ACCOUNT OF PLAGUE ADMINISTRATION IN THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY From September 1896 till May 1897. PREPARED BY M. E. COUCHMAN, I. C. S., Under the orders of J. DECOURCY ATKINS, I. C. S., Secretary to Government in the General Department. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1897.
ACCOUNT  OF  PLAGUE  ADMINISTRATION IN THE BOMBAY    PRESIDENCY From September 1896 till May 1897. PREPARED BY M. E. COUCHMAN, I. C. S., Under the orders of J. DECOURCY ATKINS, I. C. S., Secretary to Government in the General Department. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1897.
?TABLE OF CONTENTS.                     PAGES. Preface.  Part I-  Chapter I. - SKETCH  OF  THE  MEASURES   TAKEN   DURING  THE   PERIOD   FROM SEPTEMBER TILL THE END OF NOVEMBER 1896 -  Section 1 . - Introductory     ...                ...                ...   1-2 Section 2. - Early   measures  taken   by   Government   with  reference  to the Plague Administration of the Municipal Commissioner of Bombay   ...  2-5 Section 3. - Early measures taken by Government as regards Railway Inspec-               ...                tion  ...                 ...      5-7 Section 4. - Early measures taken with reference to departures from Bombay  by sea        7-9 Section 5. - Sketch of the early measures taken by the Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay   ...       9-14 Section 6. - Sketch of the history of  Plague in the Mofussil up to end of November          14-16 Section 7. - General Remarks      16            Chapter II. - SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF PLAGUE ADMINISTRATION IN DECEMBER 1896 AND JANUARY 1897-  Section 1. - Measures taken by Government with reference to Plague Administration of the Municipal Commissioner, Bombay ...                ...   17-21 Section 2. - Sketch of the measures taken by the  Municipal Commissioner  in Bombay City during this period       21-24 Section 3. - New measures for Railway Inspection in the Presidency proper ...           24-25 Section 4. - Early measures for Railway Inspection in Sind  25-27 Section 5. - Departures from Bombay by sea.   New measures regarding-...           27-30 Section 6. - The New legislation           ...                 ...           ...  31-33 Section 7. - The Pilgrim Traffic      33-40  Section 8. - Sketch of Plague Administration in Karchi in December 1896 and January 1897           ...                 ...                ...              40-45 Section 9. - Plague in the Mofussil in December and January ...  46-49   Section 10. - General Remarks      49-50 Appendix  A. - Report   of the   Committee appointed  by   Government to enquire into the nature and history of Plague (referred to in paragraph 3, Section 1)    51-52 Appendix B. - Summary by Surgeon-Major Street of the action taken by him in Bombay City (referred to in paragraph 12, Section 1)    53 Appendix C. - Memorial by certain Medical men of Bombay (referred to in paragraph 15, Section 1)...                 ...                 ...     54 Chapter III. - THE PERIOD (FEBRUARY AND EARLY PART OF MARCH) FROM THE PASSING OF THE   EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT TILL THE CONSTITUTION OF THE FIRST  PLAGUE COMMITTEE -  Section 1. - Rules framed under Act III of 1897    55-61  Section 2. - Railway Inspection             ...                ...   61-64  Section 3. - Further measures taken under Act III of 1897 for the purpose of controlling Sea Traffic                    ...                 ...     64-66 Section 4. - The City of Bombay          ...                 66-77  Section 5. - Sketch of Plague Administration in Karchi in February and up to the date of the appointment of the Karachi Plague Committee   77-81 Section 6. - Plague in the Mofussil in February    81-84            B 1135-a
ii CONTENTS. Part II-   PAGES. Chapter I.- THE FIVE PLAGUE COMMITTEES-  Section 1.- The Bombay Plague Committee 85-88 Section 2.- The Poona Plague Committee and a sketch of the measures taken  in Poona before its appointment 89-100 Section 3.- The Karchi Plague Committee 100-107 Section 4.- The Plague Committee for Hyderabad (Sind) 107-120 Section 5.- The Sukkur-Rohri Plague Committee 120-131 Chapter II.- MEASURES TAKEN IN THE MOFUSSIL -  Section 1.- Provision of disinfectants, Inspecting Staff, &c.  132-140 Section 2.- Camps of observation  140-145 Section 3.- Other measures in the mofussil  145-146 Part III-  (SELECTED REPORTS BY GOVERNMENT OFFICERS)-  Report by Mr. A. Wingate, Acting Commissioner in Sind  147-186 Report by Mr. F. S. P. Lely, Commissioner, N. D. 187-190 Report by Mr. A. C. Logan, Collector of Thna  191-217 Report by Mr. R. Gilbert on plague in Bndra  219-226 Notes by Surgeon-Major A. V. Anderson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner,  Western Registration District, on plague in the Thna District  227-229 Report by Mr. C. N. Seddon, Assistant Collector, Surat, on plague in Rnder  in the Surat District  231-234 Notes by Surgeon-Captain T. E. Dyson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, in  charge of plague operations in the City of Bulsr 235-239 Notes by Surgeon-Captain T. E. Dyson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner,  Gujarat Registration District, on plague in the Bulsr Tluka  241-244 Extract from Notes by Surgeon-Major K. S. Nariman, Civil Surgeon, Surat,  regarding plague in the City of Surat  245 -246 Report by Mr. R. E. Enthoven, Personal Assistant to the Collector of  Ahmednagar, on plague in Nagar Town and District  247-252 Report by Mr. W. T. Morison, Collector of Sholpur  253-257 Report by Mr. S. R. Arthur, First Assistant Collector, Stra  259-260 Report by Mr. E. J. Ebden, Commissioner, S. D.  261-265 Report by Mr. E. Gray, Collector of Kolba 267-272 Report by Mr. W. W. Drew, Collector of Ratngiri  273-277 Report by Colonel J. M. Hunter, Political Agent, Kthiwr 279-287 Report by Lieutenant-Colonel F. H. Jackson, Political Superintendent, Plan-  Pur  289-292 Report by Major G. E. Hyde-Cates, Political Agent, Cutch  293-301 Report by Lieutenant-Colonel J. W. Wray, Political Agent, Kolhpur and  Southern Martha Country  303-309 Report by Surgeon-Major F. F. MacCartie, Health Officer of the Port of  Bombay  311-327 STATISTICS FOR BOMBAY CITY  329-331 STATISTICS FOR THE MOFUSSIL  333-345  MAPS SHOWING THE SPREAD OF PLAGUE IN THE MOFUSSIL- Bombay Presidency*.- During October and November 1896. Do. do. December 1896. Do. do. January 1897. Do. do. February 1897. Do. do. March to end of June 1897. Thna Collectorate.-During December 1896. Do. do. January 1897. * Except Sind and the Districts of Thna, Kolba and Surat.
?CONTENTS. iii MAPS   SHOWING  THE   SPREAD   OF  PLAGUE   IN  THE  MOFUSSIL-continued. Thna Collectorate.-During February 1897. Do. do. March to end of June 1897.  Surat Collectorate.-During January 1897. Do. do. February 1897. Do. do. March to end of June 1897. Kolba Collectorate.-During January 1897. Do. do. February 1897. Do. do. March to end of June 1897. Province    of    Sind.-During December 1896. Do. do. January 1897. Do. do. February 1897. Do. do. March to end of June 1897.
?PREFACE. This compilation has been prepared for the purpose merely of bringing on record the principal administrative features of the campaign against plague from September 1896 to May 1897. Part I is divided into three chapters, which relate respectively to (1) the period from September to November 1896 inclusive, during which plague in an epidemic form may be said to have been confined to a small portion of Bombay City; (2) the period from the 1st December 1896 till the passing of the Epidemic Diseases Act on 4th February 1897, during which plague became violently epidemic in the cities of Bombay, Karchi and Poona, and was beginning to spread from place to place in the Mofussil; and (3) the period comprising the month of February and the early part of March, during which the spread of plague was becoming rapid, extraordinary powers for dealing with it were conferred on Government officers and the policy was initiated of appointing special Plague Committees in large Municipalities to organize, subject to the control of Government alone, extensive measures for the suppression of the disease. In Part II the work of the five Plague Committees is sketched in the first chapter, and the second is devoted to a brief account of a few of the more important features of plague administration in the Mofussil from March onwards. More detailed information regarding the measures taken in the infected districts of the Mofussil and in Native States in this period is given in Part III, which consists of a collection of reports. A full account of the measures which proved so entirely successful in Sind is given in the report by Mr. A. Wingate, C.I.E., Commissioner of that Province. Messrs. Ebden and Lely, Commissioners of the Southern and Northern Divisions of the Presidency, re- spectively, have submitted reports giving accounts of the plague administration of the officers controlled by them; and the measures taken in the districts of Thna, Surat, Kolba, Ratngiri, Ahmednagar and Sholpur, and in the Native States of Kthiwr, Cutch, Kolhpur and Planpur, are narrated in greater detail in reports or notes by Collectors, Medical Officers and Political Agents. In Part III also is included a special report by Surgeon-Major F. F. MacCartie, Health Officer of the Port of Bombay, regarding the medical inspection of persons leaving or arriving at Bombay by sea. In view of the recent recrudescence of plague, it has been considered un- desirable to attempt in this compilation to deal with the medical and scientific aspects of plague or with the results of the experiments of M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and Mr. Hankin. Nor has the time yet come to draw any general conclusions, or to attempt to estimate the cost of the plague. B 1135-a
?PART I DEALING WITH THE PERIOD FROM THE OUTBREAK OF PLAGUE TILL THE CONSTITUTION OF THE BOMBAY PLAGUE COM- MITTEE. CHAPTER I. SKETCH OF MEASURES TAKEN DURING THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER TILL THE END OF NOVEMBER 1896. SECTION 1. Introductory. 1. Bombay is a narrow island of approximately 11 miles in length and 3 in width, joined to Slsette, another and larger island of about 20 miles in length and 10 miles in breadth, by two railway lines and two causeways. These islands are separated from the mainland of India by the Bombay Harbour and its continuation, the Bassein Creek. Slsette is one of the nine tlukas or sub-divisions of the Thna District, through which the B. B. & C. I. Railway runs along the sea-coast towards the north of India, and the two branches of the G. I. P. Railway, which bifurcates at Kalyn Junction, soon after leaving Slsette, run towards the north-east and south-east in the directions of Calcutta and Madras respectively.  When plague became epidemic in Bombay the Slsette Tluka of the Thna District was specially exposed to risk of infection, and its two southernmost towns, Bndra and Coorla, which are virtually suburbs of Bombay City, were the first in which plague appeared in an epidemic form. 2. In every British district in the Presidency there is a recognised head of the executive administration in the person of the " Collector," so-called, who con- trols all Government officials from the village headman upwards, who is District Magistrate, head of the Police, and President of the District Local Board, and is also in a position to exercise influence over the conduct of the Municipalities in his district. The Collector, who is an officer of some standing in the Indian Civil Service, is assisted ordinarily by from two to four Assistant or Deputy Collectors, one or more of whom are natives of India, the remainder being members of the Indian Civil Service. The superior staff of a district also usually includes a Police Superintendent, an Executive Engineer, and a Civil Surgeon. These are generally Europeans, but may be natives of India. Subordinate to the Assist- ant Collector, who has charge of a sub-division of a district, is the Mmlatdr, an experienced Native officer in charge of a tluka. A tluka consists of a number of villages each under its own headman. The Bombay Presidency proper, exclusive of Sind, is split up into three Divisions, each comprising six Districts or Collectorates. The Commissioner in charge of a Division is the intermediate executive authority between the Collector and Government, and controls the former in all executive matters of importance. 3. The authority of a Commissioner does not extend to Bombay Island. The Collector of Bombay is almost exclusively a revenue officer. The Magistracy have exclusively judicial functions: the Commissioner of Police is subordinate to Government alone: the Port Trust have important independent powers as regards the docks and the foreshore of the island. The Municipality also have wide powers and responsibilities. The Municipal Commissioner, who is the chief executive officer of the Bombay Municipality, is entrusted with the administration, subject to the control of the Municipal Corporation and the Standing Committee of the Municipality, of several executive departments, of which the Health and Public Works Departments are the most important. During the plague epidemic the Municipal Commissioner was Mr. P. C. H. Snow, an experienced officer of the Indian Civil Service. The Health Department, which was the one chiefly concerned with the measures for suppressing the plague in Bombay Island, was in charge of Brigade Surgeon-Lieut.-Colonel Weir, I.M. S., an officer of many years' experience of the sanitary administration of the city, and whose intimate acquaintance not only with its sanitary conditions, but with the characteristics of the thousands B 1135-1
2 of low-caste scavengers and halalkhors employed in his department, was  of extreme value.    In Mr. Leask he had an experienced and vigorous Assistant. 4. It was recognised by Government that, whatever advice might be given from time to time by experts, the executive measures for dealing with the plague must necessarily be directed by the Collectors, working in subordination to their Commissioners, in the various British districts in the Mofussil, and by the Municipal Commissioner, Mr. P. C. H. Snow, in the City of Bombay, and that in the latter area the existing staff of the Municipality, reinforced when necessary and possible, must be utilised in the sanitary and other measures for the suppression of the plague. This policy was steadily pursued, though eventually it was found desirable in Bombay City and a few large towns, where extensive new organisations had to be created for the special purpose of suppress- ing the plague, to associate other experts with the heads of the Administration and form so-called Plague Committees. SECTION 2. Early measures taken by Government with reference to the plague administration of the Municipal Commissioner of Bombay. 1.    Towards the end of September 1896 the attention of Government was attracted to comments in the newspapers on a statement made at a meeting of the Standing Committee  of  the Bombay Municipality to the effect that several deaths from bubonic plague had taken place in the Mandvi Ward of that city. 2.    Accordingly on September 27th a letter was addressed to the Surgeon- General, who was asked to supply Government with any information  which he possessed regarding the nature of the disease, and to suggest, if necessary after consultation with the Municipal Commissioner,  any further measures  which it might be necessary for either Government or the Municipality to adopt for the purpose of obtaining correct information as to the daily progress  of  the disease, and of stamping it out in the districts where it had appeared, and effectually preventing its spread elsewhere. 3.    In  compliance with his instructions the  Surgeon-General proceeded from Poona, where he was at the time, and on the 28th September telegraphed that he had visited the affected locality with the Municipal   Commissioner and Health Officer, and seen about twenty cases of a mild type of  bubonic plague. He added that preventive measures were in active operation. 4. On September 29th the Sanitary Commissioner was asked to proceed at once to Bombay and give all possible help and advice to the Municipal Com- missioner. Brigade-Surgeon-Lieut.-Col. Waters was also asked to give his advice and help to the Municipal Commissioner. His Excellency the Governor at the same time telegraphed to the Municipal Commissioner that Government would sanction such measures as might be necessary. Mr. P. C. H. Snow, I. C. S., Municipal Commissioner. Mr. S. Rebsch, M.I.C.E., Executive Engineer, Bombay. Brigade-Surgeon-Lieut,-Col. Arnott, Physician in charge St. George's Hospital. Surgeon-Lieut.-Col. J.W. Clarkson, Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay. Surgeon-Major Manser, Physician, Jamsetji Jijibhai Hospital. Dr. Bhalchandra Krishna. Dr. Surveyor. Dr. Viegas. Brigade-Surgeon-Lieut.-Col. Waters, Presidency Surgeon. 5.    At the suggestion of the Surgeon-General a Committee consisting of the gentlemen mentioned in the margin was appoint- ed by Government on the 29th September to report on the situation. Dr. T. Blaney was also invited to serve on this Committee, but expressed his inability to do so. The Surgeon- General was asked to issue instructions as to the nature and scope of the inquiry, and to receive the report and forward it to Government. 6. The first formal report of the Surgeon-General was received on Sept- ember 30th. In this he stated that he had no doubt that the disease prevailing was true bubonic plague and that there was reason to believe that the disease had been in existence for certainly more than a month. It was at present of a
?3 mild type. The average duration of the disease seemed to be about a week and no hmorrhagic cases had been reported. He was glad to be able to assure Government that the utmost activity prevailed in the infected area on the part of the Health Department of the Municipality. The sewers had been opened, and there was a free flow through them. A large establishment of labourers was working under the orders of the Health Officer in cleaning up the locality in every way, and sea-water was being pumped all night by a powerful centrifugal pump through the sewers in the district. He proposed the following measures: (1) That the Sanitary staff, both in medical men and in subordinates, should be increased. (2) That Suburban Municipalities like Bndra and Thna should be warned and instructions issued to them to enable them to at once recognise the disease, if it should break out there; that local medical practitioners should temporarily be employed as Health Officers, and accurate registra- tion of deaths at all places for the disposal of the dead should be insisted on. This last point needed attention in Bombay itself. (3) The sick should be isolated in hospital and their bedding burned or disinfected. (4) The filth dug out of the sewers should be at once removed. 7. The Committee appointed by Government held their first meeting on September 30th. To direct their deliberations the Surgeon-General had prepared the following instructions: (1) To study the evidence for the existence of plague (bacteriological, clinical, returns of plague deaths, and of deaths from all causes). (2) To suggest remedial measures, such as (a) Isolation of the sick, in hospital or on ships. (b) Destruction of infected bedding, &c. (c) Enforced isolation of infected houses with their inhabitants, pending complete disinfection. (d) House-to-house visitation to detect cases. (e) Attention to other parts of the city, to flush drains and gullies and clean streets. (f) Seizure and destruction of all articles known to have been exposed to infection. (g) To warn Suburban Municipalities. (h) Inspection of coasting steamers on departure. (i) Issue of vernacular instructions as to the importance of wounds and abrasions, and explaining the reasons for sanitary measures. (j) Consultation with, and instruction of, leading members of various castes. 8. At the first meeting of the Committee it was merely resolved-(1) That the disease prevailing was true bubonic plague. (2) That the Municipal Com- missioner should be requested to "obtain from Government the necessary powers to carry out as far as practicable the sanitary measures recommended by the Surgeon-General." The Committee rejected proposals for the appoint- ment of a bacteriologist and of a sub-committee of a pathologist, a bacterio- logist, and a physician. 9. In forwarding on October 1st the proceedings of the Committee to Government the Surgeon-General expressed his regret that the proposals for appointing a bacteriologist and an expert sub-committee had not been carried. 10. The first point urged by the Surgeon-General in his letter received on September 30th, viz., the increase of the Sanitary staff, was also raised by the Municipal Commissioner in his letter of October 1st, in which he asked for more medical men to attend on the sick, two Assistant Surgeons and four Hospital Assist- ants. These were immediately supplied to the Commissioner (two Assistant
?4 Surgeons on October 2nd and four Hospital Assistants on October 6th). Two more Assistant Surgeons were also supplied on October 22nd. The President of the Municipal Corporation in a letter dated October 10th acknowledged with thanks the promptness with which the request of the Municipal Commissioner for more medical men had been complied with. 11. The second suggestion of the Surgeon-General, viz., that Suburban Mu- nicipalities should be warned and furnished with the means of detecting the plague in the event of its spreading to their towns, was dealt with in a letter dated Octo- ber 1st from the Secretary to Government, General Department, in which an extract from the letter of the Surgeon-General on this point was communicated to the Collector of the Thna District. Copies of this letter were at once sent by the Collector to the Presidents of the Municipalities concerned for the necessary action. Instructions for the diagnosis of plague were subsequently issued. 12. The third proposal of the Surgeon-General-viz., the isolation of the sick-was dealt with by the proclamation of the Municipal Commissioner, which will be referred to in detail in paragraphs 17 and 18 of this section. 13. The fourth proposal of the Surgeon-General, viz., that the filth removed from the drains should be removed at once, was dealt with by the Drainage Department of the Municipality. 14. In his letter of October 1st the Surgeon-General had expressed his regret that the proposals for the appointment of a bacteriologist and a scientific committee had been rejected. The Municipal Commissioner also thought that the appointment of such a committee would be desirable. Government there- fore determined to appoint a Committee for the purpose of " Inquiring into the nature and history of the disease, stated to be bubonic plague, of which a num- ber of cases have occurred in Bombay City." The services of Prof. Haffkine and Mr. Hankin were lent by the Government of India and the Government of the North-West Provinces respectively, and the Surgeon-General was asked on the 9th to appoint a Pathologist and a Physician to serve on the Committee com- prising these experts. Dr. Surveyor, who had been the first medical man to identify the plague microbe in Bombay, was also nominated by Government. The nominees of the Surgeon-General were Doctors Manser and Childe. The Port Trust, the Bombay Municipality, and the Chamber of Commerce were asked to help the Committee. 15. The Sanitary Commissioner reported on October 3rd that the Municipal Commissioner had divided up the Mandvi Ward, where the plague had broken out, into three sections, each in charge of a medical man. He had received two Assistant Surgeons from Government on the previous day. Their duties were to visit and treat every case that they heard of. 16. On October 6th the Sanitary Commissioner reported that he had visited the Arthur Road Hospital, and found some cases under treatment there. There was, he said, plenty of room there, and unless the disease increased very much there was no need to take any steps as regards a hospital ship. No danger was to be apprehended from the detritus taken from the drains (referred to by the Surgeon-General). He concluded his report as follows: " Finally, I have to report that the energy and zeal displayed by the Health Depart- ment and other executive officers of the Bombay Municipality have, in my opinion, been very successful in dealing with the outbreak. It has by no means stopped, and cases have occurred outside the Mandvi Ward, but on the whole the outbreak has been confined to one quarter, and the number of attacks and deaths has not increased-rather the other way,-and this is, I consider, a satisfactory result." 17. As already mentioned the Special Committee at their meeting on September 30th recommended to Government that the Municipal Commissioner should apply for the powers necessary to carry out the suggestions of the Surgeon-General. His Excellency the Governor had already telegraphed to the Municipal Commissioner on the 29th September promising the sanction of Government to any measures which might be needed. The Municipal Com- missioner forwarded a draft on October 2nd of a Notification under section 434 of the Bombay City Municipal Act. The wording of certain parts of the draft seemed to need some slight alterations, and it was therefore returned to him to
?5 revise in consultation with his legal advisers. In the interim, however, he was informed on October 4th that Government approved and sanctioned the measures and regulations proposed by him. 18. On October 6th the Municipal Commissioner issued with the sanction of Government the following notification: "Whereas a dangerous disease, namely, bubonic fever, has broken out in certain parts of the City of Bombay, and the Municipal Commissioner is of opinion that the ordinary provisions of the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888, or of any other law in force in Bombay, are insuf- ficient for the purpose of effectually preventing the spread of such disease, public notice is hereby given that, with the sanction of Government and pursuant to the provisions of sec- tion 434 of the said Act, the Commissioner hereby prescribes the following temporary regu- lations to be observed by the public and all persons concerned; And further, that the Municipal Commissioner will, if necessary, take such special measures as are hereby indicated  for carrying into effect the objects of the said regulations. (1) In extension of the provisions of sections 422, 425, and 427 of the said Act it is hereby prescribed that every person having the control or charge of any building shall on demand by the Commissioner or any officer to whom the powers, duties, or functions of the Commissioner under those sections may have been or may be delegated, . . . immediately cause such building or part of a building to be opened, and shall permit the Commissioner or any such officer as aforesaid to cleanse and disinfect the same, and to cause the removal for disinfection or destruction of any grain, bedding, or clothing, or of any other goods or articles found therein. For the purpose of carrying into effect the objects aforesaid the Commissioner or any such officer as aforesaid will, whenever he shall deem it necessary so to do, break open and forcibly enter any such building or part of a building and without previous notice to the owner or occupier thereof, will cleanse and disinfect the same, and direct or cause the forcible removal and disinfection or destruction of any grain, bedding, clothing, goods, or articles as aforesaid. (2) In extension of the provisions of section 424 of the said Act it is hereby prescribed that any person suffering from bubonic fever wheresoever found, and whether provided with proper lodging or accommodation or not, or whether lodged in a building occupied by more than one family or not, shall on a certificate signed by the Executive Health Officer, or by any duly qualified medical practitioner, that such person is suffering from the said disease, be liable to be removed to any hospital or place at which patients suffering from the said disease are received for medical treatment. For the purpose of carrying into effect the objects of this regulation, the Commissioner or any officer to whom the powers, duties, or functions of the Commissioner under section 424 have been or may be delegated, or any Police officer empowered by the Commissioner in this behalf, will, whenever he shall deem it necessary so to do, cause any person in respect of whom such certificate as aforesaid has been made, to be removed to any such hospital or place as aforesaid. (3) Every house in which any case of the aforesaid disease exists or has existed, shall, for so long as the Commissioner shall deem necessary, be isolated in accordance with such orders as the Commissioner may in each case prescribe, and every occupant of such house, and other person who may be therein, or who may resort or desire to obtain access thereto, shall obey any order which he may receive from the Commissioner or any Municipal or Police officer empowered by the Commissioner in that behalf, prohibiting ingress to or egress from such house. For the purpose of carrying into effect the object of this regulation, the Commissioner or any Police officer as aforesaid will, if necessary, forcibly prevent persons from entering or leaving such house." 19. From the 6th October 1896 therefore the Municipal Commissioner possessed legal powers enabling him to enter and disinfect buildings, remove goods therefrom, remove to hospital persons suffering from plague, and isolate houses in which a case of plague had occurred. These powers were never with- drawn by Government. SECTION 3. Early measures taken by Government as regards Railway Inspection. 1. The desirability of preventing the conveyance of infection by Railway passengers engaged the attention of Government as early as the 1st of October, when the Agents of the G. I. P. and B. B. & C. I. Railways as well as the legal and other advisers of Government were consulted. B 1135-2
?6 2. The law applicable was contained in sections 47 (d), 71, and 117 of the Railways Act IX of 1890, which run as follows: Section 47 (d)-A railway company is empowered to make general rules for regulating the conditions on which the railway administration will carry passengers suffering from in- fectious or contagious disorders and providing for the disinfection of carriages which have been used by such passengers. Section 71.-(1) A railway administration may refuse to carry, except in accordance with the conditions prescribed under section 47 (1), clause (d), a person suffering from any infec- tious or contagious disorder. (2) A person suffering from such a disorder shall not enter or travel on a railway without the special permission of the station-master or other railway servant in charge of the place where he enters upon the railway. (3) A railway servant giving such permission as is mentioned in sub-section (2) must arrange for the separation of the person suffering from the disorder from other persons being or travelling upon the railway. Section 117.-(1) If a person suffering from an infectious or contagious disorder enters or travels upon a railway in contravention of section 71, sub-section (2), he and any person having charge of him upon the railway when he so entered or travelled thereon shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty rupees, in addition to the forfeiture of any fare which either of them may have paid, and of any pass or ticket which either of them may have obtained or purchased, and may be removed from the railway by any railway servant. (2) If any such railway servant as is referred to in section 71, sub-section (2), knowing that a person is suffering from any infectious or contagious disorder, wilfully permits the person to travel upon a railway without arranging for his separation from other passengers, be shall be punished with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 3. Before a practical scheme was formulated the following telegram was addressed by the Government of India on the 12th October to the Secretary of the Public Works Department, Railway, Bombay: "Government urge immediate co-operation with railway administrations under sections 47 and 71 of Railways Act for detection of cases of bubonic fever by instituting careful inspec- tion of passengers at all stations within Bombay and at all junctions and large stations where trains halt. Assistance of subordinate medical establishment should be given for examination and treatment." 4. It was at first contemplated that the Railway Companies would take the necessary measures in accordance with sections 71 and 117 of the Railways Act and the rules made under section 47 (d). Accordingly copies were sent to the Surgeon-General, the Commissioner of Police, and the Inspector-General of Police with a view to their giving any assistance in their power to the B. B. & C. I. and G. I. P. Railway Companies. The Agents of these Railway Companies, however, stated that they were advised that inspection in Bombay City was unnecessary; and it was ascertained that the Companies were not in a position to themselves undertake the necessary examination, but would give any assistance in their power to medical men appointed by Government or by local authorities. Arrange- ments had already been made by local authorities for their own protection at certain stations in the Thna District, in Gujart, and at Poona, and on the 22nd October the Collectors of the districts concerned were specially consulted by telegram as to the arrangements already introduced or proposed for the stations of Ahmedabad, Broach, Surat, Kalyn, Bhuswal, and Hotgi. A few days later similar inquiries were made of the Collector of Ahmednagar and the Political Agent, Kolhpur. It was ascertained that in all cases in which arrangements had not been previously made they would be promptly made. Government were informed, moreover, in the course of October, that special arrangements had been made at the stations of Poona, Miraj, Belgaum, Londa, Hubli, Gadag, and Hotgi, by the Southern Mahratta Railway authorities of their own accord. 5. The difficulties in the way of making adequate arrangements for inspec- tion at the twenty railway stations in Bombay Island from which 84 down trains proceed daily, caused some delay in completing the arrangements, and it was considered impossible to attempt with the staff that could be made available to inspect the purely local trains. The Municipal Commissioner, who had been asked to arrange direct with the Surgeon-General for the necessary medical staff, submitted on the 27th October his proposals for the daily inspection of the ten through trains of the G. I. P. Railway at Victoria Terminus and Byculla, and of the six through trains on the B. B. & C. I. Railway at Grant Road and Bndra.
?7 These proposals were forwarded to Government by the Surgeon-General on the 29th October with a letter, in which he pointed out that all the available Hospital Assistants in the Presidency would be required to meet the demands of the Municipal Commissioner for this inspection, and there would be no reserve for cholera or famine. He accordingly requested sanction (which was promptly accorded) to engaging twenty temporary Hospital Assistants. He concluded his letter with the following remarks:- "I beg to point out that in my opinion the proposed railway inspection will be of very little use, because it will be quite easy for any one to escape medical inspection by taking a local train to any station at which a through train stops, and there join the through train after the inspection has been completed within Bombay limits. To effectually inspect railway passengers the trains will have to be inspected at all important stations and at all junctions along the line, which is practically impossible owing to the great number of medical officers required to cope with such extensive inspection. " I am of opinion that there should be an inspection at Kalyn and Virr on the two lines, beyond which I believe the local trains do not travel, and without this I think the proposed arrangement mentioned in Mr. Snow's letter under reference will be of little use." 6. The Municipal Commissioner had previously in a letter addressed to Gov- ernment on the 26th October remarked: " I would point out, in conclusion, that the general course of the bubonic disease is to prostrate its victims at once, and no medical man, however skilled, would be able to detect persons with the bubonic poison incubating in their system. I therefore cannot anticipate any practical results from this scheme." 7. The scheme proposed by the Municipal Commissioner was introduced without delay. With reference to the suggestion of the Surgeon-General for inspection at Kalyn and Virr, it was remarked in the Government Resolution issued on his letter that arrangements for inspection at Kalyn had already been made by the local authorities, and that Government considered an inspection at Virr to be unnecessary. There was no Municipality at Virr, and therefore the measures taken at stations situated within municipal districts, under section 73 of the District Municipal Act, for dealing with plague cases after their removal from trains, in accordance with the Railways Act, could not be legally under- taken.  There was no dispensary or medical man at this place: it was a village of only 1,390 inhabitants, and only six out of 40 daily down trains were stopped at the station. An inspection had already been arranged at Bndra,- the first station outside Bombay Island-at which all the trains but one are stopped. Lastly, there was no legal power before the passing of Act III of 1897 to examine all railway passengers, or detain on suspicion those suffering from fever. Government were, indeed, obliged to warn their officers as early as the 19th October that they had no power to detain or examine passengers who showed no signs of sickness. SECTION 4. Early measures taken with reference to departures from Bombay by Sea. 1. When plague first appeared in Bombay arrangements were already in force for a careful and detailed examination by the Port Health Officer and a special Medical staff, in accordance with the Pilgrim Ships Act of 1895, of all persons sailing from Bombay to Jeddah by pilgrim ships, a class of vessel more than ordinarily liable to carry infection. The only other vessels for which any sort of medical examination was conducted were those sailing for the Persian Gulf, Aden, Mauritius, Red Sea Ports, and Suez Canal. These are required to take a bill of health, in what is known as Form B, which is signed by the Port Health Officer after an inspection of the crew and passengers, and mentions amongst other things the state of their health. When plague first appeared it was thought unnecessary to alter the arrangements for inspection, which was not of the nature of a detailed examination; but orders were given by Government that the existence of plague and the number of plague cases in Bombay should be noted on the bill of health.
?8 2. For the protection of the Settlement of Aden, however, and also with a view to preventing ships for other ports than Bombay, which called at and had free communication with Aden, being compromised thereby, the following quarantine regulations under Act 1 of 1870 were, with the sanction of the Government of India, on 7th October 1896 applied at Aden against vessels arriving from Bombay: "No. 4435.-In exercise of the power conferred by Act 1 of 1870, the following rules for quarantine against plague have been made by the Government of Bombay, with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council: they have effect from the 5th instant in the Ports of Aden, Perim and the Somli Coast, as a temporary measure: I.-The Commander of every vessel, including buggalows or other native craft, arriving at Aden, Perim and the Somli Coast from Bombay shall, before entering the harbour, hoist a yellow flag (or if entering a port at night time, show whatever quarantine light signals are customary in the port) and indicate by signal the port from which such vessel has come, and shall keep such flag and signals flying until permitted to take them down as hereinafter provided. The pilot on going alongside a vessel from Bombay shall direct the flag prescribed above to be hoisted, if it has not already been done. II.-Such Commander shall not, without first having obtained permission as herein- after provided, allow any communication, except orally, with the shore or any other vessel or boat, excepting with the boat supplying pilots, and in that case communication shall be limited to receiving on board the pilot, his servant and baggage. III.-On any such arrival being signalled, the Health Officer of the Port shall, as soon as possible, go alongside the vessel and ascertain by enquiry from the Commander whether any person on board is suffering, or has during the voyage suffered, from plague, and if the Health Officer is satisfied by such enquiry that no person on board is suffering, or during the voyage has suffered, from plague, and if the ship carries a qualified Medical Officer, quarantine shall be dispensed with, and pratique granted. If the vessel does not carry a qualified Medical Officer, he shall direct the Commander to take the vessel to the quarantine anchorage duly appointed and notified by the Resident, and there to remain for a period of eight clear days from the date of arrival in the harbour. The Health Officer shall also direct the Commander to prohibit, during the period for which the vessel remains at the quarantine anchorage as aforesaid, all communication, except such as is herein- after provided for, between such vessel and the shore or other vessels and boats in the harbour. IV.-If the Health Officer, as the result of the enquiry made under paragraph III above, shall have reason to believe at the time when the vessel arrives in the harbour that any person on board is suffering, or during the voyage has suffered, from plague, he shall direct the Commander to take the vessel to the quarantine anchorage as aforesaid and there to remain for a period of fifteen days from the day of arrival in the harbour; and shall further direct that during such fifteen days intercourse between the said vessel and the shore or other vessels and boats in the harbour shall be prohibited as provided in Rule III. V.-If during the period a vessel is at the quarantine anchorage aforesaid any case or cases of plague should occur on board, the said vessel shall remain in quarantine for a period of fifteen days from the date of termination of the last case either by death, recovery or removal from the vessel and be subject to all the prohi- bitions provided for in Rules III and IV. VI.-When any vessel has been placed in quarantine as aforesaid, the Health Officer may direct the removal of so many of the passengers and crew as may not be suffering from illness, and whose services may not be required on board the vessel, to such particular spots as may from time to time be selected by the Resident as places of quarantine, there to remain for a period of eight days, or if the vessel has been placed in quarantine for fifteen days, for a period of fifteen days. If a case of plague occurs among such passengers and crew during any such period, they shall remain in a place of quarantine for a period of fifteen days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of such illness. VII.-Any mails or cargo which may be brought by any vessel so arriving shall be landed under such precautions as the Health Officer may deem necessary to prevent the spread of the disease. VIII.-It will be the duty of the Port Officer to facilitate the conveyance to all vessels in quarantine of such supplies of provisions, stores and other articles as may be required by those on board. Such supplies will be placed on the boats of the vessels in quarantine to be subsequently removed by members of their crews. IX.-All vessels arriving at Aden, Perim and the Somli Coast which may have communicated with vessels coming from Bombay, shall be subjected to the same such as vessels arriving at Aden, Perim and the Somli Coast from Bombay."
?9 3.    Similar quarantine regulations were applied in Government Resolution No. 4530, dated 13th October 1896, at Karchi, against vessels arriving from Bombay. 4.    The question whether similar regulations  should be applied against arrivals from Bombay at the numerous small ports on the coast of this Presidency was next considered.    The difficulties, however, in the way of applying quaran tine regulations to the ferry and coasting steamers which called at ports along the coast at intervals of a few hours throughout the day and night were obvious. The adoption of  measures  calculated  to stop the large passenger traffic by these steamers would have been open to the same objection as the prohibition of railway traffic.    The proposal was therefore abandoned as impracticable. 5.    It was next considered whether passengers by the coasting steamers should be medically examined before their departure; but apart from the legal difficulties, the Municipal Commissioner supported the view of the Executive Health Officer of the Municipality, Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Weir, that the examination of these passengers would be both troublesome and useless, and Government were guided by the advice of these officers.     It was recognized, moreover, that Messrs. Shepherd and Company would naturally be unwilling  to carry by their steamers persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague, and it was ascertained on inquiry that strict instructions on the subject had been given to their officers and servants.    Medical officers were appointed by the Company on November 13th for their Kthiwr and Karchi steamers. SECTION 5. Sketch of the early measures taken by the Municipal Commissioner in the City of Bombay. 1.    In the beginning of September, some cases of fever attended with swell- ings in the neck had been observed by the Health Officer in Mndvi and a few cases are reported to have been treated by some native practitioners in the month of August in the same locality.    The existence of the plague  in the city  was first made public by Dr. Viegas in the Standing Committee of the Municipality on September 23rd, and when questioned on the subject the Health Officer reported that the cases referred to by that  gentleman were  engaging the  most  serious and constant attention of his department. 2.    As regards the abnormal mortality in the city at this time, the Health Officer points out in his report that in the neighbouring districts  of Thna and Surat a similar phenomenon had been  observed, although it is beyond dispute that in those districts it was not to be explained by the presence of plague. 3.    In the case of Bombay there seems to be little doubt that the presence of the disease   in an epidemic form was brought  to light  almost   as  soon  as it appeared,   owing to  its occurrence among a  wealthy   class   of natives,   chiefly Banias, who are  in the habit of employing  qualified   medical  men.    No time was, therefore, lost in extending  the same  sanitary measures to  the outbreak reported by Dr. Viegas  in   Mndvi  as had already   been applied to somewhat similar earlier cases at the beginning of the month.    These were a thorough dis- infection of the house  affected,  and a removal as far as possible of insanitary conditions in the vicinity.    The Municipal Commissioner writes: "Extra carts and bigarries had been engaged, and men had been transferred from other sections for duty in Mandvi, Nowroji Hill, Chukla, and the Port Trust Estate. All cases of fever were treated as suspected; houses and gullies were being vigorously flushed and disin- fected, and all infected rooms limewashed. All the flushing apparatus of the Health Depart- ment was in full employment, and the Fire Brigade had supplied three engines for the same service. All the bedding and clothing of the sick was burnt, and that of their neighbours, so far as possible, disinfected. At the same time the Drainage Department were actively engaged in opening up, cleaning and flushing the drains and pouring disinfectants into them. Between the 25th September and the 17th November the whole of the Port Trust drains, some 26,000 feet in length, west of the Frere Road as far as the G. I. P. Railway, were thoroughly cleaned of silt; as many as 1,337 men being employed on the work on one day At the same time 450 openings were made and manholes constructed, and a large number of house gulkes were re- modelled and repaired. The manholes were carefully disinfected, and during this period the drains were thoroughly flushed with sea-water and carbolic acid which was poured into them by B 1135-3
?10 means of a centrifugal pump at the rate of 3 million gallons a day. The number of houses infected in this district was 180, and in all of them the house-connections were thoroughly overhauled. Where more than one case occurred, the down-take pipes were completely removed, washed in boiling water, and then dipped first into a strong solution of phenyle and afterwards into Dr. Angus Smith's solution at a temperature of 300 Fahrenheit before they were replaced."     4.    A general description of the measures taken to protect localities as yet unaffected is given by the Municipal Commissioner in the following paragraphs: "They varied somewhat under varying circumstances, and towards the end of epidemic underwent certain modifications suggested by experience with a view to obtaining the most favourable results. The general treatment of houses embraced the thorough cleansing and disinfection of every room where a case occurred, all moris, nahanis and traps connected with the building were carefully disinfected. Dry chloride of lime or carbolic acid powder was sprinkled over the floors and passages, not only of the affected house, but also of the neighbouring ones. The building, inside and out, as well as the gullies, was thoroughly flushed, the roof opened, and all obstructions to light and air removed.  The house connections were overhauled as already described. All rubbish, such as rags, old clothes, etc., of which there were enormous quantities, and all infected articles of small worth were burnt, anything of value being thoroughly disinfected, while the pre- mises were limewashed from end to end before re-occupation. The condition of the grain godowns on the Port Trust Estate attracted early attention, as it was found that numerous cases of plague were occurring in the dwelling rooms above them. Interference with these warehouses was a matter which demanded very careful consideration, but the sani- tary interests of the city were all-important, and in every instance where a case of plague was known to have occurred above a godown, the place was closed for 20 days, the grain and other merchandise were taken out and exposed to the sun in charge of ramosis, sul- phur was freely burnt inside and outside the building, and the godowns themselves thoroughly flushed and disinfected. Similarly in the case of shops, where a case occurred, no goods were allowed to be sold till they had been exposed to the sun for at least a day. The shops were not allowed to be used till they had been shut up and completely fumigated for three days, and even then had to be limewashed before they were allowed to be re-occupied. Two hundred and twenty-five godowns and 137 shops were treated in this drastic manner. At the same time large quantities of infected or damaged sweetmeats and other food preparations were destroyed, and many tons of grain sweepings were found which had been collected from the streets and gullies for the purposes of adulterating sound grain. From one godown as much as 51 cart-loads of these sweepings were taken away and incinerated. These measures met with the approval of the Sanitary Commissioner with the Gov- ernment of Bombay as well as of other Sanitary authorities from all parts of India." 5.    In Chapter I,  section 2, it has been shown that as early as October 6th, Government had conferred extensive powers on the Municipal Commissioner under Section 434 of the City Municipal Act.    These powers   comprised the removal and segregation of the sick in their hospitals, and entry into buildings for the purposes of cleaning them.    This section was subsequently taken as the basis of the Epidemic Diseases Act III of 1897. 6.    The Municipal Commissioner, however, did not find it advisable to fully exercise these powers.    His explanation,  given in his Plague  Report, is as follows: "In order to appreciate the general lines and conception of the operations against the plague, it is first of all necessary to understand the exact position in which the respon- sible authorities were placed, and the extraordinary difficulties under which they laboured. Shortly after the commencement of October, and simultaneously with the more extend- ed development of segregation and other measures, a wild unreasoning panic appeared to seize the inhabitants, and continued with little intermission to the middle of February, when the crisis of the epidemic was past, and the public began to reassure themselves. My office was besieged every day by natives of all classes imploring that nothing drastic should be done, and every consideration shown to the people with a view of keeping them in the city and preventing an absolute stoppage of trade. The Health Officer has abundantly portrayed in his report the extreme terror which prevailed, and disquieting as that was from one point of view, from another it was far more serious. The sanitary work of the City of Bombay is carried on almost entirely by imported labour divided into two main classes, hallkhors and bigarris. The majority of the former pertain to the sweeper caste of Gujart; nearly all the latter are Mahrs from the Deccan. A very small percentage are true natives of Bombay. These men (numbering hallkhors 2,392, bigarris 3,660) form the working basis of the sanitary system, and the slightest hitch in their organisation, which is a most elaborate one, or depletion in their numbers, would immediately involve a serious danger.
?11 Scattered as they are through every portion of the city in large numbers, any unrest or tendency to strike among them immediately affects numerous other low-caste natives, and any development of panic or alarm straightway spreads to their immediate surroundings. Among the first to have followed their example would have been the large staffs of labourers employed under the Executive, Water, and Drainage Engineers, on whom we were largely dependent for carrying on our struggle with the plague. A strike of hallkhors is not unknown in Bombay. The great hallkhor strike occurred in 1866 and lasted for ten days; 480 men left work, causing an inconceivable amount of danger and nuisance. The scavengering bigarris struck work on the 3rd July 1889 for a day and a half, and again on 29th of the same month till the 3rd August. The whole city, except a portion of F and G wards, was affected. Luckily the men on the Trdeo Reclamation did not join the strike while the hallkhors remained faithful and assisted in scavengering work. This strike, though so short and partial, was very serious and caused dangerous and widespread nuisances of every kind. It can be imagined, then, from the above data, what would be the result if the whole body of bigarris and hallkhors struck work. In a fortnight the city would have to be abandoned, dependent as it is on the hand-removal of sewage and cart-removal of sweepings by these men. It will, thus, be seen in the face of a foe like the plague, with what grave anxiety the Municipal Executive regarded any possible spread of alarm or disaffection among its working staff. On their presence or absence, respectively, depended the safety or ruin of this vast and important city-a ruin which, in the midst of an increasing epidemic like the bubonic plague, would have been so absolute and complete as to render even partial recovery a question of years. On these men and their good-will hung the carrying out of every sanitary measure, and even in ordinary times were they all to remove from the town for a fortnight, Bombay would be converted into a vast dunghill of putrescent ordure. I grasped the hard reality of the situation at the end of September, and determined that, whatever else happened, the bigarris and hallkhors must be kept together at all hazards, as if they struck work and left, half the inhabitants would speedily follow them, and no single measure could be adopted against the plague either then or thereafter, nor could even the Europeans, Prsis and high caste natives have remained in the city. It must be remembered that in ordinary times these men are irreplaceable for the reason that even if drafts of sweepers were obtained from 'Rjputna and other places, they would be quite useless for several months until they had been thoroughly drilled and had become acquainted with the town: new men would have no knowledge of the various gullies and privies they had to clean, and would be late ignorant of the difficult conditions under which they would have to work. With the p gue raging in Bombay it would have been quite impossible to induce any sufficient number of sweepers or labourers from other places to come and work, in the face of the fact that the regular staff had gone, and the inhabitants were moving hither and thither. On 6th October 1896, a notification granting extended powers to the Municipal Commissioner, under Section 434 of the Municipal Act, was issued with the approval of Government. Under this notification such measures of segregation and removal to hospital as had been adopted were legalised and continued, and the necessary right of entry into affected houses was placed on a clear footing. The epidemic, however, continued to increase and, coupled with the operations in progress, was productive of widespread alarm. The people refused all medical aid, or to listen to any advice, and many began to leave the city. Discontent, unrest and alarm speedily manifested themselves among the hallkhors and bigarris; the Health Officer was in daily communication and held frequent con- ferences with me on this all-important subject, and every possible means was adopted to keep the men together. Throughout October the panic continued to increase, and with it the exodus from the city; resistance and obstruction were offered to every municipal measure, whether of segregation, disinfection or cleansing; medical aid was rejected, and the attitude of the people was "Let us alone to die, but do not interfere with our customs or prejudices which are far more important than any danger from the plague." Of all measures taken at this time for combating the plague, the one which caused most alarm was segregation or removal to hospital. The people not only regarded hospital treatment with detestation, but reports were freely circulated that the authorities merely took them there to make a speedy end of them. A gang of sconndrels took to  blackmailing by personating the police and municipal servants, and increased the general terror, extorting money as they did under threats of removal to hospital. Several of these free-lances were at last brought to book by the police, and with a few salutary convictions and sentences by the Magistrates that danger disappeared. None the less surely, however, the panic increased, and while our municipal employs showed signs of wavering, the great body of mill-hands began to be infected by the general alarm and flight of so many persons from the city. On the 10th of October, a number of mill-hands assembled outside the Arthur Road Hospital and threatened its speedy demolition as well as violence to the employs. After causing great alarm to the inmates and staff of the hospital they dispersed. On the after- noon of the 29th October a gang of nearly 1,000 mill-hands attacked the Arthur Road
?12 Hospital with sticks and stones; they entered the compound, injured the tiles of the roof, struck some of the patients, and intimidated the staff. Luckily there was a telephone on the premises, and police aid was speedily summoned. The Commissioner, Deputy Commis- sioner, and a strong posse of European and Native constables quickly arrived, the mill-hands were driven out and order was restored. The incident was a very grave one, not so much in itself, but as an indication of the general feeling, and the secret intelligence which I received from time to time showed that our sanitary staff were almost in open sympathy with the rioters owing to the fear of forcible segregation. This demonstration was exclusively directed against segregation of the sick and removal to hospital, the one measure which the whole people, high and low, viewed with the wildest hostility, and were determined not to tolerate. On the night of the 30th October, Mr. Vincent, the Commissioner of Police, with the Health Officer, met me at the Municipal Office to confer on the situation. We were all well acquainted with the main facts of the position and the general feeling of the populace. The Commissioner of Police pointed out that the Baniahs in Mndvi and other parts had already begun to close their shops, others would assuredly follow, and looting and severe rioting were certain to ensue. Both he and the Health Officer were of opinion that our sanitary staff would make common cause with the rioters, nor was it possible to ascertain in a time of such wild panic and excitement how far the fine discipline of the Bombay Police force would avail to keep that body under control. Our hallkhors and bigarris had for upwards of a fortnight been seeking every excuse to leave their work and get out of the city, and had only been kept in hand by the ceaseless exertions of the Commissioner of Police with his detective staff, the Health Officer and his capable Assistant, Mr. Leask, Under these circumstances the Commissioner of Police and I were unanimous in consi- dering that any kind of riot and disturbance at such a time meant the absolute ruin of the city and the cessation of all sanitary measures, both then and thereafter. The bigarris, sweepers, cart-drivers and others would, with the first sign, have left en masse, and a vast panic and exodus of the general public would have ensued. Bombay would in a few days have become uninhabitable and left to reek in a mass of sewage, sweepings and pollution, with no one at hand to conduct the daily routine of sanitation, much less to adopt a single preventive measure against the plague. The pestilence in such surroundings would have increased a hundredfold, and the remaining inhabitants would have been literally decimated and compelled to fly. This was the situation which had to be faced on the 30th October, and the crisis called for strong and immediate action. The obnoxious measure was compulsory removal to hospital, and the safety of the city had to be placed in the balance against the possibility, and that a remote one, of a slight spread of plague from a modification of this measure. I had no hesitation as to the course I should pursue, nor, in my opinion, could an official responsible for the safety and welfare of the city in perhaps the gravest crisis which has ever beset it, have adopted any other. On the 30th October I issued two proclamations explaining and modifying the segrega- tion orders published under the previous notification of the 6th October. One of these was addressed to the general public, the other to that ever-present source of danger, the mill-hands.    These proclamations were scattered all over the town in English, Marthi and Gujarti so as to reach all classes of the people.    Their effect was soon visible, the general excitement and fear of riot calmed down, and only the constant panic and alarm at the increasing epidemic  remained as   a disturbing factor.    I have  brought these facts prominently to notice, as without a knowledge  of them the situation cannot  be accurately gauged by those not behind the scenes, and further much misrepresentation, to say nothing  of abuse, has been showered on the Municipal authorities for adopting a course which saved the city.    This misrepresentation did not   occur so much at the time;   but  months   after, when the crisis of the epidemic   had passed,   public confidence had been restored  and a totally different state of feeling and circumstances   existed, many critics arose asking why the Municipality had done this or had not done  that,  and  more  especially attacking my policy in the matter of segregation.    The fact remains that had the situation not been dealt with at once and our measures modified to suit the times, the city would have been in a week bereft of all its  sanitary staff and  the plague   left to work its  will unchecked and un- opposed.    I am in no way opposed   to segregation  where it can be  safely  carried out, but I shall show in a subsequent stage of this report that it never produced the results generally attributed to it when applied on a large scale, while up to the middle of February, when the   crisis was past,  and the  epidemic declining,   any wholesale  resort to   such   drastic measures  would have   certainly  produced  a  deplorable   catastrophe.    The   proclamations issued on the 30th October merely modified the previous orders, and segregation was restored to, whenever and wherever practicable, both by isolation in houses and   removal   of  cases   to hospital." 7.    The notification referred to here as having been issued to the public by the Commissioner on 30th October runs as follows: " Whereas it has come to the notice of the Municipal Commissioner that false and unfounded reports, with the object of producing a general panic, have been recently spread among the mill-
?13 hands regarding the forcible removal of plague cases to the Arthur Road Hospital, and whereas from information that has reached the Commissioner it is desirable that such false impressions should be removed, you are hereby informed that, provided a competent medical officer is engaged to supervise the hands employed in your mill, the duty of attending thereto and communicating with the Health Department in the event of any bubonic case occurring will be left to such medical officer, and no person suffering from such disease will be removed to hospital except on the certificate of the said medical officer. The Health Officer has been informed accordingly, and the name of any such officer appointed for your mill should be communicated to the department." 8.    On the same day (30th October) the following proclamation was issued to the general public, Gujarti and Marthi translations being also freely circulated in the town: "Whereas the Municipal Commissioner is informed that great alarm has been caused to the public by the notification recently issued under section 434 of the Municipal Act, and whereas the objects of that notification have been misunderstood, inasmuch as the powers under it were obtained principally to meet the case of a large increase of bubonic plague, the public are now hereby informed that no cases where proper segregation and treatment can be carried out on the premises will be removed to the Arthur Road Hospital, and in such cases as require removal no action will be taken except on the certificate of a qualified medical practitioner employed by the Health Department. The Executive Health Officer has been instructed accordingly, and the Commissioner of Police informed." 9.    As regards the danger indicated by the Municipal Commissioner, the Health Officer writes in similar language: "At this time the scavengers, the drivers of carts and the halalkhors were very restless. They spoke of leaving the city, saying that if the 'Setts and Sahebs'  left, they also would require a change of air. I had no doubt that a riot would occur, and eager as I had been to remove the sick to hospital, I admitted at once that if the policy was continued, not only would a riot occur, but that all the sanitary business of the city would stop and that we should not have men either to segregate the sick or to clean the city and that we should be left alone. When a  riot occurred a few years ago, and when a disturbance in ordinary times arose, all sanitary work ceased. A calamity even greater and more sudden than the pestilence might have overtaken the city. The total interruption of the sanitary arrangements would have made the city uninhabitable, and the plague would have raged unchecked." 10.    Of this period the Commissioner of Police, Mr. R. H. Vincent, C.I.E., writes as follows: "Rescues of persons suffering with the plague on their way to hospital, and attacks of the Police and Municipal servants had been for many weeks of frequent occurrence, and early in November I had found it necessary to place police guards over the hospitals in consequence of the attempted storming of the Arthur Road Hospital, which was only prevented by the timely arrival on the scene of myself, the Deputy Commissioner of Police with a dozen or two of European Police officers and some mounted policemen. In every way the people thwarted the authorities; now by false accusations of extortion, now by secreting their sick, and again by most stubborn resistance to and disregard of all sani- tary measures and precautions. At the same time the feeling of exasperation amongst the inhabitants was greatly increased by the evil doings of a number of bad characters, who, pretend- ing to be Municipal or Police employs went about extorting money, and this did not cease until the Police had succeeded in securing the convictions and condign punishment of seven offenders." 11.    Although, therefore, the enforcement of removal to hospital of all cases of plague was found unadvisable, "it must  not be supposed," the Municipal Commissioner writes, "that all attempts at isolation were given up.    The mere proposal of this measure resulted in the majority  of the cases being concealed, but  when  they   were   detected  arrangements  were  invariably  made  in   the patients' own houses to give them the best chance of recovery possible by remov- ing them to the  lightest and best ventilated rooms, and every  endeavour was made to dissuade all but the  few necessary attendants from  frequenting that part of the dwelling.    At the same time where circumstances made it absolutely impossible   to  make any suitable arrangements,  or where  the patients  were paupers or friendless, they  were removed to the Municipal Hospital at Arthur Road." 12. The attitude of unreasoning terror of hospitals maintained by all sec- tions of the native community, extended, in the early stage of the epidemic, even to hospitals established and managed by Hindus for their own caste-men. As early as October such hospitals were opened in Mandvi and Bhuleshwar, but proved useless in face of this attitude. 13.    The Municipal Commissioner notes,  propos of this abortive attempt, that "those from whom co-operation rather than  obstruction might have  been expected, backed up the unreasoning voice of public opinion by the specious B 1135-4
14 argument that hospitals, while unnecessary in themselves, were a source of the utmost danger to their vicinity." 14. The first case on the registers of the Health Department ended fatally in the first week of September. Another was recorded in the following week, four more in the third week, and 43 in the last week of the month in the Mandvi ward. Scattered cases, making up the total for September to 79 deaths, occurred in nine other sections. The progress of the disease is shown in the following table: Month. Attacks. Deaths. September 135 79 October 406 313 November 339 273 15. The experience gained subsequently in Bombay City and the chief centres in the Mofussil showed that even under the most conciliatory rgime there was a tendency to conceal cases, a tendency the strength of which no one could have foretold at this time. Accordingly there are grounds for thinking that much of the excess mortality during the epidemic period is to be ascribed to the plague. 16. The Municipal Commissioner accordingly gives in a tabular form the number of deaths from all causes for this period. Taking the average rate of mortality as 36.00 per mille per annum (allowing for the fact that in famine years the mortality has been always observed to be higher than usual in the city, the normal death-rate of which is 30.64), this would give an excess of 1,539 deaths from all causes for the months of August, September, October and November. Of this total 665 were recorded as plague deaths. 17. In September the plague was practically confined to the section of the Mandvi Ward which lies between the G. I. P. Railway line and the bandar. From this region it subsequently spread into the centre of the city, finally ending in the outlying portions of the island. 18. From time to time the Sanitary Commissioner visited the affected localities and kept Government informed as to the state of affairs and the action of the Municipal Executive. On October 29th he reported as follows: "The Health and Drainage Departments are exhibiting unabated activity, and extra powers have been conferred on the Municipal Commissioner. Regarding these powers, that providing for compulsory removal has had to be cautiously used, as it tended to concealment of cases, and is now used when proper treatment and accommodation cannot be had." SECTION 6. Sketch of the history of Plague in the Mofussil up to the end of November. 1. In this period plague in an epidemic form was reported to be confined to the City of Bombay. About 40 persons suffering from the disease were known to have escaped to numerous scattered places in the Mofussil, but as they were mostly in a moribund condition concealment was not easy, and on discovery they were, as far as could be ascertained, promptly and appropriately dealt with by the local authorities who were on the alert. Of indigenous plague it is reported that there had been one case at Mahd in the Kolba District, 3 in the railway goods yard at Ahmedabad and 29 at Sangvi, a small village in the Stra District; but at the end of the period under notice there were no signs of a spread of plague in any part of the Mofussil. 2. Thna, the Slsette Tluka whereof is joined to Bombay by causeways at Bndra and Kurla, was, as already indicated, the district most exposed to the risk of infection when plague first appeared in Bombay. As early as the 2nd of October the Collector, after a consultation with the Civil Surgeon, decided on appointing police constables to watch the railway stations of Thna, Bndra. Kurla and Kalyn until other Inspectors could be appointed, and on sending to the Civil Hospital all persons discovered at the Thna Station to be suffering from plague. The advice of the Surgeon General, communicated to the Collec-
?15 for by Government on the 1st October, was promptly communicated to the municipalities of Thna and Bndra, and on the 13th of October the Commis- sioner, N. D., in anticipation of their sanction, made rules for the removal of plague patients to hospitals and for the disinfection of infected articles and all goods and luggage from Bombay, for the municipal towns of Thna, Bndra, Kurla, Kalyn and Bassein. The Collector, in communicating these rules, insisted on the absolute necessity of having special hospitals for the plague. By the end of October special Inspectors, the majority of whom were medical subordinates, had been engaged for railway stations for the five towns mention- ed, money had been voted by the municipalities for the necessary expenses, and at all those places except Bassein plague hospitals had already been erected. 3. In the Surat District, which lies immediately north of Thna, arrivals from Bombay were inspected at the Surat Railway Station by medical officers from October 22nd: the names and addresses of arrivals from Bombay were taken down and they were watched for some days after their arrival. 4.    In the district of Broach, which lies north of Surat, a Sanitary Com- mittee was appointed by the Broach Municipality in the early part of October under the chairmanship of Dr. Mistry, the Civil Surgeon, to  effect a thorough cleaning of the town, to  erect sheds, isolate plague patients, &c.    Special powers under section 73 of the District Municipal Act were conferred  on the Muni- cipality, hand-bills were distributed and a medical inspection of railway passengers was instituted.    A register was also kept of persons arriving from the direction of Bombay. 5.    Arrangements were made at the Anand Junction in the Kaira District in the month of October for the medical inspection of railway passengers coming from the direction of Bombay. 6.    At Ahmedabad, which is the most northerly British district through which the B. B. & C. I. Railway line runs, a medical inspection of passengers and a fumigation of goods was arranged for on the 5th of October.    A building was set apart for plague cases, the names and addresses of passengers from Bombay were registered, and rules were adopted by the municipality under Section 73 of the District Municipal Act. 7.    Turning now to the G. I. P. Railway, the Calcutta branch after leaving the Thna District runs through the districts of Nsik and Khndesh,  and the Madras  branch  runs through those of Poona and Sholpur.    At   Poona the medical  inspection of arrivals from Bombay was commenced by employes  of the  Suburban Municipality on the  30th September and was supplemented by an   inspection  by  the   Southern  Mahratta   Railway   Company.    Special rules for the treatment of an outbreak of plague, should it occur, and for preventing its  introduction,   were   sanctioned   for  the   cantonment as soon   as   possible. Medical inspection at Sholpur was started by the municipality in November and an attempt   was   made,   but  in   consequence  of   the  scarcity   of medical subordinates   without  success, to  obtain an Inspector  for  Brsi.    At  several railway stations in the Nsik District, medical men were stationed to   watch arrivals from Bombay, and sanction was obtained to the adoption of rules under section 73 of the District Municipal Act by the Nsik Municipality.    At Bhus- val in the Khndesh District a medical inspection of passengers from the direc- tion of Bombay was commenced on the 1st November. 8.    The stations on the S. M. Railway, which, starting from Poona, runs through the southern districts of the  Presidency,  were protected by medical inspectors employed by the railway company. 9.    The Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioners in the course  of their tours represented to the local authorities the need for vigilance and gave such advice as was possible.    The following instructions for  the diagnosis  of plague prepared by Professor Haffkine were widely circulated by Government on November 16th: Instructions by Monsieur W. M. Haffkine for diagnosing the Bubonic Plague. 1.    Symptoms of disease: Fever preceded sometimes by rigor.    Trembling in the limbs. Pain, swelling and hardening of one or rarely several superficial glands, most frequent- ly of one in the groin, more rarely in a gland or glands of the armpit or of the cervical region. Delirium. Sometimes restless efforts at vomiting which may or may not be success- ful; constipation, or occasionally, on the contrary, diarrha.
16 Comatose or semicomatose state of patient.   Voice weak, speech incoherent. 2.    The most prominent of these symptoms is the affection of superficial glands ; cases, when this symptom is absent, if there are any, appear quite exceptionally. 3.    In a case of plague a microscopic preparation, made with the contents of the- affected gland, will show numerous diplobacteria of characteristic shape and size, described for the first time by Kitasato in Hongkong. 4.    To obtain the microbes with certainty a patient is to be selected at the height of the symptoms, with glands largely increased, and before any injections had been made into the glands.    At the commencement of the swelling, or in a convalescent patient, a drop withdrawn from the gland may fail to show the microbes. 5.    For making a preparation, an ordinary or a grooved needle, a spirit lamp, a microscopic slide and 5 per cent. carbolic lotion is to be prepared.    Then proceed as follows : Wash the skin just over the swollen gland with carbolic lotion. Allow the lotion to dry in situ ; pass the needle in the flame of a spirit lamp and leave it to cool down. Steady the gland with the fingers of left hand, so as to make it quite prominent, with the skin tightly drawn over it, and prick the gland through the skin. Press out a drop of the whitish contents of the gland, withdraw the needle and burn the part of it which has been introduced under the skin of the patient till it is red hot. Apply the slide to the drop of lymph pressed out of the gland, and spread it as uniformly as possible over about a half of the surface of the slide, avoiding any contact between the infective material and the fingers or any other object. 6.    Keep the slide in the hand till it is dry, and while holding it in the hand by its free end, pass it rapidly in the flame five or six times, with the preparation upwards, till the lower surface of the slide felt by a finger is too hot to be left in contact with the finger without pain. Excessive heating or charring will make the preparation unrecognisable. Disinfect the skin over the gland and apply a suitable dressing if necessary. 7.    In a certain number of cases, pricking the gland through the skin fails to bring to the surface the characteristic material. A more certain proceeding is to incise, with aseptic precautions, the skin over the gland, and the gland itself, and to take directly from the gland a drop of lymph on the point of a scalpel, spreading it over a slide as directed above. * Messrs. Kemp & Co., Bombay, have been instructed how to pre- pare such pipettes, and have pro- mised to sell boxes containing a dozen and half dozen of pipettes at the cost price of a few annas a box. 8.    Another way consists in sucking up a drop from the gland by means of a sterile Pasteur pipette, protected by a cotton plug.* For this cauterise a small spot of the skin just over the gland. Break the fine end of the pipette and pass the thin part of it rapidly through the flame several times. Allow it to cool down and insert the pipette into the cauterised part of skin, steadying the gland with the fingers of left hand. By a boring motion introduce the tip of the pipette into the gland. The moment when this is reached will be felt by the tissues offering less resistance to the penetration of the pipette. Apply the mouth to the open end of pipette, and while constantly moving the pipette to and fro, suck up a small quantity of fluid. The best is the thick whitish contents of the gland, blood to be avoided by changing slightly the direction of the pipette or putting it deeper or more superficially. Withdraw the pipette and blow out a drop of it on the slide, spreading as above. The pipette is to be burnt immediately after this, and all objects used disinfected. 9.    The use of a syringe is not advisable. 10.    The slide is stained by any of the aniline dyes and examined with an oil immersion lens, or sent for staining and examination to the Bubonic Plague Research Committee, Petit Laboratory, Bombay. 11.    Any operation should be avoided with glands situated on the abdomen above Poupart's ligament. 10. The Sanitary Commissioner reported on October 24th that he had issued the necessary advice to the authorities at Ahmedabad, Dhulia and Surat. The outlying municipalities were, he reported, fully alive to the importance of checking the disease at its outset. SECTION 7. General remarks. The position at the beginning of December when Government arrived in Bombay from Mahabaleshwar was briefly that extensive measures had been taken for the protection of Aden, Sind and the Mofussil districts of the Presidency from infection, and in Bombay City the Municipal Commissioner had been provided with powers of the most drastic kind for dealing with the epidemic. He bad found it inexpedient, however, for reasons which appeared very forcible at the time, to make full use of those powers as regards the segregation of the sick: but had adopted extensive measures for improving the sanitary condition of the city and for disinfecting infected localities, and those measures appeared to have had the effect of keeping the disease in check in the city.
17                                  CHAPTER II.         SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF PLAGUE ADMINISTRATION IN                     DECEMBER 1896 AND JANUARY 1897.                                     SECTION 1.    Measures taken by Government with reference to the Plague Administration                    of the Municipal Commissioner, Bombay.       1. The Committee appointed by Government in October (vide Chapter I, section 2, para. 14) to inquire into the nature and history of plague were called upon by the Surgeon-General in December to favour him with their views as to the best means to stamp out the disease.      2. In response to this the Committee on December 9th forwarded a majority report in which they urged the adoption of certain practical measures, the most important of which was the rigid segregation of the sick in the houses in which the attack commenced, or, if no suitable accommodation were available, the removal of the sick to other suitable places such as special hospitals.      3. This report, which is printed as Appendix A to this chapter, was signed by Drs. Manser, Childe, and Surveyor, and Mr. Hankin.     Professor Haffkine, the delegate of the Government of India, expressed his inability to sign the document, and wrote the following minute of dissent:     "The sanitary precautions now being taken against the plague are -in conformity with the general sanitary principles adopted at present. Any new suggestions can be made only after a patient study, for which we have not yet had sufficient time, and which ought to be uninterruptedly pursued. No immaterial alteiations or additions in the present measures are in the least likely to affect the course of the epidemic, and it is not advisable to interfere with the system at work in the city, for which there is no reason to substitute any other. The preparation of an antitoxic serum similar to that which is being experimented upon by Dr. Yersin is a correct attempt, and in my programme of work submitted to the Government of India previous to my coming to Bombay, this was the first problem to be taken up, after having ascertained the identity of the disease. Since several weeks, horses, cows, goats and sheep are being immunised at the Government lazaretto at Sewri. Dr. Yersin has also been asked for a supply of serum, just at the commencement of the outbreak, through the Consul General in Calcutta, and he answered that he had only a small amount of serum, of which he could send only two doses, since then received in Calcutta. At my request to have the sample here for a trial, I had at first a telegram from the Health Officer of Calcutta saying that it was being despatched to me, but later on he informed me that he could not spare the specimen. I am repeating the request to-day. As there is the possibility of Dr. Yersin having since prepared another supply of serum, or of his being ready now to submit it to trial, it is advisable to repeat the inquiry, and I concur with the rest of the Committee in the clause which has been inserted in your paper to that effect,"      4. In forwarding these documents to Government on December 12th the Surgeon-General recommended the proposals contained in the majority report, and expressed his hope that Government would endeavour to make the Muni- cipality carry out the recommendations as far as they could. He added that strict segregation was the best way to meet the outbreak, and the plan of re- moving the healthy from the infected localities had also been found successful in the Gurhwal hills. He feared that the recommendation of the Committee for the employment of a large number of Commissioned Medical Officers for plague work in Bombay must be disregarded, as several Commissioned Officers would be required for famine work'in the districts, and a sufficient number could not be made available. He suggested that Government should get a supply of M. Yersin's antitoxin, and informed Government of the way in which it might be procured. He concluded by saying that he took a very serious view of the situation, and urged that the caste prejudices of the natives, while they should be respected as far as possible, should not be allowed to stand in the way of the necessary sanitary measures.      5. As all the executive and sanitary measures being taken in the city were in charge of the Municipal Commissioner and, under him, of the Health Depart- ment of the Municipality, the papers were promptly sent to the Municipal Com- missioner for consideration and report. He replied on January 8th, enclosing     B 1135-5
18  a report by Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Weir, the Executive Health Officer, as follows:     " The matter is so important that I cannot give a reply or comment on the reports until I have had time for fuller consideration and also further experience in dealing with the disease. I may mention that cases have occurred within the last few days in totally different localities to the districts hitherto affected, namely, in Coliwda amongst the fisher- men at the extreme north-west of the island, and it will be most interesting to observe whether the measures taken in the crowded portions of the city will be successful in these thinly populated and isolated districts."      It should be noted that Dr. Cleghorn had been deputed to Bombay, and that the memorial referred to in paragraph 15 below, drawn up under his direc- tions, was signed by Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Weir.      6. In reply the Municipal Commissioner was informed that Government awaited his further report on the recommendations of the Committee.      7. On January 20th the Municipal Commissioner, to whom the services of Surgeon-Captain Jennings, I.M.S., had been lent in December for plague duty, asked for the services of Surgeon-Major Kirtikar, Civil Surgeon of Thna, to take charge under Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Weir of house-to-house visita- tion in the city, and also requested that a staff of native medical practitioners, to work under Dr. Kirtikar, might be supplied. He suggested also that an experi- enced medical man should be deputed by Government to watch the measures being taken by the Municipality, and in particular to supervise the measures for preventing persons suffering from plague from leaving Bombay.      8. Accordingly on the same day telegrams were sent to all the administra- tions in India, including Assam and Burma, to ask what medical men of all ranks they could spare. Their replies showed the difficulties of the situation. The Government of Bengal had no medical men to lend owing to famine works and the precautions against plague. The North-West Provinces had none on account of famine. Assam had none, as all their reserve was employed on cholera work among the cooly immigrants. The Central Provinces had none owing to famine. Burma had none available. Madras offered two Commissioned Officers, but had no subordinates to spare on account of famine and cholera. The Punjab also had none.      9. Also, on the 20th January, telegrams were sent to all Collectors sug- gesting that they should try to find pensioned medical subordinates to put in charge of dispensaries so as to release some Assistant Surgeons and Hospital Assistants for plague and famine work.      10. A proposal of the Surgeon.General on December 11th to employ ten temporary Hospital Assistants in addition to the twenty previously sanctioned, had been sanctioned by Government; but on the 26th January he reported that he had up to that date only been able to procure nineteen men. At that moment he had requisitions for eleven Hospital Assistants for plague duty and three for famine duty, with none of which was he able to comply.      11. On January 24th the services of four Military Assistant Surgeons and  eight Hospital Assistants were at the request of the Government of India placed  at the disposal of the Surgeon-General. These were without delay deputed for  service under the Municipal Commissioner. Towards the end of January the  Government of India agreed to lend this Government 16 Medical Commissioned  Officers and 21 Military Medical Subordinates, and these were subsequently made  use of as they arrived.       12. The request of the Municipal Commissioner for the services of Surgeon-  Major Kirtikar was promptly complied with, though this involved depriving the  Thna District, where the spread of plague was causing anxiety, of its only Com-  missioned Medical Officer. Also the request of the Municipal Commissioner that  an experienced Medical Officer should be appointed to watch, on behalf of Govern-  ment, the plague measures which were being taken in the city, was met by the  immediate deputation to Bombay of Surgeon-Major A. W. Street, I.M.S., D.S.O.,  Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, though this officer was needed, in Poona, to advise  regarding the sanitary steps contemplated for the suppression of the plague.  Surgeon-Major Street arrived in Bombay on January 22nd. His instructions
19  were to consult with the Municipal Commissioner and the Health Officer; to see for himself what was being done; to note any defects; to inform Government of the result of his inspections and of any defects which he might note, and, in particular, scrutinise the measures for preventing the escape of plague-stricken persons from the city. A brief account of the action taken by him is given as Appendix B to this chapter.     13. On the 20th January, in reply to a telegram in which the Secretary of State offered to send a temporary staff of doctors, the Bombay Government telegraphed that the " services of Army Medical Doctors who served in Hong- kong during the plague would be acceptable." As the Government of India expressed their willingness to lend medical men, a request made to the Secretary of State on the 23rd January to send out 10 Hindustani-speaking junior officers of the Army Medical Department was cancelled.      14. At this time, therefore, the Municipal Commissioner was devoting his attention to a scheme for house-to-house visitation with a view to carrying out as far as practicable the most important and difficult of the suggestions of the Surgeon-General, viz., the segregation of the sick; and Government had taken such steps as were possible to supply him with the medical men required for the purpose-a matter of extreme difficulty.      15. In the meantime Dr. Cleghorn, Director-General of the Indian Medical Service, had been deputed on January 4th by the Government of India to visit Bombay, " not with the object of criticising or interfering in any way with local arrangements, but with a view to informing himself fully of the existing state of affairs and of determining what measures should be adopted, should the exten- sion of the disease to other parts of India become serious." During his visit a memorial was compiled under his direction and signed by several medical men. In this, which is printed in full as Appendix C to this chapter, and the signa- tories of which included all the members, except Dr. Manser (deceased), of the Scientific Committee which had previously recommended segregation of the sick and also included the Surgeon-General and Brigade-Surgeon -Lieut.-Colonel Weir, Executive Health Officer of the Bombay Mnnicipality, it was strongly urged that evacuation of all infected houses was the only practical method of arresting the progress of the disease. Professor Haffkine, when signing the memorial. appended the following minute:     "I am of opinion that as there are facts showing that the plague is spread by people coming from infected localities, the measures compelling the inhabitants to leave those localities ought to be accompanied by others calculated to control their future movements."      16. This memorial was forwarded on the 19th January 1897 by the Gov- ernment of India to the Government of Bombay.   The Municipal Commissioner was thereupon consulted.      17. A few days previously a telegram was received from the Secretary of State, in which he made the following among other suggestions:     "After consulting experts, local and scientific, I consider-         (1) That all plague cases should be segregated apart in separate hospitals; due     allowance should be made for sex and caste; if opposition arises it should be faced.         (2) That house-to-house visitation and inspection should be put in force in the     manner least repugnant to the feelings of the people, a special staff being organised     under medical men."     18. The Municipal Commissioner on 28th January submitted the following report on the proposals of Dr. Cleghorn and the Medical Officers who had signed the memorial compiled under his direction:                              " No. 22709 OF 1896-97. From P. C. H. SNOW, Esquire, I. C. S., Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay,     to the SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, General Department.                                                 Municipal Commissioner's Office,                                                 Bombay, 28th January 1897.     "Sir,-In regard to the Despatch No. 45, Home Department, Sanitary, from the Government of India, dated 19th January 1897, lately forwarded to me I have the honour to remark as follows.
20       "Surgeon-Major-General Cleghorn seems to have been under a misapprehension as. regards the idea with which the influential Native Practitioners mentioned signed the memo- randum, copy of which was forwarded with the above quoted despatch. The following signatories-Dr. Nariman, Dr. Bhalchandra Krishna, Dr. Ismail Jan Mahomed-have clearly informed me that they signed the memorandum on the distinct understanding that no compulsion was to be used, and acquainted as they are with the people and the effects which would follow a general attempt at compulsory removal, it is impossible to conceive that they could have subscribed to the memorandum with any such views in their minds. It is probable that several of the other signatories would express themselves in a similar manner, and that segregation of this kind could only be effected by compulsion admits of no doubt.      I must here draw the attention of Government to the discrepancy in the views recently expressed by the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for India and the Gov- ernment of India. The former suggested wholesale segregation of the sick, the latter has suggested segregation of the healthy.      As regards the latter course, I would point out that at the lowest computation some 30,000 persons would be affected belonging to different races, castes and creeds. Mutual contact with one another would be regarded with the greatest abhorrence, and I know of no site within the limits of the Bombay Municipality which would accommodate a tenth of this number. The Bombay Government is aware with what great difficulty such attempts at segregation as have been possible and the limited success that has attended them, have been achieved. Fear of the plague and fear of segregation or being taken to hospitals and huts (the mass of the people do not differentiate on this head) has caused a general exodus of the population, and the most reliable calculations available lead to the conclusion that some 300,000 people had left up to the middle of January.      The gentlemen who signed the memorandum and expressed themselves to the effect  'that there will be no difficulty in providing sufficient and suitable accommodation for  people removed from  infected' houses; and that it only requires the concurrence and  sympathy of the leaders of the different sections of the community to render the plan  proposed by them a success,' do not appear to have given any serious thought to the matter  under discussion. I have carefully considered the question of a very large camp of this  kind with the Commissioner of Police and the Executive Engineer, and we are all unani-  mous as to the fact that no extensive site can be found inside the boundaries of the city.      Then follows the question of constructing say 6,000 huts at a place, if such a one could be found, several miles beyond municipal limits and beyond the jurisdiction of the Bombay Muni- cipality. Experience in putting up small numbers of huts has shown us that under present conditions with a scarcity of material and labour such a work could not be put through under three months. Supposing the camp erected no one will go there except under compulsion and the furniture and effects would have to go too. If with the use of a large military force it were possible to get all the healthy people from infected houses into the camp, the whole object of the arrangement would be defeated if they were not watched and kept to the camp as long as might be necessary. They would thus be deprived of their means of livelihood and have to be maintained at an enormous cost. Then there would be the sanitary question and the utter impossibility of getting the requisite number of sweepers. I may also point out that there is no law which would permit such forcible segregation, and it is an almost absolute certainty that plague would break out in a camp constituted of such residents and under such conditions. It would also be necessary to provide a camp and sustenance for say at least 2,000 troops to drive and watch the people.      As to the leaders of the sections of the communities referred to none have been found during  the last four months. There are many rich men, but they have no large following or influence,  and what is more, would be the first to oppose any move of this kind. The only real leader  with power and influence that I can mention at the present time is His Highness Aga Khan, and  his community would represent a small fraction only.      It is necessary to consider the matter from another point of view. Directly it became  known that any such camp was being got ready and that people were to be taken there a fur-  ther general panic and stampede from Bombay would take place. The municipal sweepers,  bigarris, and working staff, who have only been kept together by extraordinary efforts, would  immediately take fright and leave the place. Those who know can best imagine what Bombay  would be, bereft of sweepers: the city would be weltering in its own sewage, all the extended  and important sanitary works adopted for the suppression of the plague would come to an end,  trade would be further paralysed, and the city involved in a catastrophe of appalling dimensions.  I can only warn Government of my own knowledge and also on the opinions of those com-  petent to judge that this is the certain result of an attempt at such segregation, and however  much the term may be glossed over with euphemistic and vague expressions, it simply means  segregation by military force.       I will leave it to Government to judge how far the statement that the measures taken  have failed to arrest the progress of the disease is correct, but I do not think that the experi  ences in Mndvi Bandar, Cleveland Bandar, and Kmthipura would warrant such a conclusion.       Government will understand that in replying to a communication of this kind I feel it my  duty to speak with no uncertain voice, and that although I have given the most careful and
21  respectful consideration to the views of the Government of India expressed in this despatch, I cannot, after obtaining other valuable opinions on the topic, bring myself in any way to concur in them. A hundred other arguments might be advanced against this proposal, but it will be sufficient to mention its general impossibility, its prohibitive cost, the time it would take, the certainty that it would produce exactly the opposite effects which were intended even if partially carried out, and the fact that such a camp could not be put up inside municipal limits."    SECTION 2.  Sketch of the measures taken by the Municipal Commissioner in Bombay City during this period. 1. During the month of November it seemed as if the epidemic was on the decline. The reported plague deaths for the week ending October 27th had been 72, while in the week ending December 1st, 64 only were recorded. Opinion, as reflected in the public press, was up to this time divided on the subject, one school insisting that to call the prevailing disease plague was going too far; bubonoid fever, or bubonic fever, were, it was urged, more cor- rect as well as less alarming names for describing it. Others went to the other extreme, and asked for the destruction by fire of all infected houses and locali- ties. 2. The following table exhibits the sudden turn for the worse which affairs took in the first part of December:    Week ending  Deaths from all causes.  Reported Plague deaths. December 1st 742 64 " 8th 1,032 173 " 15th 1,284 259 " 22nd 1,387 226 " 29th  1,824 390 January 5th  1,693 348 " 12th 1,613 335 " 19th  1,735 470 " 26th 1,693 446 February 2nd 1,624 516  3. As regarded the direction in which the disease spread, the Commissioner notes that, speaking generally, it was preceded by a migration of rats from the parts of the city which were most affected. "The bubonic plague travelled principally from east to west and then north, throw- ing out branches to the south and obtaining a footing on Malabr Hill later on. By the commencement of December nearly all the rats had disappeared from Mndvi and adjacent quarters of the city, while they were noticed in Kmtipura, Trdeo and Byculla in great numbers, many of them being found dead. The bubonic plague followed in their track with unerring regularity. I was so struck with this portion of the plague phenomena that in the end of December and January I made a series of verbal inquiries from natives in various parts of the town. The replies were invariably the same, that the rats had dis- appeared from the centre of the city and were observed in great numbers on the west and north. In my opinion it is useless to look further for the origin of the severe outbreaks in Worli village, Mhim and Bndra on the west, and Parel, Naigaon, Sion and Dhrvi on the northern side. The inquiries I made showed that vast numbers of rats flying from the danger of the pestilence moved steadily in those directions and were noticed in numbers in places where they had not before caused remark." The figures given above show that the increase of the disease was accom- panied by a heavy rise in the total mortality from all causes. Exodus. 4. Heavy as the mortality was, it was kept within bounds by the flight of the people. It is estimated that by the end of January no less than 378,900 persons had left the city. The Municipal Commissioner describes the scenes accompanying this movement of the population as follows: "When the plague was at its height, and the exodus in full flow, the scenes at the railway stations were striking, a motley crowd of natives of every caste and creed pressing and shouting for tickets, and then, as the train steamed in, a hurrying anxious throng, old and young alike, tottering under enormous bundles of household goods. As special after special left the stations, the relies of the disappointed crowd, sooner than miss the nex opportunity, would quietly settle down to sleep on the platforms. The busy scenes at the station stood out in marked contrast to the quietness of Bombay; whole streets of shops B 1135-6
22  were closed, business was paralysed, and the desolate emptiness of thoroughfares ordinarily teeming with life was most remarkable, and continued throughout the months of December and January, when the population had been reduced to its lowest figure."  5. At the end of January the Health Officer, who had been watching the regularity of the progress of the disease from ward to ward, informed the Muni- cipal Commissioner that the end of the crisis was near. The disease was moving out of the central portions of the city, and working itself out into the north, west and south of the island, where the population is comparatively thin and scattered over a number of small villages. Segregation.  6. On the 11th December a meeting of a number of influential members of the various communities in Bombay was held at the instance of Dr. N. N. Ktrak to discuss the situa- tion. The debate showed that native opinion was still opposed to the use of force to carry out segregation, and the evacuation of the affected localities was suggested as the best way to deal with the plague. The following resolution was finally carried: "That this meeting is of opinion that it would be extremely difficult to control or stamp out the bubonic plague, if, as at present is the case, it rages in the different localities in Bombay, and in a large number of houses; that it is extremely desirous that all the different communities should concert measures with a view to start special hospitals for their communities, where the people afflicted by the disease may be treated and attended upon by their own people; that the disease may be confined and restricted to within certain limits, when the drainage, sanitation, and surroundings of these hospitals may be better looked after by the Municipality; that the heads of the communities may be appealed to to impress upon their own people the danger of allow- ing the sick to remain in their own houses, where, according to expert medical opinion, they act as so many centres for infection; that it is necessary to disinfect the infected houses freely, and to burn the bedding and other articles with which a deceased person attacked with the plague may have come into contact; that it may be pointed out compulsory segregation is in no way intended or suggested, and it is hoped that there will be no misunderstanding on the point; and that the leaders may also be recommended to impress upon the people that the healthy persons living in the infected houses would, in the interest of their own health, do well to remove from such houses." Committees of the different communities were appointed to carry into effect the steps approved of in the resolution. The Municipal Commissioner, who was present at the meeting, reports on the proposal as follows: "A camp of refuge for the whole of Bombay was an utterly impossible scheme; but the propo- sal was obviously in the right direction, and I gave the Committee all the assistance and co-operation in my power. Camps were opened for the healthy at Connaught Road and Northbrook Gardens, capable of accommodating 1,500 people, as an experimental measure, but the difficul- ty of success in this direction was shown by the fact that these camps were hardly used. Never- theless, the principle was successfully put into operation at various local centres of the epidemic, and in all the outlying villages, such as Naigaum, Sewri, Koliwda, Worli, &c., it was the invariable practice to persuade or coerce the people to leave their houses for temporary sheds erected in the fields, and this measure was generally attended with the most satisfactory results." 7. Apart from the action taken by the Municipal Executive in the direc- tion of providing temporary accommodation for people whose houses were infected by the plague, a camp was erected by Ro Sheb Ellpa Bllrm at Foras Road, and another by the Tramway Company, an example which was followed by other firms: "At the height of the epidemic," writes the Municipal Commissioner, " and afterwards, the whole of Northern Bombay, where suitable sites could be obtained, was studded with segregation huts; to say nothing of the very large number of people encamped along the Maremma at Santa Cruz, Andheri, Goregaum, and northwards: most of the refugees remained in camp till the middle of May, when the disease had almost vanished." 8. Not only in the city of Bombay, but in most up-country places where the same measure was adopted, it was found that the people, while appreciating the advantage of moving out of their infected houses, regarded health camps with some suspicion, and preferred to live out in the open under the trees, &c., where they would be subject to no sort of restrictions. And, except where it was feared that such improvised camps might become plague centres, it was not thought necessary to interfere with this arrangement, the main object being to procure the evacuation of the affected localities.
23 Hospitals.  9. Owing to the reluctance of the people to enter the Municipal Hospital, and the abandonment of the forcible removal of the sick, up to January the Arthur Road Hospital was only about half full. At the end of January when patients began to come in greater numbers, the accommodation was extended by the addition of another ward, and the Mzgaon Sisters were approached on the subject of undertaking the nursing. All along great difficulty had been experienced in obtaining the requisite number of attendants. 10. As regards private hospitals the Commissioner writes as follows: "As early as October private hospitals for Hindus on these lines (i.e. management by their castemen) were opened in Mndvi and Bhuleshvar, but this effort proved abortive, the unreasoning terror of hospital life was still in full vigour, and extended even to institutions managed entirely by men of their own class. In December, however, more successful efforts were made in this direction. A Jain Hospital was erected in the compound of the Arthur Road institution, a little later Dr. Bhdurji opened a most successful and well-managed hospital for Prsis in Parel, and on the 28th January a Hindu hospital, which did excellent service, was opened under the efficient management of the Honourable Dr. Bhalchandra Krishna. Similarly the Port Trustees opened a model hospital at Wri Bandar for their employs on the 23rd December, and through the energy of Professor Muller an institution was started at Modikhna for the servants of Europeans on 31st January. It may also be mentioned that a temporary hospital was erected in December by the Health Department at Nrelvdi for the benefit of the people of that locality, which was at the time being very severely visited." 11. Professor Muller writes with regard to the hospital for servants of Europeans that while the prospect of removal to the Municipal Hospital excited the utmost terror in the minds of the low-caste natives of the servant class, they had little, if any, objection to going to the special servants' hospital, or to the hospitals afterwards established by the Plague Committee. Disinfection, &c.  12. The measures described in section 5 of Chapter I were carried on on an ever-increasing scale during the months of December and January. Wherever the approach of the plague in a locality was apprehended, disinfectants were distributed to the people for use, but owing to the perversity with which the people insisted in scattering these in front of their houses, on their verandahs, and everywhere except in the dark and damp corners of their houses, the measure did not produce the effect it should have done. "In December," writes the Municipal Commissioner, "the drainage and building branches carried out limewashing operations on a large scale throughout a great portion of the city and suburbs in anticipation of the pestilence. The magnitude of the disinfecting and limewashing operations carried out by the Municipality can be appreciated from the fact that during the months of December, January and February some 14,000 houses were treated by the Engineering Department alone, while the Health Department was busily employed in the same work from the very beginning. Many houses were treated more than once, and every recurrence of plague was the signal for a fresh sanitary onslaught. It has been shown further on, how, towards the end of the epidemic, belief in the efficacy of ventilation to some extent superseded faith in disinfection, but the fact that in Kmtipura in some 404 houses where 511 cases occurred, only 89 were recorded after they had been limewashed two or three times, goes far to show that whether it was the germicidal properties of the lime or the effect it had in brightening and lightening the houses, the measures taken in this direction were of great value in checking the disease. It cannot be claimed for them, more than for any others, that they were absolutely efficacious, for the plague appeared in epidemic form in districts where whole streets had been lime- washed from end to end in anticipation of its approach; but when the death-rate in Bombay during the pestilence is compared with the appalling mortality that has occurred at other times and places from the same scourge, it is not unnatural to conclude that those measures to which the greatest energy was devoted in Bombay had something to do with the mitigation of the disaster. Besides the Engineering and Health Departments, the Fire Brigade gave the greatest assistance, and from the end of September till long after the constitution of the Plague Committee, they were hard at work flushing gullies and build- ings. On an average 3 to 5 steamers were daily employed on this duty, each with its com- plement of 11 men, and in addition the Brigade manuals and pumps were freely made use of." 13. Another important step taken in December was the cutting off of the water connections inside the worst houses. The majority of the buildings in which the poorer classes live in the city are of a flimsy construction, easily saturated from top to bottom by leaking pipes. " Not only do the majority of the people," writes the Municipal Commissioner, " consider it necessary to turn
24  a tap on full bore to clean their clothes, their bodies, or even their legs and faces, but they habitually avoid the trouble of turning off the taps after they have finished their ablutions."  The system of putting up meters has been repeatedly urged on the Corporation, without success, and accordingly in the plague period the only remedy was to cut off the supply. In pursuance of this policy, in December, the water was cut off from all houses in Kmtipura, standpipes being erected in the street for the use of the people.     14. In the course of a communication on the subject of plague in the period to which the present chapter relates the Commissioner of Police, Mr. R. H. Vincent, C.I.E., writes as follows:     "I had during these days, I speak of the early part of January, several communications from  the Municipal Commissioner and the Health Officer asking me to use my best endeavours to keep the menial servants of the Health Department together, and while my chief subordinates were constantly engaged to effect this. I had the headmen of these people up before me on more than one occasion and we fortunately succeeded in pre- venting strikes among the municipal employs, &c. Again, the butchers in the municipal slaughter-houses in Bndra and the meat-van drivers began to show signs of unrest, while domestic servants of Europeans and of natives of position fled in ever-increasing numbers, leaving numerous households without cooks, hamals and ayahs  Office peons likewise left their employment often without asking for their wages, and lastly the mill- hands left in thousands, compelling the owners either to close their mills or to keep them going with a very small number of men. It can easily be imagined how difficult was the task under these circumstances to keep the police and the employs of the Municipality in hand, and this was certainly not the work of an hour or a day. For weeks and well into February there was not a day on which I could with certainty reckon that the following one would not leave the city practically without a halalkhor service."                                    SECTION 3.          New Measures for Railway Inspection in the Presidency proper.      In the month of January it became clear that the existing staff of Medical Inspectors employed at the stations in the Island of Bombay was incapable of effectually dealing with the increased number of departures. Plague had by this time spread all over the island, and as there were twenty railway stations at which passengers could enter the trains, the expedient of inspecting them at a few stations only was clearly useless.      2. The matter was carefully considered by Government in consultation with the Surgeon-General with the Government of Bombay and the Consulting Engineer for Railways. There were two alternatives. One was to remove all passengers from the trains at one or two large stations outside the Island of Bombay and employ a large staff to examine them on the platforms. The other was to block the causeways leading from Bombay Island to Slsette, and to employ a small staff at each of the railway stations in Bombay to examine passengers as they came into the stations. The former plan, assuming that Kalyn was selected as an inspecting station on the G. I. P. Railway, involved an absence of interference with persons suffering from the plague when travelling by railway within 30 miles of Bombay and also involved a long detention of trains, and the turning out of passengers at night, at which time five of the ten through down trains passed Kalyn Junction. On the other hand the plan of blocking the causeways and examining all passengers before they entered any of the stations in Bombay involved the employment of an additional staff of some 40 medical subordinates. The Surgeon-General with the Government of Bombay having pointed out certain ways of obtaining the requisite staff, Govern- ment resolved on giving a trial to the latter plan.    Pending the arrival of the necessary staff the best arrangements possible were to be made        with the existing staff: and, at the Municipal Commissioner's request and on the advice of the Surgeon-General with the Government of Bombay, the management of the inspection was removed from the control of the Municipality and placed in charge of Surgeon-Major A. W. Street, D.S.O.     The difficulties in the away of promptly obtaining the requisite staff, however, being found insurmountable, a scheme for leaving local traffic unchecked, and preventing passengers for
25  distant stations from   booking except by certain     trains and  from   certain stations, where inspection could be satisfactorily made, was next considered by Government.     This scheme also had to be rejected as impracticable, and finally, on the recommendation of the Government of India on February 4th, it was resolved to adopt the first of the alternatives mentioned above-to remove all passengers from the trains by night as well as by day, at Kalyn and Plghar on the G. I. P. and B. B. & C. I. Railways respectively, and to employ at each of these stations a considerable inspecting staff under Commissioned Medical Officers.  Orders were immediately issued to all the officers concerned; the erection of hospitals and detention sheds was pushed on rapidly ; and the following rules drafted by the Remembrancer of Legal Affairs were issued on the 10th February under Act III of 1897, which had been passed six days previously, and which conferred on Government the necessary legal powers for the adequate treatment of railway passengers--powers which previously did not exist:      1. Every train coming from the direction of Bombay to any of the stations to  which these rules may be declared by Government to be applicable, shall be stopped at such  station and shall not be taken further until the inspection provided by these rules has been  carried out, and until the guard in charge of such train has obtained a certificate from the  Chief Medical Officer in charge of the inspecting staff to the effect that all persons proceeding  further by the said train, whether railway servants or passengers, are free from bubonic  plague.      2. Every such train shall be emptied for inspection of the passengers in such manner  as the Chief Medical Officer on duty may direct, and all such facilities shall be afforded by  the servants of the Railway Company as the Chief Medical Officer on duty may deem to be  necessary for the purpose of inspecting:           (a) persons who have come by such train, whether they intend to proceed by it or      not, and           (b) persons who intend to start from any of the said stations and to travel by such      train.           In particular the doors of all railway carriages shall be locked at the station at      which the train last stops before arrival at the station appointed for the inspection of      passengers under these rules.      3. The Governor in Council may appoint any person or persons, by name or by virtue  of office, to be the inspecting medical officer or officers for the purposes of these rules and  may cancel any such appointment.      4. Inspecting medical officers appointed under these rules are empowered to examine  all persons arriving by or intending to leave by the trains mentioned and to detain persons  suffering or suspected by them to be suffering from bubonic plague. n such places as may be  appointed for the accommodation of such persons respectively.       5. The Police shall act under the orders given by the Chief Medical Officer on duty  under these rules with regard to compelling persons to submit to such regulations as may  be made or approved by the said officer for the purpose of inspection and with regard to  the detention and segregation of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from bubonic  plague.       6. Disobedience to any orders issued under the above rules Nos. 1, 2, 4, and 5 will  subject the offender to a prosecution under Section 188, Indian Penal Code.       3.  On the following day the rules were extended to Ahmedabad, Bhusval,  Hotgi, and Londa.   An additional rule providing for the detention in hospital of  any cases which might be discovered was issued on the same day. The Collectors  of the respective districts were asked to arrange for the necessary accommoda-  tion for the staff, and also to have sheds put up for the reception of cases.       4. The inspections at Kalyn and Plghar began on February 12th. At   the other places the requisite increase of Medical staff was provided as soon as   possible, as will be explained in Chapter III.                                        SECTION 4.                    Early measures for Railway inspection in Sind.        1. Plague was declared to be epidemic in Karchi by the Medical Board on   the 19th December, but the Municipal Secretary had reported on the 12th Dec-   ember that the Health Officer of the Municipality had seen one case on the 11th   December, and another, which was considered highly suspicious, on the 12th,       B 1135-7
26      2.  Accordingly on the 13th December an inspection of railway passengers was commenced at Karchi station, under the orders of the Principal Medical Officer.  The passengers were at first examined at the entrance gates, where the tickets were checked, and afterwards in the carriages, at the city station. The Railway Apothecary inspected the train again at the Cantonment station.  These arrangements were supervised by the Civil Surgeon.     3. On 29th December the Government of India telegraphed to the Govern- ment of Bombay to arrange for the inspection of passengers at Karchi and the principal railway stations, as had been done in the case of Bombay. The Com- missioner in Sind was accordingly asked to make the necessary arrangements, and to submit proposals to Government. A similar telegram was received from the Government of India, Public Works, on December 30th.     4.  In reply, the Commissioner in Sind reported on 4th January that inspection had been made for several weeks at Karchi stations, and since the 1st January at all other stations where there were Hospital Assistants. He further asked what system had been adopted for railway inspection in the Presidency proper.      5. He was accordingly informed that Hospital Assistants had been posted at the principal stations to inspect passengers from Bombay, with the co-opera- tions of the railway authorities.  Cases when detected were segregated in sheds provided by the Municipalities, who took measures under Section 73 of the Municipal Act. The stations at which inspections were made in Sind from. 1st January were:              Kotri Main.                      Ruk.             Laki.                            Jacobabad.             Dadu.                            Sukkur.             Hyderabad.                       Rohri.             Pad Edan.                        Reti.     "The chief inspections," reported the Principal Medical Officer, "are made at Kotri, Ddu, Jacobabad, and Sukkur, where trains wait a considerable time, or stop by daylight at the other places the examinations are subsidiary. Special instructions have been issued for the inspections at Ddu, and at Rohri and Sukkur, passengers by the down trains also have been examined since the 14th instant. At Shikrpur the examination of passengers by rail has been directed to be carried out by the Medical Subordinates at the disposal of the Civil Surgeon and by the Medical Officer in charge of the Municipal Dispensary. Both the up-mails and the local trains are inspected. At the places named below the inspection of passengers is made by the Medical Officers in charge of dispensaries, viz.:                   Sehwan.                     Mirpur Khs.                  Tando Adam.                 Ghotki.                  Tando Alhyar.              Lrkhna.     At Jungshai railway station, by request of the Collector, a Hospital Assistant has been specially posted to inspect passengers alighting from Karchi for the town of Ttta. At Sehwan from the 18th to the 24th January a special Hospital Assistant was detailed in addition to the Dispensary Medical Officer for the inspection of railway passengers visiting the Lal Shahbaz fair. At Jhimpur on the 19th January the Hospital Assistant in charge of the Jerruck Dispensary was sent to inspect arrivals of trains during the Amirpir fair."      6. On January 1st, Collectors and Deputy Commissioners had been asked to give what help they could to the inspecting officers, and the Railway District Traffic Superintendents had been requested to arrange for the inspection. District Boards and Municipalities had undertaken the erection of isolation sheds. To supplement the arrangements of the medical authorities, the Commissioner in Sind on the 10th January addressed a circular to all Collectors and Deputy Commissioners with regard to the inspection of travellers.       7. Revenue officers were asked in the first place to keep an eye on the  Hospital Assistants engaged on the medical inspection. It was directed that  Municipalities should at once be instructed to submit proposals for measures to be  taken under Section 7 3 of the District Municipal Act, and should arrange to erect  huts for the reception of any cases which might be detected at the inspection  posts; accommodation for the friends and relations of the patient should also  be provided.  All possible provision for the comfort of those so detained should  be made, and the Magisterial and Police officers should assist in the detention  of suspects and plague cases,
27      8. As an additional security the Commissioner announced that he had sanctioned the entertainment of four travelling   European inspectors to be paid from Local funds, to travel in turn with every train from Karchi to Ddu. Persons suspected of plague were not to be forcibly examined, but detained for observation. Females were in no case to be subjected to bodily examination.     9. These instructions of the Commissioner were approved by Government on January 29th.                                    SECTION 5.            Departures from Bombay by Sea-new measures regarding.      The measures taken for the protection of Aden and Karchi and the system under which pilgrim ships and vessels leaving Bombay for the Persian Gulf, Aden, Mauritius, Red Sea ports and the Suez Canal were originally inspected, have been referred to in Section 4 of Chapter I.     2. In January when plague had assumed a severely epidemic form in Bombay City and panic-stricken persons were leaving the city in large numbers Govern- ment came to the conclusion that further measures were necessary; that the passengers and crews of all vessels leaving the port, including native craft and ferry and coasting steamers, must be compulsorily inspected; that the inspection should be of a detailed nature and that the necessary medical staff must be provided.      3. In ordinary times vessels are under no legal obligation to take any certificate of health. Those that do so, take it for their own protection. The vessels by which persons can leave the Island of Bombay by sea are of four classes:          (1) Those which receive a Bill of Health in Form B. This includes all      vessels proceeding to what are known as the quarantine ports, viz., Persian      Gulf, Mauritius, Red Sea ports, and Europe vi the Suez Canal.      This Bill of Health declares whether at the time when the ship leaves the port of Bombay it is in a satisfactory sanitary condition, and whether any case of infectious disease dangerous to life exists among its officers, passengers, or crew. It further declares whether the town and port of Bombay are free from cholera, plague, yellow fever, and all other dangerous epidemic diseases.          (2) Ships which receive Bill of Health, Form C. This merely states     whether there is epidemic disease prevailing in the city and suburbs of     Bombay.          (3) Shepherd's steamers, which do an enormous coasting traffic in both      directions, as far as Karchi northwards, and as far as Mangalore in the      Madras Presidency to the south.          (4) Native craft.      4. The outlines of a large scheme for inspection were settled at a Con- ference at which His Excellency the Governor presided. The details were then worked out by the Collector of Land Revenue and Customs, and rules under the Quarantine Act I of 1870 were framed in consultation with the Government Solicitor.      5. The sanction of the Government of India being necessary to the issue of rules under this Act, an application was made to that Government for sanction to the proposed rules. In reply the Government of India telegraphed on the 28th January that the legality of the rules was open to question, but action could nevertheless be taken thereunder, and that a Bill giving power to make such rules would shortly be passed.      6. Government Resolution No. 624-130-P., dated February 4th, accord- ingly authorised the Collector of Customs and the Port Health Officer to act on the proposed rules. To avoid delay an informal communication had previously been made to these officers, who had made arrangements to engage the requisite staff, and to commence work forthwith.
28       7. Vessels leaving the Port of Bombay were divided into three classes:           (A) Steamers and square-rigged vessels proceeding to Karchi vi      coast ports, vessels proceeding direct to any port not in the Continent of      India, and to any Indian port north of Mndvi or south of Bhatkal.           (B) Other steamers and square-rigged vessels.           (C) Native craft bound for Mndvi or for Bhatkal or for any port     between those limits.     Class (A) was to be inspected by the Health Officer of the Port and his Assistants,      Class (B) by qualified Medical officers approved by the Collector of Customs, Bombay, for this purpose, and      Class (C) by officers deputed by the Collector of Customs for the purpose.      No port clearance was to be granted to any    vessel which had not received a certificate of having passed the inspection, and vessels leaving the Port of Bombay   without complying with the rules for inspection were to be liable to prosecution under Section 271, I. P. C.      8. The Epidemic Diseases Act (III of 1897), was communicated to the Government of Bombay by telegram on the 4th February.      Accordingly on the 6th the following notification was issued in a Gazette Extraordinary, No. 656-165-P. :     " The following rules have been prescribed by His Excellency the Governor in Council in accordance with the Epidemic Diseases Act of 1897:         (1) No vessel shall leave the Port of Bombay until she has been inspected by the     Health Officer of the Port and the Master or person in charge of such vessel has obtain-     ed a Bill of Health or certificate from such officer that the Master or person in charge,     officers, crew and passengers (if any) of such vessel are free from any dangerous epide-     mic disease.         (2) Should the Health Officer of the Port be of opinion that any person on board     of any vessel so inspected is suffering from a dangerous epidemic disease, he shall refuse     to give a Bill of Health or certificate as aforesaid unless and until such person is remov-     ed from the vessel.         (3) After the Master or person in charge of the vessel has obtained any Bill of     Health or certificate under the provisions of these rules no person or cargo shall be     admitted or taken on board such vessel before she leaves the Port of Bombay unless     such vessel is again inspected by the Health Officer of the Port, and another Bill of     Health or certificate obtained from such officer by the Master or person in charge of     such vessel.         (4) No port clearance shall be delivered to any vessel unless and until the Master     or person in charge thereof shall produce the Bill of Health or certificate so to be obtain-     ed as aforesaid, and it shall be the duty of Customs officers to refuse delivery of the     port clearance without the production of such Bill of Health or certificate.          (5) The Government of Bombay may appoint any person or persons by name or     by virtue of office Health Officer or Health Officers of the Port for the purpose of these     rules as regards any class or classes of vessels and may cancel any such appointment.         (6) Disobedience to any of the above rules Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 will subject the offender     and all persons aiding and abetting him to a prosecution under Section 271 of the Indian     Penal Code.     9. Subsequently, the Government Solicitor pointed out that the words ' Section 271 of " should be omitted, as there was a difference of opinion among Doctors as to whether the plague was infectious or not; and moreover, as the rules were issued under the new Act III of 1897, a breach thereof would render the offender liable to a prosecution under Section 188, Indian Penal Code.   This amendment was accordingly made on February 8th.      10.  For the inspection of vessels     of  Class A,    three    Commissioned Officers, two Assistant Surgeons, and one Hospital Assistant were placed at the disposal of the Port Health Officer Surgeon-Major MacCartie by the Surgeon- General; and a Lady Doctor was engaged by the Port Health Officer to assist in the inspection.
29       11. As regards Class B vessels, which were to be inspected by qualified medical officers in the pay of the owners of the vessels, the Collector of Customs reported on 9th February that no such officers were available, and accordingly Government Resolution No. 945-399-P. sanctioned the engagement by him of two qualified medical. men and a lady doctor for this class of vessel.      12. For vessels of Class C the entertainment of three additional Customs Officers, one on Rs. 100 per mensem  and two on Rs. 75 per mensem, had been sanctioned in Government Resolution dated February 4th.      The Collector re- ported on February 5th that the Bandar staff would also require strengthening, and a sum of Rs. 200 per mensem was placed at his disposal for the engagement of the extra staff.  The examination of Class A vessels began     on February 4th. All vessels were thoroughly inspected from February 16th. Surgeon-Major Crimmin, V.C., was appointed an additional Health Officer for the Port of Bombay on the 15th February.                                       Aden.      13. In addition to the rules issued on October 13th for the protection of Aden against Bombay, similar rules were put in force on December 30th against Karachi, as plague had become epidemic there.      14.  On January 24th the Political Agent at Aden suggested that Govern- ment should take into consideration the necessity for more stringent rules against Bombay. He pointed out that vessels which carried a medical officer on board were under the existing rules admitted to free pratique if no cases of plague had occurred on board, and all their passengers were allowed to land without quarantine. From the fact that on the occurrence of a case of plague, quarantine for fifteen days was imposed, it followed that the journey from Bombay, which sometimes occupies only four or five days, afforded no guarantee that the persons who landed at Aden in an apparently healthy condition might not have the seeds of infection in them undeveloped.      15.  The Government of Bombay had previously given consideration to the question of the adequacy of the Aden quarantine rules and on receipt of the abovementioned letter from the Resident immediately resolved on recommending that quarantine should be imposed on persons landing at Aden up to ten days from the date of departure of their vessels from Bombay and Karchi, even if no case of plague had occurred on the voyage.   This proposal was telegraphed to the Government of India on January 31st, and their sanction was received on February 2nd. On the following day the requisite notification was published in the Government Gazette and instructions to the Resident at Aden were issued by telegram.                                      Karchi.      16.  The quarantine imposed against Bombay at this port by the notifica- tion of October 13th was modified on February 3rd, when the following rules were substituted:      "No. 592.-In exercise of the power conferred by Act I of 1870, the following rules for quarantine against plague, in modification of those issued in Government Notification No. 4530, dated 13th October 1896, have been made by the Government of Bombay, with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council: they have effect from to-day in the Port of Karchi as a temporary measure:      I.-The Commander of every vessel, including buggalows or other native craft, arriving          at Karchi from Bombay shall, before entering the harbour, hoist a yellow flag (or if          entering a port at night time, show whatever quarantine light signals are customary          in the port) and indicate by signal the port from which such vessel has come, and shall          keep such flag and signals flying until permitted to take them down as hereinafter          provided. The pilot on going alongside a vessel from Bombay shall direct the flag          prescribed above to be hoisted, if it has not already been done.      II.--Such Commander shall not, without first having obtained permission as hereinafter          provided, allow any communication, except orally, with the shore or any other vessel          or boat, excepting with the boat supplying pilots, and in that case communication shall          be limited to receiving on board the pilot, his servant, and baggage.      III.-On any such arrival being such signalled, the Health Officer of the Port shall, as          soon as possible, go alongside the vessel and ascertain by enquiry from the Commander          and by careful individual medical examination of passengers and crew whether any          person on board is suffering, or has during the voyage suffered, from plague, or any     1135-8
30           death has occurred during the voyage from unknown or suspicious causes, and if the          Health Officer is satisfied by such enquiry and examination that no person on board is          suffering, or during the voyage has suffered, from plague, and that no death has          occurred during the voyage from unknown or suspicious causes, and if the ship carries          a qualified Medical Officer, quarantine shall be dispensed with, and pratique granted.               If the vessel does not carry a qualified Medical Officer, he shall direct the Com-          mander to take the vessel to the quarantine anchorage duly appointed and notified by          the Commissioner in Sind, and there to remain for a period of eight clear days from          the date of arrival in the harbour. The Health Officer shall also direct the Com-          mander to prohibit, during the period for which the vessel remains at the quarantine          anchorage as aforesaid, all communication, except such as is hereinafter provided for,          between such vessel and the shore or other vessels and boats in the harbour.      IV.-If the Health Officer, as the result of the enquiry and examination made under          paragraph III above, shall have reason to believe or suspect at the time when the          vessel arrives in the harbour that any person on board is suffering, or during the          voyage has suffered, from plague, he shall direct that such person, if alive, and, in any          case, the family and others, who have been in immediate attendance on, or in contact          with, him on the voyage, together with all his or their baggage and personal effects;          other than articles which the Health Officer directs to be immediately destroyed, be          removed to such particular spots as may from time to time be selected by the Com-          missioner in Sind as places of quarantine, there to remain until permitted to leave by          the Health Officer. After such removal all other persons may be allowed to land          under such precautions as the Health Officer considers necessary. The vessel shall          then be thoroughly disinfected under the direction and supervision of the Health          Officer, and pratique shall be granted after such disinfection has been completed.      V.-Any mails, baggage, or cargo which may be brought by any vessel so arriving shall          be landed under such precautions as the Health Officer may deem necessary to prevent          the spread of the disease.      VI.-It will be the duty of the Port Officer to facilitate the conveyance to all persons in          quarantine of such supplies of provisions, stores, and other articles as may be required.      VII.-All vessels arriving at Karchi which may have communicated with vessels coming          from Bombay shall be subjected to the same rules as vessels arriving at Karchi from          Bombay."       17.   By the 5th February 1897 arrangements had been made to improve the system of medical inspection of vessels departing from Karchi and to adopt rules similar to those applied to Bombay : and on that date the following notifica- tion was published in the Government Gazette:      " No. 820-322 P.-The following rules have been prescribed by His Excellency the Governor in Council in accordance with the Epidemic Diseases Act of 1897:      1. No vessel shall leave the Port of Karchi until she has been inspected by the Health.           Officer of the Port and the Master or person in charge of such vessel has obtained a           Bill of Health or certificate from such officer that the Master or person in charge,           officers, crew and passengers (if any) of such vessel are free from any dangerous           epidemic disease.      2. Should the Health Officer of the Port be of opinion that any person on board of any           vessel so inspected is suffering from a dangerous epidemie disease he shall refuse to           give a Bill of Health or certificate as aforesaid unless and until such person is removed           from the vessel.      3.  After the Master or person in charge of the vessel has obtained any Bill of Health or           certificate under the provisions of these rules no person or cargo shall be admitted or           taken on board such vessel before she leaves the Port of Karchi unless such vessel is           again inspected by the Health Officer of the Port and another Bill of Health or           certificate obtained from such officer by the Master or person in charge of such vessel.      4. No port clearance shall be delivered to any vessel unless and until the Master or           person in charge thereof shall produce the Bill of Health or certificate so to be obtained           as aforesaid, and it shall be the duty of Customs officers to refuse delivery of the port           clearance without the production of such Bill of Health or certificate.      5. All steamers and square-rigged vessels will be inspected by the Health Officer before           leaving the wharves or moorings, and all coasting craft shall anchor between and to           the west of No. 1 mooring and deep-water point for the purpose of being medically           inspected by the Health Officer of the Port on the eve of their departure.      6. Vessels not leaving port within 24 hours after receiving pratique may not leave with-           out re-inspection. The date and hour of his inspection will be noted in the Bill of           Health by the Health Officer.      7. The medical inspection of vessels and passengers shall be carried out between sunrise           and sunset.      8. Disobedience to any of the above rules Nos. 1 to 6 will subject the offender and all           persons aiding or abetting him to a prosecution under the Indian Penal Code."
31                                   SECTION 6.                              The New Legislation.       As already explained in Section 3 of Chapter I the measures originally adopted at railway stations for the treatment of railway passengers suffering from plague were taken under the Indian Railways Act, which gave power to Railway Companies to refuse to carry such persons and to remove them from railway premises.  If, when so removed, they were within the limits of a municipal district, certain measures to prevent the spread of the disease could be taken under Section 73 of the District Municipal Act, though it was doubtful to what extent power to interfere with the liberty of the subject was conferred by that section. In areas other than municipal the necessary powers did not apparently exist, and, except in Military Cantonments, wherein it was possible to adopt special measures under Section 434 of the Bombay City Municipal Act (extended to those areas by the Government of India) could only be conferred by legislation. Even at railway stations the measures that could legally be taken were entirely inadequate. When plague began to spread in the Mofussil to some slight extent in December, and more extensively in January, owing to the exodus of panic-stricken people from Bombay, it was recognised that the existing law would no longer suffice and that extensive powers in both municipal and non-municipal areas would have to be conferred on Government officers and other persons. On the 22nd January Government resolved on the immediate introduction into the Legislative Council of a Bill embodying the provisions of Section 434 of the Bombay City Municipal Act and making them applicable to any local area in the Presidency whether municipal or not. This section runs as follows:          " (1) In the event of the city being at any time visited or threatened      with an outbreak of any dangerous disease, or in the event of any infec-      tious disease breaking out or being likely to be introduced into the city      amongst cattle-including under this expression sheep and goats--          the Municipal Commissioner, if he thinks the ordinary provisions of      this Act or of any other law at the time in force are insufficient for the      purpose, may, with the sanction of Government:               (a) take such special measures, and               (b) by public notice, prescribe such temporary regulations to be           observed by the public or by any person or class of persons,      as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the      spread thereof.      2. Government further resolved that the powers of a Municipal Commis-  sioner should be conferred on any officer whom Government might appoint for  the purpose, irrespectively of the question whether he was connected with a  Municipality or not. In other words, Government proposed to assume, by legis-  lation, authority to confer on their officers any powers which they might from  time to time consider necessary. The requisite instructions were accordingly  issued to the law officers of Government.      3. It may be observed that a similar measure, as regards Railway stations,  had been suggested by the Secretary of State, and Government were in com-  munication with the Government of India as regards the state of the law and  the necessity for modifying it.      4. On the 28th January a Bill prepared by the Advocate General was  about to be telegraphed to the Government of India for approval, when a telegram  was received from that Government regarding the measures proposed for the  inspection of persons leaving Bombay by sea, in which it was stated that a Bill  on the subject of the general extension of the powers conferred by Section 434  of the Bombay City Municipal Act had on that day been introduced into the  Legislative Council and would shortly be passed. This Bill was telegraphed to  the Bombay Government, and in reply the following suggestions were telegraphed  to the Government of India:
32  "Your 269, Sanitary. Government of Bombay consider the Bill should provide for the prevention and suppression of any outbreak of dangerous disease and for prevention of its spread; that dangerous disease should be defined as any disease by which the life of man is endangered; that the Bill should provide for extension of its provisions to any area whatever, for example, the precincts of a railway station, and for necessary delegation of powers to officers of Government; that the Bill should legalize the removal to, and detention at, hospitals or other places provided, of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from dangerous disease, and that this should be legal not only in affected area but anywhere, so as to cover case of travellers found on railways or in dharamshalas, &c. It is also desirable to provide that damage caused to private property shall not, unless caused recklessly, give grounds for action in Civil Courts." 5. Act III of 1897 received the assent of the Governor General in Council on 4th February 1897 and was communicated to the Bombay Government by telegram. It ran as follows:  "ACT No. III OF 1897. An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows: Short title, extent and commencement. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.  (2) It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive of Upper Burma, British Balu- chistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti); and (3) It shall come into force at once. Power to take special measures  and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease.  2. (1) When at any time the Governor General in Council is satisfied that India or any  part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the Governor General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of persons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including compensation, if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor General in Council may take measures and prescribe regulations for- (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving there- by, as may be necessary; and (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected with any such disease. (3) The Governor General in Council may, by general or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred by this Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories administered by it. Penalty.  3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (XLV of 1860). 4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done or in Protection to persons acting good faith intended to be done under this Act." under Act.  6. The following Notification was issued by the Government of India on 4th February 1897:- "SANITARY. Calcutta, the 4th February 1897. No. 302.-Whereas certain parts of India are visited by, and others threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, the Governor General in Council, in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, is pleased to direct that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised by Local Governments with regard to their respective territories as follows: (a) all the said powers by the Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal and Chief Commissioner of Burma;
33      (b) the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (1) and sub-section (2), clause         (b) by the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-Western Provinces and Chief         Commissioner of Oudh, the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab and the Chief         Commissioner of the Central Provinces; and     (c) the powers conferred by Section 2, sub-section (2), clause (b), by the Chief         Commissioners of Assam, Coorg and British Baluchistan.      7. On February 6th urgent telegrams were sent to Commissioners and Collectors requesting them  to state forthwith what powers they considered necessary. The subject of the powers conferred under the Act will be dealt with in Chapter III.                                    SECTION 7.                              The Pilgrim Traffic.*      On the outbreak and spread of bubonic plague in the Bombay Presidency, some alarm was felt at the possible risk of its being widely diffused over other countries and eventually reaching Europe through pilgrims leaving Bom- bay for the Hedjaz and carrying the disease with them. On the 7th January 1897 the Government of India telegraphed to this Government stating that Egypt was discouraging pilgrims from going to Mecca, and enquiring whether similar action could not be taken here. On the 16th January, before a scheme for effectually discouraging the pilgrimage could be formulated, the Government of India communicated two telegrams from the Secretary of State, one of which announced that two plague deaths had been reported among the pilgrims on board the S.S. " Pekin" during the voyage from Bombay, and the other that some of the European Powers were pressing Her Majesty's Government to prohibit the pilgrimage from India during the present year. The Government of India suggested that Bombay should temporarily cease to be a port appointed under Section 7 of the Pilgrim Ships Act XIV of 1895 for the departure of pilgrims. In reply, this Government deprecated the absolute prohibition of pilgrims leaving India, but were agreed that Bombay and Karachi should cease to be ports of embarkation for pilgrims with effect from the 1st of February. This proposal was accepted by the Government of India, who stated that Cal- cutta and Madras would still remain open to pilgrim traffic, and requested that persons engaged in it in the Bombay Presidency might be informed accordingly. A notification announcing the prohibition from the 1st February 1897 against the departure of pilgrim ships from the ports of Bombay and Karchi was accordingly published in a Bombay Government Gazette Extraordinary on the 21st January 1897, and steps were taken to make the change as widely known as possible, and to prevent, if possible, intending pilgrims coming to Bombay and Karchi. Some attempts were made, but without success, by the owners of pilgrim ships to induce Government to postpone the prohibition to a later date. Meanwhile, several hundreds of pilgrims, partly natives of India and partly persons from Central Asia, who had purchased tickets for the purpose of proceeding to the Haj, had already arrived in Bombay, in the hope that the S.S. " Pekin " would be ready for them about the 8th of February. In spite, too of the efforts to check pilgrims coming to Bombay, daily arrivals by rail and sea continued to add to the number of pilgrims in the city. These were naturally much dissatisfied at the state of affairs resulting from their being prohibited to embark for the Hedjaz at Bombay and were giving some trouble, and it was known that most of them would soon come to the end of their pecuniary re- sources in Bombay. Mr.Vincent, the Commissioner of Police, accordingly sug- gested that they might be sent to Madras or Calcutta, where they would be able sooner or later to find accommodation in pilgrim ships sailing for Jedda; and by Government Resolution No. 503, dated the 30th January 1897, he was authorized to pay their third class railway fares, provided he could arrange for their departure for Madras or Calcutta. The authorities at Madras, however, objected to that place being appointed a port for the departure of pilgrims, and requested that, pending the result of an application to the Government of India in the matter, pilgrims should be prevented from proceeding thither. Arrange- ments were still continued in order to facilitate the departure of some of the pilgrims to Calcutta and others to their own homes. The latter was, however, a matter of great difficulty, for when pilgrims had reached Bombay, it was almost impossible to convince them that they could not obtain a passage     *The whole history of the arrangements regarding pilgrims is for convenience included in this section though a portion of it belongs to a later period than that dealt with in Chapter II.     B 1135-9
34 to Jedda, and passengers were shipped ostensibly to Bussorah, whom enquiry showed to be pilgrims bound for Mecca vi that port; and as ships sailing for the Persian Gulf are not pilgrim ships within the meaning of Section 5 of the Pilgrim Ships Act, their embarkation could not in the then existing state of the law be prevented, and all endeavours to dissuade them from proceeding on their journey proved fruitless. 2. On the 7th February, however, the project of despatching the pilgrims in Bombay to Madras or Calcutta, so that they might take ship thence to the Hedjaz, had to undergo considerable modification. Urgent orders were received from the Government of India that endeavours should be made to dissuade them from proceeding to either Madras or Calcutta, and that if they persisted, they should be isolated for ten days at Nsik or some other suitable place in the Bombay Presidency. This Government were requested to make the necessary arrangements without delay, and meanwhile not to allow any pilgrims who had not abandoned the idea of pilgrimage to leave Bombay. The Collector of Nsik was at once instructed to select a suitable site for the proposed isolation camp some- where near Nsik. The site proposed by him was at Chehedi, one and a half miles south-east of the Nsik Road Railway Station, and about 500 yards from the village site. It lay in perfectly open country and being on the bank of the river Dharna, there was a good water-supply near at hand. The proposal was approved, and the Collector asked to push on preparations and have the camp ready by the 21st February for the isolation of the pilgrims whom it was proposed to send on to Calcutta after ten days' detention at Nsik. On the 10th February 1897, the Commissioner of Police, Bombay, reported that about 294 pilgrims had proceeded up-country ostensibly to their homes, leaving about 600, the majority of whom would probably persist in their intention of going to the Hedjaz. Pilgrims were also still coming into Bombay, and on the 11th February Government issued a Notification under the Epidemic Diseases Act (it had just become law), prohibiting pilgrims from proceeding in the direction of Bombay beyond the railway stations of Ahmedabad, Bhusval, Londa and Hotgi. 3. The arrangements for the disposal of the pilgrims in Bombay entered upon a further important stage of development on the 17th February, when the following Notification was issued by the Government of India under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897: "In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 2, sub-section 1, of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, the Governor General in Council is pleased to direct that no person resident, permanently or temporarily, in the Bombay Presidency or Sind, and no person who, though not resident in the Bombay Presidency or Sind, has entered the Bombay Presidency or Sind with the object of proceeding on a pilgrimage to the Hedjaz, shall until further orders be permitted to embark on any ship at any port in British India with the object of making a pilgrimage to the Hedjaz. The Governor General in Council is further pleased to direct that all persons who have entered the Bombay Presidency or Sind with the object of proceeding to the Hedjaz shall be placed in a camp of observation until such time as the Medical officer in charge shall satisfy himself that all risk of the occurrence of plague among them has been completely abated. They shall then be sent to their homes and the railway expenses of their journey shall be met by the State." This Government were at the same time asked by urgent telegram to arrange to have all the pilgrims then in Bombay conveyed at once to the camp at Nasik and there put under observation and not allowed to leave for ten days after arrival, or if plague occurred among them, till they had been free from it for ten days. Directions were also given that the pilgrims should be separated into batches according to their provinces of origin, and each batch taken under charge of a responsible official of the Bombay Government and by him handed over to an official to be named and at a place to be fixed by the Local Govern- ments from whose territories the men composing the batch came. This last arrangement was, however, subsequently modified at the request of this Govern- ment, and the various Local Governments concerned were asked to send police escorts to accompany the pilgrims from the camp at Nsik. 4. In compliance with the wishes of the Government of India, the pre- parations for despatching the pilgrims from Bombay and detaining them at the camp were pushed on with a rapidity highly creditable to all concerned. Arrangements had to be made with the Railway authorities for a special train to convey the pilgrims to Nsik and with the Military authorities for an escort of 100 British soldiers to guard them. Upon the Commissioner of Police, Bombay, devolved the difficult duty of keeping a watch on all
35 the pilgrims in Bombay, collecting them at the proper time, breaking to them the news that their pilgrimage had been prohibited and that they were to be detained at Nsik, and then escorting them with their belongings to the rail- way train. Upon the Collector of Nsik and his Assistants fell the responsi- bility of making all the detailed arrangements in connection with the camp, such as the erection of sheds and huts for the accommodation of the pilgrims and the provision of the necessary supplies, the expense of which was entirely borne by Government. It was originally intended that the pilgrims should leave on the 21st, but this was found impossible, and it was arranged that they should leave on the morning of the 22nd instead. At the last moment it was decided that they should be medically inspected at Bombay before leaving, and not at Kalyn on the way to Nsik, and this necessitated an urgent requisition on the afternoon of the 21st to as many medical officers as could be called at a few hours' notice to attend at the Victoria Terminus next morning, so that the in- spection of the pilgrims might entail as little delay as possible. Brigade-Surgeon- Lieut.-Colonel F. C. Barker, M.D., F.R.C.S.I., Surgeon-Major F. F. MaeCartie, M.B., B.Ch., Miss G.M. Bradley, M.D., and a number of other medical officers present in Bombay responded to the call and finally, after due medical inspection at 8-30 A.M. on the morning of the 22nd, 530 pilgrims were despatched in the special train to Nsik Road Station. Three pilgrims (1 man and 2 women) were detained for further observation on account of the state of their health. Half of the military escort provided by Brigadier-General W. F. Gatacre, C.B., D.S.O., Commanding the Bombay District, under Captain Downing, accom- panied the pilgrims, while the remainder had been sent on ahead the previous night to Ndsik Road Station. Mr. Vincent reported that on the previous night when he visited the different musfarkhnas and other places where pilgrims put up, and broke to them the news that there was to be no pilgrimage, the Pathns, Afghns and Sindhis were at first very boisterous, but they became more tranquil by degrees and submitted on the morning of the 22nd without the slightest objection to their despatch to Nsik. Some 21 pilgrims, however, had managed to elude the police while they were collecting them in the early hours of the morning when it was still dark, and wilfully remained behind. 5. It may here be conveniently noted that on the 20th February 1897 the Government of India issued the following Notification under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, altogether suspending the pilgrimage to the Hedjaz for the current season: " The question of the suspension of the pilgrimage to the Hedjaz having been under the consideration of the Government of India and Her Majesty's Government, Her Majesty's Government have now come to the conclusion that in consequence of the strong opinions of all European Governments, including Turkey, regarding the danger of plague being commu- nicated to Europe, it is impossible to meet their demands by any measure short of the sus- pension of the pilgrimage for the time being. The Governor General in Council is therefore pleased, under Section 2, sub-section (1) of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, to order that the pilgrimage to the Hedjaz shall be altogether suspended for the current season." 6. On the 22nd February this Government further issued a Notification under the same Act prohibiting the sale of tickets to the Hedjaz to pilgrims any- where in the Bombay Presidency or Sind. But prior to this, in view of the previous project to send all the pilgrims to Calcutta, Hji Ksam Jusab had already sent telegraphic orders to the commander of his vessel, the S. S. "Pekin," at Aden to proceed direct from there to Calcutta, instead of to Bombay, and had sold tickets for the voyage from Calcutta to Jedda to 153 pilgrims. The cost of these tickets, amounting in the aggregate to Rs. 5,381, was refunded by Government to each pilgrim, without throwing the loss on Hji Ksam Jusab, who had acted in perfect good faith. Similarly the cost of tickets already sold by him to 260 pilgrims for the voyage from Bombay to Jedda, amounting altogether to Rs. 5,720, was refunded by Governmet to each pilgrim concerned. 7. Meanwhile the pilgrims had arrived at Nsik and settled down in the isolation camp. The following letter from Mr. Maconochie, Assistant Collector, Nsik, in charge of the camp, No. 517, dated 27th February 1897, gives an account of their arrival and the state of things up to that date: "Having been appointed by the Collector of Nsik as Manager of the Pilgrim Isolation Camp, I have the honour to submit the daily report required by Government Resolution No. 968 of the 23rd instant, which only reached me yesterday.
36  "2. The pilgrims number altogether 534-388 men, 114 women and 32 children-of whom 9 are infants in arms. Excluding these latter, the numbers of each tribe are as follows:-   Malabri Moplahs 33 Central Asians 145 Afghns 74 Sindhis 35 Benglis 118 Panjbi Pathns 78 Hindustnis 42  525  "3. They arrived at Nsik Station in a special train on Monday the 21st instant at 3 P.M. They were then counted and medically inspected, their baggage being meanwhile put into carts and sent down to the camp. The old men, women and children were then seated in other carts, and the whole body marched down to the camp, escorted by the British troops and Bombay Police sent with them and a force of the Nsik Police. The camp was completely ready for their reception, and having sorted out their baggage, they soon settled down in the rows of huts provided for them. Supplies of all kinds were then served out to them, and by 9 P.M. they were all cooking their evening meal. Next morning I found them very well and cheerful, much satisfied with their treatment. They were then divided into messes with a mukdam to each mess, who alone comes to draw rations. This plan has ensured despatch and uniform distri- bution, preventing any confusion and crowding. Dr. Street then inspected them and the camp generally and expressed satisfaction with their condition and all the arrangements for them. "4. The strictest isolation possible is observed. The British troops guard the camp night and day and naturally form a most efficient cordon. No outsiders are admitted save the supervis- ing officers, the police guards and the minimum number of men required to bring in suppliess. The sweepers I keep inside the camp, and I make the pilgrims do most of their own water- carrying, many of them having gladly volunteered for 4 annas a day. "5. Nothing noteworthy occurred till Thursday morning, when I found the Central Asians weeping and wailing at the prospect of being sent back to their homes. Many of them live in Chinese territory, and the journey thither is very long and arduous. The roads and passes too at this time of year are blocked with snow. Till the Protector of Pilgrims returned them their passage-money, they had not apparently realized that all their months' long toil was wasted, and their excitement was intense. They have drawn up a petition and sent it to the Commis- sioner of Police, Bombay. I am getting a copy of it from the Protector of Pilgrims. They want to be kept at Peshwar or elsewhere in India till the Haj is allowed again and then railed down to Bombay. In the circumstances their request seems to merit consideration. "6. Yesterday morning, I regret to say, Dr. Street found during his inspection a suspicious case of illness. The patient, a Malbri Moplah, was at once isolated in a special shed and kept under observation. In the evening Dr. Street diagnosed plague, and I immediately had the sufferer removed from the camp to the special plague shed erected in the vicinity of the railway station, telegraphing the fact to the Civil Surgeon. The man is now lying there under treat- ment. One of his friends is with him and a police guard is watching that they do not go away. "7. This morning there was no fresh case and all were well. I learnt that they were a little uneasy about the removal of the sick man to hospital, and that one of the Afghns had been heard muttering. I am having them watched, and should they appear to be inclined to give trouble, I will separate them from the rest and put a special guard over them. The occur- rence of this one case of plague means ten days' more quarantine from yesterday. As five days have now elapsed since the pilgrims arrived from Bombay, I trust no more cases will occur." The numbers given in paragraph 2 of the above letter are, it should be stated, not quite accurate, and the following table supplies details as to the num- bers, sex and residences of the various batches of pilgrims received in the camp on the 22nd February:  Serial number of batch. Description of batch. Serial number of country or district. Name of Country or district. Number of Remarks      Men. Women Children  Infants. Total.  I  Central Asians.  1  Bokhra  17    17      2  Mergalan  27  5 3  35    A-Subjects of the Czar of Russia.  3  Andejan  19 1 1  21     4  Naurangan  2    2     5  Khokand  13    13     6  Taskand  1    1     7  Kashgar  38 2   40
?37 Serial number of batch. Description of batch. Serial number of country or district. Name of country or district. Number of     Remarks.     Men. Women. Children. Infants. Total.   B. - Subjects of the Emperor of China, 8 Aksu ......... 5 ... ... ... 5    9 Koochai  1 ... ... ... 1    10 Yarkand 4 3* ... ... 7    11 Khotan ...... 5 1 ... ... 6     Total ... 132 12 4  148  II Afghns 1 Kandhar  30 5 ... ... 35    2 Herat ......... 4 1 ...  5    3 Kbul ...... 9 ... ... ... 9     Total ... 43 6 ... ... 49  III Punjbis 1 Peshwar ...... 1    1    2 Hazara ... ... 7  1  8    3 Dera Gzi Khn 8    8    4 Muzaffargad 1  1  2    5 Rwal Pindi ...... 8 4 3 ... 15    6 Jhelum 2 ...   2    7 Delhi ......... 1    1    8 Bannoo ... ... 11 6 1 1 19    9 Dera Ismil Khan ... 4    4    10 Grotta Zil Goords- pur. 4 1    5     Total ... 47 11 6 1 65  IV Hindustnis ...... 1 Murdabd (Railway Station). 2 1   3    2 Rmpur ...... 4 3 ...  7    3 Bans Barreilly 9 13  ... 22    4 Meerut ...... 3  1  4    5 Murdabd  2 ... ... ... 2    6 Jhnsi ... 1 1 ... ... 2    7 Indore ... ... 1 ...  1    8 Nawabgunj ..... 1 ...  . 1    9 Gonda ...... ... 1 ... ... 1    10 Barabunki ..... 1 ...    1     Total .. 23 20 1 ... 44  V Benglis ..... 1 Chittagong ..... 11 3 ... ... 14    2 Saylhet ..... 17 3 1  21    3 Komilla (Tipperah) .. 15 5 2 ... 22    4 Burrisal 2 1 1 ... 4    5 Dinjpur ..... 5 ... ... ... 5    6 Sarail .........  1   1    7 Nasirbd ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1    8 Bgalpur ...... ... 1 ...  1    9 Dacca ...... 1 1 ... ... 2    10 Faridpur 17 10 ... 2 29    11 Calcutta 6 2 ... 1 9    12 Mymansingh 2 3 1 1 7     Total ... 77 30 5 4 116  VI Central Indians 1 Ajmere 4 2   6    2 Jeypur ... 2 ...  . 2    3 Rutlm 1 1 2 1 5     Total ... 7 3 2 1 13  VII Madrsis ...... 1 Malabr ...... 20 ...   20    2 Travancore ... 1 ... ... ... 1    3 Eddakullan ... ... 1 ... ...  1    4 Mangalore 5 5 ...  10     Total  27 5 ... ... 32  VIII Beluchis 1 Beluchistn ..... 23 1 1 ... 25     Total ... 23 1 1 ... 25  IX Sindhis 1 Railway Station Lr- khna. 1 1 ... ... 2    2 Hyderabad ... 4 3 1 ... 8    3 Mirpur Khs 2 1 ... . 3    4 Shdipully ...... 1 ... ...  1    5 Jimpir ... 2 ... ... ... 2    6 Jungshahi 16 ... ...  16    7 Jungshah 3 ... ... ... 3    8 Karchi ...... ... 1 ... ... 1    9 Sukkur ... 1 1   2     Total  30 7 1 ... 38       Grand Total  409 95 20 6 530  B 1135-10
38 8. The case of plague alluded to in paragraph 6 of the same letter necessitated, under the orders of the Government of India, the detention of the pilgrims for a period of ten days from the time of the removal of the patient to a distant isolation hospital, i.e., the evening of Friday the 26th February, and the various Local Governments concerned were informed accordingly. But on the 2nd March Mr. Stewart, Assistant Collector, Nsik, who had taken over charge of the camp from Mr. Maconochie, proceeding home on sick leave, report- ed that the case had turned out to be one merely of small-pox, and. the Govern- ment of India accordingly directed that the pilgrims might be allowed to depart ten days after their arrival at the camp, provided that no case of plague inter- vened.   This intimation, however, arrived too late to permit of the pilgrims being despatched on Thursday, March 4th, as the Governments of Bengal, Madras, North-Western Provinces and the Punjab had made no arrangements to send their police escorts for the pilgrims in time to reach the camp by that date, and the first large batch of pilgrims did not leave till the night of March 8th,  Mean- while nothing very eventful happened at the camp. There was no fresh case of sickness. The temper and conduct of the pilgrims continued to be excellent, and the only disturbance reported was a slight one on the night of the 28th February, when one of the Central Asians was somewhat quarrelsome and was said to have threatened another pilgrim  with a knife.  On the 4th March the escort of 100 British soldiers was reduced by one-half.     All the pilgrims were evidently well satisfied with their treatment, as indeed they had every reason to be. The following extract from a letter dated 24th February 1897, from Mr. Maconochie, supplies some further details regarding the management of the camp: "The camp is getting along very well, and is the greatest success. The pilgrims are quite delighted with their treatment, and will, I am sure, carry home glowing accounts of the kindness of Government. The Bokhris were saying this morning that they would lile- to stay for a year on the same conditions, and they hoped the Pilgrims Protector would ask the Shebs to keep them; they have settled down as if they were permanent inhabitants of the country. " We found that they much preferred to cook their own food, so we divided them into messes according to tribes and families, and appointed a mukdam to each mess to receive the daily rations. The food is issued to these mukdams every morning, and we thus ensure perfect order and equal distribution. I have not had a single complaint, and all the faces one sees are smiling. " Isolation is being strictly enforced, only persons actually bringing supplies being allowed in the camp. The sweepers and water-carriers are kept inside, and cleanliness is scrupulously attended to. There has not been a single case of illness of any kind, nor is there likely to be, as far as can be seen. Dr. Street inspects the camp and people every morning and is quite satisfied with all the sanitary arrangements. The British soldiers keep a cordon round the camp night and day, and the Bombay and Nsik Police are on duty inside, keeping order at the grain and meat stalls. " The British troops are in tents to windward (west) of the camp, the Nsik Police are to the north and south-west, the Bombay Police to the east. On the south are the latrines clear of every one and everything; the water supply is a running stream on the south-west, which we have fenced off into two parts, the lower for bathing and washing, the upper for drinking. We have two water carts and seven water-carriers going all day, and the pilgrims have all been given earthen pots besides, so that.they can fetch their own water in the evening before the sentries close in and cut them off from the river. The Ramzn being on, they get up at 3 A.M. and have a meal before sunrise, so they have to keep water ready overnight. "Captain Downing and Lieutenant Aton, in command of the British troops, are most obliging, and they and their men are invaluable. Inspectors Wilson and Gannon, of the Bombay Police, are of the greatest use. I see them  going about on duty nearly the whole day. "The pilgrims all know now that the Haj is stopped.. Only one old Sayad was indig- nant and began to shout when he heard it, but we quieted him in five minutes. Sardr Abdul Ali and the Pilgrim Protector are most helpful in explaining things to the people." 9. As regards the petition made by the Central Asian pilgrims, which has been mentioned above, Mr. Stewart in forwarding it wrote as follows: "3. I also annex the petition of the Central Asian pilgrims to which I referred in a previous letter. It merits serious consideration, as it would be a great hardship to these
39  people to turn them adrift at Peshwar to find their way back to their distant homes with all their long toil and great expense gone for nothing. The journey takes months. They have, as they say, spent the savings of a lifetime on it. If they are sent back with their cherished hoped and declared object, the Haj, unperformed, they will be unable most of them to attempt it a second time, their highest religious aspiration on earth will thus be crushed, and for the rest of their lives their countrymen will point the finger of scorn at them as men who having put their hand to the plough turned back and who are therefore not fit for the kingdom of God. They are in a great state of excitement on the point, and I hope that Government will see their way to supporting them in Peshwar or elsewhere in India till the pilgrimage is declared open. As they are Russian, Chinese and Afghn subjects, the expediency of treating them thus generously is from a political point of view apparent, and if they get the boon they crave, they may safely be trusted to carry back to their respective countries the most glowing accounts of the kindness and liberality of the English Government." 10. Government, on receipt of the petition, at once entered into telegraphic communication with the Government of India on the subject, and by the 7th of March it was settled that 60 out of the 150 Central Asians, who had funds to maintain themselves till the next Haj, should be allowed to remain at Peshwar as private travellers. The Punjab Government was asked by the Government of India to make arrangements for sending the remainder, who were destitute, beyond the frontier. 11. On the morning of the 6th March, 1 man, 1 woman and 3 children, belonging to the State of Rutlm, were sent off with an escort. On the night of the 8th the 116 Benglis were despatched in charge of the escort sent for them, and 2 pilgrims from Jeypore in charge of the Jeypore escort.  The Central Asians, Punjabis and Hindustnis left Nsik Road Station in a special train on the morning of the 9th, in charge of Mr. Warburton, Assistant Inspector- General, Railway Police, Punjab, and a strong party brought by him consisting of 1 Native Assistant Surgeon, 1 European Inspector of Police, 1 Native Inspector of Police, 2 Deputy Inspectors of Police, 5 Sergeants of Police and 54 Constables. Two Central Asians were detained, as a woman who had given birth to a child in the preceding week could not be moved, and her relations remained with her. The special train went through to Peshwar, but those pilgrims whose homes were at other places in the Punjab were dropped at inter- vening stations with a small guard for each batch, if necessary. Food was supplied to all the pilgrims en route gratuitously, and tickets purchased for all who left the special train after it arrived in the Punjab to travel to their homes by branch lines. Mr. Warburton telegraphed on the 10th March that  Hji Kamil, a pilgrim of Khokand, had died suddenly that morning between Barkhera and Bhopal. According to the medical certificate, the cause of death was anmia, scurvy and heart disease, and there were no symptoms of plague. The remainder, so far as is known, reached Peshwar or their homes safely. Thirty Madras pilgrims were sent off in charge of the Malabr escort provided on the morning of the 10th March, and the remaining 64 pilgrims, 38 of whom were Sindhis and 26 Beluchis, were sent on the 11th from Nsik to Bombay, where they were marched with the least possible delay on board the S.S. "Pachumba, " which left for Karchi on the morning of the 12th. Upon arrival at Karchi, they were at once sent by rail up-country to the stations nearest -their homes, those bound for Beluchistan being booked to Quetta, and the extra Assistant Com- missioner, Sibi, being asked to take them over from the Karchi Police at Sibi. It may be mentioned that, before being despatched, all the pilgrims, their clothes and effects were, at the request of the Government of India, disinfected with solutions of bi-chloride of mercury and carbolic acid. The pilgrim who had been suffering with small-pox died on the 11th March. 12. The camp being thus clear, arrangements had already] been made for removing to it without delay the few pilgrims who still remained in Bombay. Since the despatch of the first lot, 11 more pilgrims had been discovered in different mosques, where they had been hiding, and these with the 21 left over on the former occasion were sent off by train to Nsik Road Station on the morning of the 11th March, after being medically inspected in Bombay, and arrived at Nsik in the afternoon. The military escort was dispensed with, and they were guarded simply by police. Precautions were taken to prevent the five Bokhris, who had been detained, mixing with the fresh arrivals. These consisted of 11 Central Asians, 3 Afghns, 12 Punjbi Pathns, and 2 Benglis, as shown in the following table:
40 Serial number of batch. Description of batch. Serial number of country or district. Name of country or district. NUMBER OF         Men. Women. Children Infants Total. I Central Asians 1 Bokhra 11    11    Total 11    11 II Afghns 1 Kandhr 3    3    Total 3    3 III Punjbis 1 Peshwar 2    2   2 Bannoo 9    9   3 Rmpur  1   1    Total 11 1   12 IV Benglis 1 Rangpur 2    2    Total 2    2    Grand Total 27 1   28  Arrangements were made, as had been done in the case of the first batch of pilgrims, for refunding to them the cost of their tickets to Jedda and also for refunding to those of them who were British subjects the fares from their homes to Bombay. Nothing particularly noteworthy occurred during their stay in the camp, except that one of the pilgrims was found on the morning of the 14th to be suffering from high fever and was segregated. Fortunately, however, it did not turn out to be a case of plague, and there having been no further sick- ness in the camp, the period of quarantine expired on the 21st March. On the 22nd Mr. Stewart reported that they had all left by train that morning in good health and spirits after having been disinfected. The camp, being no longer required for quarantine or other purposes, was subsequently dismantled. 13. The total expenditure in connection with it is reported by the Collector to have been Rs. 13,368-12-8, as detailed below :   Rs.  a. p. Conveyance  155  1  0 Supplies  5,370  15  9 Lighting  328  2  7 Labour   366  13  3 Postage and telegrams  441  4  0 Medical  48  6  5 Materials  2,322  12  9 Fares and bhatta  4,326  10  11 Contingencies  8  10  0 Total  13,368  12  8  But besides this, there was considerable extra expenditure incurred by Gov- ernment in connection with the removal of the pilgrims from Bombay to the camp, payment of refunds, &c.  SECTION 8.  Sketch of Plague Administration in Karchi in December 1896 and January 1897. 1. The population of Karchi is approximately 100,000. It was the first large city to be affected with plague after Bombay. Plague was discovered in the middle of December, and spread slowly in that month but rapidly in January.
41 2. The history of Plague administration in Karchi in December and Jan- uary is succinctly told in an interesting report by Mr. R. Giles, Collector of the Karchi District, from which the following paragraphs are quoted: Sketch of events showing the  gradual education of the people up  to the Government measures.  "3. Karchi is divided by the Lyari river and the Napier Mole and Harbour into three sections. The Lyari is only a dry sandy bed, except when,  after heavy rain, it brings down to the harbour the waters of  the "Kohistan" or hilly range to the north.  "4. With the exception of the one Hindu village at its north-east corner the inhabitants of the Trans-Lyari tract, numbering some 30,000 souls, are Mahomedans, and consist of "Mohanas" or fishermen, whose ancestors, when the English first visited Karchi, were the sole proprietors of the place, a few Pathans, and a large number of Brahuis, Mekranis, Lasis, and other residents of Baluchistan, who have-especially of late years-been attracted to the place by the high wages which the rising trade and port of Karchi offer.  "5. The middle section contains the City itself, the Cantonments and Civil Lines, while the 3rd embraces Keamari, Manora, and the small villages known as the islands of Baba and Bhit.  "6. It is very necessary to distinguish these three sections at the outset, becanse each required and received somewhat different treatment, especially the Trans-Lyari tract where, as will be shown presently, we followed the Frontier system, and, under Mahomedan officers, successfully carried out our plague measures by, and through the influence of the headmen and Mullahs.  "7. As might be expected, however, the disease first broke out in the City and it did not cross (i. e., no case was reported) the Lyari until the 10th of January, the Napier Mole to Keamari until the 7th of February, and the Harbour to Manora until the 9th of March.  " 8. I was on tour at Sehwan in the north of my district, when nine days after the report of the first case, the permanent Medical Board, on the 19th of December, pronounced the plague to be epidemic in karchi.  "9. It is only characteristic of the earnest endeavours made from the first by all the officers concerned to carry the people with us, in our measures, that even prior to this announcement, viz., on the 17th idem, a Meeting of the heads of the Hindu communities "was held, at which the President, Secretary and Health Officer of the Municipality attended, in the house of Ro Bahdur Alumal, the Deputy Educational Inspector of the District, and an influential citizen, with a view to explaining to the people the benefits of segregation and treatment of the sick and the necessity for cleanliness in their houses and surroundings.  "10. As regards this Meeting, too, it is equally characteristic and significant of the pre-  judice and opposition with which all measures and advice were at first received, that Khn  Sheb Framroze, the Mukhtyrkar, in writing about it, remarks that all appeared to have no  effect, the inhabitants remaining ' obstinate as ever,' and 'instead of rendering any assistance,'  being 'in the way of the authorities.'  11. Moreover, on the day previous to this meeting, the Municipal Health Officer had  addressed the Municipal President, representing the insufficiency of their existing powers to cope  with the difficulties, stating that he had 'already experienced opposition,' and that disinfection  of houses had been flatly refused.  " 12. On the 21st of December the Municipality held a General Meeting and on that day  and the 23rd idem, framed rules under Section 73 of the Bombay District Municipal Act, for  the  (1) Entry into suspected houses.  (2) Disinfection and cleansing of houses.  (3) Destruction of infected articles.  (4) Compulsory notification, by medical practitioners, of the disease.  (5) Removal of the sick by order of certain officers.  "13. On the 28th, Surgeon-Captain H. C. L. Arnim, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner,  visited the town and made a careful examination of the measures which were being adopted in  the affected portions, reporting to the Sanitary Commissioner, Bombay, that 'as far as local conditions allow, cleansing and disinfection were being efficiently and energetically carried out.'  He also approved of the caste hospitals, which the different Hindu communities were preparing  for their sick, and of the hospital at Machi-Miani, which the Municipality was erecting, and the  isolation sheds provided in the same neighbourhood, and he adds that 'all appear to be working  with energy and system' and that the Municipal Commissioners are alive to the urgency of the  situation and anxious to follow out advice which is offered them.  "14. The above clearly shows that the Municipal Officers lost no time in doing their best  to deal with the disease; yet even in the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's letter, the note of  opposition, not only of the people but of some of the Municipal Commissioners themselves, is  again sounded; for he says 'there is marked opposition ' among them to the isolation; which the B 1135-11
42 removal of the sick to the sheds would necessitate; ' indeed,' he adds, 'there is reason to believe that at present at least the feeling among the townspeople would not admit of the segregation of all cases.' "15. This letter was written on the 30th of December, after Dr. Arnim had paid many visits to the town, and, coming from an officer who was strongly in favour of compulsory segregation, it shows pretty clearly what the position was when the year 1895 ended. By that time many of the inhabitants of the ' Old Town,' the quarter of the City which had suffered most, had fled, the exodus commencing after the 20th and continuing steadily until some time after the disease had commenced to decline. "16. The total number of reported cases up to the close of the year was 63, of 'which 51 were in the Old Town quarter, and the total number of deaths 59. "17. On the 1st of January, when forwarding a telegram from Government, diiecting that arrangements for the inspection of trains should be made, the Commissioner in Sind requested me to go to Karchi and temporarily make my head-quarters there in order that I might supervise and watch all measures necessary to prevent the spread of the disease. Accordingly, on receipt of his letter; I proceeded to karchi. "18. Mr. Wingate also went there, and on the 4th of January held a most important meeting in Government House for the special purpose of considering the Municipal Resolutions referred to in paragraph 12, and in particular the one providing for the compulsory removal of the sick to, isolat on hospitals. "19. This meeting was attended by the Principal Medical Officer, the President, Secretary, and Health Officer of the Municipality, the Civil Surgeon, the Deputy sanitary Commissioner and myself; and although opinions were not unanimous, the general sense of the meeting was adverse to such compulsion. "20. Writing to me on the subject, Mr. Wingate in his urgent letter No. B, dated the same day as the meeting, remarks:-' I find that something approaching to a panic exists in the town owing to fear of compulsory removal to isolation hospitals, and I think it was the "unanimous opin.on, i.e., at the meeting, that such removal could not be carried out peaceably; in fact, that there was reason to believe that it would be opposed to the wishes of the whole population, and serious opposition was to be anticipated. It comes, therefore, to this, that either sick people must be dragged from their houses by force, and opposition be met by force, or else their terror of compulsory removal must be allayed, and sympathy and conciliation take its place.' "21. The Commissioner, therefore, refused to sanction the rule providing for the com- pulsory removal of the sick, his policy being to win the confidence of the people by this con- cession, and so lead them to give immediate information of sickness, and permit the other essential measures, viz., (1) visitation of sick and suspected persons, (2) the disinfection of houses and (3) the destruction of infected property. "22. Mr. Wingate had done me the honour of consulting me on the subject prior to the Meeting, and I expressed my entire concurrence in the above policy, and my opinion that com- pulsory removal of the sick could not then be carried out without some risk of forcible opposition which, however, could be easily overcome, and was a matter of comparatively little moment; but that involving, as it must do, the removal of so many sick at one time (15 cases were report- ed on the day of the Meeting, and as many as 43 on the 10th of January), it would c.use a scene which would be utterly repugnant to the feelings of the whole community, and would rema'n indelibly burnt into their memories, a possible sore, which even time might never heal. "23. Nor, as a matter of fact, were the Municipality then prepared to carry out the entire policy of segregation, anything short of which is, as our subsequent experience showed, of little use; for their proposals did not then involve the segregation of the entire household, but only of those in attendance on the sick, nor was the accommodation provided sufficient for all. "24. Leaving that consideration aside, however, I am still firmly convinced that the policy adopted was at the time the right policy; that to a very considerable extent it had the immediate effect, which Mr. Wingate aimed at, and that. in consequence of its adoption, the people, as a rule, readily opened their houses to visitation and disinfection, while it is a fact that the same conciliatory policy, continued, led the people of Karchi, who had unanimously rejected both treatment and segregation, to accept both, so that before the end of March I was able to repoit that every sick person was under regular medical treatment, and that every sick person and every soul in his house, and often, of the neighbouring houses also, were removed to the hospital and segregation sheds directly the case was reported. "25. Armed with this concession,. I held, on the 7th of January, a Meeting of the leading City Mahomedans, and spoke, to them at length, promising them that the sick should remain in their houses, provided that they would report cases of sickness immediately, and allow the sick- ness to be diagnosed and their houses to be disinfected, should death from plague occur. This they agreed to, and on the whole adhered fairly to their promises. I also promised to secure the services of a Lady-doctor to visit their 'Pardah-Nishin' ladies, and a fully qualified one, Miss Jennie Duggan, was appointed by the Municipality on the following day. I also held a similar Meeting on the 14th, when I promised to try and secure the services of Mahomedan. doctors.
43 "26. On the 9th idem the Municipality again met and proposed a rule, under which recalci- trants only would be liable to have their sick removed, with the sanction of the Managing Com- mittee and the Collector, but this the Commissioner did not approve of, on the ground that it would not be wise to re-awaken the alarm, so recently allayed. He sanctioned, however, a rule directing that in case the sick migrated from affected to non-affected areas, they would be liable to be removed to hospital. "27. Early in January, when I had returned for a few days to the districts, a plague patient was brought into one of the bungalows in the Civil Lines and died there. Imme- diately on my return, I took measures to stop such a thing happening again, and succeeded in removing the family from the bungalow. "28. This and the migration of persons from the infected quarters of the town to the Sadar Bazar led to my arranging on the 13th idem for a cordon of foot and mounted police, aided by the kind consent of the General Officer Commanding, on the north-west side of Cantonment, by men of the 3rd Baluchis, for the purpose of specially protecting canton- ments, Camp and the Sadar Bazar from such migrations. "29. At the same time I arranged, in consultation with the Superintendent of Police, for a special party under an Inspector and a 2nd Class Magistrate to be present while deserted houses were opened by the Municipal employs for disinfection, and in order to pro- tect the property of all houses entered from theft. "30. Meanwhile, the disease had crossed the Lyari on the 10th of January, and on the 18th the ' Muhanas' of Nauabad declined to allow the Health Officer to visit a house in which there was a suspected case, to disinfect another house in which a death from plague had occurred, and to burn a hut in which there had also been a death. "31. The khadda and Nauabad are the two fishermen's villages, and occupy the southern end on the harbour side of the Trans-Lyari tract. These fishermen form the most unruly section of the Karachi Mahomedans, and unfortunately on several occasions, when cholera had visited their villages, they had been permitted to defy the authorities, and reject disinfectants and other remedial measures. "32. Consequently, those who know Karachi well (of whom I was not one, never having served in the district prior to November 1895), were unanimously of opinion that any attempt to enforce our measures would meet with resistance. "33. I went, however, to the village early on the 19th, in company with Dr. Arnim, and met there the Municipal Engineer and Health Officer, and the Mukhtyarkar and Town Inspector of Police; all of whom had written to me the evening before expressing their opinion that the matter was serious. "34. Being determined to secure the carrying out of our measures peaceably, if possible I went to the door of the three obstructionists and directed the Mukhtyarkar to explain fully to them the law, the penalty for disobedience, and the certainty that it would be enforced, and then to demand compliance. On their firmly, but not disrespectfully, refusing, he recorded their names and we withdrew. the same evening I tried and sentenced three to one month's imprisonment under Section 188, Indian Penal Code, four more receiving a similar sentence from the First Class Magistrate the next morning. "35. This completely broke the back of all direct opposition in Karchi. The accused literally wept on hearing their sentences, and offered to carry out any measure which I might impose upon them, while on the following day several of the headmen came to the Mukh- tyarkar's Office and on their knees begged to be pardoned. Yet it is a fact, of which I was not aware, when standing in the street at Nauabad, that a large number of people from both villages had collected with sticks which they would doubtless have used have we entered their houses forcibly. "36. On the next morning the three houses, regarding which opposition arose, were visited, disinfected, and burnt respectively without objection from any one, and thereafter I became on excellent terms with the people of both villages, and even on his release with one of the men whom I had sentenced. "37. Rather before the middle of January commenced the protracted negotiations, which led to a large section of the Hindus of. the City, known as the ' Nasarpuris,' who were suffering greatly from the disease, quitting their houses and shops and occupying a village of reed and mat huts built for them by the Municipality on the opposite bank of the Lyari. "38. Meeting after meeting was held in order to overcome their prejudice. Mr. Tahil ram, the Municipal President, Mr. Framroze, the Mukhtyrkar, myself and others all doing our best to persuade them, until on the 22nd, after a final meeting at the Mukhtyrkar's Office, when we agreed to certain conditions they actually comenced to move, some 2,000 arriving in the Camp by the 24th, where the majority of them remained until the 14th of May. "39. One of the conditions imposed was that they should be allowed to go and return daily to their business in the City. Had this not been permitted they would never have. moved. They were also allowed to bring their sick with them.
44 "40. This with our later experience we should not have permitted. Nevertheless, as I wrote when the Camp was closed, ' Whatever may be the final judgment as to its success or failure as a protective measure against the disease --and with that and the analysis of its statistics I leave other others to deal-' the Nasarpuri Camp must ever be remember- ed in the history of the Karchi plague as a most valuable measure of education, not only to the people, but to the Plague authorities themselves,' for it undoubtedly paved the way for the other Camps, which, under more careful conditions, yielded, as will be shown subsequently, such excellent results. "41. Negotiations were carried on with other sections of the Hindus, viz., the Serais and Sahtas, and huts erected for them, but eventually they refused to occupy them and left Karchi. "42. Flight, indeed, now became general, and was not confined to the Hindus, for the Mahomedans also, abandoning their fatalism and their assurances that their religion bade them face death and not fly from danger, also joined in it. "43. The movement was encouraged by all officials, and in the early part of January the complete evacuation of the two worst quarters of the City, the 'Old Town' and 'Machi-Meani,' was one of the main objects aimed at by us. At the end of January it was roughly computed that 25,000 out of 105,000 people had left the town. "44. The country and hills outside Karchi, which are little better than a desert and very thinly populated, afforded excellent ground for temporary settlements, and on the 28th of January I held a meeting of Mahomedans for the special purpose of inducing them to camp out, and even consented to assist some of the poorer ones with Local Fund money to build their huts at Mangho Pir, where some 800 of them subsequently encamped. "45. On the 26th of January Dr. Cleghorn, the Director-General of the Indian Medical Service, visited karchi in order to see the plague operations. His favourable opinion thereon is recorded in a note accompanying Government Resolution No. 832/327 P., dated the 14th February last. "46. By this time it had become apparent to the Commissioner, and to me, that it was urgently necessary to increase materially the Municipal establishment engaged on disinfecting and cleaning houses, and accordingly on the 28th January, 1, on the ground that the crisis in Karchi was of paramount importance, recommended that 20 Munshis should be selected and their services lent to the Municipality by the heads of the different districts in Sind, including my own, and that in order to add weight to their influence, all who were not already Magistrates and had passed the Magisterial Examination should be given magisterial powers. "47. The Commissioner fully concurred in my proposal as also with my view, that the Municipality required the pecuniary help which it involved, as well as the ministerial (vide Commissioner's Circular No. 346, dated 28th idem). He therefore asked the different heads to select the men, which they at once did, and signified his assent to their receiving a small allowance from the Municipality. "48. Eventually, this allowance was fixed and sanctioned by the Municipality at Rs. 10, 15 and 30 per mensem, according as the men's salaries were under. 50 and 100 and over 100 rupees per mensem respectively. "49. Work in the Karchi Customs House having shrunk considerably, owing to the injury to trade caused by the prevalence of the plague, the Commissioner next asked the Collector of Customs to lend the services of some of his men, and five were placed at my dis- posal. These, again, were subsequently added to by men from the Educational Department, whose schools were closed. "50. The deputation of these men led to the organization of the Plague Superintendent and his charge- a system which, aided by experience, developed gradually-until the Superin- tendent became under the Plague Committee responsible for the entire sanitation of his division, the correct registration of all sickness due to plague, and of all deaths, the isolation of the sick and the segregation of the healthy, the re-occupation of all houses, their sanitary condition, aud the effectual working of all the rules and orders passed under the Epidemic Diseases Aet and other authority. "51. On the 30th January the Commissioner issued a memorandum suggesting that instead of the general supervision previously exercised, some such system should be instituted and a responsible head appointed to supervise different sections of the town, each with his own staff of coolies, Mukadams and sweepers, and supply of disinfectants and apparatus. "52. On the same date at a Conference held by me at the Kacheri at which the Municipal President, Secretary and Health Officer, the District Superintendent of Police and my Assistant, Mr. Lawrence, I.C.S., who had been engaged on plague work for some days, Mr. Cadell, I. C. S whose services had just been placed at my disposal, and other officers were present, the actual details were decided on and three establishments formed with Mr. Lawrence, Mr. Cadell, and
45 Mr. Brown, as Plague Superintendents, the clerks and munshis deputed from the different offices as supervisors, and such number of police, coolies and masons as seemed necessary for each charge. "5:3. At the same meeting it was decided to obtain for the Plague Superintendents the same powers as were granted to the Municipal Engineer and Secretary, and rules were drawn up for their guidance. "54. With the initiation of this important measure the month of January ended, the num- ber of cases and deaths having reached a total of 871 and 802 respectively, the largest number of cases on any one day having been 43, while the disease had established itself in the Napier and Market quarters, and following its eastern course had commenced its attack on the suburban area, comprising the Garden, Serai, Jail, Rambagh and Runchore quarters." 3. With reference to the imported disease at the beginning of January that compulsory segregation of the sick should not be adopted the following remarks are quoted from the report of the Commissioner in Sind: A meeting was convened at Government House on the afternoon of the 4th, at which the Collector, the Medical officers named and the Municipal executive, including Mr. Tahilram, the President, and Mr, Strachan, the Engineer and Secretary, were present. The Acting Commissioner had consulted these officers. The Collector considered that Section 73 of the District Municipal Act was inadequate to deal with the disease and there was no provision of law to render compulsory notification of Plague legal. The Honourable Mr. James, in a letter of 30th November 1896, had expressed a similar opinion that, under Section 73, compulsory segregation of the sick would be unauthorized. The Principal Medical Officer, the Collector of Karchi and the President of the Munici- pality, as also Mr. Strachan and Dr. Kaka, were of opinion that no segregation of sick was possible without compulsion, and that in the present state of the public mind compul- sion would not be the best way of meeting the epidemic. In fact, it would be the worst possible means to adopt. As a scientific method, the Civil Surgeon and the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner advocated segregation, but considered compulsion neces- sary, and that it would be met by opposition. The Acting Commissioner reviewed the position with great care, chiefly in view of the fact that there were, according to the last census, over 51,000 Muhanmadans to some 42,000 Hindus, that the former had probably still further increased the disparity of numbers in the interval, and that it was practically a Hindu Municipality who would have the task of enforcing rules in the teeth of the Muhammadan majority, a majority composed largely of a fanatical congeries of tribes and nations, not one of whom had listened to the proposal for caste hospitals, nor was there a Muhammadan hospital in existence. Asked how the Municipality proposed to carry out their rules, the reply was "The Police." And the Acting Commissioner silently resolved that, if the Muni- cipality were to pass rules hateful to both Hindu and Muhammadan, at once retire to the background, and leave the Police to fight with the people, he would prefer the rules should be his own, the personality his own, and before attempting to drive a crowd of terrified and panic-stricken people, he would be quite sure he could treat the sick when they were segregated. He had seen the effect in cholera and famine of crowding numbers without carefully prepared arrangement, and determined to meet Hindu with Hindu and Muhammadan with Muhammadan, and, if possible, to win the confidence of both before resorting to compulsion. On the 4th January, immediately after the Meeting, the Collector was informed that the Acting Commissioner was unable to sanction the compulsory removal clause as it stood. The clause, read with the directions, left a door of escape for the rich and none for the poor, and these would ignorantly and fanatically resist compulsion. Government were informed that the fear of this impending compulsory seizure of the sick had already produced something like panic: medical aid was being rejected, sickness was concealed, and the population hostile. Surgeon-Colonel Bainbridge had concurred that it would be unadvisable to resort to compulsion. The segregation must be effectual, or it must be abandoned as impracticable. The Municipal President and the Engineer and Secretary had warned that a reign of terror would certainly follow resort to force, and better results were to be expected from conciliation. It came to this-either sick people must be dragged from their homes by force and opposition be met by force, or else this terror of compulsory removal must be allayed and sympathy and conciliation take its place. The success of segregation depended upon the population being more or less consenting, not opposed, to the remedy. The muhammadans, for example, would not even set a house apart. A Muhammadan Medical officer would greatly strengthen the Muni- cipality, and an effort would be made to render the hospitals, if possible, popular. A valuable suggestion from Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Clarkson was placed before the Meeting, and accepted by the Municipality, that the town should be divided into dis- tricts and a Medical officer be appointed to each, to see every case of suspected Plague before removal, and an Inspector, whose duty it would be to find out the cases. The Municipality immediately appointed Inspectors, and these men proved most useful in securing correct and early information. B 1135-12
46 SECTION 9. Plague in the Moofussil in December and January. 1. In the beginning of December Bndra, a town in the Thna District, but virtually a suburb of Bombay, was attacked, and it is probable that Kurla, a neighbouring town, which like Bndra is only separated from Bombay by a causeway, was infected about the same time, though indigenous cases were con- cealed and only a few cases classed as imported at first came to the notice of the authorities. Eight indigenous cases were also reported from Bhiwndi in the Thna District in December and two from Poona City, but the imported cases increased considerably, and in the course of December no less than 38, 21, 25, 24 and 11 cases were discovered in the Ahmedabad, Surat, Thna, Ratngiri and Kolba districts, respectively, besides a few in various other parts of the country. In January the spread of indigenous plague in the Mofussil was much more serious. The disease was widespread in Karachi and was beginning to be severely epidemic in the city of Poona. In the three towns Bndra, Kurla and Bhiwndi, already mentioned, in the Thna District, the cases were numerous and the beginning of the extensive spread which occurred later on in the Slsette Island of this district was marked by the appearance of the first indigenous cases in Thna City and in the village of Bhaynder. A few cases were reported from 2 villages in Stra, 1 in Sholpur, 3 in Ratngiri, 2 in Cutch, I in Karachi, and 1 in Hyderabad. The single case reported in January from Bulsr was the first sign of the severe epidemic which subsequently ravaged the Surat District. In this month too the cases classed as imported increased rapidly in numbers, owing to the panic and the exodus from Bombay and other plague-stricken places. Of these cases in the course of the month 24 were detected in the Ahmedabad District, 15 in Kaira, 4 in Broach, 40 in Surat, 60 in Thna, 4 in Ahmednagar, 6 in Khandesh, 2 in Nsik, 24 in Stara, 2 in Sholpur, 20 in Kolba, 67 in Ratngiri, 38 in Baroda, 16 in Kthiwr, 2 in Kolhpur, 38 in Cutch and 54 in the villages of the Sind districts of Karchi and Hyderabad. 2. The measures taken in the Mofussil in this period were for the most part merely an extension of measures taken in the period dealt with in Chapter I. Powers to take action for the isolation, &c., of plague patients were conferred by the Commissioners under Section 73 of the District Municipal Act on cer- tain additional Municipalities including Surat, Bulsr, Dhulia and Bhusval. there was a large increase in the number of local inspection posts, but though as far as possible medical subordinates were employed, the scarcity of these officers rendered it necessary in many cases that inspection should be undertaken by the police or by inspectors who were not medical men. The new inspection posts thus established included posts at the ports in the Ratngiri and Kolba districts, Mndvi and other ports in Cutch and the ports of Bhvnagar, Pore- bandar, Bedi, Jorya, Salaya, Verval, and Mangrol in Kthiwr and that of Gogo in Ahmedabad; and new local inspections of railway passengers were in- stituted at Ankleshvar and Plej in the Broach District, at Bulsr in Surat, at Yeola and Mlegaon in Nsik, at Indi Road, Bijpur and Bgalkot in Bijpur, at Sangli Road, Miraj, Shirol and Kolhpur in the Kolhpur State, at 4 stations in the Kaira District and at certain places in Kthiawr and Cutch. In the Poona District the inspecting staff at Poona station was increased and an inspection was instituted at Lonvli and Kirkee. Arrangements for sheds and other places of segregation were made at numerous places including Bulsr in the Surat District, Dhulia and Bhusval in Khndesh, Ankleshwar and Plej in Broach, Sngli, Miraj and Kolhpur in the Kolhpur State, three towns in Nsik and all the Ratngiri ports. At Kalyn a new shed was erected in place of the previous one which had been burnt down. At Poona and Kirkee special plague hospitals were erected and a new hospital was in course of erection in the former city. The other measures taken consisted for the most part of improvements of the general sanitary arrangements and the issue of circular orders to Gov- ernment officers and of advice to Municipalities. The appended instructions marked A prepared by the Sanitary Commissioner were widely circulated on the 14th January, and on the 23rd January the Surgeon-General recommended the circulation of the instructions marked B prepared at his request by Dr. Childe. These were widely circulated by Government on the 27th January.
47 Further, the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioner gave advice to local authorities both in correspondence and verbally in the course of their tours. The former officer's tour in this period included Broach, Surat, Thna, Poona, Nsik, Ahmednagar and Khandesh; while the Sanitary Commissioner visited Bombay and various districts in the Deccan. A. "As owing to the plague in Bombay many people are leaving and proceeding to out- stations to live, I think all Municipalities and other places which may have cases occurring within their limits should be informed of the mode of sanitary procedure to be adopted. "2. In my opinion the two great measures are isolation of those sick and the empty- ing of the house in which a case has occurred of all human beings, keeping all the doors and windows of the house in question open day and night for eight days, removing the roof or part of it if any good ventilation is to be obtained thereby. In fact removal to a special hospital of those actually sick, removal out of the affected house of all the other residents and opening up to light and air the affected house are the measures to be chiefly relied on. "3. Difficulties arise in the carrying out of both measures, and the fullest powers should be given, persuasion having failed, to enforce the measures recommended. It is of course little use to empower forcible removal to an isolation hospital if powers of detention there are not also conferred. Again, unless reasonable proper accommodation is provided, it is cruel to remove sick people merely to an empty hut. "4. Now to enter more into detail, measures have already been adopted at municipal towns along the line of rail to watch for sick people and those measures have hitherto been attended with success, and should be adopted also at all sea-port towns on the coast at which coasting passenger steamers touch, if it has not already been done. All cases reported from Mofassil towns have been arrivals from Bombay except in Ahmedabad in which two cases originated in that town and they were amongst the first three reported, and in the town of Bndra which adjoins Bombay, but the town is so near Bombay and the intercourse between the two so great that infection was likely to occur although the Municipality did keep a watch for imported cases. "5. The first thing then for a place infected or likely to be infected is to erect a mat hut for ten people, materials being at hand for another hut. Ten feet square per patient with plenty of ventilation. Have ready on the spot a bhangi, a bhisti and a peon with huts for each and tubs for disinfecting material. This will do away with the fear relative to experience of their sick being left alone in a lonely place, and one of the attendants is at hand to call the medical officer deputed to attend to the cases. I would also recommend that a compounder be also kept at the hospital who can receive the sick and see to his comfort when first brought in. "6. The Municipality or place affected can only be expected to erect a hospital for the general public, but if communities desire to build hospitals for the sick of their own caste, they should be encouraged to do so near to the general hospital, so that supervision, cleans- ing, and other matters may be more economically carried out. "7. Believing as I do that the poison of plague is soon rendered innocuous by plenty of fresh air, I do not think these hospitals need be placed at a long distance out of the town. Any convenient open space on which the buildings can be, when erected, 300 yards from an inhabited dwelling, may be, I consider, with safety taken up for this purpose. "8. In the next place, if people are to be turned out of infected houses, they must have some place to go to and for them also huts should be erected in which they may stay for eight days, the medical officer coming daily to inspect them. In this case also commu- nities may erect huts for their castefellows. "9. After this the procedure of the authorities, municipal or otherwise, should, I suggest, be (the watching at the station being provided for) the dividing of the town accord- ing to size and appointing to each a medical officer to whose notice all cases of plague are brought and upon his diagnosis and certificate all cases are to be removed. He should be helped by an inspector or mukdam or some one whose duty it is to look out for cases. "10. The authorities then should widely publish what steps they are taking, point out that it is to prevent the people now healthy from being infected, and ask for aid, not obstruc- tion, and state that no one will be moved unless seen by a medical officer, and that any one seeking to obtain money to let people off from being taken away should be handed over to the nearest policeman as he is not an authorized person but an impostor. "11. Also the authority should offer a fee, Rs. 2 or so, for every authentic case of plague reported by any one not their servants paid for this particular duty. The notifier reports to the medical man any suspicious case, and if the medical man finds it to be a true case, he gives a brief certificate to the man reporting, who takes it to the Municipal Secretary (say), who files it for verification and pays at the end of the'month. "12. When a patient is removed to a hospital, one relative or friend may be allowed to accompany him to attend upon him, but this attendant must stay in hospital precincts. his
48 food or what he requires may be brought to him by his friends and put down in an appointed place from whence he can remove it and brief conversation allowed at ten yards' interval. " 13. Besides this, the usual cleansing operations in the town should be carried out vigorously. " 14. Also the dead whenever practicable should be cremated. If buried, the grave should be at lenst 6 feet deep, the body covered with saw-dust and over this carbolic acid. " 15. If the authorities of a town do all this to prevent plague spreading, it is clear that they ought to be vigorously supported and that their efforts to keep the town free of this disease ought not to be rendered futile by the opposition of purely selfish people who have no care for the welfare of their fellow-townspeople, and I hope Government will be able to see their  way to effectively aid any town which has properly carried out the sanitary measures as far as it rests with itself. Unless the people thoroughly understand that Government intend, if necessary, to resort to forcible measures to carry out isolation, I fear that the mofussil towns, now overcrowded with fugitives from Bombay living in badly- ventilated houses, will suffer in proportion as much as Bombay." B. INSTRUCTIONS FOR ASSISTANT-SURGEONS AND HOSPITAL ASSISTANTS. DIAGNOSIS. The symptoms of Plague in brief. Plague is occurring in two forms - (a) with buboes, (b) without buboes. (a) With Buboes.-The onset of the attack is sudden, and there is often a rigor at first, then fever comes on with bad headache, vomiting and frequently delirium. The fever quickly rises high to 104 or more. The respirations are increased to 25, 30 or more, and the pulse is rapid 100, or more, and soon becomes soft and compressible. The tongue is either moist or a little dry, but not very dry or thickly coated with fur. (The condition of the tongue and pulse is quite different from the furred tongue and full-bounding pulse usual in ague). The patient feels ill and his face has an anxious expression, and soon pain is felt in one arm-pit or groin, more rarely in the neck; within 24 hours a painful gland can be felt at the tender spot, and later a mass of glands can be seen and felt,  and the pain is much more ; this is the bubo. The above description applies to severe cases; but there are also milder cases in which all the symptoms are less, and the bubo is much smaller and less painful, it may be only one somewhat enlarged gland. The liver and spleen are either slightly or not at all enlarged. (b) Without Buboes.-These resemble bronchitis or pneumonia, and are usually fatal within 3 or 4 days. The onset is sudden with rigor, fever, headache, &c., as above de- scribed, and soon symptoms of bronchitis or pneumonia appear; but the symptoms in the chest are slight and the patient is much more ill than he would be if he were suffering from simple mild bronchitis or pneumonia. This is the diagnostic sign ; the man is much more ill and his fever is much higher than can be explained by the amount of lung disease pre- sent. The lymphatic glands are either normal or slightly enlarged, but there is no pain in them and no bubo.                                ____________ INSTRUCTIONS FOR TREATMENT, SEGREGATION, DISINFECTION, &c. (1)   Treatment.-There is no known certain treatment; many methods have been tried in Bombay, but none with certain success.    Among these are  (a) local treatment of the bubo by branding, blistering, leeches, incision, or injection  of antiseptics such as carbolic, acid,   or   tincture   of iodine ;  (b)  giving antiseptics internally, such as liquor hydrargyri, perchloridi, sulphocarbolate of soda, carbolic acid, quinine ;   (c)  keeping the bowels  well open ; (d) cardiac stimulants, such as strychnine, caffeine, digitalis, ammonia, brandy, ether ; (e) sedatives at night if required, bromide of potassium, chloral or opium.    The value of (a) and (&) is doubtful, but (c), (?) and (e) are certainly of some use. (2)    Segregation of Patients.-The patients should be kept apart in a  separate  shed reserved for plague (which can be burnt  when the  epidemic is over), with provision for plenty of fresh air and ventilation.    Overcrowding  of patients is specially to be avoided. Attendants do not easily catch the disease from  a patient, but they should be careful to wash after being with him.    Any vomit, sputum, or excreta from a patient should  be  burnt if possible ; if not, some disinfectant should be added to it, as phenyle, carbolic acid, chloride of lime, or quicklime, and it should be buried.    It is good to have an  additional shed for doubtful cases, in which a certain diagnosis has not betn made; but if not, they may be placed in a reserved part of the plague-shed, and with but little fear of their contracting the disease (supposing they have not already got it). (3)  Disinfection of Patients' belongings.-Whatever can be boiled or heated on a fire may be thoroughly disinfected in this way.    Things that cannot be so treated should be freely sprinkled or washed with carbolic lotion (1 in 30) or phenyle, and be well exposed to the sun and wind.    Bedsteads and hospital equipment should be treated in the same way after use.
49 (4)   Disinfection of Vehicles.-They should be washed with carbolic lotion or phenyle, and  exposed freely to the sun and air ; cushions especially to  be looked to.    When the epidemic is over they should be re-painted. (5)  Disposal of  Corpses.-They  should be burnt  if   possible;   if buried, the   grave should be deep, and   quicklime put in with  the body.    Any clothing or trappings used for the corpse should be burnt or buried with it; if not, they should be boiled or freely washed with carbolic and exposed to the sun and air. INSTRUCTIONS FOR POLICE OFFICERS, STATION-MASTERS AND OTHER LAYMEN. (1)  In order to  recognise  the disease, ask the patient these  questions : Did you get ill suddenly ?   Have you  been ill only a short  time ?   Did you feel fever coming on with shivering ?   Have you a headache ?   Do you feel sick, or have you been vomiting ?   A man who has plague will answer Yes to all these questions. Then feel his skin, it will be hot; and look at and feel his armpits and groins ; if there is a painful swelling in one of these places, it is a sign of plague. Also look at his face; he looks ill and has an anxious expression of face ; sometimes his eyes are bloodshot. With regard to the case without buboes, non-medical men will probably not be able to recognise them ; but if a man looks very ill, and has high fever with cough, he should be regarded as a doubtful case of plague, until he can be seen by a medical man. Note.-If a traveller  is seen walking lame,  his groin should  be examined,  as he  may have a swelling  there caused by plague ; and similarly if he has a stiff arm, his armpit should be examined. (2)   Treatment of plague cases   by  Laymen.-No   directions can be given, except   to poultice the bubo ; if there is much pain in it, give him. a purge if he is constipated, and brandy or other form of alcohol. (3)  With regard to disinfection, segregation, disposal of corpses, &c., the directions are the same for laymen as for medical men." SECTION 10. General Remarks. As indicated in the previous sections the period December and January was marked in Bombay City by a rapid spread of the disease, a panic which increased from day to day, and a large exodus of the population : Karachi was attacked in the middle of December and became seriously infected in January, in which month also the disease appeared in an epidemic form in the city of Poona and in the southernmost towns in Slsette Island. It was recognized to be a matter of the first importance to stop the further spread of the plague : and the failure of the limited quarantine rules to protect Karchi, combined with the failure of a double railway inspection, on departure from Bombay and on arrival in Poona, to protect the latter city, showed the necessity for a change of system. The extraordinary measure of stopping pilgrimage from Bombay to the Hedjaz was therefore taken and arrangements were made not only for compul- sorily inspecting every person who left Bombay by sea, but also for preventing the departure of ships without a special certificate from the Health Officer of the Port. For the protection of the rest of India an elaborate system of railway inspection was arranged, and a scheme was prepared for legislation of the most drastic kind as regards power to interfere with the liberty of the subject. To rapidly suppress the plague in the cities of Bombay and Karachi, in both of which the officers in authority had at first considered compulsory segregation entirely out of the question, was beyond hope : but in the former, in addition to disinfect- ing and cleansing measures of a thorough description, such arrangements as were possible in the state of panic which existed and in view of the scarcity of medical men were made to discover the sick and if possible convey them to hos- pital, and the possibility of carrying out a scheme, which was being worked with some success in the much smaller and more favourably situated city of Karchi, for causing the evacuation of infected houses, chawls and localities, was earnestly considered. The Secretary of State had offered to send out doctors from England, but the Government of India had expressed their ability to lend the medical men required and had promised to send 16 officers in addition to 21 medical subordinates. The Secretary of State had also offered to supply nurses, but His ? 1135-13
50 Excellency the Governor was advised by the Surgeon-General that they would be of little use as they would know nothing of the language. The necessity for more stringent measures was clear, but it was also recognized that in a city with the characteristics of Bombay little could be done without the co-operation of the people. On the 28th January His Excellency the Governor addressed selected representatives of the native community in the following speech : Not very long ago I was asked to preside at a meeting not very far from here, the object being to  suggest that those who were in a position to do so should help by generous donation their less fortunate brethren in their time of need and famine.   To-day the circumstances are different.    Gentlemen, I have asked you to assemble-you who are men of influence and leaders of different sections of the community - to ask you to impress upon those who look to you for guidance the need, nay the imperative necessity, for helping themselves.    I need hardly refer to the circumstances by which we are surrounded.    The press, daily conversation, nay the very appearance of our city put only too plainly before us the state of affairs.    Do not believe for one moment that I speak myself with feelings of panic.    I have none of that feeling.    My object is to allay panic if it exists here.    But I am not blind to the gravity of the situation.    What 1 want to promote among you, gentlemen, if it does not exist already, is a spirit of co-operation. Among you here I have no doubt that spirit exists, but I am most desirous that you should exhort those whose confidence you hold to co-operate with and assist in the measures that are being taken for remedying the disease and preventing its further spread.    We are all of us witness of their untiring energy and ceaseless exertions.    But with the view of preventing the spread of the disease and stamping it out there must be individual action, without which much of the effect of the action of the executive is lost.    If they are obstructed in their work and met  with  unwilling  response  to  advice,  the  benefit  of their measures must inevitably be retarded, and  the run  of the disease prolonged.    Instead  of obstruction   the   executive should be  met  half  way,   houses  should  readily  be  thrown open, and indeed  many  of those who have means might  well have the limewshing of their houses done for them- selves.    This would result not only in so many more houses being whitewashed within  a given time, but to a certain extent be simultaneous action resulting in so many more people being employed in the task.    This is a city in which, as in all great towns, rumour is  easily initiated, and as it rolls  along unfounded tales already absurd assume proportions which impose easily on the credulous.    I have heard some,  there are no doubt many.    I would ask you, gentlemen, to dismiss such idle and impossible imaginings, and to impress their obvious untruth upon your people.    I believe one of these rumours which have contributed much towards the mortality by this disease is as to what goes on in the Hospitals at Arthur Road and others.    Gentlemen, I need not tell you that these hospitals, many of which have been established by the various sects,  are  built and maintained for one object only-the curing of the sick.    Insist strongly on this to your followers, and further, that what is more necessary than anything  else is that  sufferers  should go to  the hospital at the very earliest possible suspicion that they have contracted the disease.    Do not let them wait till the disease has made such an inroad on the constitution that it is incapable of successful opposition.    I have myself been making enquiries about the  Arthur Road Hospital which I passed early this morning, and I have consulted with Mr. Snow and the Health Department, and efforts will be made to render it still more useful and the assistance rendered of still greater value. I do not speak in ignorance of hospitals.    I managed one of the largest of those in London, and I unhesitatingly say that at home, where I live in a small house, I have always said that were I so unfortunate as to fall ill I was to be sent to the hospital without loss of time.    There,  gentle- men, you. see my belief in these instruments of relief.    I ask you most earnestly to enjoin your followers to have confidence and early recourse to them if seized with illness.    Again, gentlemen, there is another method by which those who are healthy can be protected, and it is by leaving their houses and delivering them over to the energies of the executive and by themselves going to a camp for the time being.    I am told there are strong objections to this.    I am further told that if the leaders of the communities really exert their influence in this direction their advice is most likely to be followed.    There surely,  gentlemen, never was a better opportunity of using your influence for good than the present situation now offers you.    I have to-day seen the com- mencement of a hutted camp.    I believe that similar arrangements have been made by some employers and by others.    This might be extended, and to this I ask your aid.    I believe this to be the most efficacious of all, and I cannot lay too much stress upon the importance of it, much as I sympathise with those who have to undergo the inconvenience and hardship.    Not only are our endeavours directed to the stamping out of the disease, but also we are anxiously striving to prevent its spread to other important and popular cities and districts in India.    Various rumours are spread about, but here again I must ask you to believe no idle rumours of tyrannical treat- ment at the hands of Government.    Now, gentlemen, you are, I am told,  men having influence with your fellows.    I believe that that is true ; if true, a great responsibility is laid upon you. You must aid me, nay, you must aid the city of Bombay which you proudly claim as the second city in the Empire.    Do not be apathetic.    Take courage and do not let those who trust you despair.    I am hopeful you share this spirit with me.    Do all in your power to assist and co- operate with the executive.    As far as possible encourage getting the sick to hospital and the healthy out ?f their houses, and going into new and temporary homes, by showing a brave example, and thus leading and encouraging the others you will greatly aid in driving this enemy from our midst.
51 APPENDIX A. (Vide para. 3, Section 1, Chapter 2). SIR,-The undersigned members of the Bubonic Plague Research Committee strongly urge the adoption of the following measures for dealing with the existing epidemic. 2.    Seeing that it is known that each plague patient contains in himself the source of infection and seeing that there is a possibility of this passing either directly or indirectly from the sick to the healthy, it is absolutely necessary that the most rigid segregation of the sick should be practised.    For the attainment of this end it is not necessary in all cases that the sick person or persons should be removed from the house in which the attack commenced.    Suitable rooms might be available in the house in which the case might be efficiently isolated.    In select- ing such room, the points to be especially kept in mind should be the free supply of  sunlight and air, and the minimising the chances of communication with other persons in the house. Often in place of a room the flat roof of a house or other such open space in connection with a house could be utilized for isolation, a temporary erection sufficing to keep off the direct rays of the sun.    Whichever method be adopted, the passage of communication with the house should be guarded by a cloth hung over it and kept saturated with carbolic solution (I pint to 2 gallons). 3.    All secretions, articles of clothing,   &c., used by the patient  should be disinfected before removal from the room, or destroyed by fire.    Not more than one attendant or at the most two at a time should be allowed in the room. 4.    If no suitable accommodation is available in the house, then the patient must be remov- ed to a suitable place, which should, if possible, be a special hospital. 5.    After the removal, recovery, or death of the patient, the infected room should first  be hermetically closed and thoroughly fumigated with sulphur fumes.    The walls and  floor  shoud then be scraped and washed together with all the articles in the room capable of being washed, a solution of  carbolic acid (1/2 pint to  2 gallons) being used for  the purpose.     Finally the walls should be washed with fresh quicklime and water, or preferably with a  solution  of chlorinated lime.    Clothing, bedding, & e., should be treated in a steam steriliser.    For the purpose  of trans- porting them to the steriliser it is advisable that they should be wrapped in a sheet soaked in carbolic acid solution.   The room should be then vacated for a period of at least six weeks. About a week before it is re-occupied the floor and walls should again be treated with chlorinated  lime. On the occurrence of a second case in the same house within 15 days of the occurrence of  the first case, the whole house should be vacated, the sick being removed to a suitable hospita.     If the removal of the sick cannot be effected  without   giving  rise to an objectionable amount  of prejudice, they should be treated in the house if approved of.   The whole house when fully vacated should be subjected to the same process as detailed for the infected room, with the proviso that any godown or place of businesss not used as a residence, and if provided with a separate entrance need not necessarily be vacated, but should be treated on its merits  as to how far it shall come under the operation of the measures applicable to the rest of the house. 6.    To meet prejudices against promiscuous segregation, communities in the various districts objecting to the ordinary isolation hospitals should be permitted to open as many selected   and approved hospitals as may be necessary for the purpose.    Vacant houses, huts, tents, or ships in the harbour may be used for the purpose. 7.    To meet the difficulty of housing the evicted healthy persons, temporary accommodation might be required, and could be erected on any available open land ; but much might be done by providing accommodation in houses already more or less deserted.    Houses that have been vacated for six weeks owing to the occurrence of plague cases might become available for occupancy. 8.    To meet the serious difficulty of the concealment of cases, all house-holders should be made responsible for the immediate reporting of all serious cases of illness to the Health Depart- ment of the Municipality.    On receipt of such a report, the municipal medical officer should visit the case, and if it should turn out to be one of plague, the person reporting should be suitably rewarded.    In the case of chawls, it might be necessary not only to make the landlord responsible, but also to compel him to keep a representative constantly on the premises to report cases of sickness in the same manner as a householder.     The concealment of cases of severe sickness should be made a penal offence.    To ensure the efficient reporting of cases of plague, house-to-house visitations by municipal medical officers should be carried out daily in all infected localities. 9.    Meanwhile the present measures for opening up and cleansing of drains, gullies, &c.,dis- infecting of roads, burning of dead rats,   &c.,  should be continued, but  we  consider that  the practice of burning sulphur in open spaces and open houses had better be discontined. 10.    We consider that an extensive mortality among rats in any locality may be taken as an indication that there is a risk of the appearance of plague among human beings there residing and that on the occurrence of this phenomenon all rat-holes should be dug up and thoroughly
52 disinfected, either by fire or by means of a strong solution of chlorinated lime.     Rat-holes should also be carefully disinfected wherever found in an infected house. 11.    A set of simple rules for the guidance of the people should be drawn up in the various vernaculars and circulated both by printed notices and by criers.    Such rules should direct attention to the necessity for free and efficient  ventilation, the prevention  of over- crowding,  the necessity of cleanliness both  of the person and of the dwelling.    The whole- contents of dwelling-rooms should be well aired and exposed to  sunlight every fortnight : bedding and clothing should be so treated  every day.    Special   care should be enjoined in keeping clean all injuries or skin abrasions even of .the slightest  description.    They should be washed with disinfectants obtained from the Municipality,  and   protected by bandages, plaster. or  otherwise.     Householders  and  landlords  should be  compelled  to   wash  and limewash  all houses  and rooms which  on inspection   are found  to be dirty.    Such lime- washing will obviously give an opportunity for exposing the contents of a room to sunlight and  air.     Persons   coming  in   contact   with  the   sick,   especially  if contaminated   with secretions,  should be instructed to carefully wash all exposed  skin surfaces with carbolic lotion of 1 in 20 strength. 12.    In order to increase the accuracy of the death returns, and to obtain a better check on the progress of the disease, a medical  officer should  be stationed at each of the places  for the disposal of the dead,  and   should   be -empowered  to  examine bodies in all suspicious cases.    As a general rule this examination need only be external. 13.    With regard  to general  measures, it may be noted that  overcrowding, deficient ventilation of houses and rooms, accumulated dirt in  rooms and passages,  are  frequently present,  and  obviously  require  to be dealt  with   where necessary by   compulsion.    The opening up of crowded   localities for  the   free perflation of air is  urgently needed.    The crowded  and   insanitary   burial   grounds   present   in   the  midst   of    thickly   populated districts  should be   closed   on the earliest possible occasion.    We also point out the need for a steam steriliser in each district of the city. 14.    The Committee is well aware that the carrying out of much of the above measures will be attended with hardship and inconvenience to the inhabitants, but we consider that nothing less than the above desiderata will suffice to eradicate  the  disease.    While  every effort should be made to prevent the regulations bearing harshly on the people, these regulations should be firmly   and unflinchingly   applied in view of the  enormous interests at  stake.     Although interference with trade and even panic may ensue on enforcing the above measures, it should be borne in mind that greater interference with trade and greater panic is likely to be produced by the disease itself if allowed an untrammelled course in the succeeding months of the cold weather. 15.    While leaving the carrying out of the above rules to the Municipal authorities, the Committee advocates the employment of Commissioned Medical Officers in each of the infected districts to inspect and supervise the methods of combating the disease.    It might be feasible to ask the Army Medical Staff and the Royal Navy to contribute their quota of such officers if any difficulty is found in providing them, from the Indian Medical Service.    Such aid is requisite, as it is feared that in some cases the present measures of disinfection are not efficiently carried out, and more responsible aid is required in supervising the sanitary needs of the infected areas.    At present it is feared that the medical officers employed by the Municipality' have most of their time employed in inspecting and treating the sick.    These municipal officers should direct the whole of their time to inspecting their districts, and to seeing that the above suggestions are carried out efficiently.    The Commissioned Medical Officers, if employed, should be independent of the muni- cipality and should report to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of Bombay. 16.    We also consider that steps should be taken for obtaining further supplies  of Mr. Yersin's antitoxin for treatment of the sick. 17.    In conclusion, we wish to point out that until scientific- researches have shown us the exact sources and modes of infection in this disease, the utility of any special mode of disin- fection must remain a matter of theory, and the safest way of avoiding the disease must be to run away from it.    In other words, although it is probable that the suggested measures of disinfection will be of some use, we consider that there is reason for placing more reliance on the evacuation of infected houses as a means of combating the disease. We have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servants, R. MANSER, M.D., Surgeon-Major, I. M. S., President, ?. ?. ? ANICI N. L. G. CHILDE, Surgeon-Captain, I. M. S. N. F. SURVEYOR. A minority report by Professor Haffkine is appended.
53 APPENDIX B. (Summary by Surgeon-Major STREET of the action taken by him in Bombay City, vide Section 1, paragraph 12.) On the 23rd January I reported myself to the Secretary to Government, General Department, and received my instructions. On the same day I called on the Municipal Commis- sioner and also saw the Health Officer, Bombay Municipality. The next day I commenced making a daily round in the city with various officers of the Municipality to make myself acquainted with the work which was being done in connection with the plague. I also put myself into communication with various officers and made myself acquainted with their views regarding the disease. On the 8th February I addressed the Municipal Commissioner in my No. 2 of that date and forwarded a copy of the same to Government which was embodied in Government Resolution No. 915-385-P. of 1897. I continued to make daily inspections and to see and consult with the Municipal Commis- sioner. I brought various matters to his notice and gave my opinion on subjects referred by him to me and also accompanied him on inspections in the city and. island. I also almost daily saw the Health Officer. I discussed matters with him and brought to his notice things which had come under my observation during my inspections and also offered suggestions on various points. I also saw various other officers of the municipality as occasion required. At the time of my relinquishing my duties in connection with the municipality, I was en- gaged with both the Municipal Commissioner and Health Officer in connection with the Notifi- cation No. 228-P, dated 10th February 1897. During the whole time of my work in connection with the municipality I was in constant personal communication with the Secretary to Government, General Department. 2.    Under instructions from Government I inspected and reported on the  Arthur Road Hospital. I brought to the notice of the Municipal Commissioner the state of the Hospital, and ad- vised what should be done. I made frequent visits to it myself to see that the necessary work, &c., was done and on some occasions spent some time there pointing out and seeing remedied defects in sanitary matters and general management, and saw various municipal officials in connection with getting the improvement, &c., carried out. At the request of the Municipal Commissioner I saw General Gatacre, C.B., on several oc- casions in connection with the opening of the Parel Hospital and made arrangements with him and with the Medical Officer, Arthur Road Hospital, for the transfer and the sending of patients to the hospital. At the request of the Municipal Commissioner I sat on a commit tee to report on the Grant Road burial ground. 3.    According to my instructions I inspected and scrutinized and reported on the means adopted to inspect people leaving Bombay by road, sea and rail.    A few days after my arrival in Bombay the control and supervision of the inspection of passengers leaving Bombay by rail- way was made over to me. ? 1135-14
54 APPENDIX C. Vide para. 15, Section 1, Chapter 2. We, the undersigned medical officers and members of the Special Research Committee, are of opinion that the bubonic plague now prevailing in the city is under certain conditions only slightly contagious or infectious, and the facts observed in connection with individual cases and those associated with the general progress of the disease, warrant us in concluding that its inci- dence is greatly due to local conditions. We are emphatically of opinion that the only practical method of dealing with the outbreak, and of arresting the progress of the disease, is by the removal of the inmates from those houses in which a case of the disease occurs. We quite appreciate the practical difficulties attending the adoption of this proposal ; but in such an emer- gency as the present these difficulties can and must be overcome. The Municipal Corporation will no' doubt provide suitable huts, free of rent, for the accommodation of the different classes, and we understand that the Mill Companies and other employers of labour are prepared to erect huts for their different employes. The experience gained in the melas at Allahabad and Kurd- wr will be available as to the construction and arrangement of the huts. There will thus be no difficulty experienced in providing sufficient and suitable accommoda- tion for the evicted, and it requires only the concurrence and sympathy of the leaders of the different sections of the native community to render the scheme a success. If houses in healthy localities are available for occupation, there is no reason why they should not be utilized. The steps leading up to removal would be the report to the Health Officer of a case by a duly quali- fied medical officer. The Health Officer would then notify the occurrence to the municipal authorities and would at the same time submit his recommendations for the removal of the in- mates in the particular home and, if he considered it necessary, of those also in the immediate neighbourhood. The municipal authorities would then take the necessary action and indicate the huts available. Carts, if necessary, should be provided, free of cost, for the removal of the goods and chattels of the inmates. The person attacked would either be removed to hospital or remain in the house' with his or her relatives until recovery or death took place. The houses would then be completely vacated and taken possession of by the Health Officer for purposes of cleaning and disinfection, and he should be invested with full powers, in consultation with the Executive Engineer, for removing all partitions, erections or portions of house walls which impede or obstruct ventilation. After an interval to be determined by the Health Officer the house would be reoccupied. There can be no question as to the necessity for the adoption of the measure we now advocate, and we trust that in the interests not only of Bombay but also in those of the whole of India it will be at once accepted and acted upon-more especially as the untiring energy displayed in the thorough and systematic cleaning and disinfection of the affected parts of the city has yet failed to arrest the progress of the disease. (Signed)    K. N. BAHADURJI. (    "     )    JAMES ARNOTT. (   "     )    TEMULJI BHICAJI NAKEMAN. (   "     )    ISMAIL JAN MAHOMED. (   "     )    BHALCHANDRA KRISHNA. (    "     )    ?. ?. ??????. (    "     )    L. F. CHILDE. (   "     )    ACCACIO G. VIEGAS. (    "     )    N. F. SURVEYOR. (    "     )    THOMAS BLANEY. (    "     )    HENRY COOK, M.D., Surgeon-Major General. (     "     )    JAMES CLEGHORN, D.G., I. M. S. (    "     )    T. S. WEIR. (    "     )    SYDNEY SMITH. I am of the opinion that, as there are facts showing that the plague is spread by people coming from infected localities, the measures compelling the inhabitants to leave those localities ought to be accompanied by others calculated to control their further movements. (Signed)    W. M. HAFFKINE.
55 C H A P T E R   III. THE PERIOD (FEBRUARY AND EARLY PART OF MARCH) FROM THE PASSING OF THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT TILL THE CONSTITUTION OF THE FIRST PLAGUE COMMITTEE. SECTION 1. Rules framed under Act  III  of 1897. The Act was communicated to the Bombay Government on the 4th February, and without delay telegrams were despatched to all Commissioners and to the Collector of Thna-the only district in which plague had become widely epidemic- informing them that Government could confer extensive powers on their officers and asking what powers they considered necessary. Their replies were received on the 8th and 9th of February, and on the 10th sanction was provisionally accorded to all their proposals. The substance of these proposals was embodied in the following draft rules prepared by the legal advisers of Government and issued on the 20th February: "RULES UNDER ACT III OF 1897, Whereas certain parts of the Presidency of Bombay are visited by or threatened with an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease, namely, bubonic plague, and whereas the Governor of Bombay in Council is of opinion that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the spread thereof in parts other than the City of Bombay, pursuant to the provisions of Section 2, sub-sections (1) and (2), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and in exercise of the powers in this behalf conferred by the Governor General in Council under Section 2, sub-section 3, of the same Act, the Governor of Bombay in Council is pleased to empower the officers hereinbelow mentioned to take the measures hereinafter specified to prevent the spread of bubonic plague, and is further pleased to prescribe the temporary regulations hereinafter set forth to be observed by the public and all persons concerned. 1.    In every local area where there is danger of plague the District Magistrate, subject to the general instructions of  the Commissioner, may appoint special officers, either by name or by virtue of office, to devise and carry out, under the District Magistrate's general direc- tions, all measures necessary to prevent the spread of the plague. 2.    The special officers appointed for any local area under these rules may be known as plague authorities and may be selected from the following: (1)    Assistant Collectors within their charges. (2)    Mmlatdrs, Mukhtirkars, Mahlkaris and Head Krkns within their charges. (3)    Municipal Commissioners within municipal limits. (4)    Health Officers of Municipalities within municipal limits. (5)    Secretaries of municipalities within municipal limits. (6)    All Medical officers holding Her Majesty's commission. (7)    Medical officers in charge of Government or State-aided medical institutions. (8)     Any Medical officer employed by a municipality not lower in grade than a Hos- pital Assistant and such officers on pension. (9)    Police officers not lower in grade than a Chief Constable. (10)    Station Masters for their stations. (11)    Customs officers not lower in grade than a Sarkrkn for  the bandars under their charge. (12)    Any other officers or persons specially selected by Government or  by the Com- missioner of the Division, or in Sind by the Commissioner in Sind. 3.    At any railway station or bandar to which no Medical officer has been or may be specially appointed for inspection duty under rules sanctioned by Government concerning the inspection of travellers by rail or boat, any plague authority who may be present on duty, if he reasonably believes or suspects that any person alighting or disembarking from a train or boat is suffering from bubonic plague, may detain any such person for the purpose of medical examination, and shall (if he be not himself a Medical officer authorized under these rules) without delay give information of the detention to the nearest Medical officer so authorized.    Any Station Master at a railway station where no Medical officer has been posted on inspection duty may forward to the nearest station at which such a Medical officer is posted any person who is or is suspected by him to be suffering from the plague.
56 4.    At any place specially appointed by the District Magistrate or by any officer em- powered by him on this behalf, and situate on a road leading into a town  or village, any plague authority on duty or other officer or person specially authorized in this behalf by the District Magistrate may detain, for the purpose of medical examination, any person whom he reasonably believes or suspects to be suffering from the plague, and shall (if he be not himself a Medical officer authorized under these rules) give information of the detention to the nearest Medical officer so authorized. 5.    In any town or village or other area to which this rule shall be applied by the District Magistrate, an occupant of a house or building or the principal surviving  member of a family shall give immediate information to the nearest plague authority of any sickness or death, due or likely to be due to plague, in such house or building or amongst the members of such family.    If the case of sickness or death occur within municipal limits, such person shall also give immediate information thereof in every instance to the  Municipal  Secretary. Such plague authority (if he be not himself a Medical officer) shall without delay send word to the nearest Medical officer belonging to any of the classes (6), (7) and (8) mentioned in Rule 2, and such Medical officer, whether appointed a plague authority for the locality or not, shall be bound to come to the place indicated. 6.    Immediately on receiving information under Rules 3, 4 or 5, the plague authority shall go to the  place indicated, and if the place be a house or dwelling place and if the occupants thereof do not   (on his  demand) allow him to enter and give him reasonable facilities for ascertaining whether any of the inmates are suffering from the plague, such authority is empowered to enter into such house or any part thereof by force and to detain, for the purpose of medical examination, any person found therein to be suffering or suspect- ed to be suffering from the plague. 7.    Every Medical officer appointed under these rules as a plague authority is em- powered to examine all persons whom he discovers or about whom  he receives information under the provisions of Rules Nos. 3, 4, 5 or 6, and to detain and segregate persons suffering or suspected by him to be suffering from the plague, in such places as may be appointed by the District Magistrate or officer specially deputed by him in this behalf for the accommoda- tion of such persons respectively.    For the purpose of segregating people   the District Magistrate or officer specially authorized by him in this  behalf may take possession of and occupy any vacant ground or building, such  compensation being afterwards made   to   the owner or occupier thereof as may be fixed by a Panch as provided in Rule 13. 8.    If a plague authority, who is specially appointed in this behalf by the   District Magistrate, has reason to believe that any building intended or used as a dwelling is or has been occupied by a sufferer from the plague, or if it appears to him that any such building is in such an insanitary condition as to be unfit for human habitation, he may prohibit by a written order the further use of such building as a dwelling house. When any such prohibition has been made, no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives him written permission in this behalf. For the purpose of enforcing this regulation, the said officer may, if necessary, forcibly remove or cause to be removed any person from such building. 9.    If it shall appear to a plague authority of the description stated in Rule 8, that any building used as a dwelling is so  overcrowded as to endanger the health of the inmates thereof, he may, by written order, require the owner or occupier of the building, within a period to be fixed by the said authority, to abate the  overcrowding thereof by reducing the numbers of inmates thereof. For the purpose of enforcing this regulation, the said authority may, if necessary, at the expiration of the time prescribed in the written order, forcibly remove or cause to be removed such and so many of the inmates of the building as shall seem to him to be proper. 10.    In the case of any building ordered to be vacated under Rules 8 and 9, and in the case of any other building or enclosure which may  appear to him  to be in a filthy or insanitary condition, a plague authority of the description stated in Rule 8 may require the owner or occupier to carry out, or in his  default may of his own motion carry out, such measures  as may  seem necessary to him for the purpose of cleansing or disinfecting such building or premises, and for the purpose of such cleansing or disinfecting may, if necessary, forcibly break open and enter any such building or part of such building or premises, and may remove and disinfect or destroy any goods, clothes or other articles found therein. 11.    Such plague authority as aforesaid is  empowered,  with the consent of any First Class Magistrate having jurisdiction in the locality, to remove or burn any huts or erections in which a case of plague has occurred or which are likely from their insanitary surroundings or conditions to give rise to the disease. 12.    The District Magistrate is empowered to make regulations, when he deems it neces- sary, for enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain  depth and for requiring that quick- lime be placed with the corpse ; and may prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than that specially assigned by him for such purposes.
57 13.     Before the destruction of property of any kind under Rule 10 or 11 the value of it shall be assessed by a Panch of three persons including the President, who shall  be an officer (other than a plague authority) appointed by the District Magistrate by name or by virtue of office and by general or special order.     The President shall appoint the two other members. Subject to the sanction of the District Magistrate or of any officer specially empowered by him in this behalf, not being lower in grade than a First Class Magistrate, the award of the   Panch shall be final and conclusive. 14.    The Police shall act under the orders given by any duly appointed plague officer with regard- (a) to compelling persons to submit to such regulations as may be made or approved by the Medical officers appointed for any locality under these rules for the purpose of inspection, detention and segregation of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from the plague ; and (b) to carrying out the provisions of Rules 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12. 15.    The District Magistrates are to do their utmost, both personally and  through others, to make it generally understood that these rules are absolutely necessary for the public safety, and to  see that no needless inconvenience is caused to any one, that examinations, &c., are carried out with as much regard as possible to sex and the customs of the country, and that everything is done to meet the wishes of the patients so far as is compatible with the public safety. 16.    Within a municipal district the expenses of carrying into effect any of the measures hereby authorized for cleaning or disinfecting any building, or destroying any hut or other pro- perty shall, in the first instance, if no other funds have been made specially available for the purpose, be defrayed out of Municipal Funds, but shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier of such building or hut under the ordinary provisions of Bombay Act VI of 1873 in the same manner, in all respects, as if the work had been carried out under the provisions of Section 77 of the said Act. 17.    Disobedience to any orders issued by a plague officer under these rules will subject the offender to a prosecution under Section 188, Indian Penal Code. 18.    The provisions of this Notification are not intended to, and shall not, operate to limit in any   way the powers which either the District Magistrate or, within a municipal dis- trict, the municipality may possess independently of the powers hereby conferred. These rules were specially extended to cantonments by a further order. 2.    Government had previously  on the  10th February  despatched   the following telegram to all Collectors : "It is essential to take all possible precautions against spread of plague. Instruct all Revenue, Police and other Government officers to report every suspicious case, and have move- ments of persons from Bombay or Poona watched. If necessary, establish segregating camps at places of arrival by land or water from Bombay, &c., and place arrivals in quarantine ; have death-rate carefully watched in all places where it can be a useful guide. If necessary, take measures to prevent all fairs and pilgrimages and large gatherings of people. Don't wait for Government sanction to proceedings or expenditure that are urgently necessary." 3.    Though the subsequent history of rules under Act III of 1897 belongs to a later period, it may here be stated that after their issue on   20th February suggestions  for    modifications   or   additions   were   received by   Government almost every day for some weeks ; and for the most part these suggestions were promptly complied with.    Eventually  on the 29th March a new draft embody- ing all the suggestions which had been  accepted was prepared and published in the Government Gazette.    The rules-which were by a further order extended to  cantonments-were as follows : "Whereas certain parts of the Presidency of Bombay are visited by, or threatened with an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease, namely, bubonic plague, and whereas the Governor of Bombay in Council is of opinion that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the spread thereof in parts other than the City of Bombay ; pursuant to the provisions of Section 2, sub-sections (1) and (2), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and in exercise of the powers in this behalf conferred by the Governor General in Council under Section 2, sub-section (3), of the same Act, the Governor of Bombay in Council is pleased to empower the officers hereinbelow mentioned to take the measures hereinafter specified to prevent the spread of bubonic plague and is further pleased to prescribe the temporary regulations hereinafter set forth to be observed by the public and all persons concerned : 1. In every local area where there is danger of plague, the District Magistrate, subject to the general instructions of the Commissioner, may appoint special officers, either by name or by virtue of office, to devise and carry out, under the District Magistrate's general directions, all measures necessary to prevent the spread of the plague, ? 1135-15
58 2.    The special officers appointed for any local area under these rules may be known as plague authorities. 3.    At any railway station or bandar to which no Medical officer has been or may be specially appointed for inspection duty under rules sanctioned by Government concerning the inspection of travellers by rail or boat, any plague authority who may be present on duty, or other officer or person specially authorized in this behalf by the District Magistrate, if he reasonably believes or suspects that any person alighting or disembarking from  a train or boat is suffering from bubonic plague, may detain any such person for the purpose of medical examination, and shall  (if he be not himself a Medical officer authorized under these rules) without delay give information of the detention to the nearest Medical officer so authorized. Any Station Master at   a railway station where no  Medical officer has   been posted on inspection duty may forward to the nearest station at which such a Medical officer is posted any person who is or is suspected by him to be suffering from the plague.    Persons entering the train or  embarking on a boat shall similarly be liable to inspection and detention under this rule by the persons and under the circumstances above mentioned. 4.    A plague authority or any person authorized by a District Magistrate in this behalf may inspect or cause the inspection of persons leaving an infected area, and may, if any such person is suffering or is suspected by him to be suffering from plague,  detain   or  cause   the detention of such person at a place appointed for the purpose, or may forward him   or  cause him to be forwarded to such place. 5.    At any place specially appointed by the District Magistrate or  by any  officer  em- powered by him in this behalf, and situate on a road leading  into  a  town  or   village,   any plague authority on duty or other officer or person specially authorized in this behalf by the District Magistrate may detain, for the purpose of medical examination,   any  person  whom he reasonably believes or suspects to be suffering from the plague, and shall   (if  he  be   not himself a medical officer authorized under these rules) give information of  the  detention  to the nearest Medical officer so authorized.    Authority  is   given  to  District  Magistrates   to place inspecting officers at posts or roads leading from an infected town or village   or  other place in order to prevent the removal of the sick into healthy towns or villages. 6.    In any town or village or other area to which this rule shall be applied by the Dis- trict Magistrate, an occupant of a house or building or the principal surviving member of a family shall give immediate information to the nearest plague authority of any sickness or death, due or likely to be due to plague, in such house or building or amongst the members of such family.    Such plague authority (if he be not himself a Medical officer) shall without delay   send word to the  nearest Medical officer holding Her Majesty's commission or in charge of a Government or State-aided medical institution or to a Medical officer employed by a municipality not lower in grade than a Hospital Assistant or to any such Medical officer on pension, and such Medical officer, whether appointed a plague authority for the locality or not, shall be bound to come to the place indicated. 7.    Immediately on receiving information under Rules 3, 4, 5 or  6, or whenever he thinks house visitation necessary, the plague authority shall go to the place  indicated,   and if the place be a house or dwelling place and if the occupants thereof do not (on his   demand) allow him to enter and give him reasonable facilities for   ascertaining  whether  any   of the inmates are suffering from the plague, such authority is empowered to enter into such house or any part thereof by force, and to detain, for the  purpose  of  medical   examination,  any person found therein to be suffering or suspected to be suffering from the plague, or in his opinion likely to have been infected, e. g., owing to his having lived in the same house  with a plague patient. 8.    A plague authority is empowered to have  the cause of death inquired into in all cases, and, unless satisfied, to treat it as a plague case. 9.    Every Medical officer appointed under these rules as a plague authority is empowered to examine all persons whom he discovers or about whom he receives information under the provisions of Rules 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7, and to detain and segregate persons suffering or suspected by him to be suffering from the plague, in such places as may be appointed   by   the   District Magistrate or officer specially deputed by him in this behalf for the accommodation of   such persons respectively.    For the purpose   of segregating   people   the   District   Magistrate   or officer specially authorized by him in this behalf  may   take possession   of   and   occupy   any vacant ground or  building,  such  compensation   being  afterwards   made   to   the   owner   or occupier thereof as may be fixed by a Panch as provided in Rule 15. 10.    If a plague authority who is specially appointed  in this behalf by the District Magistrate has reason to believe that  any building intended or used as a dwelling is   or   has been occupied by a sufferer from the plague, or if it appears to him that any such building is in such an insanitary condition as to be unfit for human habitation, he may prohibit by a written order the further use of such building as a dwelling house. When any such prohibition has been made, no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives him written permission in this behalf.
59 For the purpose of enforcing this regulation, the said officer may, if necessary, forcibly remove or cause to be removed any person from such building. 11.    If it shall appear to a plague authority of the description stated in Rule 10 that any building used as a dwelling is so overcrowded as to endanger the health of the inmates thereof, he may, by written order, require the owner or occupier of the building,  within a period to be fixed by the said authority, to abate the overcrowding thereof by reducing the numbers of inmates thereof. For the purpose of enforcing this regulation, the said authority may, if necessary, at the expiration of the time prescribed in the written order, forcibly remove or cause to be removed such and so many of the inmates of the building as shall seem to him to be proper. 12.    In the case of any building ordered to be vacated under Rules 10 and 11 and in the case of any other building or enclosurse which may appear to him to be in a filthy or insanitary condition, a plague authority of the description stated in Rule 10 may require the owner or occupier to carry out, or in his default may of his own motion carry out, such measures as may seem necessary to him for the purpose of cleansing or disinfecting such building or premises, and for the purpose of such cleansing or disinfecting may, if necessary, forcibly break open and enter any such building or part of such building or premises, and may remove and disinfect or destroy any goods, clothes or other articles found therein,    The said plague authority is empowered to enter any building for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is in a filthy or insanitary condition. If the plague authority considers it necessary, he may, of his own motion, immediately and without previous notice, carry out such measures for cleansing and disinfecting as he considers necessary. 13.    Such plague authority as aforesaid is empowered, with the consent of any First Class Magistrate having jurisdiction in the locality, to remove or burn any huts or erections in which a case of plague has occurred or which are likely from their insanitary surroundings or conditions to give rise to the disease. 14.    The District Magistrate is  empowered  to make regulations,   when he  deems   it necessary, for prescribing the route which shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the graveyard, burning ground or other place for final disposal of the corpse and the places (if any) at which such procession may halt, on its way, for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes, for enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain depth and for requiring that quieklime be placed with the corpse; and may prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than that specially assigned by him for such purposes. 15.    Before the destruction of property of special value under Rule 1 2 or 13 the value of it shall be assessed by a Panch of three persons, including the President, who shall be an officer appointed by the District Magistrate by name or by virtue of office and by general or special order.     The President shall appoint the two other  members.    Subject to the sanction of the District Magistrate or of any officer specially empowered by him in this behalf, not being lower in grade than a First Class Magistrate, the award of the Panch shall be final and conclusive. A plague authority is empowered to decide  whether an  article which it is proposed to de- stroy is of sufficient value for a  Panch to be called to assess its value.    If he decides it is not of sufficient value, he may destroy it on the spot and may in his discretion pay compensation to the owner: provided, however, that no person shall be entitled as of  right to claim any compensation whatsoever. It is the desire of Government that plague authorities should show liberality and promptness in the exercise of their power to award compensation, and that, for example, a very poor man should be promptly compensated for the loss of clothes which, though of no special market value, may be of considerable value to him. 16.    The Police shall act under the orders given by any duly appointed plague authority with regard- (a) to compelling persons to submit to such regulations as may be made or approved by the Medical officers appointed for any locality under these rules for the purpose of inspection, detention and segregation of persons suffering or suspected to be suffer- ing from the plague; and (b) to carrying out the provisions of these rules. 17.    The District Magistrates   are to do their utmost, both personally and through others, to make it generally  understood  that these rules are   absolutely necessary  for the public safety, and to see that no needless inconvenience is caused to any one, that examina- tions, &c., are carried out with as much regard as possible to sex and the customs of the country, and that everything is done to meet the wishes of the patients so far as is compatible with the public safety. 18.    Within   a   municipal   district   the expenses of carrying into effect any of the measures hereby authorized for  cleaning or  disinfecting any building, or destroying any hut or other property,  together with the cost of compensation under Rule 15 above, shall, in the first instance, if no other funds have been made specially available for the purpose,
?60 be defrayed out of Municipal Funds, but shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier of such building or hut under the ordinary provisions of Bombay Act VI of 1873 in the same manner, in all respects, as if the work had been carried out under the provisions of Section 77 of the said Act. 19.    The plague authority may require people to adopt such measures as he thinks fit for the disinfection of their persons, vehicles, clothes and other property when he considers that otherwise, in  consequence of the risk of infection to which their persons, vehicles, clothes and other property have been exposed,  there is a danger of plague spreading.    If he considers it necessary he may destroy or order the destruction of such property. 20.    The District  Magistrate may, with  the  previous sanction of the   Commissioner, prohibit, either wholly or subject to such restrictions as he may impose, the holding of fairs, caste feasts or other assemblages which are likely in his opinion to assist the spread of the plague. 21.    All persons practising medicine, whether qualified or  not, shall report, within twenty-four hours, to the nearest plague authority any plague cases or cases  of fever with glandular swellings which come to their notice. 22.    All persons shall, on demand, give their names and addresses and mention their business and intentions regarding future movements to   railway   station masters, plague authorities and any other persons whom District Magistrates may empower to collect such information. 23.    When a person dies of the plague elsewhere than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it  for the funeral.    Such persons shall disinfect themselves according to the orders of the plague authority or person authorized by the plague authority. 24.    Every person passing by any chauki or other place provided by the District Magistrate for the inspection of travellers shall submit to examination if required and  to detention in any hospital or quarantine camp which may have been established for that purpose. 25.    Every Police Patil shall prevent the entrance into his village site of any person believed by him to be suffering from the plague.    If there be any such person anywhere within the limits of his village area, he shall either send him in a cart or litter to the nearest isolation hospital, or, if it be too far, shall forthwith build or allot a hut for him outside the village site and detain him there until the orders of the Mmlatdr are received.    The com- panions of any such person shall also not be allowed to enter the village site, but the  Ptil shall send them such supplies as they may require and shall give them reasonable assistance to accommodate themselves in the fields during their detention. 26.     District  Magistrates are empowered,  when they consider it necessary, to impose quarantine at any place or places against any other place or places. 27.    District Magistrates or plague authorities are empowered to break holes in the walls or roofs of houses or to remove roofs altogether for the purpose of admitting light and air. 28.     A District Magistrate is empowered to direct the evacuation of houses in the neigh- bourhood of an infected house or of a block of houses or a particular locality and to prohibit re-occupation of such houses or locality without permission.    Notice for such period as the District Magistrate thinks suitable should be given, and temporary accommodation should be provided. 29.    A District  Magistrate,   with the sanction of the Commissioner, is empowered to prohibit intercommunication between any place and any other places. 30.    A District Magistrate or plague authority especially authorized by him in this behalf is empowered to close places used for the supply, preparation or storage of articles of food and drink in infected localities or in the immediate neighbourhood of infected houses and to direct the removal of all articles of food and drink found in such places. 31.    A District Magistrate is empowered to prohibit the removal of plague patients from houses or sheds, except in accordance with regulations framed by himself, and to take such steps as may be necessary to enforce such prohibition. 32.    Disobedience to any orders issued or regulations made by a District Magistrate or plague authority under these rules will subject the offender to a prosecution under Section 188, Indian Penal Code. 33.    The provisions of this Notification are not intended to, and shall not operate to limit in any way the powers which either the District Magistrate or, within a municipal district, the Municipality may possess independently of the powers hereby conferred. 34.    The foregoing rules are applicable throughout  the Bombay Presidency and Sind, except in the City of Bombay, subject to the following modifications in the case of cantonments and hill-stations in charge of Superintendents :- In the case of cantonments, substitute 'Cantonment authority' for 'District Magis- trate.' In the case of hill-stations in charge of Superintendents, substitute 'Superintendent' for 'District Magistrate.'"
?61 4.    A few modifications of and additions to the above rules were subsequently made, the most important being the cancellation, at the request of the Govern- ment of India, of Rule 26 and the substitution of the following for Rule 29: "Plague authorities specially appointed by a Commissioner for this purpose are au- thorized to prevent the passage of suspicious persons from any town, village or local area, or into any town, village or local area to which this rule may be applied by the Commis- sioner, unless such persons have been detained in a place of observation for a period pre- scribed by the Commissioner, and unless, if arrangements for disinfection of their clothing, baggage, &c., have been made under the Commissioner's orders, such disinfection has been effected. Such plague authorities shall have the widest discretionary power, subject to the general or special orders of the Commissioner, to decide what persons shall be considered 'suspicious' for the purposes of this rule. So long as he remains in a place of observation under this rule no person shall be allowed to communicate, except with the permission of the plague authority, with persons outside the limits of the place. He shall obey such orders as may be issued by the plague authority for the cleanliness or protection from infection of the persons, property or quarters of the persons detained." 5.    In addition to the above, which are known as the "General Plague Rules," Government from time to time issued special sets of rules, e.g., regard- ing   Bombay City, the Plague  Committees, railway inspection, sea traffic inspection, observation camps, &c., which are referred to in other sections of this report. SECTION 2. Railway Inspection. 1.     As explained   in Chapter II, the stations of Kalyn, Plghar, Hotgi, Londa, Ahmedabad, and Bhusawal were constituted first class  inspection posts. At these stations trains were emptied, and the inspection   was either   conducted or  supervised  by  a  Commissioned Medical Officer,   or  a selected   Assistant Surgeon.    This was what was known as first class inspection. Kalyn. 2.    The staff here, which varied from time to time, consisted at first of two Commissioned Medical Officers and 14 subordinates. This was the most important of all the inspection posts on the railways. No less than 172 cases of plague were detected, 93 of which ended fatally. Inspection was commenced on February 12th. Plghar. 3.    Inspection began here also   on February 12th.    The staff consisted of one Commissioned Medical Officer and eight subordinates. Hotgi. 4.    The  inspection began on February  24th, and   was   conducted by   an Assistant Surgeon and four Hospital Assistants.    Out of 579 cases detained for observation, only two proved to be genuine cases of plague. Londa. 5.    Inspection began on March 1st, and was conducted at first by two Mil- itary Assistant  Surgeons with three Hospital Assistants.    From March 11th to March 31st a Commissioned Medical Officer was in charge.    Other changes were made from time to time as the exigencies of  other places demanded.    No cases were detected here, but on the other hand no cases are  known to have escaped, detection. Before the inspection began one case was imported into the Dhrwr District. Ahmedabad. 6.   Up to the time of the passing of the Act the inspection here had been con- ducted, with success, by the two Inspectors under the orders of the Municipality. ? 1135-16
?62 On February 16th the management of the work was made over by Government to a Commissioned Medical Officer, and from February 24th, owing to an indi- genous outbreak at Planpur, all up-trains were also examined here. All passen- gers were examined on the platform, and 24 plague cases in all were detected. Bhusawal. 7.  The staff which has already been described as having been posted here from the 1st November under the orders of Government was strengthened in February by the addition of an Assistant Surgeon and three Hospital Assistants.    In March the staff was still further increased, and in its final form consisted of two Assist- ant  Surgeons and five Hospital Assistants.    23 cases of plague were detected here out of 125 suspected cases. 8.    Of the six first class inspection posts described above, two, namely, Kalyn and Plghar,  were  selected for the protection of the Bombay Presidency from infection by panic-stricken people leaving Bombay, and the others were selected as being in a sense frontier stations.    The inspection at Ahmedabad junction  in the  extreme north, protected both Rjputna and Kthiwr ; that at Bhusval junction in the north-east, on the Calcutta line, protected the  Central Provinces and Bengal; that at Hotgi junction protected Hyderabd and the Madras Pre- sidency ; and that at Londa junction protected both Madras and Mysore. 9.    It  may be mentioned here that  other first class inspection posts were subsequently established at Dhond and Rajewadi for the protection of places in the Deccan and the Southern Martha Country at the time when panic-stricken people were flying from Poona; a special inspection was arranged at Maumd ; and at Poona an inspection of persons leaving by train in both directions was instituted in the course of March.    Previously persons arriving in Poona had been inspected since the month of October, and the arrangements which were under the local officers' authorities had been extremely successful; up to the end of January 140 cases of plague had been detected  and  taken  to   hospital  by  Medical  officers employed by the municipality. 10.    In addition  to first  class inspection, the rules for   which have been already given, there were inspections of passengers entering and leaving the trains at numerous stations in the Mofussil.    To legalise these measures, the following rules applicable to such  local  inspections  were   published   by   Government   on February 17th: "No. 883/351-P.-The following rules have been prescribed by His Excellency the  Governor in Council in accordance with Section 2  (2)  (a) and (b) of the  Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897: 1.    At any railway station within the Presidency of Bombay other than the stations to which the rules published in Government Notifications Nos. 723/211-P. and 257-P, dated respectively the 10th and 11th February 1897, and No. 884/362 P. of this date are applicable, or at any bandar or landing-place within the said Presidency and outside the limits of the port of Bombay at which a medical officer or medical officers may be appointed by the Government or the local authority, or with the sanction of the local authority, by a railway or shipping company, as the case may be, for the purpose of inspection under these rules, such officer or officers shall be empowered to examine  (a) persons, whether passengers, railway servants or members of a boat's crew who alight or disembark at such place from a train or boat or vessel coming from the   direction of Bombay, whether they intend to  proceed by such train, boat or vessel or not, and (b) persons who intend to start from any of the said places and to travel by such train, boat or vessel. All such persons shall be bound to submit to such inspection as the Medical officer on duty under these rules may deem necessary. 2.    For the purpose of these rules 'local authority' means the District Magistrate and any one empowered by him in this behalf, and within municipal districts includes the municipality. 3.    All inspecting Medical officers appointed at such places as aforesaid before the passing of these rules shall be deemed to have been appointed under these rules, subject to the approval of the District Magistrate or of any one empowered by him in this behalf.
?63 4.    All inspecting Medical officers appointed under these rules are empowered to detain persons suffering from, or suspected by them to be suffering from, the dangerous disease known as bubonic plague, in such places as may be appointed for the accommodation of such persons, respectively. 5.    The Police shall act under the orders given by the Medical officer on duty under these rules with regard to compelling persons to submit to such regulations as may be made or approved by the said officer for the purpose of inspection and with regard to the detention and segregation of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from bubonic plague. 6.    Disobedience to any orders issued under the above rules 1, 4 and 5 will subject the offender to a prosecution under Section 188, Indian Penal Code." 11.    As an additional security the following rule was issued, on the sugges- tion of the Government of India, on February 23rd to enable the local authorities to keep a better watch over the movements of persons coming from an infected area: "Railway station masters shall require all passengers coming from infected stations to give 'names and addresses, business which has brought them to the station and intentions regarding future movements.' For the present the following shall be considered to be infected stations, viz., all stations in the Island of Bombay and Slsette, Kalyn, Bassein, Bulsr, Rnder, Kirkee, Poona and Ghorepuri. A station master shall forward a copy of his list containing the above information every day to the nearest Mmlatdr, who shall forthwith instruct the headman of the town or village or the Secretary of the Municipality to watch such person and send a report if he is ill or departs within ten days." 12.    It was subsequently ascertained that it was not practicable for station masters at all stations to undertake the duty of recording the necessary informa- tion.    Collectors  and Political Agents were therefore informed (G. R. No. 2757 -2104-P., dated May 20th 1897) that at such stations arrangements for collecting this information should be made through the agency either of the Railway   Police or of special karkuns  to be employed  by  the Municipalities  or Local Boards concerned. 13.    Lists of the stations at  which this duty could be performed by the railway staff, and of those where special arrangements would be required, were at the same time circulated to the District officers. 14.    Further, in April, at the suggestion of the Government of India the disinfection of the baggage of railway passengers was ordered at the stations of Hotgi, Bhusawal and Ruk.    Arrangements for such disinfection had previously been made by the local authorities at Ahmedabad. New measures for Railway inspection in Sind. On February 6th Government telegraphed to the Commissioner in Sind to arrange for a platform inspection of individuals by a Commissioned Medical Officer. "It is considered essential that medical inspection of passengers in trains coming from the direction of infected districts shall be complete, and this can only be effected by the removal of the passengers to the platform and by holding an individual inspection there by Medical officer. Regulations should provide for this. India suggest Karchi as one of the places for inspection. Commissioned Officers required for inspection......" On receipt of this telegram, the Principal Medical Officer in Sind ordered the Civil Surgeon and the Medical Officer of the North-Western Railway to inspect carefully and individually every railway passenger leaving Karchi, and to do this on the platform of the cantonment station. The same officers at Sukkur were similarly ordered to personally conduct a platform inspection of all railway passengers from Karchi. The question of having a platform inspection at Ruk, the junction for Beluchistn, was deferred for the time, as no Commissioned Officer was available, and at Ruk, Shikrpur and Jacobabad, Hospital Assistants were already conducting inspections. It was suggested that Ddu, where there was a roomy platform, would be a better place for a platform inspection than Ruk. Two more Commissioned Officers were required for this work.
?64 In the case of Karchi, it was arranged that the passengers who entered the train at the city station should be examined as they entered the train, the car- riages then being locked up. Persons who booked from the cantonment station were examined at the entrance gate. In March a lady doctor was engaged to attend the evening and morning mail train for the examination of females. A certificate was to be given to the effect that every passenger in the train had been inspected, and found free from suspicion of plague. By the middle of the month the arrangements for a platform inspection at Karchi and Ddu were complete and a Commissioned Officer was deputed for the duty at each place. The Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad, was also asked to make a platform inspection at that place before the departure of the train for Rohri. The rules legalising these arrange- ments were sanctioned by Government. Under these arrangements no passenger could escape being examined twice during the journey from Karchi to Sukkur. SECTION 3. Further measures taken under Act III of 1897 for the purpose of controlling Sea Traffic. 1.    The measures for the protection of Karchi and A den have already been described.    The inspection of all vessels before they were allowed to leave the port of Bombay was under the management  of the  Port Health  Officer of Bombay.    In Chapter II the action of  Government  in the  matter  and  the provision of the necessary staff have been dealt with. 2.    In the meantime the state of the city of Karchi had become such as to make it necessary to provide for the inspection on similar lines of all vessels leaving that port.    Accordingly on February 15th the following rules were issued: 1.    No vessel shall leave the port of Karchi until she has been inspected   by the Health Officer of the Port and the Master or person in charge ?f such vessel has obtained a Bill of Health or certificate from such officer that the Master or person in charge, officers, crew and passengers (if any) of such vessel are free from any dangerous epidemic disease. 2.    Should the Health Officer of the Port be of opinion that any person on board of any vessel so inspected is suffering from a dangerous epidemic disease, he shall refuse to give a Bill of  Health or  certificate as aforesaid unless  and until  such person  is removed from the vessel. 3.    After the Master or person in charge of the vessel has obtained any Bill of Health or certificate under the provisions of these rules, no person or cargo shall be admitted or taken on board such vessel before she leaves the Port of Karchi unless such vessel is  again  inspected by the Health Officer of the Port and another  Bill   of Health or  certificate obtained from such officer by the Master or person in charge of such vessel. 4.    No port clearance shall be delivered to any vessel unless and until the Master or person in charge thereof shall produce the  Bill of Health or  certificate so to be obtained as aforesaid; and it shall be the duty of Customs Officers   to  refuse delivery of the port clearance without the production of such Bill of Health or certificate. 5.    All steamers and square-rigged vessels will be inspected by the Health Officer before leaving the wharves or moorings, and all coasting craft shall anchor between and to the west of No. 1  mooring and  deepwater point for the purpose of being medi- cally inspected by the Health Officer of the Port on the eve of their departure. 6 Vessels not leaving port within 24 hours after receiving pratique may not leave without re-inspection. The date and hour of his inspection will be noted in the Bill of Health by the Health Officer. 7.    The medical inspection of vessels and passengers shall be carried out between sunrise and sunset. 8.    Disobedience to any of the above Rules Nos. 1 to 6 will subject the offender and all persons aiding or abetting him to a prosecution under the Indian Penal Code. 3. It remained to give the district officers powers to examine and, if necessary, detain persons arriving from Bombay by sea at the ports in their districts.
?65 4. Accordingly Government Resolution No. 883-351, dated February 17th, 1897, provided for the inspection, by Medical officers appointed for the pur- pose, of all persons arriving at any bandar from the direction of Bombay, and of persons who intended to start from any bandars. Powers of detention were also given and both examination and detention were in case of necessity to be enforced by the Police. 5. On February 25th the Commissioner, Northern Division, forwarded a new set of rules to deal with the same class of travellers, prepared on the basis of drafts submitted by the Collector of Ahmedabad and the Assistant Collector of Salt. The former officer said that similar rules were already in force at Bhv- nagar and Porbandar. The Commissioner said: "It is likely that as the inspection of travellers by land becomes stricter the danger by coasting sea-craft will increase, and it should be anticipated by some well-considered arrange- ments. "The practical difficulty is that a Medical officer is not available at all the ports and cannot possibly be obtained. Things may however come to such a pass that the examination or in- spection of a boat by a non-professional officer may be better than none at all, and if it comes to this, I would propose to appoint as plague authorities the Port officers, though they may not be of the rank of Sir Krkns. They would be supplied with Dr. Childe's directions to laymen for recognising the existence of the plague." The following rules under the Act were therefore issued on March 6th, and Commissioners of Divisions were empowered to apply them to any ports in the Bombay Presidency, reporting their action to Government in each case : Under Act III of 1897 the Governor in Council is pleased to prescribe the following rules and to authorize the Commissioners of Divisions to apply them, as a temporary measure, to any ports in the Bombay Presidency, reporting to Government from time to time the ports to which he has applied them: (1)  Any vessel, except ferry boats (to which the rules of Government Resolution No. 883 -351-P., dated 17th February 1897, apply) arriving at a port shall anchor at a place fixed for such purpose, and the passengers and crew  shall be examined before she is granted entry inwards and is allowed to land passengers or cargo. (2)  If any of the passengers or crew are found by the Plague authority to be plague- stricken, the patient or patients shall be removed to the nearest segregated hospital, and the vessel shall be made to proceed to the place set apart for the anchorage of such vessel.    Such vessels shall not communicate with the shore or land or receive cargo for the period of eight days.   Provisions, &c., shall be sent to her under directions from the Port Officer or other officer appointed for the purpose by the Commissioner of the Division, and shall be passed up the side in receptacles which shall not be received back. (3)  If no further plague case occurs on board during such period of eight days she may receive pratique.    If other cases occur, the course directed in Rule (2) shall be followed for a further period of eight days respectively. The vessel shall not receive pratique, or communicate with the shore or receive cargo or receive provisions otherwise than as directed in Rule   (2) until after the lapse of eight days from the occurrence of the last case. (4)  If a vessel arrives with a case of simple fever on board, the above rules shall apply to her, but the detention shall be for a period of four days,  subsequent to which, if no plague cases develope, she may be granted entry inwards. (5) If a place on shore suitable for the segregated accommodation of passengers is avail- able, the passengers from vessels treated as above may be removed to the same and placed there under observation instead of being detained on board. (6)  Cargo unloaded from vessels which have been quarantined on account of ascertained or suspected plague on board shall be removed by the consignee to a place set  apart for the purpose and exposed to the sun for a period of three days, or in the case of cargo  which may have become damp until such further period as may be necessary  to thoroughly dry it,  after which it may be taken possession of by the consignee. (7)   Bedding, rags, &c., may not be landed from vessels aforesaid, and if landed,  shall be destroyed. (8)  Piece-goods and other articles liable   to  carry infection brought by vessels aforesaid shall be fumigated or otherwise disinfected before being carried away by the consignee. (9)   Any grain brought to the port and landed from any vessel and found by a Magistrate to be unfit for human consumption shall be destroyed. (10)  Any port may be declared to be an infected   port by the  District    Magistrate. Vessels arriving from such ports, even if no case of plague has occurred on board, shall not be granted entry inwards unless or until eight clear days have elapsed from the date of her depar- ? 1135-17
?66 ture from the aforesaid prt. If the vessel arrives before the expiry of such eight  days, she shall remain at the anchorage fixed for such vessels until such eight days have elapsed, subject to the conditions laid down in Rules 2, 5, and 6, after which, if no plague case is discovered on board, she shall obtain pratique. If plague is developed or has been developed before her arrival, all the above quarantine rules shall apply to her, her crew, passengers and cargo. 6.    The  salient features  of these rules are that the inspection was to be carried out by plague authorities, who might or might not be medical men; that vessels even with a case of simple fever on board could be quarantined for four days; and that all vessels from ports which had been declared to be infected were put into quarantine, whether or not a case of plague had occurred on board, pro- vided that they had not been eight days out from the infected port.    To avoid the inconvenience to the public which the interruption of the coasting traffic would have caused, ferry steamers were excluded from the operation of the rules. 7.    It may here be mentioned that on the 6th March 1897 the Government of India prohibited emigration by the following Notification : "In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 2, sub-section (1), of the Epidemic Diseases Act (III of 1897), the Governor General in Council is pleased to direct that no person who has since the 1st January 1897 resided, or been in, or passed through, the territories administered by the Governor of Bombay in Council or the State of Baroda or the territories of any Native Prince or State under the suzerainty of Her Majesty exercised through the Governor of Bombay in Council, shall, until further orders, be permitted to embark on any ship at any port in British India with the object of proceeding as an emigrant or as a labourer to any port out of British India." SECTION 4. The City of Bombay. 1. The report dated the 28th January 1897 by the Municipal Commissioner, Bombay, on the scheme suggested in the report compiled under the direction of Dr. Cleghorn, which has been referred to in Section 2 of Chapter II, was carefully considered by Government. A reply was sent by telegram to the Government of India on February 10th, to the effect that wholesale segregation on the lines suggested was deemed impracticable. Vigorous action was being taken under Section 426 of the Municipal Act for the demolition of huts, and further measures of the most drastic kind were in contemplation under regula- tions under the new Act which had just been passed. The telegram continued- "Government do not doubt that the building regulations need strengthening, and are making provision to strengthen them both temporarily by regulations under the Epidemic Diseases Act, and hereafter permanently by amending Bombay Act III of 1888. One Deputy Sanitary Commissioner is in Bombay, one in Thna Dis- trict, one in Karchi; only two are left for ordinary and famine work and for repressing extension of plague in Mofussil. Four Doctors who were through plague in Hongkong are coming out. Two extra Commissioned Medical Officers are assisting the Health Officer, another assisting at European Hospital, another assisting Port Health Officer, others will be employed as they arrive." 2. A detailed reply to the Government of India on the subject of evacua- tion of the infected houses was despatched on the 12th February. In this the facts and arguments adduced by the Municipal Commissioner were communi- cated to the Government of India, and the conclusions to which they pointed were enforced by the following remarks on the situation of affairs generally: "Great as would be the evil to Bombay, this is not the only unhappy result that would attend such a feeling of panic. The exodus has already necessitated precautionary measures against arrivals from Bombay in every part of the Presidency; it has led to the plague becoming endemic in Poona and in parts of the Thna District; it has resulted in overcrowding by re- fugees from Bombay of many cities and towns, and it has made demands on the number of qualified medical practitioners available to Government that can with difficulty be met. Every addition to the number of refugees adds to the possibility of spreading the disease and to the difficulty of dealing with it should it break out.
?67 "I am to assure the Government of India that every precaution is taken short of measures that would, it is feared, lead to the panic and the evils I have described. The liberality of the Corporation and the energy displayed by Mr. Snow, Municipal Commissioner, Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Weir, Executive Health Officer, and Mr. James, Executive Engineer, and their subor- dinates are, as is surmised in paragraph (6) of your letter, appreciated by this Government no less than by His Excellency the Governor General in Council, and it is a very great satisfaction to the former to find these efforts are so cor- dially acknowledged. But it is not only their energy that deserves notice; it is the conviction of this Government, as will be gathered from what I have written, that they have shown sound sense. The measures taken may not have been so stringent as those that would, in an European city, have gained general support, but they are the most stringent that it was possible to undertake without almost certainly producing a calamity more serious and more widespread than the very terrible one that has now to be dealt with. "At the same time the segregation of the healthy and the evacuation of infected houses are recognised as desirable measures and are being and will be carried out in so far as is possible without leading to a general panic. "My telegram dated 10th instant has put you in possession of information regarding regulations to be framed for Bombay City under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. A copy of these regulations will be sent to the Government of India as soon as they are published. "The question of strengthening the building regulations and taking enlarged powers to prevent overcrowding is one that is engaging the earnest attention of Government, and will be made the subject of a separate communication to the Government of India." 3. On February 2nd the Municipal Commissioner forwarded to Govern- ment a draft notification for the cutting off of the water-supply from houses. Foremost among the causes of the insanitary condition of many of the larger chawls in Bombay City was the reckless use of the water, and the constant leak- age of the badly constructed taps. 4.    The notification ran as follows (after the usual preamble): "Whenever I shall be satisfied upon the representation of the Health Officer that any water connection inside any house, chawl, or other premises is likely to be detrimental to the health of persons residing there or in the neighbourhood thereof, I shall cause a standpipe or other suitable accommodation to be provided or affixed outside such house, chawl, or premises, and I shall thereupon cause the water connection with the interior of such premises to be cut off." 5.    The sanction of Government was accorded to this measure on February 2nd. 6.    Another measure referred to in the letter to the Government of  India of February 12th, namely, the prevention of overcrowding, was dealt with in the notification published in the Gazette of the 10th February, and provided for the reduction of the number of persons residing in any house by an order of the Municipal  Commissioner,  the eviction of the inhabitants from a house pro- nounced to be unfit for human habitation, and the forcible entry into a building for the purpose of cleaning and disinfecting it after giving notice to the occu- piers of not less than 24 hours. 7.    A further telegram from the Government of India, dated February 12th, suggested a reconsideration of the telegram of the Bombay Government of the 10th, and communicated to the Bombay Government for information a copy of the regulation recently passed by the Government of Bengal for compelling the evacuation of infected buildings. The experience at Karchi, it was urged, tended to show that if well-regulated temporary accommodation was provided, and the executive and municipal authorities strenuously endeavoured to carry out a scheme on a large scale, the population would not prove very difficult of persuasion. 8.    This together with the letter of the Bombay Government dated February 12th was sent to the Municipal Commissioner for early report on the 13th February.
?68 9. In his reply, dated 18th, he pointed out that measures advocated by the Government of India had all along been vigorously carried out as far as it had been possible: "On the occurrence of plague, and in many localities before its occurrence, our gangs have gone in, limewashed the whole place, cut off the water to reduce the damp, taken off the roof, and so on. The result has been that hundreds of houses have been vacated as any one might see in Nigaum, Narelwdy, Worlee, &c. All those houses have been regularly treated and kept vacant for a long space of time with the sunlight pouring in through the roof. Simultaneously with all this huts have been put up in many places (and are being put up) such as Tank Bandar, Bhoiwda, Worlee, Chaupatty, Victoria Gardens, Tardeo, Foras Road, Northbrook Gardens, Chinchpoogly, Matunga, and other spots, and every effort has been made to get people into them, in a good many cases with marked success. More huts will be put up continuously, and the same efforts continued. It will thus be clear to the Government of India that the object of getting people out of their houses and cleansing and disinfecting them has been studiously prosecuted ". The Municipal Commissioner proceeded to point out that instances had already occurred of persons being attacked more than once by the plague, and there were facts which seemed to show that the period of incubation was longer than that laid down by the most experienced medical authorities. This would greatly diminish the value of any scheme of segregation of persons who had been living in an infected area as plague was certain to break out in any large camp composed of such persons, were such a measure practicable, which, for the reasons given in his previous letter, he believed not to be the case. As for the other point raised by the Government of India, he remarked that the notification published under the Epidemic Diseases Act went far beyond the Bengal notifica- tion communicated by that Government. "Vigorous steps," he added, "are being taken to give practical effect to the notification, and when the scheme is once in working order it will be difficult to imagine anything more, short of total conflagration, which could be done to check the progress of the plague." His concluding remarks are not without significance. "In conclusion, I can only express my firm conviction that after five months' full experience of this deadly epidemic and with scientists, doctors and executive officers closely watching and dealing with it, nothing definite is as yet known, while its ever-changing phases and characteristics upset every theory advanced in the course of a week or two, and virtually render valueless all opinions, however eminent." 10. On the 10th February, at the request of the Municipal Commissioner, the following notification which has been briefly referred to in para 6 above, was published in the Government Gazette under Act III of 1897: "No. 228-P.-Whereas the City of Bombay is visited by an attack of a dangerous epidemic disease, namely bubonic plague, and whereas the Governor of Bombay in Council is of opinion that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the spread thereof: pursuant to the provisions of Section 2, sub-section 1, of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and in exercise of the powers in this behalf conferred by the Gov- ernor General in Council under Section 2, sub-section 3, of the same Act, the Governor of Bombay in Council is pleased to empower the Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay to take the measures hereinafter specified to prevent the spread of bubonic plague, and is further pleased to prescribe the temporary regulations hereinafter set forth to be observed by the public and all persons concerned: I.-If for any reason it shall appear to the Commissioner that any building intended for or used as a dwelling is unfit for human habitation, he may, of his own motion, prohibit by a written order the further use of such building as a dwelling, and cause notice of such prohibition to be affixed to the door of, or on some conspicuous part of, such building. As a temporary regulation, it is hereby prescribed that when any such prohibition has been made, no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the Commissioner certifies in writing that the causes rendering it unfit for human habitation have been removed to his satisfaction. For the purpose of enforcing and carrying into effect the said regulation the Commis- sioner or any Police or other officer acting in co-operation with or under the orders of the Commissioner may, if necessary, forcibly remove any person from such building and may prevent the re-occupation thereof until such time as the Commissioner shall have certified as aforesaid. II.-If it shall appear to the Commissioner that any building used as a dwelling is so overcrowded as to endanger the health of the inmates thereof, he may, of his own motion, by written order require the owner of the building, within a time not exceeding seven days
69 to be prescribed in the said order, to abate the overcrowding thereof by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or other inmates of the said building. As a temporary regulation it is hereby prescribed that the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 379 of the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888, shall (mutatis mutandis) apply in the case of any such requisition by the Commissioner in the same manner and to the same extent in all respects as if such requisition hid been made by the Chief Presidency Magistrate under the provi- sions of sub-section (1) of the same section. For the purpose of enforcing and carrying into effect the said regulation the Commis- sioner or any Police or other officer as aforesaid may, if necessary, at the expiration of the time prescribed in the Commissioner's order, require such and so many of the inmates of the building as the Commissioner may direct, to forthwith vacate the said premises, and such inmates as are so required shall forthwith vacate accordingly, or if they fail to do so the Commissioner or any Police or other officer as aforesaid may forcibly remove them and prevent their re-occupation of such building. III. - If the Commissioner shall be of opinion that it is necessary that any building or premises be vacated for the purpose of cleansing or disinfecting or otherwise for the purpose of checking the spread of disease, he may, by the written notice mentioned in Section 425 of the Municipal Act aforesaid, require the owner or occupier of such building to vacate the same within such time as shall be prescribed in the said notice. As a temporary regulation it is hereby prescribed that when any such requisition has been made, every inmate or occupier of the building shall, within the time so prescribed, vacate such building and remove his property and effects and any animals therefrom. For the purpose of enforcing and carrying into effect the said regulation, the Com- missioner or any Police or other officer as aforesaid may, if necessary, after the expiration of such time forcibly remove any person and any property or animal or thing from such building, and may prevent the reoccupation of such building or any part thereof for so long as the Commissioner may deem necessary. IV.-If and whenever any building or part of a building which has been vacated or deserted by the inmates thereof is found to be fastened or locked up, the Commissioner may, by a written notice affixed on the door, require that such building or part of a building be opened and that all property (if any) therein be removed therefrom within such time, not being less than 24 hours, as may be prescribed in such notice, and at the expiration of the time so prescribed the Commissioner or any Police or other officer as aforesaid may forcibly break open and enter any such building or part of a building and cleanse, disinfect and ventilate the same and remove and disinfect or destroy any grain, bedding or clothing or any other goods or articles found therein and may forcibly prevent the reoccupation of such building or part of a building for so long as the Commissioner may deem necessary. V.-For the purpose of preventing the spread of disease, and for carrying into effect any of the measures contemplated by Section 425 of the Municipal Act aforesaid, the Commissioner may, without any such previous notice of requisition to the owner or oc- cupier of a building as in the said last-mentioned section provided, himself cause such building or any part thereof to be cleansed or disinfected and any article found therein to be removed, disinfected or destroyed. VI.-The operation of cleansing or disinfecting a building within the meaning of this notification shall be deemed to include not only the cleansing and limewashing of such building, but also, if deemed necessary, the removal of the earth or soil of the groundfloor thereof to a depth of four inches, the removal of the whole or any part of the roof thereof, the removal of floors, the burning of kerosine oil or any other substance thereon, or any other measure whatever. The expense of carrying into effect any of the measures hereby authorized for cleansing or disinfecting a building shall in the first instance, be defrayed by the Commissioner out of the Municipal Fund, but shall, at his discretion, be recoverable from the owner or occupier of such building under the ordinary provisions of the Municipal Act aforesaid, in the same manner, in all respects, as if the work had been done after notice and after failure to comply with notice within the meaning of Section 489 of the same Act. VII.-Save such compensation, if any, as the Commissioner may, in his discretion, allow under sub-section (4) of Section 427 of the Municipal Act aforesaid, no person shall be entitled to recover any compensation by way of damages or otherwise for the destruction or disinfection of any article removed or dealt with as hereinbefore provided. The owner of any moveable property in any building dealt with under the powers hereby conferred shall be responsible for taking charge of such property at the time when any action is taken under such powers, or in the case of an article requiring disinfection, so soon as the same has been disinfected, and in default of his so doing, the officer in charge of the operations may cause such property to be placed wherever he may think fit, and neither the owner nor any person interested therein shall have any claim for compensation, damages or otherwise in respect of loss of or damage to such property, however caused, during the removal thereof or at any time thereafter. B 1135-18
70 VIII.-If the Commissioner shall be of opinion that any water-connection inside any building is, or is likely to be, detrimental to the health of persons residing therein or in the neighbourhood thereof, he may, after causing a stand-pipe or other sufficient means for the supply of water to be provided outside such building, cause the water- connection with the interior of such building to be cut off. IX.-If in the opinion of the Commissioner any building (not being a hut or shed) which has been vacated, or which has been dealt with under any of the provisions of this notification, cannot be adapted to the sanitary requirements of a dwelling, or is otherwise permanertly unfit for human habitation, or if its existence is a source of danger, the Commissioner may demolish the same or any part thereof. Prior to any such building being demolished, the Commissioner shall cause the same, or such part thereof as he may think necessary to demolish, to be surveyed, and its value at the time to be assessed by such person as Government may, by name or by virtue of office, appoint for that purpose, and shall by written notice affixed on some conspicuous part of such building intimate the date (not being less than seven days from the date of such notice) and the hour at which the building will be surveyed and assessed as aforesaid, and the work of demolition shall not be commenced until the building or portion there of has been surveyed and the value so assessed. The valuation of such building by such officer shall be final and conclusive and the owner shall be entitled to receive the amount thereof which shall be provided out of the Municipal Fund, but he shall not be entitled to receive any further or other sum by way of compensation. Subject to the powers of the Municipal Commissioner under Sections 297, 298 and 299 of the Municipal Act aforesaid, to acquire any portion of the site for the widening or improvement of any street, any such demolition as aforesaid shall not affect the ownership of the land, nor shall it confer on any Fazindar or other superior owner any right which he would not have had, if such demolition had not taken place, in regard to resuming possession or otherwise. The materials of any building or part of a building demolished as aforesaid shall be the property of the Municipality and shall be removed and disposed of, or, if necessary, destroyed by the Commissioner. In assessing the value of any building regard shall be had only to the then actual market value of the structure, and no allowance shall be made, nor shall any compen- sation be paid, for compulsory demolition or otherwise. X.-The provisions of this notification are not intended to, and shall not, operate to limit in any way any powers which the Commissiouer may possess independently of the powers hereby conferred." 11.    The Commissioner of Police was on the following day directed to give the Municipal Commissioner the assistance of the police in carrying out such measures as he might consider necessary in the exercise of his powers under this notification, and on the 18th February Mr. J. Pollen, I.C.S., Collector of Land Revenue and Customs, Bombay, was appointed to make valuations of buildings as prescribed by Rule 9 of the rules.    Mr. P. Reynolds, Superintending Engineer was appointed to assist him. 12.    By the middle of the month  of February  all  necessary powers had, been given to the Municipal Commissioner.    Every effort had also been made to supply  him  with  the staff required to carry them into effect, but nevertheless the staff for house-to-house visitation with a view to the discovery of the sick, &c., was entirely inadequate, and Government therefore resolved on  making an  at- tempt to secure volunteers for the work.    The following notice appeared in the Press on the 16th February: "His Excellency the Governor desires to meet the Justices of the Peace for the Town and Island of Bombay on Tuesday the 23rd instant at the Town Hall at four o'clock." 13. The Justices occupy an important place in the municipal constitution, having the right of electing 16 members of the Corporation. Representing as they do the leading communities in the city and occupying a position which implied the confidence of Government, it was to the Justices that Government turned for assistance as soon as it became clear that no official agency, however powerful and however considerate in its use of power, was able to overcome the prejudices of the masses of the native population and the passive resistance which they offered to all the measures designed for their good. 14. In a speech to them on February 23rd His Excellency said that looking to the history of the Justices, of the Peace, and also to the personnel of which that body was then composed, Government had a special right to appeal to them for
?71 practical assistance in their campaign against the plague. The action of the people themselves in concealing cases, refusing to evacuate their insanitary dwellings, and opposing the isolation of the sick was the result of ignorance, but was suicidal to themselves, disastrous to others, and ruinous to the city. The Justices were enlightened members of their various communities, and if they chose to exert their influence on the fellow-castemen it was in their power to overcome this opposition, and prove themselves useful citizens. What he had told the people of Poona he repeated here-voluntary action on the part of the people themselves in taking the necessary measures was to be preferred; failing that, use of the powers conferred under the new Act would be inevitable. He asked the Justices to volunteer for active work in the city; those who were medical men could give part of their time to work in hospitals; the rest were asked to take certain streets, which had been already mapped out for this pur- pose, and get the sick whom they might find to move out from their houses into hospital, or, failing that, to inform the authorities of the localities in which the cases were being concealed. On the conclusion of this speech His Excellency announced that he was ready to take down the names of any of those present who might be willing to volunteer for this work. A large number came forward and gave in their names for the work. 15. On the 27th February His Excellency the Governor made the follow- ing speech regarding the policy of the Government in the presence of repre- sentatives of the Bombay Chamber of Commerce assembled at the Secretariat: "Mr. Abercrombie and Gentlemen, I am very glad that the representation of the Chamber here to-day is not limited merely to the members of its committee, for there is certainly no body of men in Bombay who have a greater right to address the Governor and to come and lay their views before him.    I well remember, Mr. Abercrombie, the last  time I had the pleasure of meeting the Chamber of Commerce ; on that occasion instead of your coming to see me, I went to see you.    I do not recollect the actual state of trade at that time, but at any rate none of us then foresaw the terrible condition of affairs which was to ensue within such a very short time. I regret that I should have had to postpone this meeting from yesterday to to-day, but in the great over-pressure I really had no option.    I understand that your good feeling was that, in view of this over-pressure, and bearing in mind the little speech I made to the J. P.'s, you were willing to let me off, but, gentlemen, while it is unhappily true that with famine in the Mofussil and plague in Bombay our hands are more than full, yet I said to myself and to Mr. Abercrom- bie, a bargain is a bargain, and I am glad to have an opportunity of meeting the Chamber of Commerce at this time.    That, however, has caused no delay in dealing with your suggestions that no vessel should be permitted to proceed from Aden towards Europe unless with a clean Bill of Health there obtained, and that at Moses Wells, near Suez, there might be an Inter- national Board of Health to certify to the  condition  of passengers and crew on every vessel proceeding through the Canal towards Europe.    The suggestion was at once telegraphed to the Government  of India  and  recommended for  their  serious  consideration.    I may say at the outset that I consider that the tone of your letter is in keeping with the spirit that has been generally shown-that of moderation.    I am aware how seriously the general commerce of Bombay -nay, every shop-keeper and everyone who plies  a trade has been affected, and  amid all this I will say that I think that the executive have been treated not only with modera- tion, but with generosity.      The letter  of  the   15th  February that  I  received  from your Secretary is full of suggestive  matter.     It  alludes  to  what has   been   done,    and   states what,  in your judgment, might be  done, both as temporary  measures to stamp  out  the plague, and as permanent measures to prevent or minimize all possibility of its recurrence.    I may say here, what I think should be received with general acceptance, that the Municipal Commissioner and his  staff have spared no energy in combating this invisible foe, and have worked with an energy  which has   secured   the  eulogies   of Dr. Cleghorn,  which ' have been endorsed by the Viceroy.    It is superfluous, after such testimony, to say that the Municipal Commissioner carries  my confidence, and that he and his   staff are entitled to the warmest admiration and encouragement.    At the same time it is necessary to remember chat we are fighting, a new foe that we know not whence and how it came, or on what it thrives.    We have sought the advice of medical,  sanitary, and bacteriological experts.  We have listened to the words of a multitude of councillors, and  we have striven by active measures to combat and resist this pestilence.    We shall now have the advice and assistance of those who dealt with the plague in Hongkong.    Two of these medical officers have been directed to thoroughly acquaint themselves with this city, the methods employed, and the general system pursued, and they are directed to make any suggestions that their former experience of dealing with  plague prompts. A third I have sent to Karchi, as a personal plague assistant to Mr. Wingate, the Commissioner in Sind, whose efforts and those of all under him deserve the highest commendation; and the fourth has gone in the same capacity to the officer who has lately assumed charge of Poona town.    One thing, however, to me seems very clear; it is not quite understood  what has been and is being done in this city.    In each of the great divisions of the city we have the existing staff to which additions have been made, are being made, and will be made.    At the very outset of
?72 the plague the powers the Municipal Commissioner required were given him under Section 434 of the Municipal Act, 1888. His operations have been extended and facilitated by the further powers conferred upon him under the Epidemic Diseases Act lately passed by the Government  of India. Under that Act Government have empowered the Municipal Commissioner of his own authority, and without reference to the Magistrate, firstly, to prohibit the use of dwellings unfit for habitation; secondly, to require abatement of overcrowding; thirdly, to require   vacation of buildings and premises for cleansing and disinfecting; fourthly, to forcibly enter deserted buildings and cleanse and disinfect them; fifthly, to remove earth of floors; sixthly, to cut off water connections ; seventhly, to demolish the whole or part of any building unfit for habitation or dangerous to health ; eighthly, to destroy infected bedding, clothing, &c.     To show that the officers of the Corporation are actively at work and that their powers are not merely nominal, I may tell you that in the last fortnight, for which I have complete figures -the fortnight ending on February the  18th-a total of 2,059 houses have been separately inspected by those entrusted with the duty of visiting houses to see whether they are suitable for human dwellings.     The result has been that 473 dwellings have been condemned as unfit for habitation, excluding the Marine Lines;   197 have been recommended for alterations mainly in regard to admission of light and air, ventilation,  and removal of partitions ;  16 were referred to the Engineering Department of the Municipality for opinion as it was feared they were unsafe on structural grounds.    A total of  1,455 houses were visited to ascertain the state and use made of water-connections.    In 256 cases recommendations were made for cutting off the connections, in which case outside stand-pipes not far away are provided, and in 67 cases it was found necessary to repair the taps.    Other statistics illustrating the activity of the Municipal Executive are that in the fortnight to which I refer,  1,326 houses were flushed and disinfected; from 4,412 houses tiles were removed or the roof opened to admit air and sunlight; in 1,373 the floors were dug up; 4,340   were limewashed; 895 houses were caused to be vacated; and 53 were destroyed by fire.    In the latter of the two weeks of which I speak disinfectants were distributed to 2,853  houses,  12,345 feet of drains were cleansed,  and 1,150  gullies flushed.     I have not by me the exact figures on these points for the earlier of the two weeks.    These are not actually the most recent figures, but they serve to show what is being done.    This is what has been and is being done in this city,    You mention the provision of hospitals in your letter.    An additional one will be opened directly, if not already opened, in Kamatipura, and another was  some  days ago opened in  Parel   Government   House  grounds.    I  am  under obligation to General Gatacre for his prompt and ready assistance.    His great organising power has been of the utmost value to us at this  crisis, and the thanks of the community are due to the General, and also to His Excellency General Nairne, who gave a ready sanction to the proposal and assistance as regards the staff.    I am obliged to you, gentlemen, for giving me this opportunity of tendering public thanks to the military authorities in view of an intemperate attack I have heard of as being lately made by somebody, whose name I have forgotten, and which really doesn't matter at all.     Further, you make mention of the need for additional Inspectors, I have aheady remarked as to the increase of staff.    One of the most important things is the house-to- house visitation  and the  discovery of the    sick and those   infected by   contact with them. This has already been going on.    I need not repeat here what I said to the Justices  of the Peace.    In response to my  appeal very many have come forward, and there will be room for more,   and others than  Justices   of the Peace might   volunteer,   and with  proper  organization a large  increase  in the  amount  of  effective house-to-house visitation can be made.     And I have no fear but   that I shall enlist   as many as I require.    We must get our  cases to  hospital, we must ensure the disinfection and cleansing of infected houses, and this  can best be done with the assistance of members of the various communities.    It has been,  I know, in some quarters thought that  nothing  has  been  done   with  a  view to getting people  out of infected houses. But   this impression is entirely  erroneous.     Outside the city we have made   rules under the Epidemic Diseases Act by which local officers are empowered to inspect arrivals by road or at railway  stations  and landing-places and detain any suspected case for examination, to enter. houses and detain for   medical examination   cases   therein found.      Medical officers are em- powered to detain and   segregate, in places    specially   provided,    persons  suffering  from  or suspected  of  plague.    I   might here  mention  a  matter   which  has   caused it to be assumed that the arrangements fell short of what they ought to be for the proper treatment of persons removed from trains at Kalyn.    It was stated that people found suffering from plague were sent back to Bombay.     It is true that before the new accommodation was quite ready, and as the old accommodation was full, a small party were sent back to Bombay under supervision.     By working day and night the necessary accommodation was arranged for before any further occasion arose to bring a plague patient back to Bombay.    From figures I saw to-day, I learn that since they began they have detained 101 persons taken out of trains at Kalyn.    Examination, if it is not already taking place, will shortly be required of people coming into Bombay, as there are signs of their returning, and there is a fear of re-infection of houses by those who return from other infected places.   Local officers also have power to cause evacuation of houses, to order abate- ment of overcrowding, to cleanse and disinfect buildings, to burn insanitary huts, to regulate burials and destroy infected goods and clothes; it is also ordered that all cases of plague must be reported.    In order to prevent the possibility of the plague extending to Europe extensive pre- cautions have been taken.     At Aden there is to be a medical inspection of all ships arriving there from Bombay or Karchi.    Here in   Bombay the crews and passengers on all out-going vessels are inspected.    But this does not exhaust the subject.    You desire to know what more we propose to do.    Well, gentlemen, in so far as  I can speak for this Government, I can promise you we shall spare neither men, nor  energy, nor money, and we await the report of the   Hongkong  officers.     But   as I  stated on   Tuesday in  addressing  the   Justices,   we   as
73 a Government are not the only power.    If we are thwarted, if we are not aided by the people themselves, we are impeded in our efforts to suppress this d.sease, and this obstruction must be overcome.    Gentlemen, so much for the past.    We must now, I think, look to the future-not the immediate future only, but the future as regards the city of Bombay.    Whatever is done in the way of demolition of bad dwellings and premises in the present emergency to arrest the course of the plague, and whatever is done to open out lungs for the city, will be done with the view to permanent usefulness and the future improvement of Bombay.    I am convinced, both from personal investigation-and I have seen some of the worst quarters in this city-and from enquiries, that much must be done to improve the buildings and the sanitation.    The drainage question is mainly one for experts to settle, and their opinion must be obtained and a settlement made, or existing proposals rapidly carried out.    But we scarcely need expert opinion to tell us that insanitary buildings and overcrowding must, if possible, be abolished.    The most cursory survey of the city will prove that they exist: a thorough survey of the city by officers of practical experience in buildings and sanitation will indicate with fair accuracy where and to what extent the remedy is to be applied.    I am told that the great practical difficulty is the expense, that the  cost of compensating property-owners whose property will be destroyed is prohibitive.    For my own part I am not afraid of opinions of that kind.    There is a very large number of properties in this city, the value of which is little more than the value of the land. It is true that the bu'ldings may have brought in large rents, but what are these buildings ? Are they not insanitary in design, flimsy in structure and overcrowded?    Are they not fertile spots for the growth and extension of disease, the most difficult places from which to eradicate it ?    The measure of their value for the purpose of compensation seems to me to be the actual value of the structure, not the capitalized value of the rents.    To use an alliterative phrase, those who are to make valuations may, perhaps,  "look not to rents but to rafters."    To my mind it appears that it is neither equitable nor right that large profits should be made out of unwholesome and overcrowded dwellings to the detriment of a helpless population.    This over- crowding must be stopped not only now, but, if possible, in future, for, as in great cities in Europe, it is a premium on crime, misery, squalor and disease.    The right of owners to land to which they have a just title, I acknowledge; and when land is taken up for widening streets and making open spaces,-and I hope that much land will be taken up for these purposes,-the owners must receive full value for it.    But the existing insanitary dwellings must come down or be altered and new dwellings that are constructed to meet sanitary requirements must be made.    And I venture to think that new dwellings constructed on sensible, wholesome, sanitary principles will not only be more sightly to the public and more healthy to the occupants,  but will also be more profitable to the owners.    Legislation may be necessary to carry out this properly, and to insure as fully as possible the end that should be kept in view.    I  shall not be here to see the final results of our labours or the completion of a scheme which, I think, will not hereafter be quoted as a dream, but which is capable of realization.    Now is the time for a commencement, and a commencement has been made.    To use a well known term, I am now engaged simultaneously with our efforts to get the better of the plague in laying the foundation stone of what will, I hope, prove to be a healthier and still more prosperous and beautiful city than Bombay was before overtaken by this fell disease." 16. On the 26th February Surgeon-Major Reade, A.M.S., and Dr. Lowson, M.B., of the Colonial Service, who had had experience of the plague in Hongkong and had arrived in Bombay a few days previously, submitted the following report to Government: "We have the honour to submit a report on matters of urgency connected with the plague operations in Bombay. "There is no doubt that, in addition to the plague in the city of Bombay, we have to face a serious outbreak in the Presidency, if all history of the plague up to the present time is to be taken as a guide. An increase of the present sanitary staff in certain branches is therefore im- perative, as men trained in this special work will be required in the near future. The class of Native Assistant Medical Officers should be augmented; these men have an intimate knowledge of the prejudices, language and habits of the people amongst whom they will be called upon to work, a knowledge which is essential for successful house-to-house visitation, proper direction of disinfecting operations, diagnosing cases of the disease and, if required, removal of the sick. No better opportunity of learning this duty could be had than under the men at present in charge of districts in Bombay. This body of men should be augmented by calling for volunteers from the senior medical students of the Bombay University. We think the Government might reason- ably expect them to exercise some devotion to their calling and their country. These men should be remunerated for loss of time and study, and a record kept of the services they have rendered; such men, other things being equal, having a claim for consideration from the Government when future appointments are made. These students should be drafted to the different districts at once so as to learn their duties and familiarize themselves with the surroundings incident on plague work, frequently of a revolting character. "Another branch requiring augmentation is that of the European inspectorial staff who have to deal with the details of disinfection  and cleansing, in addition to that house-to-house visitation so necessary for the thorough   isolation of sick and infected.    This should be strength- B 1135-19
74 ened by reliable non-commissioned officers and men belonging to British regiments serving in the Bombay Presidency. This clement would largely stiffen the professional and native one engaged in these operations. Of the devoted services of the soldiers in Hongkong we have had experience. and we are confident that they would work with equal zeal and trustworthiness in India. In all duties in India the European element is most essential; it is found to be so in the army, and it will be at least equally so in this plague work, and if the disease is to be effectually grappled with, their employment becomes an absolute necessity. From our knowledge of the plague and the means by which it is spread, we can guarantee that these duties will be carried out with almost complete immunity to the men employed ; far from suffering in health, the men employed on this work in Hongkong gave fewer admissions into hospital from ordinary affections. "The history of plague at all periods tends to show that it is a slow-spreading disease; but, if at once vigorously attacked, it can be stopped. To effect this, the isolation of the sick and segregation of the probably infected is of the first importance, without which it is hopeless to control its spread. For the efficient carrying out of this system careful house-to-house visitation is necessary, the sick should be at once removed to hospital, and those immediately in contact with the sick in the same room removed to a segregation camp. Unless this action be taken, in spite of any disinfection and cleansing that may take place, the patient and his family will still remain as great a danger as before and will certainly lead to further infection of the house and its inhabitants. Already infected people have arrived and formed new foci of infection in parts of the city which at great trouble and expense had previously been cleared and disinfected. This may carry on the epidemic indefinitely, thus showing the hopelessness of dealing with this disease without efficient isolation and segregation. "This presumes the necessity of having suitable hospitals and segregating buildings in proximity to the affected districts, and in view of these measures being adopted, it is desirable that means should be taken at once for erecting hospitals, and also segregation huts for the reception of the infected. These buildings should be in the vicinity of the infected districts, and we understand from Mr. James, Executive Engineer under the Municipality, that there would be no difficulty in erecting such structures on suitable sites. The objections that are put for- ward against this segregation are mere prejudices, and should not be entertained for one moment; and whatever weight the objections may have had at the commencement of the epidemic, we cannot too forcibly impress on those in authority that they are now face to face with a state of affairs in which all such prejudices must be set aside. The difficulty of isolating and segre- gating a large number of people of different castes can be readily overcome by proper adminis- tration. "We have made it our duty to get information on this subject from those best qualified to judge, and the almost unanimous opinion is that this question of segregation could be easily arranged. "We venture to point out that the epidemic of 1894 in Hongkong was practically got under in about eleven weeks' time after these measures were put in force, and, although determined opposition was experienced in the early stages, the inhabitants gradually gave in to the inevit- able. Those who have knowledge of both Indians and Chinese know that the prejudices of the latter are quite as strong as those of the former. If further evidence is wanting of the absolute necessity of such measures, we would add that in Hongkong in 1895, where a large staff educated in plague work was ready at hand, the immediate removal of sick and isolation of all probably infected persons prevented small outbreaks from assuming large proportions, whilst disregard of segregation of infected and other practical matters led to the 1896 epidemic in that colony. "It is needless to say that such a huge task as the administration of the details of this epide- mic requires the most thorough organization, and we feel bound to say that, in spite of the real hard work which has been done, there is an absence of any proper chain of responsibility. The disease is now scattered over the Bombay Presidency, and we would urge that this want of orga- nization should be remedied at once, as the chaos caused by such a want will certainly increase. We suggest that a small Central Working Commitee be formed, presided over, if possible, by an official having high executive authority, the members of such Committee being composed of representatives of departments having special bearing on this work, and all orders should emanate from this authority. Sub-Committees under the Central committee would, of course, be formed in the various districts, who should report direct to the Central authority. As the Central Committee should be composed of men who have had experience of the disease in the city of Bombay, they would be competent to issue instructions which, if energetically carried out, will have beneficial results. "A matter requiring immediate attention is the inspection of incoming passengers to the city. This is necessary as a protective measure, and will also deter a considerable number from re- entering the town until the situation improves. As noted in a previous paragraph, instances have been brought under our notice where diseased persons have re-infected districts. "Prompt suppressive measures should be taken, as the longer the disease persists the more likely is it to become endemic, remaining as a constant source of danger, and likely at any time to light up into epidemic dimensions. Signs are not wanting which lead us to think that the
75 almost complete immunity enjoyed by Europeans is decidedly less than formerly, and cases are now occurring in full-blooded Europeans of a rapidly fatal nature. "It is useless to recommend minor practical details until the system of the isolation of the sick and segregation of the infected has been brought into operation. JAMES A. LOWSON, M.B. W. S. READE, Surg.-Major, A.M.S." 17. By this time Government had come to the conclusion that for the sup- pression of the plague in Bombay City before the rains a large organization would be necessary and that a Committee should be formed of experts who should be responsible to Government alone. On the 27th February it was resolved to associate with the Municipal Commissioner a selected Engineer and a selected Medical man, and in view of the important share which the Military might be called upon to take in the extensive operations which were contemplated, a Military member of the Committee was considered necessary. The Military officer selected-Brigadier General Gatacre-as the senior member of the Board, was to be chairman thereof. The issue of formal orders was delayed until details of the necessary organization could be settled by the members of the Committee : but on the 5th March the following notification was published in a Government Gazette Extraordinary: "No. 1204/702.P. -In exercise of the  powers conferred by sub-section  (1) of Section 2  of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 189 7, and of the powers in this behalf conferred by the Governor General in Council under Section 2, sub-section (3), of the same Act, the Governor of Bombay in Council is pleased to direct as follows: (1) The following gentlemen are constituted a Committee for the purpose of carrying out, under the orders of Government, the measures to be taken to suppress, and prevent the spread of, bubonic plague in the City of Bombay: [1] Brigadier-General W. F. Gatacre, C.B., D.S.O ... ... ...   Chairman. [2] Mr. P. C. H. Snow, I.C.S., Barrister-at-Law, Municipal Com- missioner, Bombay Municipality ... ... ... ... ...  [3] Surgeon-Major H. P. Dimmock, M.R.C.S., L.R C.P... ... Members. [4 ] Mr. C. C. James, A.M.I.C.E., Deputy Executive Engineer, Bombay  Municipality ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (2) The Committee are invested with all the powers conferred on or vested in the Muni- cipal Commissioner for the city of Bombay by Sections 422, 423, 424, 425, 426, 427 and 429 of the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888, and by the Notification of the Municipal Com- missioner dated the 6th October 1888, and by the Notification No. 228-P. of the Governor of Bombay in Council, dated the 10th February 1897, and the Committee are empowered to take any of the measures authorized by the said sections and notifications. (3)   The Municipal  Corporation of the city of Bombay, and all the officers and servants of the Corporation, and all public servants and all persons employed by the Committee shall carry into effect, without delay, any measures which may be ordered by the Committee. (4)   All expenses incurred in carrying out such measures shall, in the first instance, be paid out of the Municipal Fund of the  City of Bombay, but the Municipal Commissioner or the Corporation may recover from any person any amount which such person would, under similar circumstances, be liable to pay to the Municipal   Commissioner or the Corporation under the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888. (5)  On the requisition of the Committee, the Commissioner of Police shall give such assist- ance as may be necessary in order to enforce immediate compliance with any order of the Committee." 18.    At the same time the following letters were despatched: "Malabar Point, 5th March 1897. DEAR GENERAL GATACRE, It is desirable that I should supplement the notification appointing your Committee by some definite written instructions as to the course of action you should take.    The  notification
76 empowers you to carry out the measures to be taken to suppress and prevent the spread of bubonic plague.    These measures should comprise an organization for - (1)  the discovery of all cases of plague; (2)  the treatment of all cases in hospitals; (3)   the gradual segregation, as far as possible, of the probably infected, that is, of those living in the same room with or in close attendance on a person who is found to have the plague. These are the objects to the attainment of which your energies should be directed. I am sure I need not do more than indicate that in all cases of obstinacy or misunderstanding on the part of those whom it is our endeavour to benefit, persuasion and gentleness should be used; that the privacy of women should be disturbed as little as possible and only by women ; and that the caste and religious usages of the people should be treated with all consideration. It is essential that the hospitals should, as far as is possible and practicable, be open to the friends and relatives of the patients, who should be, as far as possible, accommodated near them and encouraged to come and see for themselves that the patients are well cared for. Everything that can be done is to be done to avoid creating a feeling of distrust, and I hope that those employed under you will by combining persuasion and explanation with firmness avoid this evil. Every advantage also should be taken of the services of natives of influence. Many influential gentlemen of the various communities, most of whom are Justices of the Peace, have offered their services, and I have great confidence that the assistance they will render you will be really beneficial. In carrying out these measures you will have at your disposal the whole staff already employed in plague operations in the city of Bombay. You are empowered to add to their number and to arrange and organize them in what you consider to be the most effective way. Believe me, yours sincerely, SANDHURST." "Malabr Point, 5th March 1897. DEAR MR. PRESIDENT, My Government are about to issue a notification under the Epidemic Diseases Act appointing an Executive Committee to carry out, under the orders of Government, all the measures within the city of Bombay that we consider necessary to check and prevent the spread of the plague. It is my wish that there should be no misunderstanding of the reasons which have led to this course. 2.    The epidemic has now been prevalent for more than five months; since October last it has been severe; during the past three months it has been so severe, that the total number of deaths has been from three to four times the normal number; and this  without  making any allowance for the large diminution that we know has taken place in the population of the city.    Steps to check the spread of the disease have been taken; the  Municipal Commissioner and the servants of your Corporation have worked with an energy and a devotion to duty that have  commanded our unstinted admiration.    The cleansing and  disinfecting of the city  have been thorough.    It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that the continued presence of the epidemic in Bombay to its present extent is conclusive proof that it cannot be kept in check by cleausing and disinfecting, and all the other measures that have so far been relied on as sufficient.    Other measures are needed.    If we cannot summarily kill the plague, we can, I am advised and I believe, check its spread, reduce its  strength and limit and weaken it, till it will die a natural death.    But we cannot do this unless we take larger and different measures from those we have hitherto adopted.    And first of all it is impossible to deal  with this  disease unless we know  where and to  what extent it exists. We must therefore search for and discover it.    This is merely matter of enquiry, but the enquiry must be more widespread, more constant and more systematic than heretofore. Next, we must provide a sufficient number of hospitals,  at convenient   places, with every regard to religion and sex, for all who suffer from plague, and we must ensure the removal to them of all persons so suffering ; we must treat them well and show that treatment in a hospital is the most humane and hopeful course that can be adopted.    Those in charge of hospitals will be instructed that, as far as possible and practicable, they should be open to friends and relatives of the patients, who should be encouraged to come and see for them- selves that the patients are well cared for.    I am glad to find that private effort has already provided several hospitals; that is a good and wholesome sign.    This is a time when the city needs every help and support that its citizens can give; it is the duty of each one of us, by example and persuasion, to demonstrate that treatment of plague patients in hospitals is essential to the welfare of the patient and to limit the possibilities of spreading the disease. It is a duty that I hope the members of the Corporation will take upon themselves earnestly and actively.
?77 3.    But the requirements of the case do not end with hospitals.    If  we are really to check this epidemic, to prevent it wandering wherever chance may take it, we must try to watch, in some way, all those who are in special danger of being attacked; those for example who have lived in the same room with or in close attendance on a plague patient.     There is a danger that such persons may have contracted the disease.    We must watch them so that at the first indication of illness the patient may be brought under treatment.    By this means we shall secure for him the best chance of recovery and on behalf of others the least scope for infection. 4.    Very briefly put these are the measures on which I mainly rely for a successful fight against the plague.    To carry them out most effectively it is  necessary to appoint a small Committee, not to consult and advise but to work: a Committee that will  divide the whole scheme of work, apportioning certain branches to  each member.    It is  desirable to include in this body a Medical man and an Engineer.     But as the Committee is to be a working not an advising body, it must be  as small as possible.     We have come to the, conclusion that what we need will be secured by a Committee of four,  and to form  that Committee we have selected General Gatacre as Chairman, Mr. Snow, the Municipal Commissioner, Dr. Dimmock and Mr. James, one of the Engineers of the Corporation.   They will be subordinate only to Government: this is essential, both because it is  Government   alone by exercising the powers very recently conferred under the Epidemic Diseases Act, that can call the Committee into being; and for another reason that I will now explain. 5.     Unhappily  this  epidemic has spread beyond  Bombay:   it has  attacked certain places in the Thna District and Poona severely, and reached  to other places.    As people move from infected places to others  they  may take the plague with them; its tendency is to spread.     Our efforts require to be widespread, far-reaching and systematic; they must, wherever they may be, be  directed, controlled  and harmonised.     We  cannot have one practice pursued in Bombay  and a materially different one elsewhere; our methods must be consistent and complete, and beyond everything we must, if possible, be successful before the rains. 6.    So individual efforts, whether of Municipalities, of Local Boards or of local officers, must all be made systematic and co-operative, and this can only be done by Government; they must take the control absolutely into their own hands.    To do this is no  slur on local bodies; it is no blow to local self-government; it is simply an Imperial necessity. 7.    With the earnest hope that the necessity for the action of Government will be apparent to all, and that the co-operation of all the citizens of Bombay may be secured, I am, dear Mr. President, yours faithfully, SANDHURST. TO COWASJI HORMUSJI, Esq., President of the Municipal Corporation of Bombay." SECTION 5. Sketch of Plague Administration in Karchi in February and up to the date of the appointment of the Karchi Plague Committee. The following  paragraphs  are  quoted  from the  report of   Mr. R. Giles, Collector of Karchi : 55.    On the 3rd of February the municipality held a general meeting, when their Plague Rules were finally revised, all being embodied   in the Commissioner's Notification No. 439, dated the 5th February last. 56.    After the appointment of the Plague Superintendents,  informal  meetings were held by me in the early morning at the Max. Denso  Hall, which adjoins the place where all of them used to meet in order to collect their gangs before commencing work.    The municipal officers attended also and numberless matters especially as regards the changes of Superintendents and their charges were disposed of promptly and without correspondence. 57.    Thus on the 11th February at one of these meetings two fresh charges were created, Mr. Crouch, the Public Prosecutor, and Mr. Cumming, Secretary of the Port Trust, having kindly offered their services to the municipality.    On the 15th it was decided to place Sardar Khn Bahadur Mahomed Yakub in sole charge of the Trans-Lyari Mahomedans with Khn Sheb Rassulbux as his assistant and three Mahomedan supervisors.    Three Mahomedan doctors were already working there who strengthened the Sardar's hand greatly and did excellent work. 58.    It should be mentioned that the services of Sardar Khn Bahadur Mahomed Yakub, the Deputy Collector of the Nara Valley, who recently distinguished himself in the suppression of the Thar and Prkar dacoities, and of Khn Sheb Rassulbux, a selected Mukhtyarkar, had been placed at my disposal on the 3rd of February by the Commissioner in Sind, with a view to carrying out the policy referred to in paragraph 6, and managing the Trans-Lyari Mahomedans B 1135-20-
?78 through men of their own religion. These officers had arrived on the 8th and 9th respectively and were employed up to the 14th in making themselves thoroughly acquainted with the people and endeavouring to secure influence with the headmen and Mullahs. 59.    It should also be mentioned that, at the commencement of February, Mr. Gloster, T.C.S., the Assistant Sessions Judge, and Mr. Barker, the Karachi A'bkari Inspector, had kindly offered their services and been working as Superintendents, Mr. Jacob, I.C.S., the Sessions Judge, also assisting for a short time.    Dr. Arnim was at the same time-in consequence of a special representation made by the Principal Medical Officer regarding the interests of Cantonments-placed in charge of the Sadar Bazr, in addition to which work he subsequently, at the special request of the Commissioner, agreed to supervise sanitary and medical matters in the suburban area. 60.    On the 7th of February, after some correspondence, arrangements were made to run a special train from the stations of Landhi and Malir to Karchi and back, leaving in the early morning and returning in the evening, so as to accommodate those persons who liked to camp at either place and come into Karchi by day for business. 61.    The Manager of the North-Western Railway kindly sanctioned special fares of one anna for a single journey and 11/2 annas for the return, and eventually as many as 724 persons used these- trains in a day.    Subsequently, too, on the 12th idem, 3rd class carriages were attached to a goods train, which left for Karchi later than the special trains and was in consequence more convenient for clerks. 62.    In consequence of these arrangements, Messrs. Ralli Brothers built a number of huts for their workmen at the Malir, and the Local Fund Department also ran up huts at both stations and rented them to the employs of different firms and offices. 63.     So far no information regarding the treatment of the sick has been given in this report, the fact being that prior to the 14th of February, when  1,476 cases of plague had been reported, only 7, of which 3 were Government servants, had been treated in the Civil Hospital, 11 by the Mahomedan Assistants across the Lyari, one in the Municipal Hospital at Machi-Meani, and none in the Caste Hospitals. 64. The distrust of all treatment was, in fact, greater and more intense than could have been expected from previous experience in other epidemics, and can, I think; only be accounted for by the suddenness with which death had occurred on one or two occasions at, or after, the medical man's visit-a suddenness which unfortunately is a common feature of the illness. 65.    That this distrust was not confined to Medical officers I can vouch for by my own experience; for having visited at a Superintendent's request a house, in order to try and prevail on the people to let the children of the house be removed, I found two persons lying dying on the floor; one of whom expired directly I had left the room, "the natural consequence," as the Superintendent was informed next day, of my visit.    In this house the man who spoke to  me and was the sole attendant on the sick had himself 'buboes' on him,  while two of the children were evidently recovering from the disease. 66.    With the close of the week ending the 13th of February, however, a new departure was made as  regards treatment, for on that day the two young officers of the Indian Medical Service, Surgeons-Lieutenant Niblock and Cornwall, arrived, and on the following day were sent out on either side of the Lyari, to make their own way as best they could with no one but an English-speaking Munshi to interpret for them. 67.    Yet within a very few days both had secured patients, the number of which steadily increased, until on this side of the Lyari Dr. Niblock was required for the Plague Hospital, to which he carried off several of his patients, and on the other Dr. Cornwall had succeeded in getting all the sick under treatment in the different hospitals, which he was chiefly instrumental in organizing. 68.    In the following week, too, the Commissioner had, at my urgent request, asked for and obtained from  Government permission to use the High School, which adjoins the Civil Hospital, in place of the latter, and convert the Civil into a Plague Hospital, a measure which, coupled with the nurses provided and comforts poured into the hospital by the Famine Relief Fund, and the splendid work of the Convent Sisters, converted it into a thoroughly successful institution, at which up to the date when this report closes over 516 had been treated, of whom 192 had been discharged cured. 69.     The Relief Fund above alluded to was started on the 6th of February, the money being raised by private subscriptions, and reaching the large sum of Rs. 19,629-0-10.    With this money 14 nurses, including volunteers, were supplied to the different hospitals, and board and lodging provided to the Sisters of the Roman Catholic Convent, who worked so nobly under Sister Heriberta from the  28th February to the 25th of June.    The money also provided clothing and comforts for the patients, and allowances to poor persons when discharged, as well as relief to people in real want and distress.    Every Plague Superintendent  received a certain amount to spend at his discretion. 70.    Another great measure of relief was the provision of grain shops in all central parts of Karachi, including Keamari, Manora, and the Trans-Lyari.    This was rendered necessary by
?79 the departure, during the end of January and the first two weeks in February, of the "Utradhis," or the class who have nearly all the reta 1 grain and provision shops (some 400 to 500) in their hands. The result was a great dearth of provisions and an abnormal rise in prices, which caused us considerable anxiety, even the General Commanding writing and asking me to a'd in procuring supplies. Fortunately, however, I was able, with the assistance of Khan Sheb Framroze, the Mukhtyrkar, to obtan gran from Larkhna and Hyderabad, and to enlist the services of some of the rative gentlemen, notably Seth Vishindas, and persuade them to open shops and bring in supplies. 71. On the 9th of February a second large camp was commenced across the Lyari, the huts being erected by the people themselves from material supplied by the municipality. The people came from a very dirty squa\ill\id corner, where their huts were crowded up and so small that each person had on an average only 30 square feet to exist in, and where plague and smallpox were both raging. 72.    They were first induced  to move   by  Mr. Strachan, the Municipal Secretary, but differences subsequently arose, which the assistance of the Sardar alone enabled me to settle. Two 'kings' appeared in this little 'Brentford,'  i.e., two persons claimed to be their spiritual and temporal leaders. 73.    Plague having, as stated in paragraph 7, reached Keamari on the 7th of February, that place was made a separate charge under Mr. Coghlan, the Collector of Customs, and Mr. Morris, the Port Engineer.    Mr. Coghlan subsequently withdrew at my request, as Mr. Morris resided nearer and a second officer was not necessary.    Manora and the villages of Baba and Bhit were also in Mr. Morris's charge. 74.    The plague was brought to Keamari from Karchi by a Police Constable, who arrived on the night of the 7th with the disease on him and died the following day.    The second case reported on the 16th was also brought from Karachi by a discharged Policeman, who was found lying in the Port Trust godown, and having been removed to the Isolation Hospital, died the same day, 21st February, the first local case being reported on the 22nd, although the person had been \ill\ from the 10th. 75.     Prior to the middle of February the removal of the healthy members of an infected house to regular  segregation camps was not carried out.    Rigid segregation, as well as universal removal of the sick, were measures of gradual growth. 76.    The first step taken was the attempt to isolate the sick in their houses, the healthy, with the exception of the attendants on the sick, being removed to any place deemed suitable; but in my report for the week ending February the 20th, municipal segregation camps are mentioned for the first time, and it is stated that removal to them of the healthy is now almost universal. 77.    In this matter, as in others, however, the Trans-Lyari people led the way,  the headmen having been induced by the  Sardar to consent to the measure, so that after segregation camps had been constructed near each village, they voluntarily sent the relatives of any plague-stricken man to them, with the result that within five days from the date of his becoming Superintendent there were 31 families, within twelve days 123, and before the 13th of March 226 families segregated. 78.    The construction of camps of reed and mat huts was at this time continually  being carried on by the municipality, so that in my report for the week ending the 27th of February the number of such camps is shown as 18 and of their inhabitants  3,933, while eventually in the middle of May they had increased to 30, with a maximum population of 6,475. 79.    In the same report is the following paragraph: 'The people continue to become more amenable in every way, and to understand that all that is done is intended to benefit and not injure them.' 80.    With this satisfactory change, clearly manifest in the attitude of the people,  did the month of February end, the total number of cases having risen on the 28th idem to 1,997, and of deaths to 1,797, the worst day having been the first of the month, when the numbers were 59 and 51 respectively,  59 being the largest number of cases ever reported on one day in Karchi, and 52 (on the 6th) the largest number of deaths. 81.    It may also be noticed as interesting that during the  week ending the 27th of February there was not a single case in the 'Old Town,'   the quarter which at the end of January claimed more than two-thirds of the plague victims.    The disease was then, in fact, declining throughout the city and showing a tendency to  advance further eastwards-the direction  in which it always travelled - a feature which was specially referred to in the press, and may   account  for  the remarkable fact that, so far as   we   knew,   no  case   ever occurred in Baluchistan, or on the Mekran Coast, or up the Persian Gulf. 82.    On the 2nd of March,  owing to the people beginning to return to the city, and especially to the Nasarpuris clamouring to return,  a meeting was held by me at the Max Denso Hall, at which the Civil Surgeon, the Municipal President,  Secretary,   Health  Officer and Plague Superintendents were present, when it was decided to allow the Nasarpuris, provided they had had no recent disease in their families, to return with the permission of  the
?80 Plague Superintendent and a certificate from him that their houses were in a sanitary condition. The return of others who had vacated their houses and left Karchi was temporarily prohibited, except on the condition that they were first segregated for ten days. This was, of course, due to the spread of the plague up-country. 83.    Early in March a serious outbreak occurred in one of the large dhobi's ghats in the Garden quarter, where some 70 dhobis wash for people who are scattered all over the town. 84.    The news reaching me in the evening, I directed the Superintendent of Police to place a guard over the ghat for the night, and early in the morning went with him and  the Plague Superintendent to the spot, where, after removing five sick to hospital (2 had died at the ghats), we proceeded to steep the entire quantity of their clothes in the washing tanks,  after  putting the proper proportion of disinfectant (Jeyes' fluid)  in the water, and sending all the dhobis to the segregation camp. 85.    There they remained ten days-three cases   occurring among them there-during which time all their houses at the ghat were thoroughly disinfected, after which they returned and have never had any sickness in the ghats since.    The clothes were returned to the owners after 48 hours, wet from the tanks, with instructions to dry them in the sun. 86.    This led to my instituting, at the Commissioner's request, a system of licenses, which enabled us to keep some check over the locality from which clothes were brought, but could not be really an efficient control without a considerable establishment to supervise it. 87.     Owing to the rapid increase of patients at the Plague Hospital (68 were under treatment during the week ending March the 6th), steps were taken to obtain the new 'Lady Dufferin Hospital,' which is situated just opposite and was not quite completed, as an additional wing for the plague patients.    It was subsequently used almost entirely for convalescents, although two upper-rooms were prepared for Europeans and one Parsi, one Eurasian child and later on a Eurasian sister, who had been nursing in the hospital, were treated there. 88.    At this time (the  11th March)  I reported that throughout the suburban areas the sick were being removed to hospital, and throughout Karchi the healthy inhabitants of infected and even neighbouring houses, if thought necessary, were being rigorously segregated directly a case occurred. 89.    The class of people in the suburban areas was,  it must be remembered as a rule, a poorer one and easier to deal with, but it was by this time generally understood that all sick, of whatever class, would be removed, and no real opposition was ever offered. 90.    Early in March, too, the question of removing the sick was taken in hand, across the Lyari, a scheme for a large hut hospital having been first considered; but this  ended in the Baghdadi Police  Lines being converted into a hospital and a few hospital sheds being erected near the other villages. 91.    Directly provision was made, the Sardar commenced to move the sick, but unfortunately at this time the presence of an officer, who had had no  experience of the natives,  led to injudicious interference and an idea that more stringent measures were coming, and for a short time the headmen of the Mekranis and Brahuis became obstructive and flatly refused to move their sick at all. 92.    The Sardar, however, soon succeeded in allaying their fears, and at a meeting of the people held by him on the 13th of March, the majority agreed to his demands, some 40 families who remained in opposition leaving Karchi for the hills. 93.    He then arranged that they should remove their sick themselves, the headmen keeping the dooly, and that all in hospital should receive subsistence allowance, the sick 4 and their attendants 3 annas per diem. 94.    On the following day the 'Muhanas' agreed to the same arrangement in my presence, and on the 19th of March no less than 86 plague patients were removed between sunrise and sunset to the places appointed for them, the removal being carried out through their own headmen and Mullahs and no official taking part, while 13 more were removed on the 30th idem at the Khadda, the delay in their case having been due to the necessity of reclaiming the land on which their sick sheds were built. 95.    The above facts are, I think, remarkable and exemplify what can be done in the way of carrying the people with you, although  I fully admit that such methods could not be as successful in the city, where the people are of mixed races and religions. 96.    I have not hitherto alluded to the passing of the Epidemic Diseases Act and the powers granted under it.    These were first communicated to us in the telegraphic sanction of the 9th February, and subsequently in various Government Resolutions, most of which were embodied in Government Resolution No. 1720-1201-P. of the 29th March. 97.    Acting on the strength of one of the above Resolutions, I issued, as District Magistrate, on the 6th of March, an order directing the compulsory notification of sickness and death, due or likely to be due to plague, and at a meeting held previously at the Max Denso Hall settled with the Plague Superintendents and the Municipal officers the places at which, and the persons by whom, such notification should be received.
?81 98.    Owing to the determination to insist on the removal of the sick, the leaders of the different communities in Karchi now began to apply for permission to open private hospitals, and the Commissioner appointed a Committee, consisting of the Principal Medical  Officer, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner and myself, to approve the sites. 99.    Rules for their management were  also drawn up and approved  by the Commissioner (vide paragraph 34 of General Cooke's report). 100.    These private hospitals-but more particularly the excellent one erected for both Mahomedans and Hindus by the public-spirited gentleman  Seth Vishindas Nihalchand-were of great value to us in carrying to completion the policy of removing the sick, because they enabled us to give the people the alternative, viz., the Government or the Vishindas Hospital. From the time, therefore, that the latter was opened (the first patient being admitted on the 17th of March), the removal became practically universal throughout Karchi, both in the city and suburbs. 101.    A conference was held by the  Commissioner in Sind at Government House on the 12th idem, at which a large number of officers, including the Principal Medical Officer, Civil Surgeon, Municipal President and Secretary, and all Plague Superintendents and Medical Officers on plague duty were present.    The object of the meeting was to consider the necessity for any change in the measures then being taken.    Generally, however, little change was thought necessary, except that the removal of the sick should be insisted on in every case-a measure which, as has already been seen, had gradually developed itself and became universal only a few days later. 102.    Much consideration had been given by all concerned to the problem of dealing with the villages across the Lyari, the obviously best plan, so far as the disease was concerned, being to build new huts for all. 103.    This, however, was found to be financially impossible, and eventually it was decided to build one village of some 300 huts, remove the people to them from the village in which disease was worst, and then strip their old houses of their roofs and matting, and after laying them open to the sun, disinfect them thoroughly and permit the people to return after a reasonable time. For this scheme the money was advanced by Government. 104.    A new village was also built at Keamari at this time, the disease there having attacked the men employed at the wharves and threatened to stop the entire work of landing and shipping goods. 105.    This brings my narrative up to the 20th of March, when His Excellency the Governor of Bombay visited Karchi, and after inspecting the operations on both sides of the Lyari, announced in the evening the appointment of the Plague Committee, under the presidency of Brigadier-General Cooke, the Officer Commanding the District, with Surgeon-Captain Arnim and myself as members, to whom Government subsequently added the name of the Municipal Engineer and Secretary, Mr. Strachan. 106.    The announcement-even to those of us who knew well the advantages to be gained by the appointment of a small and absolute Committee, with the invaluable aid of the military at our disposal-was not at first entirely welcome, the reason being that we had worked side by side with the Municipal President and his officers, and knew how excellent and self-sacrificing that work had been. 107.    But the fact remained that the Municipal Commissioners, who stuck   to the ship when in danger, were comparatively few and   'salus populi suprema   lex.'    The results undoubtedly showed that  Government  was right.    The  work   was proceeded with more rapidly, more thoroughly, and with vastly improved system and supervision." SECTION 6. Plague in the Mofussil in February. February was marked by a rapid spread of plague in the Mofussil. The Thna District, especially Slsette Island, which is joined to Bombay Island by causeways, was the one most severely affected, but in Surat, a coast district north of Thna, the epidemic became severe in the town of Bulsr, and gave cause for anxiety in the city of Surat and the adjoining town of Rander; in the city of Poona plague was increasing rapidly; in the Kolba District which lies on the east of Bombay harbour, the disease had obtained a footing in the towns of Panvel and Uran; while imported and occasionally indigenous cases were discovered from time to time in several other districts. To prevent, as far as possible, the further spread of plague and to stamp it out in the places where it had appeared, Government, as already shown, conferred powers of the most drastic kind on their officers under the Epidemic Diseases Act, in the course of this month, and made special arrangements for controlling railway and sea B 1135-21\?\
?82 traffic.    They also sent the following telegram on the 10th February to Collectors and Commissioners: "It is essential to take all possible precautions against spread of plague. Instruct all Revenue, Police and other Government officers to report every suspicious case and have movements of persons from Bombay or Poona or Thna District watched. If necessary, establish segregating camps at places of arrival by land or water from Bombay, &c., and place arrivals in quarantine. Have death rate carefully watched in all places where it can be a useful guide. If necessary take measures to prevent all fairs and pilgrimages and large gatherings of people. Don't wait for Government sanction to proceedings or expenditure that are urgently necessary." 2. The measures taken in this month in the city of Poona will be sketched in Part II, Chapter I, by way of introduction to the history of the Poona Plague Committee. The measures of the nature of quarantine adopted specially with a view to preventing the spread of plague in the Deccan by panic-stricken people emigrating from Poona, Daman and the infected cities in Sind will also be referred to in Part II. In the Kolba District, owing to the scarcity of medical subordinates, and the facts that there was no Commissioned Medical Officer and the Collector had only one Assistant, little would be done in this month to meet the first outbreaks, except in the Mora hamlet of Uran, where the presence of Mr. Carrel, Supervisor of Government Distilleries, a gentleman who possessed great influence over the Kolis, enabled a system of segregation to be established with success. The measures adopted in this month in the Thna and Surat districts in which the disease had become firmly established, are sketched below. Thna. 3.    On   13th  February   provisional  sanction having   been  accorded   by Government to   the  rules   proposed   by him,  Mr. F. S. P. Lely, Commissioner of the Northern Division, visited Thna and in consultation with the Collector of the district, the Sanitary Commissioner, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner and the Civil Surgeon formed a plan of campaign.    It was resolved that the segregation of the sick and their families in hospitals and observation camps should be rigorously enforced and  orders for the erection of hospitals  and sheds in each affected place  were   given.    The affected area  was partitioned out among the available European officers.    The Civil Surgeon took charge of operations in the city of Thna, and Mr. R. Gilbert, a Solicitor of Bombay, volunteered to become President of the Bndra Municipality and to take charge of plague operations in the town of Bndra, thus setting free the First Assistant Collector, Mr. Hudson, to devote his attention to the other infected villages of Slsette, except Kurla and the villages in its neighbourhood, which were placed in charge of Surgeon-Major Anderson, Deputy Sanitary   Commissioner.     The Second  Assistant Collector, Mr.   Mead,   took   charge   of  Bassein   and   Dahnu,   and the Collector himself proceeded to Bhiwndi to assist the Deputy Collector in its administration which was   giving   trouble.    It  may   here  be   mentioned   that in this town   it  was found   at   one  time  necessary  to bring up a body of armed police; at Vesva in   Slsette   a  violent  riot  took  place   early  in   March  in  which   the First Assistant Collector and the  Special Plague Mmlatdar were some-what severely handled   by   the mob:  and   at Bndra also on one   occasion difficulties   were experienced   which  rendered  necessary  the presence of troops.    The prejudice against   hospitals   seems  however to   have   rapidly disappeared,   especially  in Thna, Kurla- and Bndra, where there were European doctors, Surgeon-Captain Prall  having  volunteered for   service at the latter.    In   many places   people preferred to have their own caste isolation sheds, and no objection was taken to this, the  important point being to   promptly remove the  occupants of infected houses and to disinfect the houses. Discovery of the sick was ensured by house-to-house visitation. 4. As already mentioned the Civil Surgeon of Thna had been removed in January for service under the Bombay Municipality and the Thna District was thus left entirely without a Commissioned Medical Officer. Surgeon-Major Anderson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, was, however, promptly ordered to abandon his tour, proceed to the Thna District, and remain there till further orders. Another Commissioned Medical Officer, Surgeon-Captain Hudson-one of the officers deputed to this Presidency by the Government of
?83 India-was also ordered to the Thna District, being appointed plague officer in charge of the city of Thna and in addition discharging the duties of Civil Surgeon. Government further strengthened the executive administration by deputing two Assistant Collectors, Messrs. Leggatt and Mead, from Gujarat to Thna, and by sanctioning the request of the Commissioner, N. D., fur the appointment of two Special Plague Mmlatdrs. 5.    As additional precautions, all station-masters on the B. B. & C. I. Rail- way were appointed plague authorities to detain plague cases and hand them over to the village headmen; and at Bhyndar, Bassein, Sophla, and Boisar special medical inspectors were employed to watch arrivals. The history of the next two months shows that the people soon began to understand the necessity of the steps which in February had to be carried out against their wishes, occasionally with the use of force. Before the passing of the Act the attitude even of the more prominent members of the various communities is well illustrated by the following Resolution passed February by the Municipality of Bhiwndi. Segregation. they said was against religion, and could do no good, inasmuch as "life and death were not in the hands of men, but of the Creator." This, the Collector remarks, was virtually a sentence of death on the town, and he was contemplating the suspension of the Municipality when the passing of the Act made uniform action possible on the lines described above. Surat District. 6.    The existence of the disease in the town of Rnder was first discovered by the   divisional officer at the end   of January, when the necessary powers were  applied for, and arrangements were made to prevent the importation of fresh cases. 7.    A European Inspector of Sanitation and three Prsis were appointed to supervise operations.    The arrangements were on February 16th undertaken by Mr. C. N.  Seddon, I. C. S., and on the next   day a special   meeting of  the Municipality was held at which the whole available balance of the Municipality was devoted to plague measures.    Thorough disinfection of all infected houses was then carried out, segregation was insisted on, caste hospitals being encouraged within the limits of a general camp,   an exception however being made in the case of parda women.    Isolation of the " probably infected" was not found possible. 8.    In Surat City, where the population was enormously inflated by the exodus from Bombay, the inspecting staff at the railway station, which had been at work since December  1896, was strengthened by the employment of two medical practitioners.    Three travelling Inspectors were engaged from February 9th to February 17th to travel up and down from one end of the district to the other (i. e., between the stations of Kim and Daman Road) as a temporary measure till sufficient medical men could be procured to watch the stations all along the line. 9.    Arrivals by sea were inspected from February 17th and the bridge leading from Rnder was watched in order to prevent the importation of plague therefrom.    House-to-house visitations were carried out, but with little success. Medical practitioners were compelled to report cases which came to their notice. Imected houses were vacated for a month.    All plague cases discovered were taken to the hospitals.     Owing to   the  hostile   attitude  of the people   two companies of native troops were brought to Baroda for service in Surat and Rnder.   These were subsequently sent to Bulsr. 10.    In Bulsr the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner of Gujart, Surgeon-Captain Dyson, who was required to abandon his tour, was placed in charge of operations.    Vigorous measures for segregation were adopted, which resulted in the flight of about 3,000 people.    Most of the fugitives, however, settled in the fields within five miles of the town, as the villagers were on the alert to prevent their entry into their villages.     Separate private hospitals for Hindus, Maho-medans and Prsis were erected, and in addition to these there were municipal and railway hospitals.    Certain measures for medical inspection at the railway station had been taken in December and these were made more efficient  in
?84 February, in which month also a medical inspection of arrivals by sea was commenced. Guards were posted night and day at the entrances to the town to detain for medical examination all persons who appeared to be ill. 11. The Portuguese Settlement of Daman was attacked with plague in this month, and the Prdi Tluka of Surat, which adjoins it, was exposed to the risk of infection. The village system is strong in Gujrat and the idea of keep-ing all strangers from an infected place out of the village site was not new to the people here. In February the Commissioner, N. D., Mr. Lely, did his best to stir them up to resist the influx of all people from infected places and keep them at a distance for some time till danger of an outbreak had disappeared. The headman of the town of Prdi responded well to this appeal, and, exposed though the town was to infection from various quarters, the efforts made were entirely successful in keeping out the disease. The same spirit was encouraged in the villages, and it had the effect of preventing the fugitives from Bulsr crowding into and infecting this tluka. Even in the Bulsr Tluka much was done to minimise the danger to which the state of Bulsr city exposed the villages. In February the Collector issued an order to all Patels to prevent plague-stricken persons from entering their villages, and either isolate them in huts in the fields, if there was no hospital within reasonable distance, or send them to hospital.
PART II. THE PERIOD  FROM THE   CONSTITUTION OF  THE FIRST PLAGUE COMMITTEE TILL THE END OF MAY. CHAPTER I. (THE FIVE PLAGUE COMMITTEES.) SECTION 1. The Bombay Plague Committee. 1.    The points to which the attention of the Chairman of the  Committee was directed by His Excellency the Governor were- (1)    The discovery of all cases. (2)    The treatment of all cases in hospitals. (3)    The gradual segregation, as far as possible, of the probably affected, that is, of those living in the same room with or in close  attendance on persons found to have the plague. 2.    The machinery for the first of these measures was to some extent in existence already.    The subordinate Medical officers employed by the Health Department had been carrying out house-to-house visitation for the previous month and a half; and the Justices of the Peace, whose services had been enlisted by His Excellency the Governor in February, were now placed at the disposal of the Committee.    For utilising these resources to the full, and for the general sanitary supervision of the city, the Committee mapped out the whole island into ten districts.    The unit thus created was placed under the management of a District Medical Officer, and with much difficulty the services of sufficient Commissioned Medical Officers were obtained to provide for eight of the ten districts.    Two of the districts were put in charge of private practitioners who had been previously engaged by the Municipal Commissioner.    To each District Medical Officer a certain number of Justices of the Peace was allotted for house-to-house visitation, and to these again the District Medical Officer allotted a certain division containing a number of streets.    A few military sepoys were told off to accompany them and prevent the chance of any disturbance.    Sub-divisional medical officers, in most cases Native practitioners, were placed under the orders of the District Medical Officers, to assist in the search for cases and to accompany the Justices where possible. 3.    On the discovery of a case the Justice posted a sepoy at the door to prevent the relations of the patient carrying him away, and the Medical Officer was sent for, if there was room for doubt, to diagnose the case.    Ambulances were provided for the conveyance of the patients.    The presence and assistance of these Justices, many of them prominent men in their  communities, was of the  greatest value to the Committee.    Their intimate  knowledge of the habits  of the  people, and of  their  prejudices, enabled them to  discover the sufferers, and at the same time convinced people that nothing  needlessly offensive to their feelings or religious  prejudices was intended.    The people soon showed their appreciation of the efforts made to conciliate their feelings by the diminished reluctance with which they allowed their sick to be removed.    As soon as caste hospitals were ready, many communities removed their own sick of their own accord, the co-operation of certain leading men having been secured. The District Medical Officers themselves were also continually searching for cases personally, and supervising and directing the work of their subordinates and their Justices.    In all cases of plague brought to the notice of the  Committee by house-to-house visitation or otherwise, the patient was removed to hospital in an ambulance.    The room in which the patient resided was vacated and thoroughly disinfected and only allowed to be re-inhabited after it had been kept empty for 15 days. 4.    The second point to which His Excellency the Governor had directed the attention of the Chairman of the Committee was the treatment of all cases in B 1135-22-
?86 hospitals. An important step taken by the Committee was to provide more Government hospitals in all parts of the city in order to obviate the danger arising from the shock caused by a removal to a distant hospital. At the same time all the communities were urged to prepare their own hospitals, as it was the intention of the Commitee to have all cases removed from houses, and if no caste hospital was ready their patients would be taken to the nearst Government hospital. They were given the option of putting up a separate shed for themselves inside the compound of some Government hospital, or of providing an entirely separate one of their own. The result of this was that applications began to pour in rapidly, and the house-to-house searches which were vigorously carried on convinced all classes that no time was to be lost if they wished to have their sick under their own management. The management of these caste hospitals was entirely in the hands of the promoters, the only interference being that the District Medical Officer frequently visited all the hospitals in his district to see that proper sanitary arrangements were made, that the treatment of the patients was consistent with humanity, and that sufficient good food was administered to them. The treatment was left, as stipulated, entirely in the hands of a practitioner appointed by the community and approved by the Committee. The relations and friends of the patients who wished to attend them were allowed to do so, sheds and food being provided for them free of charge. The knowledge that they would be allowed to attend their friends in hospital went far towards reconciling the relations of the plague-stricken to their removal. 5. Another important step in regard to the treatment of cases in hospital was the employment of nurses by the Commitee. The Sisters of Bndra (Sisters of the Cross), the Mzgaon Sisters (All Saints' Sisters), and the Clare Road Sisters (Nuns of Jesus and Mary), came forward about this time. The Mzgaon Sisters had volunteered for the Arthur Road Hospital early in February, and their services were generally accepted by the Committee. Other nurses were procured locally and the Secretary of State was asked to send 12 more trained nurses from England. The details given in the report of the Committee show that everywhere it was found that the services of the nurses were fully appreciated by the patients, who showed many signs of their gratitude. 6. It has already been mentioned that all the disinfecting staff formerly engaged by the Municipality was taken over by the Committee. Large additions were now made to it, and every house in which a case of plague or even of suspected plague had taken place was thoroughly disinfected under the immediate supervision of the District Medical Officers, each of whom had a separate gang of experienced coolies under the Health Department Inspectors attached to his district for this purpose. 7. As regards the segregatian of the probably affected, the third suggestion of His Excellency the Governor on the discovery of a case the relatives and persons living in the room with the patient were removed with him to hospital and kept under observation for from 10 to 15 days. The breadwinner of the family was allowed to go out of the hospital during the day if he so desired, returning at night. Where several plague cases occurred in a chawl or house, the place was vacated and the tenants found quarters in other premises, and as far as possible they were kept under observation by the District Medical Officer of the district. The wholesale vacation of infected streets or districts was not attempted, for no space was available in Bombay for such large camps as would have been necessary when the epidemic existed throughout the city; neither was it considered to be essential, as all Government and private hospitals provided segregation houses or huts for the families of infected persons. But in the months of March and April the population of the city was reduced to about 475,000 and whole streets of houses in the worst districts were vacated by the spontaneous flight of the people. Examination of Traffic. 8. It is estimated that about of 33/4 lakhs of people had left Bombay by the time of the appointment of the Committee. With the decreasing epidemic the stream set the other way, and the inspection of the inward traffic was carried out by the Committee, arrangements being made for the examination of all arrivals by land and sea. The Thna District was one of the worst affected at this time,
?87 and accordingly the causeways leading from Bombay to the island of Slsette were closed at night from March 24th, and all travellers were examined by medical men as they passed through in the day time. 9. At the end of April it was arranged that up trains should be examined at Kalyn and Plghar Stations, where the large outward inspections were already being held under the orders of Government. Passengers by local trains were examined at Kurla and Bndra, and it was arranged that the through up trains by the G. I. P. Railway should not take up passengers between Kalyn and Bombay except at Thna, where arrangements were made for inspecting them before they entered the trains. The outward arrangements were also put under the Committee at the stations of Kalyn and Plghar about the same time. 10. The inward sea traffic was examined from April 1st, the necessary additional staff being placed under the orders of Surgeon-Major MacCartie, Port Health Officer. Quarantine. 11. As the plague decreased in Bombay it became more severe in other places, especially in the Kolba District and at Cutch-Mndvi. In the case of arrivals from all ports other than ports in the Kolba District and Cutch, only those whose temperature was abnormal were detained under observation. Arrivals from ports in Kolba were detained for 5 days, whether they had fever or not; those from Cutch for 8 days. For their reception large camps were built at Nriel Wdi, Reay Road, Wri Bandar: the Malet Bandar pilgrim shed was also borrowed for this purpose. Some communities provided their fellow-castemen with the necessaries of life during their detention; other persons were provided with uncooked food and the means of cooking it, and arrangements were made for the different castes to have their cooking places separate. From March 1st to June 30th (for the Port Health Officer had been keeping an eye on the inward traffic before the Plague Committee's scheme was ready), 57 plague cases were detected by the inward sea-traffic inspection, 258,684 persons were examined, and about 5,000 passed through the observation camps. The largest numbers of cases came from Karchi, Cutch, and Kolba District. Aid to other places. 12. At the end of April, by which time the Plague Committee had a large and well trained staff and equipment, the Collectors of Thna and Kolba were advised by Government to consult the Bombay Plague Committee as to the measures to be taken in hand in their districts. The Collector of Thna merely asked for a few gangs of coolies who understood disinfecting work. These were promptly supplied. The Collector of Kolba was in need not only of a disinfecting staff, but of the materials for equipping hospitals. 13. In the Kolba District it was important to get the disinfection of all the plague-infected places completed before the rains. Five experienced Inspectors and large gangs of coolies under the management of Chief Inspector Atkinson were despatched to the district, and completed their operations well within the time. Surgeon-Captain Collins, who was deputed to supervise the plague work in this district later on, reports: "The benefits to the district of this thorough cleansing are incalculable. All the towns that were in a very filthy condition have now been brought to a condition of average cleanliness." 14. Besides the staff lent to the Collector of Kolba, Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Wilkins, D. S. O., who had been in charge of No. 5 District under the Committee in Bombay, and a staff of four nurses and two medical subordinates, were despatched for duty in Cutch-Mndvi on 27th April, at the request of His Highness the Ro of Cutch. Additional medical men, nurses, labourers, disinfectants, and ambulances were sent as soon as they could be spared from Bombay.
88 15. The accompanying table shows the decline of the plague week by week  after the date of the appointment of the Committee:- Week ending. Total Mortality from all causes. Average Mortality. Difference. 2nd March 1,484 546 1,371 9th  " 1,326 544 782 16th  " 1,258 534 724 23rd  " 1,139 539 600 30th  " 1,141 544 597 6th April 1,007 559 448 13th  " 970 572 398 20th  " 836 614 222 27th  " 671 625 46 4th May 638 606 32 11th  " 558 599 ... 18th  " 547 602 ... 25th  " 541 581 ... 1st June 500 546 ... 16. The figures of the actual excess of the total mortality over the average do not by themselves give an entirely accurate idea of the plague morality. On 2nd March when the Committee were appointed, the population of the city was only about 467,000; whereas the figures for average mortality are based on the census population of 821,000. If account were taken of the reduced population, the normal mortality would be found to be considerably less than that shown in column 3 of the above statement, and the difference therefore between the actual and the normal figures would be greater than that shown in column 4. In the absence of any other epidemic in the city, this difference may be said to represent approximately the plague mortality in the city. In view of the constantly changing figures of population an accurate estimate of this difference cannot be made, but a rough calculation shows that the deaths from plague from September 1896 down to the end of June were between 25,000 and 30,000. Use of the Military by the Committee. 17. The chief use to which the military were put in Bombay was to act as ward servants, and to accompany the parties engaged on house-to-house inspection. Few British troops were employed in Bombay, partly because the European garrison of the city is very small, and partly because the Native Justices gave valuable assistance in house-to-house visitation. Three British officers, 6 non-commissioned officers and 20 men only were employed, and these, with the exception of 14 men in the Colba ward of the city, were not engaged in house-to-house visitation, but in inspecting and supervising other work. 537 native troops were employed, and 29 non-commissioned officers with 11 native and 4 British officers. The relations between the military and the people were from first to last of a friendly nature. 18. The extensive house-to-house searches personally conducted by the members of the Plague Committee in the earlier stages of its existence were supported by the presence of large numbers of troops, both native and British. These were not employed to conduct the searches, but simply to prevent the possiblity of a breach of the peace. Their presence undoubtedly exercised a wholesome influence on the mob, and made it clear that no resistance would be tolerated. 19. A full report by the Bombay Plague Committee is being separately published,
89 SECTION 2. The Poona Plague Committee and a sketch of the measures taken in Poona before its appointment. 1. Arrangements at Poona Railway Station for the medical inspection of persons arriving by train from the direction of Bombay were first made by the City and Suburban Municipalities at the end of September and were subsequently improved and extended. The result of the inspection was that numerous persons were from time to time found to be suffering from plague. These were usually removed to hospital for treatment; but instances were reported of persons refusing to go to hospital, or to remain in hospital when they had been taken there, and there were then no legal powers of compulsion. In the absence of any measures of the nature of quarantine it was impossible to prevent the importation of plague by persons in whose systems the disease was only incubating. Isolated cases of plague, mostly imported, were discovered in the city from time to time, and probably many more cases were concealed. Shortly after the middle of January plague was reported to be epidemic in the city. Act III of 1897 had not then become law; but the Municipality towards the end of January obtained powers from the Commissioner, C. D., under Section 73 of the District Municipal Act for entering and disinfecting private premises and removing to hospital persons found to be suffering from the plague. The Sanitary Commissioner, who visited Poona at this time and found the arrangements were in a backward condition, recommended the employment of a European Commissioned Medical Officer in the city for plague duty, and, accordingly, Surgeon-Captain Lloyd Jones was, in the beginning of February, removed from famine duty in Ahmednagar, appointed a Deputy Sanitary Commissioner and ordered to remain in Poona. He without delay began to insist on the removal to hospital of persons suffering from plague, but the persons employed in this task were in some cases mobbed and the sufferers from plague were rescued, the police force available being insufficient. On the 8th February His Excellency the Governor visited the city, inspected the infected locality and consulted the Government and Municipal officers. In a speech made on this occasion he said he was sorry to know that Poona had contracted, at least in certain portions, the terrible disease. He came to find out what steps were being taken, and whether they were satisfactory. He asked the officials to impress upon the people the necessity of removing to the hospital all those afflicted. He had heard it said that rather than go to hospital some people would sooner have the plague. They should be told to go to hospital and to make known their condition, if affected, at once to those who could help them. He asked those present to give every assistance to the executive by inducing people to whitewash their houses thoroughly so as to be beforehand with the executive. He remarked that they could do much by persuasion; but the measures would have to be carried out, and he much preferred they should do it voluntarily, instead of the Government being obliged to use the powers they possessed, so as to save not only this city, but to stop the spread of the disease to the surrounding towns and villages. The authorities were determined to do all in their power to save the city of Poona and to stop this plague. He wished to impress upon them to do all in their power to help in this good work. 2. The result of His Excellency the Governor's visit to Poona was that Mr. W. C. Rand, I. C. S., was on the 10th February directed to proceed to Poona to take administrative charge of the plague measures and Surgeon-Major J. P. Barry, I. M. S., was, on the 17th idem, transferred to Poona for plague duty. Before the arrival of the latter, another Medical officer, Surgeon-Captain Beveridge, A. M. S., who had acquired experience of plague measures in Hongkong and had just arrived from England, was sent to Poona to help Mr. Rand.  On the 25th February, Dr. Beveridge submitted through Mr. Rand an important report in which he proposed to employ organized search parties and parties of fumigators and limewashers, to adopt special measures for segregation, and to employ for plague duty volunteers from the British regiments in Poona. 3. Mr. Rand, in forwarding the report of Surgeon-Captain Beveridge on February 27th, supported his proposals in the following letter: "It will be seen that Surgeon-Captain Beveridge holds that if the plague is to be stamped out of Poona before the monsoon, drastic and thorough measures are required. In considering his proposals it has to be remembered that hitherto moderate measures have entirely failed to root out the epidemic from any of the towns in India in which it has taken hold, while the same disease has succumbed to strong measures in Hongkong. On the B 1135-23
90 other hand, it must not be forgotten that the strict enforcement of the measures he advocates will be intensely unpopular, at any rate for the present, and perhaps for a long time to come, among all sections of the native community, and will not necessarily be successful.  The question is a momentous one owing to the extent to which the disease has already spread in the city and the rate at which it is increasing. An idea of how the disease has spread will be given by the following table of Poona City mortality :  Month. Total number of   registered deaths from all causes. Average for last five years. Difference. November ... 170 244 -74 December ... 270 261 9 January  ... 497 261 236 February up to 26th 882 225 657  Apart from the plague the season has not been an unhealthy one, and the figures in  column 4 for December, January and February may probably be taken to represent approximately the plague mortality.  The reported plague deaths are much fewer, the dread of official interference causing most people to return plague deaths as due to other causes.  As far as I am aware there is nothing in the history of former epidemics to  lead us to suppose that measures of moderate stringency will have the effect of eradicating the plague  or even of diminishing the length of its stay in an epidemic form, and it appears to me that  the only logical alternatives are either to take the most drastic measures with a single eye  to the removal of the epidemic, or else to refrain from compulsory processes. I am of opinion  that the former alternative should be adopted, as with proper arrangements it seems to offer  a fair likelihood of success. That there may be a chance of clearing the city of plague within a short period, I think  that the officer in charge of the operations will require more extensive powers than I could  exercise under the rules published with Government Resolution No. 941-398-P. of the 20th  instant, General Department. Those rules seem indeed hardly suited to the circumstances  of a large town on which plague has gained a firm hold, and in which every effort is made  to keep the authorities in the dark as to the occurrence of cases. I therefore venture to submit a draft of rules under Act III of 1897, which appear to  me to be necessary for the successful carrying out of the operations. I agree with Surgeon-Captain Beveridge in thinking that for the discovery of plague  cases and the disinfection of infected houses we should chiefly rely on the work of squads  each containing a European, and organised in general accordance with his suggestions Nos. 1  and 2. Houses should be systematically searched for plague cases throughout the city, and  all houses in which deaths had recently occurred and the cause of death was either plague  or was not satisfactorily shown to be something else, should be dealt with as plague-stricken. It would not be possible to find a medical officer to accompany each squad, but his presence  with each squad is not essential. In order that effective squads may be organised, I request that 100 British non-commissioned  officers and men may be placed at my disposal. As many as possible of these  should be drawn from the Royal Engineers, and the rest might be taken from any branch  of the service. They would work immediately under the Medical officers who have been  appointed as my colleagues. The question of the pay they should receive while on plague duty is one for Government to settle. The Poona District Superintendent of Police has only detailed 12 men for plague duty, and is, I believe, unable to provide a considerably larger  number at an early date. Owing to the attitude of the population towards segregation  it will, however, be necessary to support the men engaged on plague duty with sufficient  armed men to make effective opposition to them an impossibility. In the absence of policemen it will be necessary to employ military aid for this purpose. The following is an  estimate of the number of troops that would be required on quasi-police duties :-200 men to be massed at some central point in the city, and to be prepared to move to any quarter  where a riot might arise ; 200 men to accompany the searching and disinfecting squads ;  50 men to take charge of the inmates of vacated houses, and to escort them to the segregation  camps ; 25 men to guard the hospitals; 50 men to guard the property in the vacated  houses which are left open for purposes of ventilation. In addition, a few cavalry patrols  would probably be useful. The estimate is no doubt a rough one, and it may be that less  than 575 men would be required for duty daily, especially after the inhabitants of Poona  had become accustomed to the work of the squads. I think, however, that it would be  advisable in the first instance to employ enough troops to make the necessity of obedience  to the authorities self-evident. As the cash balance of the Poona Municipality is very low, and as it is absolutely  necessary that funds should be available if effective operations against the plague are to be  carried on, I beg that Rs. 25,000 may be ordered to be advanced to the Municipality  at once on the understanding that the terms of repayment will be settled hereafter. If it is decided to employ the military in connection with plague operations, I would  suggest that Surgeon-Major Barry and Surgeon-Captains Lloyd Jones and Beveridge may  be gazetted as Magistrates, and that they as well as myself may be empowered to call for  the services of any of the troops employed on plague duty to quell a riot."
?91 4. In forwarding these papers to Government, the Honourable Mr. J. K. Spence, Commissioner, Central Division, made the following remarks:- "It will be seen that Surgeon-Captain Beveridge considers that the measures hitherto taken have been absolutely useless, and there can be little doubt that he is right. The figures given by Mr. Rand show that the disease is quite as virulent and widespread as it is in Bombay, and that the official returns of plague seizures and deaths are utterly unreliable. Surgeon-Captain Beveridge recommends thorough and effectual house-to-house visitation under European supervision, the assistance of military volunteers being obtained for the purpose; the removal of the dead and diseased; thorough disinfection of affected houses and property, and absolute segregation of healthy inmates of infected houses. Mr. Rand agrees with Surgeon-Captain Beveridge, and in addition proposes certain rules under the Act which will considerably extend his own powers. In addition to military aid for search parties Mr. Rand asks for military assistance for police purposes. He also asks for funds and that the Commissioned Medical Officers working under him should be gazetted as Magistrates in order to be able to call for military aid. I am quite in accord with all the proposals made, and would recommend that they should be sanctioned, but I would go even further." 5. The additional proposal of the Commissioner was that a military cordon should be placed round the whole city to prevent the inundation of the district by plague-stricken fugitives. "Unless some such system," the letter continues, " is carried out, I am convinced it will only be a question of time for the disease to attack every large town in the Presidency. As Surgeon-Captain Beveridge says, we should be following the disease instead of getting in front of it and driving it back, and unless it is eradicated or at least suppressed before the rains commence, when segregation in leaking huts will be impossible, it is difficult to foretell the calamitous results that will surely ensue." 6. At the same time Mr. R. A. Lamb, Collector of Poona, proposed that similar action should be simultaneously taken in the cantonments. He said:- "Otherwise the latter will be flooded by refugees from the former, bringing the plague with them. To take this measure the use of soldiers is needed, because the men are avail- able, they are disciplined, and they can be relied on to be thorough and honest in their inspection, while no native agency is available, or could be relied on if it were, I trust I may be pardoned if I add that the matter is very urgent. Owing to concealment of cases plague is spreading in Poona City to an alarming extent, and there is every likelihood of the cases in Poona Cantonment (which adjoins the city) being far more numerous than are reported, and becoming vastly more numerous if the concealment of cases be not promptly dealt with. There is no means of dealing with it effectively (and if not dealt with effectively it would be as well to cease from attempts to combat the plague) except by a strong disciplined and trustworthy agency. Such agency is to be found in the military alone." 7. In describing the situation at this time, Mr. W. C. Rand in the report drafted before his murder remarked: "The state of the city was one of panic. A large proportion of the leading men of the place had already left or were preparing to leave Poona on account of the outbreak. Several of the Municipal Commissioners and Honorary Magistrates were among the deserters. The majority of the Gujarti and Mrwdi traders (who have the grain trade entirely in their hands) were closing their shops and returning to their native countries. The mass of the people were, as a natural consequence of their ignorance, opposed to segregation either of the sick or of apparently healthy persons who had been exposed to infection. Most of the influential men left in the town declared themselves in favour of the principle of segregation, but their ideas on the subject were generally crude, and few, if any, of them were recon-ciled to the application of it to persons of their own position in life. Another fact to be reckoned with was that a section of the Brhmin community, including some of the most influential men in the city, were disinclined to support any measures that emanated from an official source, and were more likely than not to work against any operations that might be set on foot by Government to deal with the emergency. Another important factor, too, in the situation was the state of the labour market. Many labourers were leaving the town on account of the epidemic, and owing to the panic-that prevailed those who remained could not be relied on to work regularly, especially if there was an element of danger in the work to be done. It was difficult, therefore, to carry on lime washing and other measures of disinfection on a large scale with private labour. Under these circumstances it would have been unsafe to attempt to carry out any extensive operations against the plague without a disciplined and reliable agency. It was of the atmost importance to crush the epidemic with the least possible delay, both to stay the
92 great mortality that was taking place in Poona and to prevent the spread of the disease to the other towns of the Deccan, in none of which had it so far attained epidemic proportions." 8. The result of the recommendations referred to in paragraphs 2-6 above was that Mr Rand and Dr. Beveridge went together to Bombay with a scheme for plague operations in Poona. This scheme was discussed with His Excellency the Governor. The two senior Hongkong Doctors, Surgeon-Major Reade and Dr. Lowson, who had been appointed Joint Plague Commissioners for the whole Presidency, were also called into consultation. Mr. Rand and Dr. Beveridge then returned to Poona to make arrangements for bringing the scheme into operation. Drs. Reade and Lowson followed them to help and advise. His Excellency the Governor himself proceeded to Poona in the first week of March, and on the 8th addressed a meeting in the Collector's office. In the course of his speech His Excellency said that the increase in the death-rate had made it necessary to search out cases of plague and treat them in hospital; those who sought to conceal cases were only adding to the danger and exposing themselves and their friends to the risk of certain death. Large numbers of people had been leaving the city on account of the rumours which were prevalent as to the measures to be adopted. He wished to allay those fears, and hoped that those present would assist him by explaining to their countrymen what house-to-house visitation meant and why it was being done. He wished to impress on the people that what was being done was for their good and that the treatment in the hospitals was for their good, and that the treatment there was humane and kind. Persons who were asked to leave their houses would be provided with accommodation and supplied with food if they wished it. Every consideration would be shown to females, and their privacy would not be interfered with except by females. Special orders had been issued to secure this. Certain native gentlemen had been asked to accompany the search parties and explain to the people what was the object of carrying out the searches. Where it was necessary to destroy property, the owners would be indemnified for any loss they might suffer. He was glad to see so many leading native gentlemen present, and among them Mr. Tilak, who was a member of his Council. He thought it was Mr. Tilak's duty as a Member of Council to explain what was required of the people. He also desired the Muhammadan gentlemen present to explain to their co-religionists the orders which had been issued for the protection of the privacy of their females, and for showing consideration to them in the searches. The authorities were trying to work with the people and not against them, and he hoped that the people would appreciate the gravity of the situation and come forward to help the authorities in their work. As regards the hospitals he wished to tell them that those who were taken there could have a friend to accompany them there, and they should be encouraged to keep up communication with those outside. A hospital was not a prison, but was designed to make the life of the patient more comfortable. Though it was not possible to admit a large number of friends to the hospital, one at least should be encouraged to come to ascertain what was actually being done for the sufferer, and to see for himself if the accommodation was satisfactory. The gentlemen who accompanied the search parties would be able to render the most valuable assistance, and all their expenses in the way of carriage, &c., would be paid for them to encourage them to come. 9. His Excellency also availed himself of the opportunity during this visit to Poona to impress the same points on the authorities, especially insisting on the necessity of securing the co-operation of the leading native gentlemen, of having ladies to accompany the search parties, and of doing all that was possible to ensure that the caste and religious usages of the people should be respected. 10. In a letter addressed to Mr. Rand on March 10th the Private Secretary to His Excellency again drew his attention to the same points. Soldiers by themselves were not to be employed for search parties, for the views of the Hongkong doctors had to be adapted to the circumstances of this country. Although, therefore, there was no objection to soldiers working by themselves for ventilating, cleansing, and disinfecting work, no search party should work without a respectable native to be the interpreter, and to explain the object of the visit. No house should be entered by the soldiers without giving the occupants due notice,
93 and in the case of Muhammadans and the higher caste Hindus no women should be examined and no women's apartments entered except by a woman. The letter continued: "The most careful, thorough and earnest attempt must be made to work with and not against the people. Mr. Padamji, the President of the Municipality, the Chairman of the Managing Committee, Mr. Plunkett, and others can give you much information and pro- bably much assistance. Lastly, His Excellency desires to suggest for your consideration that you should take some of the leading natives into your confidence, and for example in the evening of one day explain to them and ask their co-operation with the measures to be taken the following day. They would be useful in explaining to the people the necessity for segregation, and ample explanation is in his opinion essential. I am to explain that His Excellency's meaning throughout is that you should use the natives, should try and induce them to work with you and on behalf of Government." 11. In ordinary times the Cantonment, the Suburban area and the City are managed by separate bodies, though they are in reality only different parts of the same town. For plague purposes it was advisable to place them under one central organisation, or else, as the Collector had pointed out, the localities not under the control of the Plague authorities would be inundated with fugitives from the parts where the plague operations were being carried out. Accord- ingly a Special Plague Committee was appointed by Government Resolution No. 1272-765-P., dated 9th March, composed of the following gentlemen: Mr. W. C. Rand, I. C. S.,-Chairman. Lieutenant-Colonel C. R. Phillipps. Surgeon-Captain W. W. O. Beveridge, A. M. S. The scope of their duties, and the powers conferred on them for their execution, are described in the following notification: "In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and of the powers in this behalf conferred by the Governor General in Council under Section 2, sub-section (3), of the same Act, the Governor in Council is pleased to direct as follows:- 1. The following gentlemen are constituted a Committee for the purpose of carrying out, under the orders of Government, the measures to be taken to suppress and prevent the spread of bubonic plague within the limits of the City and Suburban Municipalities of Poona and the Poona Cantonment: Mr. W. C. Rand, I. C. S.,-Chairman. Lieutenant-Colonel C. R. Phillipps. Surgeon-Captain W. W. O. Beveridge. 2. For the purposes of plague operations, the Committee shall exercise authority and control over the whole establishments of the City and Suburban Municipalities of Poona and the Poona Cantonment Committee. They may add to those establishments to such extent as they think necessary and may remove from them any persons whom they consider unfit for their posts. 3. The Committee may temporarily either rescind, suspend, alter or modify any bye-law, rule or order already made or issued by either of the City and Suburban Municipalities of Poona or the Poona Cantonment Committee, or by any Committee appointed by either of the said bodies, to such extent as they consider necessary or advisable in order to suppress and prevent the spread of the plague. 4. The Committee may incur such expenditure out of the funds of the Municipalities and the Cantonment Committee as they may consider necessary for the performance of their duties, and in order that sufficient funds may be available for plague operations they may control the expenditure of the Municipalities and the Cantonment Committee on objects unconnected with the plague. 5. The Committee may cause any building or enclosure to be entered and searched for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the inmates or occupants are suffering from the plague or whether any corpse is concealed therein, and may cause any persons found therein to be examined in order to ascertain whether any of them are suffering from the plague. They may further cause any person to be detained for medica examination and segregate, in such place as they may appoint for the purpose, any person found or suspected, after examination by a Medical officer, to be suffering from the plague. 6. If the Committee have reason to believe that any building is or has recently been occupied by a sufferer from the plague or that any death which has not been B 1135-24-
94 certified by a Medical officer holding Her Majesty's Commission, or some other Medical officer empowered by the Committee to certify in this behalf, to be due to some cause other than the plague, has occurred in any building, the Committee may cause the inmates of such building to be segregated in such place as they may appoint for a period not exceeding ten days, and may prevent such building from being used as a human habitation in the meanwhile. 7. If the Committee are of opinion that any building is in such an insanitary condition as to be unfit for human habitation, they may prohibit the further use of such building as a dwelling house. When such prohibition has been made, no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the Committee give him permission in this behalf. For the purpose of enforcing this regulation, the Committee may, if necessary, forcibly remove or cause to be removed any person from such building. 8. If it shall appear to the Committee that any building used as a dwelling is so overcrowded as to endanger the health of the inmates thereof, they may by written order require the owner or occupier of the building, within a period to be fixed by the Committee, to abate the overcrowding thereof by reducing the number of inmates thereof. For the purpose of enforcing this regulation the Committee may, if necessary, at the expiration of the time prescribed in the written order, forcibly remove or cause to be removed such and so many of the inmates of the building as shall seem to them proper. 9. In the case of any building ordered to be vacated under Rule 6, 7, or 8, and in the case of any other building or enclosure which may appear to them to be in a filthy or insanitary condition, the Committee may require the owner or occupier to carry out, or may of their own motion carry out, such measures as may seem to them necessary for the purpose of cleansing, ventilating or disinfecting such building or enclosure, and for the purpose of such cleansing, ventilating or disinfecting may, if necessary, forcibly break open and enter any such building or enclosure, and may remove and disinfect or destroy any articles found therein. 10. The Committee are empowered to remove or burn any huts or temporary erections in which a case of plague is believed by them to have occurred. 11. The Committee are empowered to make regulations, when they deem necessary, for the purpose of enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain depth and for requiring that quicklime be placed with the corpse; and may prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than that specially assigned by them for such purpose. 12. The Committee may for the purpose of military camps, segregation camps, hospitals, burial grounds, warehouses or offices take possession of and occupy any vacant ground or building either within or without the limits of the City and Suburban Municipalities of Poona and the Poona Cantonment, such compensation being afterwards made to the owner or occupier thereof as may be awarded by a Panch constituted as provided in Rule 13. 13. For the property destroyed under Rule 9, no compensation shall be payable to the owner. No property shall be destroyed under Rule 10, until the value of it has been assessed by a Panch consisting of the Poona City Magistrate and two other members appointed by him. The award of the Panch shall be final and conclusive. 14. The Committee are empowered to temporarily impress carts or other vehicles ordinarily let for hire with the beasts necessary to draw them and labourers or coolies, and to make payments for the same at rates fixed by the Committee. 15. The City and Suburban Municipalities of Poona, the Poona Cantonment Committee, and all the officers and servants of those Municipalities and of that Committee, and all public servants and all persons employed by the Committee, shall carry into effect, without delay, any measures which may be ordered by the Committee. 16. On the requisition of the Committee, the District Superintendent of Police Poona, shall give such assistance as may be necessary in order to enforce immediate compliance with any order of the Committee. 17. The principal occupant of a house or building or the principal surviving member of a family shall give immediate information to the Secretary of the Municipality or Cantonment within the limits of which the house or building is situated of the occurrence in the house or building, or amongst the members of the family, of- (a) any sickness due or likely to be due to plague, (b) any death, whatever may be the cause of it. 18. On receipt of information of any death, the Secretary shall immediately register the death and give the informant a certificate that the death has been registered.
95 19. It shall not be lawful to carry any corpse to the place of cremation or burial unless the bearers are in possession of a certificate given under Rule 18 that the death has been registered. In the event of a corpse being carried in contravention of this rule all persons acting under the orders of the Committee and all policemen on duty are empowered to demand the name, sex, age, caste and residence of the deceased and to detain one of the funeral party until the information is truly given. 20. All expenses incurred in carrying out any of the measures hereby authorized shall, in the first instance, be paid out of the Municipal funds of the City and Suburban Municipalities of Poona and the Poona Cantonment Fund in such proportions as the Committee may determine, but the Committee may recover from any person any amount which such person would, under similar circumstances, be liable to pay to either of the said Municipalities or to the Cantonment Committee under any law for the time being in force. 21. The powers conferred upon the Committee by these rules may be exercised by such persons as they may from time to time empower in that behalf. All persons so empowered will, however, act subject to the control of the Committee. 22. Disobedience to any orders issued under these rules by the Committee or any per- son acting under their authority will subject the offender to a prosecution under Section 188, Indian Penal Code." 12. All necessary arrangements having been made, volunteers for plague duty were called for, after consultation with the military authorities, from among the native and British troops stationed in Poona and Kirkee. With reference to this Mr. Rand, in the report drafted before his death, remarked: "The call was readily responded to, and it was found that many more volunteers than were likely to be required were willing to come forward. A plague duty camp was accordingly form- ed at Parvati, on the Sinhgad road, and 893 officers and men, British and native, under the command of Major Paget of the Durham Light Infantry, were placed on plague duty on 12th March 1897. Of these, 122 officers and men where posted as guards at the hospitals and segregation camps, and the remainder went into the plague duty camp at Parvati." 13. The plan of operations comprised :- (1) The removal of the plague-stricken to hospitals. (2) The removal of persons who were apparently healthy, but had been exposed to plague infection, to segregation camps. (3) The disinfection of houses and moveable property which had been exposed to infection. Hospitals. 14. Five plague hospitals were in use during the plague operations, one each for the Hindu, Prsi, and Muhammadan communities, the Sassoon Hospital for Europeans and observation cases, and the General Hospital for all other persons. 15. The caste hospitals were under the management of the communities who had established them, but in the case of the Hindu hospital an entrance fee of Rs. 10 and a daily fee of one rupee for food, &c., placed it beyond the means of all but the well-to-do. At the General Hospital, Muhammadans were admitted at the beginning of April, when their own hospital was full. 16 The Prsi community enjoyed almost complete immunity from the epidemic. Mr. Rand remarked in his report on their hospital: "The hospital is a model one and reflects the highest credit on the Prsi community. That it has remained for the most part empty (there was only one case) they would doubtless consider a matter of congratulation." Segregation Camps. 17. The segregation camps were a special feature of the Poona campaign. "The object," wrote Mr. Rand, " of segregating the apparently healthy inmates of plague-infected houses was twofold. First and principally, to prevent those of them in whom plague was in a state of incubation from developing the disease in private houses and becoming fresh plague centres; secondly, to insure the non-occupation of plague infected buldings till the build- ings had been thoroughly disinfected. Ten days was fixed as the maximum period of detention, as that was believed to be the longest term for which the malady commonly remained in a state of incubation in a human being."
96 18. Lieutenant Owen Lewis of the 19th Bombay Infantry was appointed segregation officer, in general charge of all the operations conducted under this head. Segregation parties accompanied the search parties to remove the healthy inmates of houses in which cases of plague were discovered. Much difficulty was experienced in the performance of this work, as the other inmates of a house in which there was a sick man soon adopted the method of absenting themselves at the time of day when a visit from the segregating party might be expected. 19. Four segregation camps were erected, one for Muhammadans, one for Parsis, one for the Cantonment, and a general camp. An attempt to induce people to live in segregation camps by the offer of free food proved ineffectual. Mr. Rand was at first not without hopes that compulsion would not be neces- sary. He stated: " When I arrived in Poona so much of the camp as was then in existence was open to any of the inmates of infected houses that chose to come there. There was then no agency to compel people to come to the camp, and hardly any came there of their own accord. After my arrival and before the employment of the military on plague duty, I endeavoured to attract the inhabitants of plague houses to the camp by offering one free meal a day to every one in camp, and at the same time allowing the inmates to return to the city in the day-time to follow their ordinary avocations. Even this inducement failed to bring any considerable number of people to the camp, and I was forced to realise that a non-compulsory system of segregation was impracticable in Poona." 20. In all 3,077 persons were detained in the camps, of whom 36 were found to be suffering from plague. The persons detained in camp are said to have improved in condition during their stay, no doubt owing to the healthy conditions of the life in the open, combined with good and abundant food. Free food was given, in practice, to almost all the inmates of the camps. Search Parties. 21. The necessity of employing British soldiers on plague duty being agreed on, the difficulty which the Plague Committee had to face was how to minimise the annoyance which their employment would necessarily cause to the people. The Hindus of Poona are notoriously conservative in their customs, and Muhammadans everywhere resent any interference with their domestic privacy. The only way by which the efficiency of the British soldier could be made use of, and at the same time the prejudices of the native population conciliated, was by inducing respectable natives to accompany the men on their rounds. 22. With this idea Mr. Rand called a meeting of the leading native gentle- men on 11th March, and succeeded in enrolling 51 volunteers for this work. The services of additional native gentlemen were also advertised for on March 12th and 16th. They were required to point out to the British soldiers the cook-rooms and god-rooms of the houses searched, to prevent the troops through ignorance of the customs of the country unintentionally hurting the susceptibilities of the natives in these matters. The case of purdah women was met by attaching ladies to each party for the purpose of searching the women's apartments. The work began on March 13th and ended on May 19th. The details of the system are fully described in the report of the Chairman. His general remarks on the working of the system were as follows: "The attitude of the inhabitants of the city towards the search parties was on the whole friendly, though people who had sick in their houses usually tried to conceal them. The Brhmin community was the only one whose behaviour towards the troops employed was generally unfriendly. In the Brhmin quarters the troops met with a good deal of obstruc- tion, which, however, always stopped short of forcible resistance. Of the native gentlemen who volunteered to accompany the search parties, the majority did not attend regularly and some did not attend at all. Of the gentlemen who have rendered the best service, the majority are retired native officers." 23. In all 218,124 houses were searched, and 338 plague cases and 64 corpses were discovered. Every house in the city was searched on an average eleven times, and even in his first report of progress Mr. Rand noted that the search had the effect of making people report cases or remove them to hospital voluntarily.
97 24.    For the purposes of the search the whole city was divided up into sections and divisions, and to avoid unnecessarily alarming the people, operations were commenced on a smaller scale than that adopted  at a later period.    When the number  of parties was increased on March 22nd, and the native gentlemen who had promised their services failed to attend in sufficient numbers, it became impossible to have one in attendance on each party.    Two or three, therefore, accompanied each division : although 51 had given in their names, Mr. Rand reported that the average number that attended seldom exceeded 20. 25.    At one time the experiment was tried of having two searches a day, but it was found that this was more than the men could do ; their camp was at a distance of 2 or 3 miles from the scene of the operations, and the  work itself was of a laborious and exhausting nature. 26.    A general idea of the system followed will be gathered from the following report, the first of the weekly reports submitted to Government by Mr. Rand during his work in Poona : "Dated 25th March 1897. "With reference to Government circular No. 1095-572-p. of the 1st instant, I have the honour to submit the requisite weekly report for the week ending 19th March 1897. The military were employed on anti-plague operations in the city of Poona on the 13th instant and on each subsequent day except Sunday. On each day 20 search  parties, 20 fumigation parties, and 20 limewashing parties worked in the city. Search parties consisted of three British soldiers, fumigation parties of one British and two native soldiers, and limewashing parties of three British  and one native soldier. The parties were arranged in divisions, each consisting of ten parties and under the command of an officer. Native gentlemen were attached to the search parties, as were European and native ladies, most of whom possessed some medical experience. The house-to-house inspection of the search parties resulted in a fair number of cases being detected and sent to hospital. The principal result of the house-to-house inspection has been that a substantial proportion of the plague cases that occur in the city are voluntarily brought to hospital by the relatives of the sick person. The behaviour of the troops employed has been excellent, and only a few complaints have been made against them. In addition to the work of the military, search for cases is conducted by the Municipal Hospital Assistants under the supervision of Surgeon-Captain Lloyd Jones. Within suburban municipal limits medical inspection of passengers entering and leaving Poona was made at the railway station. Prepa- rations were made for house-to-house inspection with the aid of the military. In Poona Cantonment two military search parties were employed from the 18th instant. From Kirkee Cantonment no changes in the arrangements for dealing with  the plague have been reported." 27.    From this time the operations progressed smoothly, and a reduction in the death-rate  became apparent in the  beginning   of   April.     On  April  11th Mr. Rand reported that pickets and cavalry patrols had been posted on the roads leading out of Poona, and had detected several plague cases which were being con- veyed from the city by night.    At the same time he said that the Medical officers were of opinion that the epidemic was assuming a milder form.    This was borne out by the fact  that the  proportion of patients  discharged  cured from  the hospitals was increasing. 28.    The steady decrease in the mortality is shown in the following table :-  Period. Plague deaths  reported. Total mortality. March  1-10 202  615 *,,     10-20 241 517     ,, 21-31 313 524 April  1-10 218 328 ,,     11-20 132 206 ,,      21-30 66 109 May    1-10 22 59 ,,      11-20 16 53 29. As regards the actual mortality which had taken place from plague, Mr. Rand points out that the recorded figures of plague cases are little guide, as in the early period no attempt at securing accurate returns had been made by the * Plague Committee's operations began on a small scale on March 13th, but the number of parties was increased on March 22nd. B   1135-25+
98 Municipality. He gives the following table from which an approximate estimate can be obtained of the true plague mortality. The population of Poona City is 118,790 with a density of 24,242 persons to the square mile:  Month. Quinquennial average. Actual. Difference. December        261 270 9 January 261 497 236 February 225 1,009 784 March      244 1,656 1,412 April 1st to 20th 178 534 356 Add - reported plague deaths down    to May 20th, from April 2lst   ... ... 104 Total Estimated Plague Mortality     2,901  30.    On these figures Mr. Rand remarks : "The estimate of the total plague mortality thus arrived at is probably too low rather than too high. In the first place it has to be remembered that the general health, apart from plague, was good throughout the epidemic. Another cause that operated to keep down mortality during the period the military search parties were employed was the removal of sick persons from the city into the surrounding villages. I believe that this practice did much to lower the general mortality of the city, and it certainly accounts to a great extent for the exceptional lowness of the mortality from causes other than plague during the period from April 21st to May 20th." 31.    A fact which Mr. Rand omitted to take into consideration would lend additional strength to his argument for placing the plague mortality so far above the recorded deaths from plague.    Even before the house-to-house inspections had begun, he had himself reported that fear of the plague itself was driving numbers of people away from the city.    The experience of Bombay was that the period of the greatest exodus corresponded, not with the period (March) of the most vigorous measures for its suppression,  but with the period  (January)  of the greatest severity of the epidemic.    The  Collector  of Ahmednagar  also reports that as early as the third week of February, the city of Ahmednagar was being flooded with increasing numbers of  fugitives from Poona.    The actual population of Poona City during the latter half of February up to the end of the fine season  was certainly far below the census population, on which the average death-rate was calculated. Compensation. 32.    In the month of May the attention of the Government of India was attracted by a statement in the Press that the granting of compensation for articles destroyed during the plague operations in Poona City was not conducted  on such liberal terms as in Bombay.    The Chairman of the Poona Plague Committee being asked to report on the system actually followed, replied on May 14th as follows : "Of the rules sanctioned for Poona City in Government Resolution No. 1272-765-P. of March 9th, 1897, No. 9 empowers the Committee to destroy articles found in infected, insanitary or overcrowded buildings, while No. 13 provides that no compensation shall be payable to the owner for property destroyed under Rule 9. The soldiers, who enter private houses in the performance of their duties in connection with the operations, belong either to search, fumigation, or limewashing parties. Search parties are forbidden by the orders of the Plague Committee to destroy any property except the mats or bedding of plague patients. The mats or bedding are in practice destroyed in the presence of the Medical officer who accompanies the search division. The Medical officers are supplied with cash for the purpose of enabling them to pay compensation on the spot for articles destroyed.  Fumigation parties are forbidden to destroy any property whatever. Limewashing parties are instructed to burn all rubbish found in the houses which they limewash, but are forbidden to destroy property of any value to the inmates except under the orders of a Medical officer. In order to guard against any undue destruction of property as rubbish officers commanding limewashing divisions have been ordered to visit as far as possible all houses which are limewashed and
99  decide what should be destroyed, and, when property of any value to the owners is destroyed, to note the approximate cost of replacing what has been destroyed in order that compensation may afterwards be paid. In practice nothing is destroyed except in the pre- sence of a Medical or Military officer, and when property of any value is reported by an officer to have been destroyed, compensation is paid if the owner is a poor man. In this matter the Committee have followed the instructions contained in Government Resolution No. 1759-1228-P. of 31st March 1897, General Department.     The Committee have done their utmost to impress on everybody connected with the operations that property of any value to the owners is not to be destroyed unless the Medical officer declares it to be necessary to do so, and they believe that except perhaps during the first few days of the operations, when the men did not perfectly understand what they had to do, very little of substantial market value, except infected bedding, has been burnt."      The report concluded by stating that in the case of the poorest classes where old clothes, &c., of little or no market value, but still of some use to such people, had been burnt, it was the intention of the Committee to pay a small fixed sum as compensation to all householders of the labouring classes whose house articles had been destroyed during the operations.      33.  Section 14 of Mr. Rand's report relates to the conduct of the troops employed on plague work in Poona.    It shows that the closest watch was kept on the troops by their officers, especially in the case of the search parties; and that the men themselves showed the utmost consideration for the customs and prejudices of the people.  Persons who had any complaints to make were directed to make them on the spot to the officer in charge of the men.  Mr. Rand notes that no allegation was ever made to the Plague Committee that any officer failed to inquire into a reasonable complaint presented to him.  He remarks:     "It was a matter of great satisfaction to the members of the Plague Committee that no credible complaint that the modesty of a woman had been intentionally insulted was ever made either to themselves or to the officers under whom the troops worked."      34.  At the end of his report on the history of plague administration in Poona, Mr. Rand remarked as follows:     "In conclusion, I would record my opinion that if a reasonably high standard of sanita- tion is to be maintained in the City of Poona and the work that has been done there under Surgeon-Major Barry's supervision is to have lasting results, European control will for some time be absolutely necessary. The exact shape that control should take is a matter of detail, but I am convinced of the futility of expecting that the sanitation of the city will be better in the near future than it has been in the past unless it is under the direction of a supervising authority that possesses practical knowledge and appreciation of European standards of cleanliness."                         Cantonment and Suburban Limits.      35.  Operations similar to those conducted in the city of Poona were at the same time carried on in the Cantonment and in the Suburban Municipal district, the work being directed in the former by Colonel Newnham-Smith, Can- tonment Magistrate, and in the latter by Mr. Plunkett, C.I.E., City Magistrate. In both cases native gentlemen gave valuable assistance and there was an absence of friction.                                   Other Measures.      36.  The measures for examining persons arriving in Poona by train from the direction of Bombay have been already mentioned.       The inspection was taken over by Government from March 21st.    An inspection of persons leaving Poona by rail was also instituted on February 20th.   For a few days in March the experiment was tried of stopping 3rd class booking, except in the case of persons possessing passes, at Poona and other railway stations in the neigh- bourhood; but the difficulties were found to be considerable, and the experiment was speedily abandoned.      37. From March 29th the chief roads leading out of Poona were patrolled  by troops.  By this means 103 plague cases and 23 corpses which were being  carried out of the city were interrupted.      38.  The villages in the neighbourhood of Poona were thoroughly searched  at the end of April, but no plague cases were discovered.       As already mentioned, His Excellency the Governor paid two visits to Poona  before the appointment of the Plague Committee.   Thereafter he was constantly
?100 in communication by letter with Mr. Rand, with whom he also had interviews in Poona on March 26th, April 4th, April 22nd, and May 22nd. In the course of his visits he inspected the plague hospitals and segregation camps, had con- sultations with some of the leading members of the native community, made special inquiries regarding the operations, and addressed the soldiers employed on plague duty. He at all times urged the necessity for gentleness and con- sideration in dealing with the people. 39. The late Mr. W. C. Rand had drafted the greater part of an able and comprehensive report on plague operations in Poona before his murder in June 1897. This report will be separately published. SECTION III. The Karchi Plague Committee. 1. Regarding the appointment of this Committee, Mr. A. Wingate, C.I.E., I.C.S., Commissioner in Sind, makes the following remarks in his general plague report: "On the 20th March, His Excellency the Governor of Bombay, Lord Sandhurst, G.C.I.E., arrived, and, after inspecting all that had been done, appointed a Plague Committee for Karchi, consisting of Brigadier-General T. A. Cooke, Commanding Sind District, as President, with the Collector, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, and Mr. Strachan, of the Municipality, as Members, though the last-named was added a day or two later. This measure was like the relief of a beleaguered garrison. Not only did His Excellency's approval encourage everyone, but the General immediately threw himself heart and soul into the work, brought to bear the whole strength of the military, with unlimited officers and men and habits of rigid discipline on the existing material, and soon had the population under thorough control. In their first sittings, the Committee had the advantage of the counsel of Surgeon-Major Reade, one of the Joint Presidency Plague Commissioners. He suggested the bathing and disinfecting sheds for arrivals at each camp, the disinfection of all bundles and baggage brought to the camp, and similar arrangements on leaving. These suggestions were most carefully elaborated by the Plague Committee. Disinfection of the person and personal clothing had previous to this been in the background, the getting of sick and healthy out of the infected houses, and the disinfecting and cleaning of those houses absorbing all the time of the workers. Now immediate transference to hospital and camp was working smoothly, and it was possible to perfect that control of the camps to which Surgeon-General Cleghorn had invited attention. This thorough and painstaking disinfection of the clothing and bathing of the persons in tubs with a mixture of Jeye's fluid in the water soon extended up-country with marked effect. On the 25th March, the first Military search party went out. It was very carefully organised and admirably managed, the civil officers accompanied by medical men taking charge of each party. The General had carefully instructed the men, and from that day forward there was no need for the slightest apprehension, either that the soldiers would not deal tenderly, or that the people would not welcome them. Not a complaint was ever preferred." 2. The Government Notification appointing the Committee was as fol- lows:- "GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 24th March 1897. No. 1650-1112-P.-In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and of the powers in this behalf conferred by the Governor General in Council under Section 2, sub-section (3), of the same Act, the Governor in Council is pleased to direct as follows:- 1. The following gentlemen are constituted a Committee for the purpose of carrying out, under the orders of the Commissioner in Sind, the measures to be taken to suppress and prevent the spread of Bubonic Plague within the limits of the Municipality of Karchi and the Karchi Cantonment:- Brigadier-General T. A. Cooke-President. Mr. R. Giles, Collector of Karchi. Surgeon-Captain H. C. L. Arnim, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Sind Registration District. Mr. J. Strachan, M.I.C.E, Engineer and Secretary, Karchi Municipality. 2. For the purpose of plague operations, the Committee shall exercise authority and control over the whole establishments of the Municipality of Karchi and the Karchi Canton- ment Committee. They may add to those establishments to such extent as they think necessary, and may remove from them any persons whom they consider unfit for their posts.
?101 3. The Committee may temporarily either rescind, suspend, alter, or modify any bye-law, rule, or order already made or issued by the Municipality of Karchi or the Karchi Canton- ment Committee, or by any committee appointed by either of the said bodies, to such extent as they consider necessary or advisable in order to suppress and prevent the spread of the plague. 4. The Committee may incur such expenditure out of the funds of the Municipality and the Cantonment Committee as they may consider necessary for the performance of their duties, and in order that sufficient funds may be available for plague operations, they may control the expenditure of the Municipality and the Cantonment Committee on objects unconnected with the plague. 5. The Committee may cause any building or enclosure to be entered and searched for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the immates or occupants are suffering from the plague, or whether any corpse is concealed therein, and may cause any persons found therein to be examined in order to ascertain whether any of them are suffering from the plague. They may further cause any person to be detained for medical examination, and segregate, in such place as they may appoint for the purpose, any person found or suspected, after examination by a Medical officer, to be suffering from the plague. 6. If the Committee have reason to believe that any building is or has recently been occupied by a sufferer from the plague, or that any death which has not been certified by a Medical officer holding Her Majesty's Commission, or some other Medical officer empowered by the Committee to certify in this behalf, to be due to some cause other than the plague, has occurred in any building, the Committee may cause the inmates of such building to be segre- gated in such place as they may appoint for a period not exceeding ten days, and may prevent such building from being used as a human habitation in the meanwhile. 7. If the Committee are of opinion that any building is in such an insanitary condition as to be unfit for human habitation, they may prohibit the further use of such building as a dwelling-house. When such prohibition has been made, no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the Committee give him permission in this behalf, For the purpose of enforcing this regulation, the Committee may, if necessary, forcibly remove or cause to be removed any person from such building. 8. If it shall appear to the Committee that any building used as a dwelling is so overcrowded as to endanger the health of the inmates thereof, they may, by written order, require the owner or occupier of the building, within a period to be fixed by the Committee, to abate the overcrowding thereof by reducing the number of inmates thereof. For the purpose of enforcing this regulation, the Committee may, if necessary, at the expiration of the time prescribed in the written order, forcibly remove or cause to be removed such and so many of the inmates of the building as shall seem to them proper. 9. In the case of any building ordered to be vacated under Rules 6, 7 or 8, and in the case of any other building or enclosure which may appear to them to be in a filthy or insanitary condition, the Committee may require the owner or occupier to carry out, or may of their own motion carry out, such measures as may seem to them necessary for the purpose of cleansing, ventilating, or disinfecting such building or enclosure, and for the purpose of such cleansing, ventilating; or disinfecting may, if -necessary, forcibly break open and enter any such building or enclosure, and may remove and disinfect or destroy any articles found therein. 10. The Committee are empowered to remove or burn any huts or temporary erections in which a case of plague is believed by them to have occurred. 11. The Committee are empowered to make regulations, when they deem necessary, for the purpose of enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain depth, and for requiring that quicklime be placed with the corpse; and may prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than that specially assigned by them for such purpose. 12. The Committee may, for the purpose of military camps, segregation camps, hospi- tals, burial-grounds, warehouses or offices, take possession of and occupy any vacant ground or building either within or without the limits of the Municipality of Karchi and th Karchi Cantonment, such compensation being afterwards made to the owner or occupier thereof as may be awarded by a ' Panch' constituted as provided in Rule 13. 13. For property destroyed under Rule 9, no compensation shall be payable to the owner. No property shall be destroyed under Rule 10, until the value of it has been assessed by a ' Panch,' consisting of the Karchi City Magistrate and two other members appointed by him. The award of the ' Panch ' shall be final and conclusive. 14. The Committee are empowered to temporarily impress carts or other vehicles ordinarily let for hire, with the beasts necessary to draw them, and labourers or coolies, and to make payments for the same at rates fixed by the Committee. B 1135 -26
?102 15. The Municipality of Karchi, the Karchi Cantonment Committee, and all the officers and servants of that Municipality and of that Committee, and all public servants and all persons employed by the Committee, shall carry into effect, without delay, any mea- sures which may be ordered by the Committee. 16. On the requisition of the Committee, the District Superintendent of Police, Karchi, shall give such assistance as may be necessary in order to enforce immediate com- pliance with any order of the Committee. 17. The principal occupant of a house or building, or the principal surviving member of a family, shall give immediate information to the Secretary of the Municipality or Can- tonment, within the limits of which the house or building is situated, of the occurrence in the house or building, or amongst the members of the family, of- (a) any sickness due or likely to be due to plague, (b) any death, whatever may be the cause of it. 18. On receipt of information of any death, the Secretary shall immediately register the death and give the informant a certificate that the death has been registered. 19. It shall not be lawful to carry any corpse to the place of cremation or burial unless the bearers are in possession of a certificate given under Rule 18 that the death has been registered. In the event of a corpse being carried in contravention of this rule, all per- sons acting under the orders of the Committee, and all policemen on duty, are empowered to demand the name, sex, age, caste and residence of the deceased, and to detain one of the funeral party until the information is truly given. 20. All expenses incurred in carrying out any of the measures hereby authorized shall, in the first instance, be paid out of the Municipal funds of the Municipality of Karchi and the Karchi Cantonment Fund, in such proportions as the Committee may determine; but the Committee may recover from any person any amount which such person would, under similar circumstances, be liable to pay to either the said Municipality, or to the Cantonment Committee, under any law for the time being in force. 21. The powers conferred upon the Committee by these rules may be exercised by such persons as they may from, time to time empower in this behalf. All persons so empowered will, however, act subject to the conditions of the Committee. 22. Disobedience to any orders issued under these rules by the Committee, or any person acting under their authority, will subject the offender to a prosecution under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code." 3. The report of this Committee will be separately published, but extracts therefrom are quoted below. 4. The Chairman of the Committee makes the following remarks regard- ing the first measures taken: " On the Plague Committee assuming charge of the administration, it must be allowed, in common justice to the Municipality, that they had made stringent efforts to fight with the disease. Various portions of the town had been cleared of its inhabitants and the people located in camps, and every effort made to cleanse and disinfect the 'infected areas' of the city: special attention being given to conservancy and all the streets, houses, alleys, courts, &c., of which the city is composed, thoroughly cleaned and looked after. Hospitals and segregation camps were arranged for and built in the 'Trans-Lyari' quarter, and stringent measures taken to alleviate matters. On assuming charge of the organization and administration of the City, Sadar Bazar, Cantonments and the outlying villages, &c., in the Trans-Lyari, the first steps taken by the Plague Committee were to re-divide the town into ten divisions, each division under a special- ly appointed Superintendent and subordinate staff-European soldiers and specially selected native officials, to arrange for more Medical officers, whose services were urgently required, and to add to the conservancy establishment, which was known to be quite inadequate for the work required, and which had been depleted by death and the desertion of the sweepers from fear of the plague." 5. Regarding the work of military search parties the following paragraphs are extracted from the Chairman's report: " The Committee generally decided to search a division of the town where most cases of the plague had been reported. Confidential orders were issued to the troops and to the Superinten- dent of the special division, who was requested to state the number of search parties required, viz. 4, 6 or 8, as the case might be: other Superintendents, Medical officers and medical sub- ordinates were warned, as a Superintendent, Medical officer or subordinate always accompanied each search party, as well as the officers in command. The Superintendent of the division searched was answerable for the following arrange- ments: extra dhoolies, if required, picks, red paint and brushes, hammers, lanterns, &c. Also a plan of his division made out into different portions for the use of the other Superintendents assisting in the search.
?103 Before daybreak on the following morning a 'cordon' of the 30th Bombay Infantry (Baluchis) was thrown round the area to be searched, so that ingress and egress was practically impossible. The search-parties and all officials concerned arrived at the named 'rendezvous' at the stated hour, and as soon as the Superintendents received their plan of the portion of the division to be searched, and the Medical officer or medical subordinate told off to each party, all moved off at once, and the search was quietly and successfully carried out. Most practical results resulted from these search parties, as the people never knew when their houses 'were going to be raided and 'concealed cases' found, and was the means, in due course, of making the inhabitants report cases of sickness, and thus avoid prosecution for con- travention of orders on this point." 6. Section III of the report regarding medical arrangements is quoted in full below: "The services of a certain number of Medical officers had already been obtained by the Commissioner in Sind for special plague work, but on the formation of the Committee, owing to the large area to be looked after, it was resolved that further medical aid should be obtained. Dr. Nicholson, M.D., a private practitioner in Karchi, was engaged, and Surgeons-Captain Bray, A.M.S., and Jenney, I.M.S., were obtained from the Quetta District, as well as the ser- vices of Surgeons-Captain Rivers and Fleury, A.M.S., kindly lent by the Principal Medical Officer, Sind District. The services of many extra hospital subordinates were also procured from the same source. I.-HOSPITALS AND SEGREGATION CAMPS. (a)-For Karchi Proper-City and Suburban areas. (b)-For the Trans-Lyari Division. (c)-For Keamari. (d)-For the Harbour, Manora, Baba, Bhit, Shamspir, Maripur, &c. (a) i.-Hospitals.-The Committee took over the working of the Civil Plague Hospital, the Runchore Camp Hospital, and the seven private caste hospitals (Parsis, Mehmons, Vishin- dass, Borahs, Sahta, Serai and Khojahs). The Civil Plague Hospital was in good working order, only needing strengthening of the nursing and subordinate staff. The Runchore Hospital was placed under a Commissioned Medical Officer, Surgeon-Captain Rivers, A.M.S., a European subordinate Medical officer, Mr. Corke, being in residential charge. The subordinate staff of the hospital was strengthened, the nursing and conservancy arrangements receiving special attention. A Medical officer, Surgeon-Lieutenant Rainier, I.M.S., was appointed to supervise the private caste hospitals and to enforce the rules drawn up for the proper conduct of these hospitals. The Machi-Meani Hospital, which had been very little used, was disinfected and closed, the camp attached to it being required for use as a detention camp. (a) ii.-Segregation Camps.-The segregation camps in the City and Suburban areas were scattered over the various spaces in and around the town. There were also private segregation camps attached to certain of the private hospitals. The Committee issued orders for the con- centration of all public segregation camps on two sites, viz., one near the Lawrence Road, the other near the Runchore Lines. This refers to the camps on the town side of the Lyari. Traus-Lyari and the six small segregation camps were left intact. These camps were supplied with a military guard and absolute segregation enforced during the ten days' detention. These segregation camps were utilized for the detention of persons removed from plague-infected houses. The camps were placed under the charge of Surgeon-Captain Rivers, A.M.S., with an efficient subordinate and disinfecting staff. The camps were self-contained, having their own shops, water-supplies, and conservancy staffs. A register was ordered to be kept of all persons detained; the residents of the camps were all disinfected on arrival and departure; a daily medical inspection was held, and persons showing signs of plague were removed to hospital, and the huts occupied by them disinfected. (b) i.-Trans-Lyari.-The Bagdadi Police Lines were converted into a very efficient Cen- tral Hospital, equipment, nursing staff, subordinate staff, &c., being provided. The hospital was under the charge of Surgeon-Lieutenant Cornwall, I.M.S., a qualified native subordinate and a female nurse being in residence. The Kalankote Hospital, situated at the eastern end of the Trans-Lyari Division, was a Camp Hospital. This was in charge of a subordinate Medical officer, under the Commissioned Medical Officer in charge, and possessed an efficient nursing and subordinate staff. The Khudda Hospital, at the western end of the Trans-Lyari Division, was similarly arranged to the above, as was also the Gulam Shah Village Hospital. In addition to the four hospitals above named, there were five small camp hospitals located in the vicinity of their respective villages. (b) ii.-Trans-Lyari.-Segregation camps, for the accommodation of persons removed under observation from infected houses, were erected at Bagdadi, Kalankote, 'Khudda,' Gul- mahomed's village, old Khumberwara and Shershar; later on these camps were placed under military guards. The internal arrangements were somewhat similar to those of the Lawrence Road and Runchore Camps described above.
?104 (c) i.-At Keamari the Committee found a hospital shed situated over a mile away from the village, at the foot of a sand-hill: the site was an unsuitable one. The segregation camp; situated some half a mile from the village, was similarly badly placed. The plague was so prevalent that, for the safety of the shipping arrangements in harbour (the Keamari village being mostly inhabited by Stevedores' coolies), immediate steps were taken by the Committee. A new hospital and segregation camp were selected, the site chosen being some new huts recently constructed east of Keamari. The huts and hospital were suitably equipped, an effi- cient staff collected, disinfecting arrangements, conservancy, &c., &c., receiving special attention. The hospital and camp were placed under a military guard. A new health camp of 255 huts including shops, bathing-ghauts, latrines, &c, &c, was erected south of the Keamari village;  this 'health camp' was also placed under a military guard. The persons, some 1,300 in num- ber, residing in old and new Keamari were then medically examined. Those found to be sick were sent to the Keamari Plague Hospital, persons residing in or near infected houses were regarded as 'suspected persons,' and were (after disinfection) ordered to be detained for ten days in the new segregation camp; the remaining healthy persons were then removed to the health camp noted above. The entire villages of old and new Keamari (a congerie of dirty, unhealthy huts,) were then burnt to the ground. Dr. M. A. Nicholson, M.D., and afterwards Surgeon-Captain Jenney, I.M.S., were in charge. (d) The Quarantine Hospital was equipped and placed under a qualified Medical officer for the accommodation of cases from Manora and Baba. At Bhit a special hospital was arranged for. The quarantine detention sheds were also utilized for the accommoda- tion of suspected persons. MARIPUR-SHAMSPIR. The plague never appeared at the Maripur (salt works) village. A cordon was placed round the village and steps taken to render the huts, privies, &c., clean and sanitary. Plague was reported from the fishing village of Shamspir on the 1st April; in all some 10 cases and 8 deaths had occurred on this spot. The Plague Committee visited Shamspir on Thursday, April 1st, when it was decided to destroy the wretched huts com- posing the village. The inhabitants, numbering 150 persons, were removed in boats to the Khudda; the sick being placed in the Khudda Hut Hospital, and the suspected in the segregation huts. The healthy persons were disinfected, together with all their belongings, and allowed to return to their houses in the Khudda village. II.-PRIVATE HOSPITAL AND SEGREGATION CAMPS. Previously to the formation of the Plague Committee, the headmen of certain communi- ties had requested sanction to provide hospital and segregation accommodation for the mem- bers of their respective castes. As at this period powers for compulsory isolation and segrega- tion did not exist, the request was encouraged, as it was hoped that it would result in a considerable reduction of the foci of the disease. A small Committee was formed and sanction given for the following caste hospitals, the sites of which were carefully inspected previously. A set of rules (vide Appendix) was- drawn up for the conduct of these establishments, and Surgeon-Lieutenant Rainier, I.M.S., was appointed to daily inspect the hospitals and advise the private practitioners in charge as to sanitary measures, disinfecting, &c. The following is a list of the private caste hospitals in existence at the time the Committee was assembled:- 1. Seth Vishindas Hospital, in Garden Quarter. 2. Borah Hospital and Segregation Camp, in Garden Quarter. 3. Memon Hospital and Segregation Camp, in Preedy Quarter. 4. Parsi Hospital and Segregation Camp, in Runchore Quarter. 5. Khojah Hospital and Segregation Camp, in Muchi-Meaui Quarter. 6. Sahta Hospital and Segregation Camp, in Lyari Quarter. 7. Serai Hospital and Segregation Camp, in Lyari Quarter. On the whole, these institutions were well conducted and all suggestions of the Inspect- ing Medical Officer promptly carried out; however, a doubt existed as to the strictness with which isolation and segregation were observed, After careful consideration of the subject, the Plague Committee resolved not to sanction the opening of any more private hospitals, and to gradually close those already in existence. As the accommodation of the public hos- pitals and segregation camps increased, and their arrangements improved, the need for these private hospitals ceased to exist; many of the persons entitled to use the private hospitals elected to bring their sick to the Government buildings. On June 25th only one of the Private Hospitals (Seth Vishindas') remains open, all the others having been gradually closed. III.-DETENTION CAMPS. The need for the detention, under medical supervision, of persons coming to Karchi from infected areas, presented itself to the Plague Committee in April. Appendix I shows the gradual improvement which had taken place in the plague incidence in Karchi, from the date the Plague Committee assumed charge of affairs; and it now became necessary to protect the town from fresh importations from without.
?105 This became especially necessary as the persons, who had fled from Karchi in large numbers on the first appearance of plague, were commencing to return in large numbers, many coming from badly-infected towns. The arrangements for protecting Karchi against the re-introdaction of the disease naturally grouped themselves under two heads- (a) Protective measures against infected arrivals by sea. (b) ,, ,, ,, by land. (a) Owing to the incidence of the disease in Cutch and Bombay -ports within one and two days' sail from Karchi -special measures were taken to prevent the introduction of fresh cases from these areas. A special Port Health Officer, Surgeon-Captain Jenney, I. M. S., with an efficient staff was appointed for the purpose of examining in-coming vessels and disposing of suspected passengers and baggage. Arrangements were made by which the entry of vessels into the harbour by night was forbidden. A hospital and segregation camp existed at Manora for the accommodation of plague cases or suspects arriving at or leaving the port. Large pendals at Manora accommodated 350 persons, while the Quarantine Hulk held 150 or more This accommodation, however, proved insufficient for the large numbers of persons returning by native craft (special steam- ers had been run for the convenience of the largely increased passenger traffic); so the Muchi- Meani Health Camp, accommodating 300, was taken into use for the detention of i ward passengers. Still this accommodation proved insufficient, and a request to Government asking it to control the exodus from Cutch being answered in the negative, it became necessary to make further arrangements. Three of the large export sheds at Keamari were lent to the Committee by the Karchi Port Trust; each shed having ample accommo- dation for 500 persons. Hence, the accommodation for passengers returning by sea pro- vided for a total of no less than 2,300 souls. Up to June 25th, 1897, no less than 9,699 persons were detained and disinfected in these camps. Each camp was complete in itself, and under the charge of qualified Medical officers and efficient subordinate staffs. Shops, bathing ghauts, permanent latrines, &c., &c., were arranged for. The camps were under military guards. The disinfecting arrangements, to which the minutest attention was paid, were carried out by European subordinates under the immediate supervision of the Medical officer in charge. Twice daily each person was medically inspected, and cases of plague were at once removed to the respective hospitals attached to the Camps, the suspected being placed in the segregation camps. Suspicious febrile cases were kept under observation in special observation wards. (b) By land, Karchi had to protect itself against the infected areas, of which Suk- kur, Rohri and Hyderabad were the centres. For this purpose a large camp was erected at Malir-a spot eight miles from Karchi on the Railway line; special arrangements were made with the Railway authorities to detain the trains here. pending the careful examina- tion of all passengers. Two Commissioned Medical Officers, Surgeon-Captain Bray, A.M.S., and Surgeon-Lieutenant Rainier, I. M. S., were in charge of the camp and train-inspection duties, with an efficient subordinate staff under them. Provision was also made for the examination of '?urda-nishin' ladies by a lady doctor. The Malir camp was opened on the 12th April 1897, with accommodation for 209 persons, provision being made for the separate housing of families and single men, the various castes, 'purda-nishin" families, &c. Due regard was also given to caste and sex in the drinking-water, bathing, latrine and cooking arrangements. The accommodation of this camp soon became insufficient and, pending the addition of extra huts, the excess people were brought into Karchi and sheltered at the Muchi-Miani camp. Eventually the Malir camp accommoda- tion was increased to 1,089. In addition to the arrangements noted above, it should be observed that hospital, dispensary, observation sheds, &c., were attached to the camp; shops for the sale of cooked and uncooked provisions, &c., &c. The whole camp was placed under a police guard. The mounted police cordon watching arrivals by road brought suspected persons to the Malir camp for detention. The detention period was ten days, and disinfection was most carefully carried out, both of persons and their personal effects. From the date of opening up to June 25th, 5,843 persons were detained in this camp and 9,394 persons and their belongings disinfected. The Medical officer in charge was given wide discretion with regard to detention of persons. Primarily, he was ordered to detain all coming from known infected areas and villages in their vicinity. Persons travelling from places without the province, or from uninfected areas within the province, were allowed to pass on, as were also persons provided with passes from the Collectors, Deputy Commissioners and Assistant Collectors. IV.-HEALTH CAMPS. A certain difference of opinion appears to exist as to the exact meaning of the words  'health camp.' In the early stage of the Karchi plague epidemic, several camps were opened, in and around the town, to which persons from badly infected areas were induced to migrate, partly with the hope that in cleanly and more salubr\ill\ous surroundings the d sease might disappear among them, and partly to facilitate the wholesale cleaning of the crowded portions of the native ? 1135-27\?\
106 city. Such camps were the Nusserpuri camps, the three Quarry camps, the camps at Sher- shah, Mora, and Amli Tallao, also the encampments at Muggir Pir, &-c. It may be safely denied that the above named camps were of the nature of health camps ; the persons using them were placed under no kind of restriction, being allowed to come and go as they pleased. No medical examination of persons entering these camps was enforced, no disinfection of persons, clothing, &c. The result was that plague soon appeared in the majority of these places, being conveyed thither by persons and infected clothing, and the so-called health camps speedily became plague-infected areas. There is no doubt that  the persons occupying these camps benefited by the improved sur- roundings and the consequent minimizing of the dangers of overcrowding. The sites to which the designation 'health camp' may be correctly applied are the temporary hut villages erected by the Plague Committee when dealing systematically with severe outbreaks in badly affected areas. Camps of this nature were erected at Keamari, Rambagh, Kalankote, Muchi-Miani, and other places. To shortly describe the system adopted in these health camps, attention may again be drawn to the action taken at Keamari village, also the measures adopted at the Rambagh and Kalankote. When the Plague Committee took Keamari in hand, the disease was prevalent in the old and new villages in a most virulent form. Scarcely a hut in this area, inhabited by 1,300 persons, could be declared free from in- fection. The Keamari health camp of 255 huts, with all necessary sanitary arrangements, having been built, and the camp being placed under a military guard, the healthy persons were, after careful medical examination, moved into it from the infected village. Before being allowed to enter the health camp, all persons and their be ongings were most carefully dis- infected by European subordinates under medical supervision. During  the month previous to the removal of the inhabitants of old and new Keamari to the health camp, cases of plague occurred in these villages. There were 76 cases and 62 deaths during this period. After removal to the health camp, only two cases of plague occurred among these people. These cases occurred within the incubation period of the disease, with the exception of two cases (among workmen permitted to leave the camp by day on passes), who became infected from outside sources. No local case occurred in the Keamari health camp. A most striking in- stance is also that of the Rambagh Tank Health Camp. Plague appeared among a community of some 200 persons inhabiting an isolated area, known as Nagirbai's compound. The incidence of the disease was so severe among these people that it was resolved to remove them to a health camp, which was elected to their accommodation, as rapidly as possible. The below-noted figures will show the satisfactory results of the steps taken : Plague appeared first in Nagirbai's compound on April 14th, 1897.  Cases. April  14th...  1 "    18th... 1 "    19th... 3 "    20th... 4 "    21st... 1 "   23rd... 3  "   24th... 4 "   30th... 1 May   1st... 4 "      2nd...  1 "     3rd... 4 "      4th... 1 On May 4th, after a most careful medical examination of the inhabitants, they were removed to the health camp, after minute  disinfection of themselves and their belongings ; the result was that after removal the disease entirely disappeared  from among these people. Three days after removal one case only occurred, which must have been in the incubation stage at the time the people were medically examined, and with this exception the disease was completely checked. At the Kalankote Health Camp similar results were obtained. When the need for segregation accommodation became less urgent, the Lawrence Road Segregation Camp was converted into a health camp also. The  measures  adopted in these health camps are thus described at length,  because they clearly indicate the undoubtedly good results of removal of persons, with due medical precau- tions, from a badly infected area. Similar measures adopted in future, on the first appearance of a plague outbreak in any locality, would, without doubt, at once stamp out the disease and promptly check its progress.
?107 7. Regarding the mortality from plague and the exodus of the population the following paragraphs are extracted from the report of the Commissioner in Sind :-  "On the 1st, 2nd and 3rd February there was a sudden accession of plague cases. From the 28th January, the daily figures had been rising, but on these three days the number rose to 59, 49 and 56 respectively-a record never subsequently reached. In fact, the epidemic in the first week in February attained its climax, and thereafter, though the out-breaks in new quarters partially obscured the fact, the disease gradually abated, as the marginally noted figures taken from Dr. Kaka's reports show. Or, taken by months, the mortality, was as follows, recollecting that February is the shortest month:    Total Plague deaths. Week ending 10th December 1896 1  " 17th " " 9  " 24th " " 21  " 31st " " 28  " 7th January 1897 103  " 14th  " " 159  " 21st " " 200  " 28th " " 181  " 4th February 1897 295  " 11th " " 262  " 18th " " 2 9  " 25th " " 217  " 4th March 1897 197  " 11th " " 207  " 18th " " 189  " 25th " " 188  " 1st April 1897  192  " 8th " " 172  " 15th " " 115  " 22nd " " 17  " 29th " " 86  " 6th May 1897 65  " 13th " " 52  " 20th " " 23  " 27th " " 20  " 3rd June 1897 29  " 10th " " 7  " 17th " " 1  " 24th " " 2   In December 1896 59 deaths from plague.   " January 1897 743  " "  " February  " 995  " "  " March  " 864  " "  " April  " 538  " "  " May "  167  " "  " June   " 23  " "  " July   " 9  " "    The movements of the population corresponded with these figures. The exodus by road, and specially to encampments or villages in the neighbourhood, was considerable, but figures are not available. The numbers entering and leaving Karchi by rail and sea are known, and the net difference between arrivals and departures is as follows:  Population of 1891. Net difference between arrivals and departures. Remaining population. In December 1806  98,195 -3,233 94,972 " January 1897  " -11,047 83,925 " February "  " -9,461 74,464 " March "  " -4,232 70,232 " April  "   +1,951 72,183 " May  "  " +5,733 77,916 " June  "  " +4,405 82,321  leaving a net loss at the end of June of nearly 16,000 people. The full table is given in Appendix B. As already stated, the figures for 1801 are much below the true population.  SECTION 4.  The Plague Committee for Hyderabad (Sind). 1. This city contains a population of approximately 60,000. The history of the operations of the Plague Committee and of the measures taken before its formation is clearly told in a report drafted by Mr. Rieu. I. C. S., under the directions of Mr. Steele, Collector of Hyderabad and President of the Plague Committee. Paragraphs 3-47 of this report are quoted below:-
108 Measures taken before the oc- curreuce of any imported cases. "3. The history of the plague and of the plague operations in the city of Hyderabad commences as early as October 1896, it being during the course of that month that my predecessor, Mr. C. G Dodgson, I. C. S., addressed the President of the Municipality on the subject of the advisability of taking precautions to prevent the spread to the city of the bubonic fever which was at that time prevalent in Bombay. A temporary increase in the sanitary and conservancy establishments of the Municipality and the more thorough cleansing of the town were among the chief measures suggested, and subsequently, on the 19th December, when the plague had apparently obtained a footing in Karchi, these sug- gestions were more emphatically brought forward, with the result that shortly after the Pre- sident of the Municipality was able to report that the desired increase of establishment had taken place, 18 sweepers, 6 bhistis, and a Sanitary Sub-Inspector having been brought on to the strength of the establishment, and that large supplies of disinfectants were being ob- tained. From the 24th December, the medical inspection of passengers by the ferry plying between Kotri and Gidu Bandar was commenced, a special Hospital Assistant having been deputed for the purpose. A house was rented in Gidu for the detention of any suspicious cases that might be detected. Occurrence of imported cases. Adoption of more stringent mea- sures to prevent the same. 4. On the 7th January 1897, the first imported case occurred, the person affected, a Hindu, having succeeded in evading detection at Gidu Bandar and making his way into the densely populated quarter around the Dalvani lane. During the week ending on the 13th Janu- ary, no less than eight such imported cases occurred, seven of which terminated fatally. The returns for the week following show exactly similar figures, but during the week ending the 27th January only one case was detected. The recurrence of these imported cases and the danger arising from the rapid influx of persons seeking refuge from the spread of the pestilence in Karchi, together with the extreme probability that cases were occurring in the city without ever being brought to light at all, showed the urgent necessity for the adoption of more stringent measures. Accordingly, on the 19th January, arrangements were made for the patrolling by the police of the left bank of the river, both above and below Gidu Bandar. At the same time, with a view to protecting the outside districts, the medical inspection of passengers leaving the city by the Kotri-Rohri Railway was undertaken. Continued importation of cases. Proposals for quarantine. 5. That undetected cases were occurring with alarming frequency is evident from the fact that, during the week which only returned a single case, the general mortality from all causes as compared with that of the previous week rose from 44 to 74. The additional pre- cautions taken do not appear to have checked to any appreciable extent the importation of cases from Karchi, which continued to occur at an average of four a week. There can be no doubt that, whether through negligence on the part of the inspecting officials or through their being accessible to bribery, advanced cases of plague were being admitted into the city; for it is unreasonable to suppose that in all these cases the disease had not gone fur- ther than its incubation stage and was therefore impossible to detect by means of the some- what cursory inspection to which it was subjected. With a view to putting a stop to this importation of plague cases, proposals for the imposition of strict quarantine against Karchi were advanced, only to be rejected as totally impracticable, owing to the impossibility of rendering it really effective and to the overwhelming disadvantages which such a measure would necessarily entail, Measures recommended by the Collector. The Municipality opposed to segregation. 6. Towards the close of January, Mr. Dodgson strongly urged upon the Municipality the necessity for undertaking systematic house-to-house clean- ing and limewashing under the supervision of Municipal Commissioners, the construction of segregation and observa- tion camps both at Hyderabad and Gidu Pandar, and, above all, the segregation of the apparently healthy inmates of a house in which a case of plague had occurred. No immediate action appears to have been taken for the carrying out of these suggestions, especially in the case of the last, the Municipality deprecating the adoption of the proposed measure as being unduly severe and likely to give rise to opposition on the part of the public, and advocating its postponement to the time when the plague should have definitely localized itself in the city. Energetic measures adopted by the Municipality. 7. Nevertheless, on the 11th February, the President of the Municipality reported the construction of four huts in the vicinity of the railway station, intended for the detention of suspected cases, of three huts, slightly more removed, for undoubted cases of plague, of two huts on the vacant ground in the rear of the old jail, to serve as a nuclens for an extensive health camp, and, finally, of three huts at Gidu for the detention of suspected cases detected there. At the same time notices were being served on all house-owners calling upon them to clean and limewash their houses, and the town was divided into sections, placed severally under the charge of Municipal Commissioners according to the Collector's suggestion. Hand pumps for the disinfection of infected houses were requisitioned, and arrangements were made for the sale and free distribution of lime in large quantities. Several European gentlemen tendered their services to the Municipality at this juncture,
109 and although their offer was not immediately availed of, it was nevertheless gratefully accepted for future emergency. First attempt at segregation and its results. 8. On the 23rd February,. the first step was made towards the general evacuation of the town, which subsequently became the principal measure by the adoption of which the ravages caused by the disease were to a great extent minimized. A considerable number of cases having occurred in a group of houses occupied by several Hindu families lately arrived from Karchi, Mr. Dodgson, accompanied by Mr. Hiranand, the President of the Municipality, and Surgeon Captain Jackson, proceeded to the spot and personally removed these people to the health camp which had just been constructed in anticipation of this step. Such a drastic measure was not carried out without considerable difficulty, and it was largely due to Mr. Dodgson's exercise of tact and firmness that no serious opposition was offered to its execution. For the time being it appeared as though a panic would set in among the people, so great was their consternation; but the public excitement soon quieted down, temporarily at least. Meanwhile, the adoption of this measure was attended by two undoubtedly good results: the public became accustomed to the idea of segregation, so that, when eventually the plague broke out violently in all directions and segregation had to be generally enforced, the opposition was far less serious than might have been anticipated; at the same time, the spread of the disease in that quarter at least was tempo- rarily arrested, and a prolific source of infection summarily extinguished. Measures taken to prevent the plague from localizing itself. 9. Meanwhile, strenuous efforts were directed towards preventing the possibility of the disease taking root by sterilizing, so to say, the town, i.e., re- moving every object on which the germs of the plague, which in spite of all precautions were being sown broadcast over the city, might find a favourable soil in which to develop themselves. In this way, house-to-house visi- tation by Municipal Commissioners, Military officers, and others who had volunteered their services was introduced, and extensive cleaning and limewashing operations were commenced, the inhabitants in the majority of cases readily complying with the wishes of the authorities. This general cleansing of the city continued up to the end of March, by which time the frequent and rapid recurrence of indigenous cases tended to limit operations to the disinfection of actually infected houses, leaving little time or opportunity for dealing with uninfected houses in any systematic manner. Outbreak of plague in three quarters. Probable origin of the outbreak. 10. On the 26th February, the first local case of plague occurred, and other cases followed in rapid succession. The disease seems to have broken out simul- taneously in no less than three quarters of the town, viz., the Kirpalani, the Malkani, and Parwar Shah's Pir. Up to the end of the first week in March, the number of indigenous cases which had occurred in these localities were respectively two, two, and seven. With regard to the first two localities, there is no satisfactory explanation to account for the outbreak, except one which might equally well have applied to any other quarter of the town, had the plague chosen to break out in it, viz., the repeated occurrence of imported cases, the majority of which were not detected until death had ensued, thus seriously aggravating the danger of infection. There can, however, be little doubt as to the origin of the outbreak in Parwar Shah's Pir. A family of goldsmiths, lately arrived from Karchi, allowed three deaths to take place in their house before intimation was given to the authorities. The house became a centre of infection, from which the pestilence rapidly spread itself over a large area. Spread of the plague through- out the city. 11. Notwithstanding the fact that the most thorough steps were taken to secure the complete disinfection of the houses in which these cases had occurred, the plague continued to spread gradually and irresist- ibly in all directions, and by the 17th March no less than 33 indigenous cases had been recorded. From that date the pestilence became endemic, having firmly established itself in most quarters of the city, so that all hopes of summarily stamping it out had vanished. There was no alternative but to allow it to run its destined course, falling back on such measures as might best conduce to keeping it within limits and preventing its spread to hitherto uninfected localities. That the adoption of these measures proved, on the whole, eminently successful is shown by subsequent events. Segregation extensively resorted to. Opening of the health camp. 12. The most important and efficacious of all the numerous precautions to which recourse was had was undoubtedly that of segregating the inmates of infected houses. This measure was admittedly a severe one, involving great hardship and inconvenience to private individuals. As such, it was necessarily extremely unpopular with the public, though, to their credit be it said, they at no time offered any serious opposition to its enforcement. It does infinite credit to the foresight and firmness of my predecessor, Mr. Dodgson, that, at a time when the segre- gation of the healthy had only been tentatively introduced elsewhere, he never shrank from enforcing it wholesale the moment he perceived that it was the only safeguard against the universal spread of the disease, although in doing so he knew full well that he was exposing himself to obloquy and misjudgment on the part of those whom ignorance or prejudice rendered blind to their own true interests. Accordingly, the inmates of the infected and adjoining houses in the Kirpalani, Malkani, and Parwar Shah's Pir quarters were placed under observation in the detention camp and health camp, respectively. The latter had, as already stated, been opened on the 23rd February, being reserved for the detention of persons residing in the vicinity of B 1135 - 28
?110 infected houses. The former was not started definitely until the 10th March. It was intended for the reception of the inmates of infected houses who were prim facie suspected to be infect- ed with the disease. Rapid spread of the plague in spite of segregation. 13. Notwithstanding these precautions, the plague continued to spread rapidly. On the 16th March, 19 cases having occurred in the Parwar Shah's Pir, the Collector cleared the whole quarter of its in- habitants ; but the evacuated area was too restricted to pre- vent the insidious spread of the disease, and in a brief space of time cases began to appear on the boundaries of the clearing, more especially to the north-west, a fact which affords an indication of the manner in which the infection is communicated from one locality to another. Measures taken to prevent the infection spreading from Hyder- abad to the districts. 14. With the plague firmly established in Hyderabad, a change of tactics became necessary. The exclusion from the precincts of the city of persons liable to introduce the infection ceased to be a matter of paramount importance. The essential point now was how to prevent infected persons from leaving the town and thus spreading the disease over the surrounding country. The necessity for taking the most stringent precautions against such an eventuality was materially increased by the almost universal exodus which set in with the advent of the plague and the adoption of severe repressive measures. The inhabitants fled from the plague-stricken city in vast crowds ; so much so, that it is roughly estimated that the normal population of 61,000 was at one time reduced to barely 8,000. This exodus was at once a source of danger and a means of safety. So long as no infected persons escaped, the more the city emptied itself of its overcrowded population, the less scope was there offered to the pestilence. Accordingly, on the 10th March, a cordon of medical inspection posts was drawn round the town, medical students (in default of qualified Hospital Assistants), assisted by Police Constables, being stationed at convenient points on the one free bandar, Husri, Tando Muhammad Khn, Mini and Tando Jm roads, with instructions to inspect all persons leaving Hyderabad and detain Suspicious cases. At the same time, passengers leaving by the Kotri-Rohri Railway were medically examined at the station, at first by the Civil Surgeon and subsequently by a Hos- pital Assistant. As a further precaution, the booking of passengers from Tando Thoro, the first station out, was temporarily suspended. Finally, the Gidu-Kotri steam-launch, which used to take the place of the ferry steamer at night, was stopped, so as to make it impossible for passengers to cross except by day, when the medical examination could be efficiently performed. Disinfecting operations actively carried on. Organization of disinfecting staff.  A list of the officers so employed will be found in Appendix E. 15. Great activity was displayed during this [period (the early part of March) in the systematic organization of disinfecting operations in the city. The entire area within Municipal limits, including Gidu and the villages beyond the Fuleli, had previously been divided into 11 divisions, one of which was subsequently sub-divided, making in all 12 divisions. Each division was placed in charge of a Divisional Officer, who was invested under the rules framed under Act III of 1897 with the full powers of a Plague authority. Under each Divisional Officer, one or more Sub-Divisional Officers were appointed, and under these again were placed Supervisors, who had charge of the gangs of coolies engaged in dis- infecting operations. Some 8 depts were established at convenient points in the town in order to facilitate the rapid distribution of lime and disinfectants to the numerous gangs at work. In the divisions in which plague had firmly established itself, the time and energies of the dis- infecting staff were severely taxed in order to keep pace with the cases that kept occurring. In other divisions, the limewashing and cleaning went on steadily, so that by the second week in March some 3,000 houses had been dealt with in this manner. Compulsory notification intro- duced. System of reporting cases. 16. On the 17th March, the important step of declaring the compulsory notification of all sickness was taken. A central office was established, with a suitable staff of clerks, at the Municipal office, and similar arrangements were made at Gidu. At these offices, registers were kept in which all cases of plague, together with the necessary details, were posted up, the procedure being as follows :-On a case of sickness being reported at the central office, information would be sent to the Health Officer, who immediately proceeded to the spot in order to ascertain the nature of the disease. Should he diagnose the case as one of plague, he would inform the central office, whence notice would be given to the Divisional Officer in whose division the case had occurred. This procedure ensured the speedy and certain communication of cases to the disinfecting staff, whose immediate presence on the spot was of the highest importance. Further organization. Progress of the work of disinfec- tion . House-to-house visitation. 17. On the 20th March, the organization of disinfecting operations was still further elaborated and perfected. The city was divided into four quarters, each one forming the charge of a Medical officer, whose duty it was to examine cases when called upon to do so by any of the Divisional Officers within his quarter, to act in consultation with the Health Officer in diagnosing doubtful cases, and to accompany
?111 A list of the officers engaged on this duty is attached. Divisional Officers when engaged in house-to-house visitation for the purpose of detecting concealed cases. Detailed instructions were issued to disinfecting officers for the purpose of securing as much uniformity as possible in the method of carrying on operations and ensuring the smooth working of the somewhat complex machinery which had been set in motion. House-to-house visitation for the purpose of detecting concealed cases was instituted, the orders being to the effect that, so far as possible, every house in a division should be examined once a week. Owing to the pressure of work, however, and the limited establishments at the disposal of Divisional Officers, it was frequently found impossible to fully comply with these orders. Opening of segregation camps and hospital. Enlistment of extra police. Arrangements for the deposit of valuables. 18. On the 23rd March, a private health camp, established by Mukhi Sukhramdas for the benefit of his caste fellows, was opened in the neighbourhood of the Fuleli and placed, together with the health and detention camps at Hyderabad and the health camp at Gidu, under the immediate superintendence of Surgeon-Captain Jones, A. M. S., who was temporarily transferred from Military duty for the purpose. On the 24th, the General Plague Hospital was opened under the supervision of Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Henderson, Civil Surgeon of Hyderabad, the Government High School building having been selected for the purpose. At the same time, the leading members of the Hindu community combined, at the instance of Mr. Dayaram Gidumal, the Sessions Judge of Shikrpur, to establish a Hindu Panchyati Hospital. The site selected was the Native General Library and an adjoining school-building. Among other measures taken towards the close of March, were the enlistment of 96 extra police constables for duty in connection with the plague throughout the district and the entertainment by the Municipality of 16 extra constables for duty in the town. Out of the former body, 78 were posted in and around Hyderabad, thus making a total of 94 extra constables engaged on plague duty within municipal limits. These men were chiefly employed in connection with the medical inspection posts, the various segregation camps, both public and private, and the cremation and burial grounds; also, for the reinforcement of existing police posts and the patrolling of the numerous quarters of the town which had been partially or wholly vacated, and in which the protection of private property would otherwise have been insufficiently provided for. In this connection, it may be well to mention that, as soon as the general exodus from the town set in, arrangements were made for the safe storing of valuables which their owners were unable to carry off with them. These valuables, consisting almost entirely of iron safes and chests, were deposited on payment of a fee of Re. 1 in the rooms usually occupied by the warders of the Civil jail, and were under the care of the Nzir of the Civil Court. The public availed itself to a considerable extent of these facilities for safeguarding their property. The epidemic reaches its culmi- nating point. Operations actively pushed on. 19. It will be seen that, by the end of March, the organization for combating the plague in Hyderabad was fairly complete. For a few days it seemed as though there might after all be a possibility of arresting the progress of the plague altogether, especially as during the last week in March there was a distinct lull, the number of cases decreasing to 37 as compared with 46 for the previous week. Nevertheless, the efforts of the disinfecting staff were not for a moment relaxed, whilst the construction of plague huts was pushed on with the utmost speed, and fortunately so, for during the first week in April the pestilence attained alarming proportions, the number of cases being nearly double of the previous highest returns. The culminating point was reached in the second week in April, when the number of cases amounted to no less than 131. The highest daily total of cases was recorded on the 10th April, the number being 23, exactly equal, curiously enough, to the maximum number of deaths which was recorded on the 12th April. Whether this sudden outburst was due to the rain which fell on the 2nd April, or whether it was merely a natural phase of the epidemic, is a point on which I do not feel competent to express an opinion. Inspection of grain godowns and its results. Mortality among rats, cats and dogs. 20. To revert to the subject of protective measures, it may be mentioned that during the early part of April special attention was devoted to the inspection and disinfection of grain godowns. This was in consequence of the medically expressed opinion that a fruitful source of infection lay in the rats, which succumbed to the plague in enormous numbers. Naturally, their bodies were most frequently found in the vicinity of grain stores. Accordingly, Mr. J. C. Pringle, I. C. S , was deputed to syste- matically inspect and clean up all grain godowns and bakeries in the city, being assisted in his duties by a Native official, well acquainted with the geography of the town, and four British privates and non-commissioned officers of the garrison. At the same time, arrangements were made by the Municipality for disinfecting grain declared infected by inspecting officers, by thorough exposure to the sun and air. Mr. Pringle completed his special duties on the 26th April, submitting a full and detailed report, in which he condemned a considerable number of shops as unfit for the storage of grain, and advanced certain recommendations based on the experience gained during the discharge of his duties. In pursuance of these recommendations, instructions were issued to Divisional Officers, in which special stress was laid on the necessity for preventing the storage of grain by burial in places where it was particularly accessible to infection by rats. While on this point, it may not be amiss to note one of the most curious features of the epidemic in Hyderabad, namely, the manner in which the disease affected the rats with which the city swarms. It was the exception to open a vacated house without finding the floor strewn with the dead bodies of these animals. Fortunately quite contrary to their
?112 usual habits, they generally left their holes in order to die, and their presence was thus quickly discovered. It was a common sight to see these animals in the last stages of the disease, crawling about the streets and drinking at the gutters, when they were easily killed. In addition to this, large numbers of cats and dogs used to be found lying about dead, but their high mortality may be ascribed to the evacuation of the city and their consequent starvation. Steps were taken to destroy these animals. Revised instructions to Divisional Officers. Systematic cleaning and disin- fection commenced. 21. On the 5th April, revised instructions were issued to Divisional Officers, in which their attention was called to the importance of their assuming the entire administrative control of their charges, both as regards the special disinfecting operations and the ordinary conservancy of the divisions, instead of merely confining themselves to the routine duty of superintending the work of the coolies engaged in disinfecting houses. The necessity for beginning systematic house-to-house cleaning and disinfecting was urged, and directions were given for the issue of passes to houses in which all the necessary steps for disinfecting had been taken to the satisfaction of the Divisional Officers. These instructions were intended to apply to all houses irrespective of the fact that a large proportion of them had been cleaned and limewashed before the outbreak of the plague. Now that the supply of coolies had become sufficient to meet the demand for labour, that the supply of disinfectants and pumps was no longer inadequate, that the subordinate staff had thoroughly learnt its duties, and that, in short, the entire organization had in process of time been brought into smooth working order, the rapid rate at which cases continued to occur was no longer an obstacle, as before, to the undertaking of these wider operations. Precautions, against the evasion of segregation, the concealment of cases, and the spread of infection by the public conveyances. 22. On the 8th April, strict orders were issued forbidding the removal of the inmates of an infected house without the permission of the Divisional Officer, in order to prevent the evasion of the rules for the segregation of such persons in the detention camp; and, further, in order to check the practice of concealing cases, no burial or cremation was allowed to take place without the production of a certificate, showing that the death had been duly reported at the central office, special police being posted at the burial and cremation grounds to enforce these orders. Amongst other minor precautions that were adopted may be mentioned the steps taken to prevent public conveyances from becoming a source of infection. These were stripped of their cushions and any material likely to retain infection, and specially marked carriages were permanently retained for the conveyance of plague patients or suspected persons, care being taken to have them frequently disinfected. Mr. Dodgson proceeds on leave, and is succeeded by Mr. Steele, Services rendered by the former. 23. On the 10th April Mr. Dodgson proceeded on medical leave, delivering over charge temporarily to Mr. J. C. Gloster, I.C.S., who had been sent to Hyderabad in the first week of that month as Special Plague As- sistant, the magnitude of the operations having become such as to make it impossible for a single person to direct them unaided. specially when hampered with his ordinary duties as Collector of the district. Mr. Dodgson withdrew from his difficult and onerous position, his health seriously affected by the severe mental and physical strain to which it had been subjected. As sole originator and director of the complex organization which had been set on foot, his task was an exceedingly arduous one, while the heavy responsibilities with which he was burdened only accentuated the diffi- culties of his position. None can appreciate more fully than his successor the extent of the labour which devolved upon him. Appointment of a Plague Com- mittee, and reasons therefor. 24. Before leaving, Mr. Dodgson had addressed the Commissioner regarding the advisability of the supersession of the Municipality by a Special Plague Committee. The reasons alleged in support of this proposal were that, while no grounds existed for being dissatisfied with the work of the Municipal Executive, who had given the Collector their loyal support and assistance throughout the plague campaign, nevertheless they were not in a position to take any important steps on their own initative, partly on account of their constantly requiring the advice and guidance of the Collector, and partly owing to their being hampered by the necessity for obtaining formal sanction before entering on any expenditure, however insignificant. It was thus left for the Collector to direct operations through the intermediary of the Municipal Executive-a cumbrous form of procedure, utterly unsuited to the requirements of the emergency. On the 9th April Mr. Dodgson's proposals received the sanction of Government and the Committee was constituted as below:- Chairman. The Collector. Members. Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Henderson, Major C. H. U. Price, Surgeon-Captain Caton Jones,
113 Mr. Hiranand Khemsing, President of the Municipality, being subsequently appointed an additional member. Employment of British soldiers. Financial difficulties of the Municipality: Grant of a loan by Government. Constitution of a Board of Control over expenditure. 25. On the 17th April, I assumed charge of the district from Mr. Gloster, who remained under my orders as Special Plague Assistant and Secretary to the Plague Committee. At a meeting held on the 12th April, it was decided that British troops should be employed in connection with the cleaning operations and for duty at the health and detention camps. Accordingly 20 privates and non-commissioned officers of the garrison were detailed for plague duty in the manner proposed. On the 18th April the financial question came to the fore, the Municipal funds being almost exhausted by the heavy drain on them during the recent extended operations. The balance at the disposal of the Municipality had been reduced to Rs. 10,000, whereas a sum sufficient to allow of operations being continued yet another three months was con- sidered requisite. The actual balance was insufficient for this object, as shown by the fact that no less a sum than Rs. 21,000 was expended during the first half of April. The Commissioner in Sind was requested to apply to Government for a grant of one and a half lakhs, to enable the Committee to continue operations. Subsequently, in the course of the month of May a sum of Rs. 25,000 was put at the disposal of the Committee and placed to the credit of the Municipality, the expenditure being conducted as heretofore by Municipal agency under the supervision of a specially constituted Board of Control. General evacuation of the city: Its results. Gradual subsidence of the epi- demic. 26. By the middle of April the pestilence was at its extreme height. The exodus of the population, which towards the close of March had received a slight check, had set in more strongly than ever, and the city was almost entirely depopulated, extensive quarters being left devoid of a single inhabitant. In division No. 5, for instance, it was seen that cases persistently continued to occur in the small and scattered colonies of people who still remained, and it was thought advisable to take measures to put a stop to this state of things. Accordingly, two raids with the aid of the military were made, and the whole quarter was practically swept clean of its few remaining inhabitants. These measures practically checked the plague in this division. Naturally under such a state of things all trade was at a stand-still, the prices of provisions rose alarmingly, and considerable distress made itself felt among those who were unable to join in the general exodus. Nevertheless, the condition of affairs was not wholly unsatisfactory, for with a population so reduced and the unremitting application of wholesale preventive measures, the disease quickly entered upon its phase of subsidence. The 21st April saw the returns for the week reduced to 88 cases, and from that point onwards a steady decrease week by week was observable, the figures for the successive weeks being, respectively, 53, 35, 25, 10, 4, 2, and 0. The period covered by these figures extends from the 22nd April to the 9th June. Inspection of villages round about Hyderabad. Arrangements for stabling cattle. Condemnation of insauitary houses. Supervision of private encamp- ments. Regulation of the boat traffic, &c. 27. Reverting once more to the plague operations, it was ascertained that occasional cases were occurring in the villages round about Hyderabad. Mr. Pringle, who had been relieved of his duties in connection with the grain godowns, was now. entrusted with the duty of inspecting these villages, inducing the inhabitants to clean their houses and arranging for the construction of huts for the isolation of the sick. Mr. Pringle discharged these duties until May, when he was ordered to Sukkur, and handed over charge to Surgeon- Captain Jones. Steps were also taken for subjecting the boat traffic on the Fuleli to close supervision. Boats were not permitted to depart until those on board had undergone medical examination, and passes were issued, which the headmen in charge had to produce to enable the boats to proceed beyond the bridge openings at Seri and Tando Muhammad Khan. Medical students were also placed on board the steam-launches with a view to the detection of any sick persons who might endeavour to travel by them. Attention had been drawn to the insanitary practice of herding cattle in dwelling houses. To put an end to it, arrangements were made on the 27th April for the stabling of such cattle in the municipal goat-yard. These officers were transferred from the Punjab for plague duty. The question of the demolition of insanitary houses was also taken up, and Divisional Officers were called upon to make a note of any such houses existing in their charges in order that their fate might be decided by the Committee. Attention was then directed to the exten- sive private encampments which had been formed and tenanted by refugees from Hyderabad in the gardens along the banks of the Fuleli Canal. Surgeon-Lieutenant Milner whose services together with those of Surgeon-Lieutenant Evans had been placed at the disposal of the Committee, was placed in charge of these encampments, with instructions to closely supervise their sanitary arrangements. Meanwhile, Surgeon-Lieutenant Evans had been placed in charge of the plague operations and the health camp at Gidu, thus relieving Surgeon-Captain Jones of the portion of his multifarious duties, and enabling him to devote attention to the condition of the villages round about the city. B 1135-29\?\
114 Rapid progress of disinfecting operations. Precautions for prevention of overcrowding. 28.    From the beginning of May operations began to assume a new form.    Once more Hyderabad had to protect itself against infection from outsiders. The first step was to notify to the public that the re-occupation of evacuated houses without the leave of Divisional Officers was forbidden. Meanwhile, the general cleaning and disinfecting operations, as distinguished from the disinfection of infected houses, had been progressing rapidly, the owners of the houses showing themselves anxious to complete the work and obtain passes for their houses as quickly as possible. There were quarters of the town in which nearly every house had been passed as fit for re-occupation. Divisional Officers were supplied with pass-books. To obviate the danger of overcrowding by the introduction into passed houses of strangers who were desirous of returning to the city, but whose houses had not been passed, details of the number and sex of the inmates of every house, the re-occupation of which was permitted, were entered in the pass, which was itself affixed to the door of the house. Establishment    of   public   and private disinfecting depts. 29.    Before the influx into the city had become at all general, additional precautions were taken up to prevent the re-infection of the town. Accordingly, three public disinfecting stations were in the first instance estab- lished for Hyderabad and another for Gidu near the bank of the river. The management of the depts was entrusted to the native gentlemen who had devoted themselves to plague work in connection with the Hindu hospital, viz., Messrs. Pribhdas, Lekhraj, Kundanmal and Sahibsing. These superintendents were authorized to issue certi- ficates of disinfection, and without the production of such certificates, re-occupation passes were under no circumstances to be given out. The services of four ' dais' were engaged, one of whom was posted at each dept in order to carry out the disinfection of females. To facilitate the gradual re-occupation of houses, accommodation in the shape of eight blocks, each consisting of two semi-detached residences, was provided for persons who had been discharged from the health camp and whose houses had not yet been passed for re-occupation. On the 1st May, further arrangements were made whereby females residing in the private camps could be disinfected at their own residences (on payment of a fee and the incidental expenses) under the supervision of the Lady Physician of the Dufferin Hospital and her assistants. These arrangements were subsequently extended, as it was found that the better classes disliked the idea of being disinfected at the public stations. Accordingly, on the 28th May, three private disinfecting  depts were established-one for Muhammadans at the Musa- firkhana, under the supervision of a specially engaged lady superintendant, and  two for Hindus at the Fort School and the Tulsids Mandir, respectively, these being superintended by the lady doctors of the Women's Hospital. These depts were solely intended for the disinfection of women and children. On the 20th May the big health camp had been closed, a portion of the detention camp near the railway station being used for the purpose. The public disinfecting dept at the health camp was accordingly transferred to the site recently occupied near the old jail by a private camp established by Mr. Dayaram Gidumal. Subsequently, on the 2nd June, an additional private disinfecting station for Muhammadans was established opposite the Musafir- khana and placed in charge of some of the Medical students who had been relieved of their duties in connection with the medical inspection of persons leaving Hyderabad. The system of disinfecting need not be described in detail; suffice it to say that it was entirely in accordance with the instructions issued on the subject. It may be noted that about 23,000 persons passed through the disinfecting depts. General construction of plague operations. Final cessation of the plague. 30.    Meanwhile, the limewashing and cleaning operations were rapidly approaching com- pletion; consequently, with a view to economy, establishments were largely reduced. The depts for the distribution of dis- infectants had been withdrawn and the employment of coolies largely discontinued. Orders for the early completion of the work were issued at the end of May, and by the 15th June there was almost a complete cessation of work, the services of Sub-Divisional Officers and Supervisors being dispensed with from that date. By the first of July affairs in Hyderabad City had resumed their normal aspect, and the epidemic, which had from its commencement, during its gradual spread, its period of greatest activity and virulence, its steady subsidence, up to its final extinction, extended over a period of three months and a half, had now become a thing of the past. The last case occurred on the 2nd June, raising the total number of cases to 586, of which 451 had proved fatal. Report on the insauitary condi- tion of the city. Recommandations made by the Plague Committee for dealing with the same. 31.    Notwithstanding these satisfactory results of their labours, the Plague Committee did not consider it advisable to entirely suspend operations. In the month of May, the Medical officers serving on the Committee had submitted a report, in which they reviewed the sanitary condition and the conservancy arrangements of the city. The principal conclusion which they arrived at during the course of their in- vestigations was that the conservancy arrangements, specially such as related to the supply of publ c latrines, the removal therefrom of night-soil, the draining off of sullage water, the condition of private latrines, &c., were dangerously inadequate for the requirements of a densely
115  populated city like Hyderabad. Their chief recommendations were the introduction of an efficient drainage system, the demolition of insanitary dwellings, the opening up of the more crowded quarters by broad streets, the improvement of the conservancy arrangements, and the provision of a pure and plentiful water-supply.  A special memorandum  was added, in which recom- mendations were made for the improvement of public and private latrines.  On receiving these memoranda, the Committee called upon Divisional Officers to submit suggestions as to the re- quirements of their several charges in respect of public latrines and the localities most suitable for their erection. They were also required to express their opinions regarding the adequacy of the conservancy arrangements in their divisions.  These suggestions and opinions having been collected, the Collector, as President of the Plague Committee, drew up a note, in which he first drew attention to the unsatisfactory state of the Municipal finances and to the fact that the Municipality was already committed to the introduction of a new system  of water-supply, and advised the formation of a special Committee, Consisting of the President of the Municipality, the Civil Surgeon of Hyderabad, the Executive Engineer, Fuleli Canals, and four prominent members of the Municipal Board, for the purpose of drawing up a clearly defined project for the improvement of the sanitation of the city on the lines indicated by the Medical officers above mentioned, and preparing an estimate of the cost of carrying out the scheme finally advocated by them.   He further urged that, pending the result of this enquiry, it was of the utmost urgency to give immediate effect to the recommendations of the Medical officers regarding the supply of latrines and the proper removal of night-soil from private latrines.  It was estimated that the measures to be undertaken would involve an immediate outlay of Rs. 18,000, and this sum the Municipality was enjoined to raise in the open market in accordance with the provisions of Act XII of 1897.   The Municipality was further to be called upon to appoint, in terms of clause 10, Section 27 of Act II of 1884, a Committee to exercise control over sanitary matters. Such Committee was to be empowered to take action under Sections 53, 54., 55, 56, 58, 59 and 62 of Act VI of 1873 and under clauses (a), (b) and (c)'of Section 33 of Act II of 1884.  A final recommendation was to the effect that an amendment should be made in the rules govern- ing the Municipality so as to give the Sanitary Committee full control over the conservancy establishment.  These proposals of mine were accepted by the Plague Committee, and the Municipality have been called upon to take action conformably thereto. History and description of the   various  segregation  camps in Hyderabad and Gidu.                 32.  Having given an outline of the history of the epidemic in the city and the action   taken to combat it, I now proceed to discuss in detail the most important of the measures adopted.  Chief of these were the isolation of the sick and the segregation of the suspected. .To carry out these measures, four camps, under the direct supervision of Surgeon-Captain Jones, were established as follow:                       (1) Health Camp (Hyderabad),                       (2) Detention Camp (Hyderabad).                       (3) Health Camp (Gidu).                       (4) Residential Camp (Mukhi Sukhramdas' garden).      At the time that Surgeon-Captain Jones took over charge of the above camps, viz., 24th March, the plague was just commencing to be epidemic.  The camps were inadequately equipped and the arrangements defective. The total number of huts was only about forty, twenty of which constituted the health camp. With the rapid spread of the plague the enlargement of the camps was pushed on with all speed, but nevertheless, at times, their accommodation was severely taxed.  When at last the work was completed, the epidemic had already entered upon its period of decline.      Hyderabad Health Camp.        33. To take the camps in detail, the health camp first calls for notice as being the largest and most important.  It was extremely favourably situated from                               a sanitary point of view on the open ground to the south of the  Central Jail. It was reserved for the accommodation of the inmates of houses adjoining infected  houses.  The dates of its opening and closing were, respectively, the 22nd February and the  20th May, during which interval there were 759 admissions.  Eight cases of plague occurred,  but no deaths. Accommodation. was at first provided in the shape of 23 spacious huts, consisting  of two rooms with a courtyard, containing a privy, cook-house and wash-house.    As the  epidemic increased, additional huts of a cheape kind were built, which, with the advent of the  hot weather, were improved by the addition of extra matting to the roof and in some cases by  mud roofing.  Huts were also provided for the European soldiers, the police guard, the store  room and office, and camp servants. Being surrounded by a high thorn fence, a police guard  consisting of a Naik and five constables proved suffiient.   The establishment varied with the  requirements of the moment.  Its full complement consisted of the following:-                        2 European soldiers.           1 Modi.                        1 Medical student.             3 Peons.                        2 Munshis.                     2 Bhistis.                        1 Bania.                       2 Dhobis.                                           5 Sweepers.      Supplies were provided by a Bania, who sold Provisions to the inmates of the camp at fixed rates.  At first all occupants were fed free of cost, but after the 18th April this was dis- continued, and only the indigent were rationed on the Following scale:-                         Adults     ...              3 annas per diem.                         Children    ...      .. . . 2 annas per diem.
116 No family received more than 8 annas without special sanction. All healthy men in receipt of rations were put on camp fatigue duty under the supervision of the European soldiers. Blankets, cots, and utensils were issued to those who were without these articles. The water- supply was obtained from two stand-pipes, supplemented for washing and disinfecting purposes by bhistis. The drainage of the camp was excellent, the ground having a marked slope. The conservancy arrangements were adequate,-the men using the two public latrines provided; the women and children, the private privies in the courtyards. Disinfectants were freely used. Both on admission and on discharge, each person was disinfected, together with his personal effects. Huts in which plague cases had occurred were dismantled. The matting was destroyed, and the frame wood-work and floor soused with phenyle or perchloride of mercury. Four days were allowed to elapse before re-building. Subsequently, when matting became scarce, it was no longer destroyed, but soaked in a disinfecting solution and exposed for four days to the action of the sun, after which it was again utilized without any evil effects. The inmates of an infect- ed hut were again disinfected and commenced a fresh period of detention. The duration of the latter was invariably ten days. Registers of admissions and discharges, in which all necessary details were posted up, were kept, and certificates of discharge and disinfection were given to persons leaving the camp. Occasionally, inmates of the camp were allowed to leave it under a pass for the purpose of procuring money or of cleaning up their houses. Hyderabad Detention Camp. 34. The detention camp at Hyderabad was situated near the railway station and was opened on 10th March. The last occupants were discharged on the 15th June. Until May 20th, when the health camp was closed, this camp was used solely for the detention of the inmates of infected houses. Subsequent to that date, a portion of it, provided with a distinct water-supply and capable of entire isolation, was turned into a health camp. Altogether 130 huts were built, a few of which, however, replaced others which had been burnt down. The huts were built on the same pattern as those in the health camp, but were smaller, the average cost being only Rs. 45. In April the roofs were strengthened, and in May some of the huts were mud-roofed. The full establishment was as follows:- 2 European soldiers. 1 Modi. 1 Police Havildr. 3 Peons. 6 Police Constables. 2 Bhistis. 1 Hospital Assistant. 2 Dhobis. 3 Munshis.  8 Sweepers. The water-supply was derived from taps and a neighbouring well. The drainage was excellent, the camp being divided into three portions by intervening nlas. The number of admissions was 1,124. Two deaths from plague occurred, and 17 cases were sent to hospital. In other respects the arrangements were precisely similar to those that existed in the health camp, with the exception that only under very special circumstances were passes granted, the inmates remaining under police escort all the time they were away from the camp. Gidu Health Gamp. 35. The Gidu Health Camp was opened on the 20th March and closed on the 10th June, It was situated on cultivated and not very well drained ground between Gidu village and the new railway line. The camp was purely a Health Camp, the inmates of infected houses being sent to the detention camp at Hyderabad. The number of admissions was 341 Three deaths from plague occurred and one case was sent to hospital. The establishment was as follows:- 1 Police Dafadr. 2 Peons. 4 Police Constables. 1 Dhobi. 2 Munshis. 1 Bhisti.  3 Sweepers. Surgeon-Captain Jones had charge of the camp until the middle of April, then it was placed under Surgeon-Lieutenant Evans, assisted by the Hospital Assistant of the Gidu Dispensary. Mukhi Sukhramdas' Camp. 36. Mukhi Sukhramdas' Camp was latterly used purely as a residential camp, and differed but slightly from the numerous camps established by various communities on the banks of the Fuleli, its distinguishing features being that it was partially constructed by Municipal agency and that it was under Dr. Jones' direct supervision. The camp was opened on March 23rd, and at first consisted of 45 huts, unprovided with courtyards or cook-houses. It was at that time occupied by 166 persons, chiefly of the Mochi caste, but after the construction of the kacha brick lines, it was used as residential quarters and remained in occupation for a period of nearly two months. The total population amounted to 256. Accommodation for office estab- lishments. 37. Although scarcely falling under the head of segregation camps, it may be well to mention in this connection the arrangements made for the accom- modation of the Government office establishments during the time when their residence in the city was scarcely practicable. A camp was formed close to the old Jail consisting of 30 huts, erected at a total cost of Rs. 2,800. This camp provided accommodation for the Collector and the District Judge's office establish- ments. Separate arrangements were made for the members of the Assistant Collector of Naushhro's office, for whose accommodation four huts, costing Rs. 200, were built on a site temporarily granted by the Cantonment authorities.
?117 Formation of divisions. 38. The next precautionary measure calling for special notice is the organization introduced for the carrying out of disinfecting operations. As previously stated, the entire city, including Gidu and the villages and encampments on the Fuleli banks, was divided into 12 divisions. The main bazr, running east and west through the entire length of the city, formed the chief dividing line, and the larger streets striking off at right angles separated the divisions on either side of it. In this way, 10 divisions were formed. Gidu and the Fuleli quarter constituted special divisions, raising the total to 12. Divisional Officers. 39. Each division was the charge of a Divisional Officer, who, being appointed a Plague authority, directed the operations of the disinfecting staff, super- vised the conservancy of his charge, gave orders for the segre- gation of suspected persons, directed the evacuation of insanitary houses or houses liable to become infected by reason of their proximity to already infected houses, supervised the destruction of property considered to be infected, and was in short the responsible person entrusted with the execution of the directions of the Plague Committee. The following gentlemen served as Divisional Officers either throughout or for periods of various length of the epidemic:- Major C. H. U. Price, Surgeon-Major Avetoom, Surgeon-Captain Jackson, Captains Tighe and Fowler, Lieutenants Humphreys, Hart-Dyke, Hext and Hulseberg, Surgeon-Lieutenants Evans and Milner, Messrs. Knight, Rieu, Bushell, Pringle, Hesketh, Cox, Bayliss, Keefer, Ryan, Rozare and Meyers, and Diwan Kauromal. Of the above, all the Military officers, together with Messrs. Knight, Hesketh, Cox and Bayliss, tendered their services voluntarily to the Municipality. The remainder were either Government servants specially deputed for plague duty, or persons whose services had been temporarily engaged by the Municipality. Sub-Divisional Officers. 40. Acting under each Divisional Officer were one or more Sub-Divisional Officers. The latter were for the most part Municipal Commissioners, or other Native gentlemen of standing, though a few had been specially engaged for the occasion and were salaried. Although the Sub-Divisional Officers had no very definite duties assigned to them, being variously employed according to the diverse requirements of each division, they were nevertheless very hard worked and of the greatest service to Divisional Officers. Their local knowledge and the influence which, owing to their position, they exercised over the public were invaluable. They were the medium through which Divisional Officers found it convenient to issue their directions to the staff under them, and to whom they deputed their powers when occasion required. They exercised a thorough supervision over the disinfecting staff, and made all arrangements for the supply of coolies and disinfectants. They frequently kept the statistics necessary for the weekly reports of work done submitted for each division. They were, in short, the Divisional Officers' right-hand men. Supervisors and European sol- diers Medical Officers of quarters. 41. In addition to his Sub-Divisional Officers, each Divisional Officer had under his orders a number, generally three, of Supervisors. The latter were, almost without exception, drawn from the ranks of the school masters and other servants in the pay of the Municipality, whose services had been rendered available by the closure of all the schools and suspension of business in the city during the prevalence of the epidemic. Their duty was to immediately supervise the gangs of coolies engaged in disinfecting and cleaning. When they had once acquired a thorough knowledge of the entire process of disinfecting a house, their services were exceedingly useful, for they thus set their superior officers free from the ordinary petty routine work, enabling them to devote their attention to the general administrative work of their charges. From the middle of April until the complete cessation of plague operations, European soldiers to the number of about 10 were distributed under certain Divisional Officers and employed on disinfecting and cleaning duty. Their work was partly manual, partly supervisional. It was invariably satisfactory. The division of the city into four quarters, each under a Medical officer, has already been commented on. It only remains to mention that the officers in question were Surgeon-Lieutenant Colonel Henderson, Surgeon-Major Avetoom, Surgeon-Captain Jackson, and Surgeon-Captain Austin. Process of disinfection of houses in which cases of plague had occurred. 41 a. The process of cleaning and disinfecting is described below. Before the plague broke out in the city, operations were confined to limewashing the inner walls of the houses, inducing the inhabitants to clear out their houses and rid them of the accumulated rubbish which they were generally found to contain, and sprinkling privies and gutters with disinfectants. Subsequently, when plague cases began to occur, the disinfecting of infected houses became the chief duty of the staff. The mode of disinfecting varied in some particulars during the course of the epidemic. In all cases, however, the first step on entering an infected house was the sprinkling of the floor with a solution of perchloride of mercury or phenyle. All furniture was then removed, articles capable of disinfection being either boiled for 30 minutes, or washed in a solution of some disinfectant, or fumigated with sulphur, or merely exposed to light and air, accord- ing to the discretion of the Plague authority. Articles incapable of disinfection, and in any case the clothes and bedding of the plague patient, were generally destroyed by fire. The walls and ceilings were then abundantly sprayed with a solution of perchloride of mercury, hand syringes and latterly, when they became available, pumps being utilized for the purpose. The walls were then thoroughly scraped down. This process was subsequently discontinued, being an exceedingly B 1135-30
118 laborious one and obviously fraught with danger to the coolies. Limewashing was substituted, the wash generally containing an admixture of perchloride of mercury. The floor was dug up to a depth of two or three inches, the loose earth being carted away until its removal was discon- tinued by expert advice and sprinkling with chloride of lime substituted. If considered necessary the house was ventilated by making apertures in the roof or by widening the windows. Lastly, the conventional plague mark was conspicuously painted in red outside, the date of death or of the removal of the case being recorded below. A house thus dealt with remained vacant for at least 10 days, but generally was not re-occupied until the cessation of the plague. No cases of plague occurred in houses which had been disinfected in the manner above described. It is important to note that a house in which dead rats were discovered was treated in every respect as though a case of plague had occurred in it. Systematic cleaning prior to re- occupation. 42. When the systematic cleaning of all uninfected houses prior to re-occupation was undertaken, the procedure was as follows: The house was emptied of all furniture, which thus remained exposed to light and air during operations; only absolute rubbish was destroyed; the walls and ceiling were squirted with the solution of perchloride of mercury, the walls were lime-washed all over, and, finally, the floor was sprinkled with chloride of lime. The house was then passed as cleaned. In the majority of cases, only the spraying with perchloride of mercury and the laying down of chloride of lime were performed by Municipal agency, the rest of the work being done by the house-owners themselves. Where houses had been evacuated and their owners had failed to comply with the orders contained in the notices which were affixed to all empty houses, the entire process was necessarily performed by Municipal agency, the owners being liable for the cost. Number of houses infected. 43.    Accurate statistics as to the number of houses infected either by plague cases or by rats are not available.    The returns for some divisions in which plague was prevalent show extraordinarily low figures, from which it must be inferred that there was considerable misconception as to the information required under the somewhat ambiguous heading 'Houses infected.' The statistics obtainable show that 511 houses were compulsorily evacuated, that 4,301 houses were disinfected and cleaned by Municipal agency, and 4,221 by private agency. Opening   of  Plague    Hospitals. The General Plague Hospital. 44.    The next subject calling for  special notice is  that of  the Plague  Hospitals.    When the epidemic first made its appearance, the sick  were removed to huts situated on the southern side  of the city, some fifteen cases being treated in this manner.    The process was, however, attended with great difficulty and inconvenience, owing to the distance from the city, and as the attendance on the sick was insufficient and their medical treatment and comfort was inadequately provided for, it was determined to open a hospital in a more central position and equipped in a more adequate manner. The Government High School buildings were selected for the purpose, and the General Plague Hospital was opened on the 24th March under the supervision of the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Henderson. The group of buildings was well adapted for the purposes of a hospital, consisting as they did of a spacious central hall, capable of containing 50 beds, and two smaller detached buildings on either side. The latter were composed of five rooms of different sizes and were each capable of accommodating  30 patients. The one to the south was set apart for females; that to the north for convalescents, the large central hall being used as the male ward. On the opposite side of the road; the nurses were comfortably lodged, and the High School out-houses provided ample room for kitchens, store rooms, &c., and for the accommodation of ward-boys and sweepers. The play-ground was utilized for the erection of huts for patients under observation. The Hospital Assistants were also located there in a detached row of houses. The establishment consisted of - 4 Nurses. 4 Hospital Assistants. 14 Ward-boys. 8 Sweepers. 4 Dais. 11 Pall-bearers (Muhammadans and Hindus). Three nurses from Calcutta, viz., Mrs. Murphy, Miss Durham, and Miss Browning, assisted by Mrs. Hart, from Karchi, while the epidemic was at its height, worked enthusias- tically, and it was remarkable how soon the menial attendants gained confidence from their example and waited upon the patients carefully and attentively. All menials were supplied with a change of clothing while off duty, and it is satisfactory to note that none of the attendants was attacked. The hospital was closed on the 15th June. The number of patients treated was 209, of whom 53 were discharged cured, giving a percentage of 2531. Of this number, how- ever, 53 died within a few hours of admission, and cannot be said to have come under treatment at all. The percentage of cures was, therefore, properly speaking, 333. The Hindu Panchayati Hospital. 45.    At the time the General Hospital was opened, the Hindu community raised a fund for the purpose of establishing and equipping a Plague Hospital solely for their co-religionists.   The action taken was mainly under the direction of Mr.  Dayaram  Gidumal,   Sessions  Judge  at   Shikrpur,  who,  in  addition  to
119 personally supervising the organization during its early stage, contributed largely to defraying the cost of the undertaking. The Hindu Panchayati Hospital, as it was designated, was opened on the 19th March and closed on the 15th June. The site, which was selected by the Civil Surgeon, was that occupied by the Native Library and a school building. Both were situated in the same enclosure, and answered the purpose of a Plague Hospital admirably. The out-houses were not sufficient for the large staff of menial servants entertained, but this defect was made good by the erection of huts and a good kacha built house to serve the purpose of an office and store room. The buildings were capable of accommodating 50 patients. The want of a convalescent ward was much felt, as the hospital was most deservedly popular. With the consent of the Committee of the Countess of Dufferin Hospital for Women, that building was handed over to the Hindu Hospital as a convalescent ward and thus supplied all that was necessary. The establishment was on the same scale as that of the General Plague Hospital with the exception that only two nurses The names of those who came forward to assist will be found in Appendix H. were entertained. This was amply compensated for by the constant attention and careful nursing of a band of volunteers. Among these, the Reverend D. A. Canney, Miss Piggott, of the Church of England Zenana Mission, Messrs. Pribdas, Lekhraj Sahibsing and Kundanmal rendered conspicuous service. The number of patients admitted to the hospital was 190. Of these, 67 were discharged cured, giving a percentage of 4171. As in the General Hospital, however, a considerable number of cases, in this case 27, terminated fatally almost immediately after admission. If these be taken into account, the percentage of cures was 35 8. These highly satisfactory results were in a large measure due to the assistance given by Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Henderson, who paid daily visits to the hospital and undertook its medical supervision. Compensation for the destruc- tion of property and the Plague Relief Fund. 46.    The awarding of compensation for infected property destroyed and the distribution of relief to necessitous persons, in consideration of the hardships to which they were exposed owing to the necessity for the adoption of drastic measures for the extirpation of the disease at all costs, deserve some mention. Instructions regarding the award of compensation were from time to time issued to the Plague authorities. The necessity for showing the utmost consideration in dealing with indi- vidual cases and for refraining as far as practicable from destroying property was impressed upon them. They were directed to make an inventory of all property of any special value de- stroyed by them. Under Rule 15 of the Plague Rules, ten respectable native gentlemen were appointed to serve as 'Presidents of Panchs' for the purpose of assisting the plague authori- ties in assessing valuable property. The Municipality undertook to grant compensation in ac- cordance with the awards made. In some cases, funds were placed at the disposal of Divisional Officers, but generally the latter gave compensation by issuing orders on the Municipality for the sums awarded. In special cases, compensation was also granted by the Plague Committee. The total amount so far awarded has only been Rs. 563-3-5, being distributed among twenty- three persons. Payments were also made from the fund below mentioned. About the end of March, it was decided at a meeting of the principal residents, both Euro- pean and Native, presided over by Mr. Knight, I. C. S., that a General Relief Fund be raised. About Rs. 1,500 were collected on the spot, a sum which was ultimately raised to nearly Rs. 4,500. An Executive Committee was appointed for the organization of the relief, Surgeon- Captain Jones acting as Chairmam. A sum of about Rs. 2,200 was distributed through the medium of Divisional Officers and others. Indigent persons on being discharged from camps or hospitals were given small sums of money to enable them to support themselves while still con- valescent or to replace bedding and clothes that had been destroyed. It has been decided to invest the balance in the Savings Bank in the name of the Collector and President, Plague Relief Fund. A separate fund was also raised by the Muhammadan community. It was originally in- tended to provide for the construction of a residential camp for Muhammadans, but, owing to a disagreement as to the selection of a site, the proposal fell to the ground. Relief to the poor was given, and a sum of Rs. 300 disbursed towards the cost of maintaining the special nurses engaged from Calcutta for attendance at the General Plague Hospital. Concealment of cases and prose- cutions under the Act. 47.    The prevention of concealment of cases was naturally a subject to which considerable attention was given. On several occasions, search parties assist- ed by the military unexpectedly raided certain quarters, notably the Fuleli villages, Gidu, the Sadar Bazr and a few villages on the outskirts of Hyderabad. On no occasion were any concealed cases detected; indeed there is good reason for believing that, after the introduction of compulsory notification, there was re- markably little active concealment of cases. The fear of infection made people generally anxious to report cases occurring in their vicinity, and concealment was only practised to the extent of causing a delay in the reporting of cases and rarely to the actual hiding or surreptitious disposal of dead bodies, though one such case was brought to light, the body having been buried in the compound of a factory not far from the Municipal Office ! A frequent practice, and one exceedingly hard to check, was that indulged in by the people who had encamped themselves on the banks of the Fuleli.    When a case occurred among them,
?120 they would secretly convey the patient to any vacant house in the city and there leave him to his fate. In this way they avoided segregation and other inconveniences to which they would otherwise have been subjected. In other cases the inmates of a house in which a person had been attacked with the disease would make good their escape before the arrival of the authorities on the scene. 2.    The following table of indigenous cases of plague and deaths from plague in Hyderabad is extracted from the report of the Commissioner :-  Week ending. Cases. Deaths. 5th March 3 2 12th      ,, 5 4 19th     ,, 42 29 26th      ,, 40 27 2nd April 33 25 9th     ,, 117 58 16th     ,, 119 104 23rd     ,, 75 68 30th     ,, 49 40 7th May 37 32 14th    ,, 13 12 21st    ,, 8 8 28th   ,, 1 2 4th June 2 2  544 413  SECTION 5. The Sukkur-Rohri Plague Committee. (a) Sukkur before the appointment of the Plague Committee. 1.    The Municipal city of Sukkur, which ordinarily has a population of about 29,000, consists of two clearly defined quarters known as Old Sukkur and New Sukkur respectively. The latter is sub-divided into New Sukkur proper and Gharibabad. Between Old Sukkur and New Sukkur lies the European quarters. 2.    The first known imported case occurred in New Sukkur on February 12th.    The removal to hospital of the woman attacked caused consternation, and within a fortnight  10,000 people are said to have left the city.    Up to March 15th only 29 cases are believed to have occurred, but the disease then began to spread rapidly.    The measures at first adopted for repressing it were frustrated by the concealment of cases, and house-to-house visitation was therefore intro- duced by the Collector and Civil Surgeon  towards the end of March.    At the first visit a census was taken of the occupants of every inhabited house and the names of all occupants were entered in a book.    These names were called out at every subsequent visit, and the absentees had to be accounted for, or traced if they had left the city.    Two hospitals and a segregation camp were erected. (b) Rohri before the appointment of the Plague Committee. 3. Rohri is a town with a population of about 10,000 on the other side of the Indus, and joined to Sukkur by a bridge. A few cases of plague were imported from Sukkur, but no local cases are believed to have occurred before the forma- tion of the Sukkur-Rohri Plague Committee. The measures adopted at an early stage consisted of cleaning the town and watching the railway station, the ferries and the bridge. The bridge was closed to traffic at the end of March.
?121 (c) The Plague Committee. 4. On the 30th March 1897 the Commissioner in Sind announced that he had, in anticipation of sanction, appointed Lieutenant-Colonel Mayhew (Collec- tor of Shikrpur), Mr. W. H. Lucas, I. C. S., and Mr. W. A. Ingle (Secretary of the Sukkur Municipality), a Plague Committee for the suppression of the plague within the municipal limits of Sukkur and Rohri and the adjoining talukas. This appointment was communicated to Government by telegram and was legalized by Government Resolution 1750/1221 A.P., dated 30th March 1897, and which gave the Committee powers similar to those conferred on Committees previously appointed, and in addition empowered them to spend Local Fund money. 5. A sketch of the work of the Committee is given in Chapter 2 of their report, which is quoted in full below: "History of the Plague in Sukkur Town from the appointment of the Plague Committee on 31st March to the date of the submission of this Report. Preliminary remarks. 1. By 31st March, from which date the Plague Committee came into existence, the popu- lation of New Sukkur and Gharibadad was reduced to at most 2,000 souls. Everybody who could afford to leave had long ago done so, and only the very poor, or those, such as Government or Municipal servants, who were absolutely compelled to stay, were left. Cases were occurring in New Sukkur and Gharibabad at the rate of about 20 a day. The population of the European and Railway quarters was still almost normal, and so far very few cases had occurred in them. Paragraphs 62 to 69 of Mr. Ingle's report describe the abject state of panic prevailing in and around Sukkur, and the impossibility of procuring either supplies or labour. Procural of skilled labour from Karchi. 2. As it had been found very difficult to keep abreast of the work of cleaning and dis- infecting plague houses, and as the rapid spread of the disease to every part of the town in which people still lingered showed that it would be necessary to disinfect the whole town before it could be fit for re-occupation, the Committee decided to import a number of skilled masons and coolies from Karchi. So 312 coolies and masons, mostly Mekranis and Pathans, were sent up in two batches to Sukkur from Karchi (where they had already been employed in cleaning plague houses). Mr. Cadell, I. C. S., who had had great experience of plague work in Karchi, and had been deputed to Sukkur on special duty on 29th March, was asked to organise gangs for the systematic cleaning and disinfection of the town. Division of the town into quar- ters each in charge of a Plague Superintendent. 3. Up to the end of March, New Sukkur had been divided into three quarters, with Messrs- Marston, Harrison and Dracup for Superintendents, and Ghariba- bad had been in charge of Ro Bahdur Dewanmal, the Collector's Daftardar, assisted latterly by Ro Sheb Rochiram, City Magis- trate. But it was found that as the plague spread, these divisions were unwieldy, and therefore New Sukkur was redivided into four new quarters with Messrs. Harrison, Hayter and Dracup and Lieutenant Leith for Plague Superintendents, while Mr. Cadell took over the whole of Gharibabad and had Ro Sheb Rochiram, the City Magistrate, under him as an Additional Superintendent. The division of the town into quarters is shown in the map of Sukkur which accompanies the report. Cleaning and disinfecting of the town. 4. Each Plague Superintendent was given six gangs of coolies and masons. The gangs were under Plague Inspectors, who were generally school mas- ters and other Municipal employs or Tapadars and Munshis of the Revenue Department. Six trained Inspectors were sent for from Karchi, and these were at first told off to instruct the untrained Inspectors A special Inspector was attached to each Superintendent to act as pay Munshi and Personal Assistant. Three police orderlies were at first attached to each Superintendent, to assist in the work of segregation, but when the plague abated and the few surviving people in the town had been moved outside into camps, these were withdrawn. As the correct method of cleaning and disinfecting houses in which cases of plague had occurred was not understood by the Inspectors, and it had not been the custom to make any preliminary disinfection of a house before the Inspectors and coolies entered it (which circum- stance no doubt partly accounts for the strangely large number of deaths from plague that occurred in the early days of the plague among those engaged in cleaning operations), instruc- tions on this point were drawn up by Mr. Cadell and printed and issued to the Inspectors. The following were the principal details to be observed in cleaning and disinfecting all houses, for all houses were treated as plague houses:- (1)    The floors and walls were first thoroughly sprayed before entrance,   with the syringe filled with a solution of perchloride of mercury (1-1000). B 1135-31
122 (2) The room was then entered and divested of everything in the way of furniture, rubbish, &c. (3) The latter, and specially anything of little value, was at once burnt, and clothes or draperies were drenched with phenyle (1-100) water. Boxes, cooking pots, &c., were replaced after also being similarly treated, the strings of cots were cut out and burnt and the frames were sprayed. (4) The walls, roof and floor were then thoroughly sprayed with a solution of perchloride of mercury (1-1000). (5) The floor was dug to a depth of 6 inches in any room where a case had occurred and the loose earth not removed but thickly scattered with chloride of lime. (6) The walls were then thoroughly whitewashed, one part of lime being used to three parts of water, and in addition two handsful of chloride of lime were also mixed. (7) Holes were then made either in the roof or walls to ensure light and free venti- lation, all thatch straw or matting roofs being removed and burnt as a rule. (8) A red circular mark was then made on houses cleaned and disinfected in which cases had occurred, and a blue mark on other houses so cleaned in which no case had occurred. (9) All heaps of rubbish were consumed on the spot, being saturated as a rule with kerosine oil. (10) All houses were then locked and the key tied to a label, which indicated the number of the house, the street and owner's name, which was then sent by the Superin- tendent of the quarter to the Municipal Secretary. By 14th April the second batch of Karchi coolies and masons had arrived and the work of cleaning and disinfecting all houses in which cases had occurred since the commencement of the outbreak had been brought up to date. The Plague Committee then directed that every house and godown in New Sukkur and Gharibabad was to be considered as infected and cleaned and disinfected in exactly the same manner as houses in which plague cases had occurred. This was a gigantic task and kept the Plague Superintendents engaged continuously from 15th April to 15th June. Altogether about 6,000 houses were cleaned and disinfected in the manner described above. Mr. Cadell with his 12 gangs of Karchi masons and coolies and assisted by Mr. Bahadurji, Subordinate Judge, who relieved Ro Sheb Rochiram as Additional Plague Superintendent of Gharibabad early in April, completed the cleaning and disinfection of the entire Ghribabad quarter consisting of 1,638 houses on 16th May, and some of his gangs and Inspectors were then transferred to the other divisions of the town. About one-third of the Karchi masons and coolies were paid off and sent back on 13th May 1897 and the remainder returned to Karchi on 17th May. Mr. Cadell was transferred to Karchi on 18th May. To him alone belongs the credit of procuring labour and of organising the gangs, and of setting on foot the systematic and scientific cleaning and disinfection of the town. System of segregation of in- mates of infected houses and of neighbours. 5. Up to the end of March it was the custom to segregate only the inmates of houses in which cases of plague occurred. But experience had shown that the plague passed from house to house, and that neighbours living several doors off a plague house were frequently attacked after the inmates of the plague house had been removed; and therefore one of the first measures of the Plague Committee was to give the Plague Superin- tendents full power to segregate also the inmates of as many houses as they considered necessary in the neighbourhood of the plague house. After first week in April such persons were sent to a camp named the 'health camp' quite distinct from the 'segregation camp' and which will be described hereafter. This measure proved most successful. It not only stayed the progress of the plague in the town (especially in Gharibabad which was in places fairly thickly inhabited up to 17th April) by creating wide gaps which had to be bridged before fresh victims could be found, but in many cases it certainly saved the lives of those who were segregated by removing them beyond the reach of infection. From 1st April the Plague Committee introduced a system by which the inmates of plague houses and neighbouring houses were sent to the segregation and health camps, respectively, under printed passes issued by the Superintendent of the quarter in which the case occurred. The printed pass was in counterfoil, and contained details of the names, sex, &c., of the persons segregated from each house. The persons to be segregated were given in charge of a police orderly and he returned with the pass countersigned by the Superintendent of the segregation or health camp as the case might be, in token of his having admitted into the camp the number of persons shown in the pass. Segregation was
123 carried out on a most liberal scale in Gharibabad, where the plague continued to rage during the first half of April. Erection of camps. 6. The very early attention of the Plague Committee was given to the question of providing accommodation outside the town, not only in segrega- tion camps for those persons whom it was their duty to remove from the town and keep under temporary restraint and observation, but also in health camps for those who either would not or could not leave the town and get beyond the reach of infection. (1) New Sukkur Health and Segregation Camps. It has already been mentioned that when the Plague Committee was first appointed neither labour, supplies, nor materials could be locally procured, and that the only camp in existence was the New Sukkur Segregation (or as it was then termed Health) Camp consisting of 25 huts. This camp was quite incapable of accommodating the increasing numbers of inmates of infected houses whom the Superintendents now kept sending out of the town into segregation, much less could the inmates of neighbouring houses, who it had now been decided should also be segregated, find room in it. Mr. Gwyther, the Executive Engineer, N.-W. Railway, and Mr. Rickie, the District Locomotive Superintendent, N.-W. Railway, very kindly came to the rescue, and placed all their resources of labour and material at the disposal of the Plague Committee. The first thing was to enlarge the existing New Sukkur Segregation Camp, and lay out an entirely new health camp on a separate site from the segregation camp, for the accommodation of persons segregated from the neighbourhood of plague cases. By the 14th April 16 sleeper huts had been added to the existing segregation camp, and a health camp of 52 sleeper huts had been completed. Water pipes had already been laid out to the segregation camp, and two stand-pipes erected, and pipes and stand-pipes were also laid on at the new health camp. (2) Cooly Camp. Simultaneously with the construction of a health camp and the enlargement of the segregation camp, Mr. Gwyther was, at the request of the Plague Committee, erecting blocks of sleeper huts for the accommodation of the Karchi masons and coolies on an open site close to the railway and about 1 mile out of Sukkur. In all 16 blocks containing 160 units were built. Water-pipes were also laid on to this camp, and it was finished about the middle of April. The inmates were medically examined every morning and evening. (3) Gharibabad Health Camp. In the first week of April, as the state of things in Gharibabad was becoming worse and worse, and the inhabitants, who are for the most part of the poorest, could not leave their houses and escape infection, it was decided to try the experiment of bodily transport- ing those who remained to a camp outside the town. The Executive Engineer, N.-W. Railway, undertook to provide accommodation for the purpose, and by 15th April a camp consisting of 102 sleeper huts and capable of holding from 500 to 600 people had been completed and water laid on. The removal of Gharibabad and the complete success of the experiment will be described in the next paragraph. (4) Limji's Charhi Camp. After moving the Gharibabad people out into the camp, it was decided to do the same with the people still left in a part of New Sukkur known as Limji's Charhi who num- bered about 300. A new camp consisting of 31 sleeper huts was therefore built for the purpose close to the health camp on the Saidabad Road. As the health camp was practically empty by the time the new camp was ready for the Limji's Charhi people, the few remaining occupants were moved into this new camp, and the health camp, with its 52 huts, was used for the Limji Charhi people. They were moved in on 26th April. (5) Sweepers' Camp. In the latter part of March and at the beginning of April the mortality among the Municipal sweepers had been very heavy. No fewer than 11 cases of plague had occurred among them. By the 20th April a camp, consisting of 58 sleeper huts, was built for them outside the town to the west of Gharibabad, and after they had all been given a new suit of clothes they were with their families, numbering in all 104 persons, moved into this camp. They were medically inspected every day, but no fresh case of plague occurred among them.
124 The Plague Committee's camps, excepting the Old Sukkur camps which are mat sheds and the Cooly and Sweeper camps which were laid out in blocks of 10 sleeper 'units' each 10 feet square, were laid out in rows of sleeper huts 15 feet long by 10 wide by 8 high with an interval of 25 feet between each hut, and 50 feet between each row. The huts were protected from the heat of the sun by a thick roof of mud plaster laid over the sleepers, and Rao Bahadur Showkising provided a layer of grass thatching on the top of this, so that there was no cause for complaint on account of the heat, the roofs of the huts being as thick as, if not thicker than, the roofs the inmates were accustomed to; and besides light and air came in through the clinks between the sleepers. The Plague Committee visited the camps during the greatest heat of the day, and found them reasonably cool. Employment of soldiers. 7. On 4th April a detachment of 30 non-commissioned officers and men of the Wiltshire Regiment, in charge of Lieutenant A. E. Beadon, was sent from Hyderabad to Sukkur for plague duty. The chief duty which it was intended that they should perform was house-to-house visitation. They were employed in this way so long as any people were left in New Sukkur and Gharibabad, and so long as there was any reason to suppose that there might be con- cealed cases of plague in Old Sukkur. They made two searches in Old Sukkur (the first of which was directed by the Com- missioner in Sind in person), 2 in Gharibabad and 3 in New Sukkur; besides occasional searches in the European and Railway quarters, in Jan Mahomed's village, in clusters of huts to the north-west of the Railway Station, occupied by potters, quarry men and others, and in the scattered habitation between Old and New Sukkur. Cases of plague and corpses were discovered both in New Sukkur and Gharibabad, but in no other quarters were any concealed cases found. Searches were also made in the villages of Abad and Arai, but without result. Other duties on which the soldiers were employed were:- (a) Guarding the Lansdowne Bridge at night. The bridge was closed from 31st March so as to prevent all communication between Sukkur and Rohri. A Non-Commissioned Officer and three men were employed on this duty from 10th April to 14th June. (b) Superintending the boiling and disinfection of clothes at the segregation and health camps. (c) Superintending steam disinfecting arrangement at Sukkur and Rohri Railway Stations. (d) For a short time during April 3 soldiers were attached to each Plague Superin- tendent to assist in house cleaning, but for several reasons they were found to be unsuited to this work, and they were therefore taken off it. (e) After 27th May 12 soldiers were employed every day in New Sukkur and Gharibabad under the orders of the Plague Superintendents, to accompany search and medical inspection parties. (f) After 27th May 2 soldiers were employed at the Gharibabad Health Camp to superintend the disinfection of fugitives returning to Sukkur. The detachment of the Wiltshire Regiment returned to Hyderabad on 15th June. The men behaved extremely well. They kept fit, and seemed to thrive on the work. They stood the heat wonderfully, and were quite sorry when the time came for them to go back to Hyderabad. Lieutenant Beadon had a busy time, for in addition to looking after the detachment he worked as Plague Superintendent of Old Sukkur. The Plague Committee are much indebted to him for the valuable assistance he rendered to them. Removal of inhabitants of Gharibabad and Limji's Charhi into health camps. 8. The construction of health camps for the people of Gharibabad and Limji's Charhi has already been described. Of the removal of the people from Gharibabad and the marvellous results obtained by this, Surgeon- Major Corkery writes as follows:- 'For three weeks prior to the 19th April, when plague was at its height and cases of the most malignant type were occurring, of a total of 298 cases registered for the three weeks ending 19th April, no less than 106 occurred in the neighbourhood of Gharibabad, when it was resolved that the whole of the inhabitants should be removed en masse. The day fixed was that of the 17th April and it was a sight which would have impressed any one to witness, about 600 people being marched off quietly with all their goods, chattels, poultry and domestic animals, the wives and children and kit being conveyed in carts supplied at the Municipal expense. Little or no confusion occurred and by about 11 A.M. these people were comfortably settled in their new abode. It must now be remembered that no less than 106 cases occurred amongst them within the past three weeks and a day or two before their compulsory removal; 5 cases and 2 corpses
?125 were found amongst them ; but, marvellous to relate, with the sole exception of one case which occurred the very evening removed (and which needless to add was evidently infected before removal) not another person was attacked, though they were carefully watched and inspected daily during the whole of their stay in camp exactly a month, and even up to the date of this report they have been entirely free from infection.' To this account it need only be added that the proposed date of the removal was kept a secret from the people of Gharibabad, and that on the morning when it was carried out a police cordon was placed round the quarter before daybreak, and the men of the detachment of the Wiltshire Regiment were employed in 5 parties simultaneously to hasten the vacation of the houses and the removal of all property in carts to the camp. By 11 o'clock there was not a soul left in Gharibabad. Altogether 582 people were removed, 367 of whom were sent to Gharibabad Health Camp ; the remaining 215, who were Railway employs, with their families, were sent to the Railway Health Camp on the Shikrpur Road, whereas already stated, 60 blocks of 10 sleeper huts each and capable of accommodating upwards of 1,000 people had been constructed by the Railway Department. The day after the removal of the Gharibabad people the health camp was surrounded by a police cordon before dawn, and all old bedding, &c., was burnt and compensation to the extent of Rs. 476-11-6 paid on the spot. The remainder of their effects, clothes, clean bedding, &c., were disinfected by boiling under the supervision of soldiers. Cots and furniture were disinfected with perchloride of mercury solution. After this no restrictions whatever were placed on the inmates of this camp. They were principally carriage proprietors, cartmen, labourers and weavers and they were allowed to go about their business as usual. Several private shops were opened in the camp, and a large grain and provision store was started by two enterprising Seths, Tahilram and Soliemon. The cleansing and disinfection of the entire Gharibabad quarter was completed on 16th May, and the people were allowed to leave the camp and re-occupy their houses on 17th May. Only one case of plague had occurred in the camp and that on the very first day. It was a case of a man who had sickened from the disease in his own house, before leaving for the camp. The numbers of cases which had occurred in Gharibabad during the 18 days previous to the removal into camp are as follows : -          Cases. 30th  March  9 31st                   ,,  1st    April 4 2nd     ,, 8 3rd      ,, 8 4th      ,,   5 5th          ,, 5 6th          ,, 6 7th       ,,  7 8th           ,, 3 9th          ,, 6 10th         ,, 1 11th         ,, 3 12th    ,, 6 13th   ,, 2 14th    ,,  15th    ,, 6 16th    ,, 6 Total 85  No cases occurred among the 215 persons who were removed from Gharibabad to the Railway Health Camp. The removal of the people from the Limji's Charhi quarter is thus described by Surgeon- Major Corkery :- 'A second instance worth recording is that of the Limji Charhi people. 'This neighbourhood was also badly infected for at least a fortnight prior to the 26th April, 4 and 5 cases occurring daily amongst a somewhat limited population, and as the experiment with regard to the Gharibabad people proved so efficacious, the residents of this quarter were removed en masse on the 26th April to a camp specially set apart for them and described previously, and it is more than satisfactory to have to record that not a single case occurred amongst them for the month they were in camp and that since their return to their quarter they have been absolutely free from infection.' The number of persons removed was 232. On the day of their arrival in camp their clothes and bedding were disinfected by boiling ; rags and dirty bedding were destroyed and Rs. 81 paid as compensation on the spot, and their beds and furniture disinfected with perchloride solution. They were medically examined every day during their stay in camp and were allowed to return to the town on 26th May. B 1135-32
126 Cases of plague in the camps. 9. The following table shows for the different camps (including the Old Sukkur Camps) the number of occupants admitted to each camp and the number of cases of plague that occurred in each from 1st April to the close of the camp:- No. Names of the Camps. No. of occupants. Seizures. Deaths. Cured. Absconded. 1 Old Sukkur Segregation Camp 52 2 1 1  2 New  do.  do. 529 11 7 3 1 3 Old Sukkur Health Camp ... 131 1 1 ... ... 4 Gharibabad  do. 367 1 1 ... ... 5 Mekrani Cooly Camp 312 1 1 ... ... 6 Limji Charhi Health Camp ... 232 ... ... ... ... 7 New Sukkur Health Camp opposite  7 3 4   Limji Charhi Camp ...  346     8 Sweepers' Health Camp ... 104 ... ...   9 Railway Locomotive Health Camp 1,100 6 4 2   Total ... 3,173 29 18 10 1  As for the New Sukkur Segregation Camp it is surprising that so few as 11 cases occurred among 529 people, all of whom had before their removal into camp been very closely exposed to infection, and who came for the most part from Gharibabad, Limji Chahri and the neighbourhood of Frere Street and Babarki Bazr at the east of the town, where the plague assumed a very virulent form at the beginning of April and numbers of corpses were discovered. Of the cases which occurred in the segregation camp 1 case occurred one day after admission, 1 two days after, 4 four days after, 1 five days after, 1 six days after, 1 seven days after, and 1 eleven days after. The eleventh case occurred 13 days after admission. It was that of a woman who had a miscarriage and it was rather a doubtful case of plague. In the New Sukkur Health Camp 346 persons were admitted, all of whom had been exposed to almost as great danger of infection as the inmates of the segregation camp. Still only 7 cases of plague occurred among them, of which 2 occurred the next day after admission, 1 the second day, 2 the third day, 1 after five days, and 1 after eight days. It is extraordinary that there should have been only 1 case of plague in the Mekrani Cooly Camp. The origin of this solitary case was traced to the man having been on visiting terms with a Mrwari in Limji Charhi who was subsequently attacked with plague. When it is remembered how heavy was the mortality among coolies employed in house cleaning work in the early days of the plague in Sukkur (and this was the reason why at the end of March labour could not be procured on any terms), the most probable explanation why these 312 masons and coolies were not attacked with plague must be the precaution they took of disinfecting all houses with perchloride solution before entering them. The immunity enjoyed by the sweepers after their removal into camp has already been alluded to. Arrangements of the segregation and health camps. 10. Surgeon-Captain Borrodaile, A. M. S., held charge of the New Sukkur Segregation and Health Camps from 5th April to 19th May inclusive. After this the general supervision was taken over by Surgeon-Major Corkery, I. M. S. The following staff was employed at these two camps, which were only about 300 yards apart:     Rs. 1 Superintendent on ... 100 1 Assistant on ...  50 1 Hospital Assistant, Sweepers, Kahars and Bhisties.    The period of detention was ordinarily 10 days, but might be more. It was of course always extended in the case of inmates of a hut in which a case of plague occurred. Observation huts were provided for both camps with separate latrine arrangements. The camp latrines were regularly disinfected with chloride of lime and were continually sprayed with perchloride of mercury solution. Upon arrival in camp each person was given a phenyle bath, and such clothes or other property as the Superintendent of the quarter, whence he had been segregated, had permitted him to bring with him, were disinfected by boiling in large iron cauldrons, or by spraying with perchloride of mercury. Beds and bedding were provided in the camp and were disinfected every day. Men of the Wiltshire Regiment superintended the boiling and disinfection. Both camps were rigorously guarded by police. Printed registers were maintained, and printed tickets given to every person admitted showing details of date of admission, &c.
127 A Bania's shop was provided at each camp, and free rations were in most cases given to the inmates. It was left to the discretion of the Plague Superintendent to note on the pass with which he sent the people to the camp, whether or no they were entitled to receive free rations. It was the rule that all who depended for their livelihood on some occupation which would be interrupted by their detention in camp should receive free rations. Mr. Shoukising, Divisional Forest Officer, arranged for supplies and superintended their distribution at all different camps, not only the segregation and health camps, and fixed the rates at which different articles should be sold. Those entitled to free rations were at first supplied with daily doles of certain articles, but it was soon found to be a more convenient and popular arrangement to make a daily money allowance to each person and let him purchase what he wanted at the camp shop. The allowances were 4 annas for a man, 3 annas for a woman and 2 annas for a child. Liquor and opium were supplied to those who were accustomed to them. Before leaving the camp each person was again washed in phenyle and his clothes were re-disinfected. The largest number of persons in the segregation camp on any one day was 143 on 13th April and in the health camp 182 on 11th April. Plague in Old Sukkur and mea- sures taken for its suppression. 11. As Old Sukkur is about a mile distant from New Sukkur and more healthily situ- ated and less crowded, and inhabitants are better to do than those of New Sukkur, it is not surprising that the plague was slow in making its appearance there, and that for a long time only im- ported cases from New Sukkur occurred. A great many Old Sukkur people carry on business in New Sukkur by day and return to their houses in Old Sukkur at night, and these were the people who were first attacked. During March there were 19 cases, all of this kind. The cases which occurred at the beginning of April were also declared by the people of Old Sukkur to be imported cases. But the police cordon had been established on 3rd April 1897 and communication absolutely stopped between the two towns, and therefore this theory cannot be accepted, and the way in which most cases after 1st April occurred in houses near other houses in which cases of plague had previously occurred, proved that the disease had at last become local. The opening of the Old Sukkur Plague Hospital on March 25th has already been mentioned. Up to the end of March persons segregated in plague cases had been sent to a small camp consisting of 5 huts near the hospital. But the accommodation here was inadequate, and as the Plague Committee considered a severe outbreak to be not improbable, sites for two new camps, one a segregation camp and the other a health camp, were selected and huts run up with the least possible delay. Mr. Gwyther kindly undertook the construction of the segregation camp which consisted of 26 sleeper huts, and lay between the hospital and the railway, while the health camp was taken in hand by a local contractor, and consisted of 10 large mat and mud plaster sheds under trees on the bank of the Sukkur Canal. On 8th May as the sleeper huts which lay in a hollow out of the wind, and under the railway embankment, were found unbearably hot, the segrega- tion camp was removed to a shady site at the mouth of the Sukkur Canal where mat and mud plaster sheds had been erected for the purpose. The arrangements for provisioning and guarding the Old Sukkur camps and for latrines and disinfection were exactly the same as those at the New Sukkur camps. Persons were sent there by the Plague Superintendent of Old Sukkur under the same system of passes, and the same kind of registers were also kept. There was a staff of 1 Hospital Assistant and 1 Superintendent, besides the usual complement of Bhisties, sweepers and Kahars. Two cases occurred in the segregation and one in the health camp (vide table in paragraph 9 above). The largest number of inmates on any one day was 86 at the health camp on 11th June, and 26 at the segregation camp on 12th May. Rao Saheb Kimatsing, Mukhtirkar of Sukkur, acted as Plague Superintendent of Old Sukkur until 3rd April. Lieutenant Fagan, 6th Bombay Cavalry, was in charge from 4th to 12th April. He was succeeded by Lieutenant Leith, 6th Bombay Cavalry, who remained in charge until 25th April, and from that date until the disappearance of the plague from Old Sukkur, Lieutenant Beadon, Wiltshire Regiment, was in charge, assisted first by Rao Saheb Kimatsing and afterwards by Rao Bahdur Chandumal, Huzur Deputy Collector. Trained gangs under trained Inspectors were attached to the Plague Superintendent' and his staff was so strong that the houses in which cases of plague occurred and the neigh- bouring houses, the inmates of which were sent to the health camp, were always cleaned and disinfected on the day of the occurrence of the cases. The Plague Superintendent of Old Sukkur, besides directing segregation and cleaning and disinfection work, was in charge of the two camps and also superintended the sanitation of the town. After the departure of Lieutenant Beadon on 15th June, Rao Bahdur Chandumal
128 held charge of Old Sukkur, but the plague had long since died out and the only work left to be done was the 're-occupation' work, which will be presently described. The people of Old Sukkur, if they did not assist the authorities, at least showed no opposition to the measures of the Plague Committee, and there is no reason to suppose that any of the cases discovered had been wilfully concealed. Statement No. A contains details of the cases that occurred. The first case occurred on 9th March and the last on 18th May. There were 19 cases (all imported) in March, 27 in April, and 5 in May, 51 in all. The largest number of cases that occurred on any one day was 3, and this figure was reached four times. The last case of plague occurred on 18th May, but Old Sukkur had been practically free from plague some time before then; and, thanks to the rigorous way in which both inmates of the house and neighbours had been segregated, as each case occurred, the town had never been badly infected. At no time was more than one quarter of the population absent from Old Sukkur, and in April when the plague had become local, people only left with the written permission of the Plague Superintendent, and did not move far away. There never was any real exodus. So on 25th May the Plague Committee issued a notice permitting the people to come back to their houses after putting in 3 days under observation either at the health camp or under the trees on the bank of the Sukkur Canal, and after their persons and effects had been disinfected. This notice was readily responded to. After the 9th June, as the Sukkur Tluka was known to be free from plague and the Old Sukkur fugitives were close at hand, they were allowed to re-occupy their houses after being detained only so long as the process of disinfection lasted. Rao Bahdur Chandumal supervised the disinfecting arrangements. Old Sukkur was full by the end of June. Measures taken to prevent infection spreading from Sukkur to the Punjab and elsewhere and to prevent the infection of Sukkur. 12. (a) Police Cordons.-Besides the posting of police at all the railway bridges on the roads between New and Old Sukkur to prevent communi- cation between the two towns, all the roads leading from New Sukkur into the adjoining country were from the 7th March 1897 vigorously guarded by police, and no sick or suspicious  person was allowed to leave or enter Sukkur. This cordon was maintained until 4th of May, when plague had practically died out in Sukkur. The Lansdowne Bridge and the ferries were closed from 31st March to 6th July, and all communication between Sukkur and Rohri forbidden except by passes issued by the Plague Committee. Until the end of April the object of this was to prevent infection being carried from Sukkur to Rohri, while afterwards when Rohri had become thoroughly infected it was to prevent the reinfection of Sukkur. As a case came to notice of a person avoiding the police guard on the foot-way by following the permanent-way and thus crossing the bridge, a guard was furnished at night by the detachment of the Wiltshire Regiment. On 6th April the Plague Committee issued orders forbidding any person to leave Sukkur by road except under a pass from the Superintendent of the quarter of the town in which he resided. Persons leaving under passes were to be disinfected at the camp cauldrons. These orders, though somewhat relaxed in practice towards the close of April, remained in force until the police cordon was taken off. From 12th April all the River Indus ferries between Rohri and Shahpur and Rohr and Madeji were closed so as to save the Rohri side from being infected by Sukkur fugi- tives. Subsequently this measure protected the Sukkur side from the Rohri side. (b) Disinfection of persons arriving at and departing from Sukkur by train.-Surgeon- Major Corkery describes the arrangements as follows: 'Up to the 15th April the disinfection of clothing of arrivals and departures by trains was carried on in the ordinary manner by boiling, large cauldrons being utilized for this purpose and some disinfectants being usually added to the water. This process, though effective, ruins the coloured clothes and dyes all white things, causing great complaints, while books, boots and other articles could not possibly be boiled but only syringed over with some antiseptic solution. The boiling process was superseded by that of steaming. On the 15th April a locomotive not in use was placed in position near the railway siding and connected by a steam pipe with a large iron tank, but as this gave only a pressure of 7 or 8 lbs. and a corresponding temperature of 230 or 233 and this did not satisfy the requirements of the Government of India, the Railway Locomotive Department kindly altered the arrangement and supplied a more powerful tank, capable of supplying 20 to 25 lbs. pressure, with a corresponding temperature of 250 and above, and this was in working order after 3 days' suspension by the 5th May. The disinfection is immediately under the supervision of Sergeant Brady, Railway Inspector of Police, and a staff of 1 Jemadar and 4 coolies and the whole is generally supervised by a Commissioned Medical Officer. There is no confu- sion and seldom or ever any complaints. While the kit is being disinfected and boiled, the passengers are accommodated in sheds close by and have a disinfecting bath. The clothes come out practically dry and the smaller article in a compressed bundle comes out heated to such an extent, that it is not comfortable to handle. The steaming lasts
?129 20 to 25 minutes; a Eurasian nurse is in charge of the female passengers and their sheds are erected on the other side of the steaming apparatus. A similar arrangement exists at Shikrpur and also at Khnpur, while at Rohri the ordinary boiling process takes place. By these arrangements the risks of railway passengers conveying infection by means of their clothes are reduced to a minimum and the Punjab and Baluchistan are both practically protected.' From 1st July the disinfection of persons departing by trains and also of persons arriving except passengers from Rohri and by the Kotri-Rohri trains was dispensed with. From 5th May Surgeon-Lieutenant Gwyther exercised general supervision over the steam disinfecting. Liberal exceptions were of course made to the general rule that all arrivals and departures should be subjected to disinfection. Government servants on duty, parties to suits, well-known traders and native gentlemen and others were not detained, and it was left to the discretion of the Commissioned Medical Officer who examined the trains to make such other exceptions as he thought proper. (c) Medical Inspections of trains and restrictions of booking.-This is a subject which affects not only Sukkur but other parts of Sind, the Punjb and Baluchistan, and it will therefore be dealt with in Chapter III. Arrangement made after the abatement of the plague for the return of the fugitives and the re- occupation of the town. 13.    At the beginning of May, not counting the Gharibabad and Limji  Charhi people who had been moved out into camp, there were hardly 100 people left in Gharibabad and New Sukkur. The plague had by this time much abated and many of the fugitives were anxious to be allowed to return so that they might open their premises and take stock of their property. But the cleaning and disinfection of the town was not yet completed and most quarters were considered to be still unsafe for re-occupation. The permanent re-occupation of houses was therefore forbidden by an order dated 7th May issued under the authority of Rule 7 of Government Resolution No 1750 A./1221-A. P., dated 30th March 1897, but at the same time it was notified and made known throughout the district that temporary re-occupation of premises during the day time would be permitted to heads of firms and families, provided the premises had been cleaned and disinfected and that the night was spent at the camps or on the Bandar. Plague Superintendents were authorized to issue yellow printed passes for re-occupation on these terms; and the persons in whose favour such passes were issued were required to paste them on their door posts, otherwise they would be liable to immediate expulsion from the town. The system of granting passes for temporary occupation came into force from 10th May and worked most satisfactorily. At first only men of business came in to look after their pro- perty. Next those who could not earn their living in the villages re-opened their shops in the town. As people complained of not being able to guard their premises at night, the conditions of the pass were on 20th May so far relaxed as to permit every householder either himself to remain at night in the street in front of his premises or to appoint a watchman for the purpose. Red passes were granted in favour of one man only for each house. These passes were to be produced for inspection of the police patrols at night. By 17th May the whole of Gharibabad had been cleaned and disinfected and the people had been allowed to return from the health camp to their houses, under printed passes which they were required to paste on their doors. As the whole quarter was clean the other residents of the Gharibabad who had fled from Sukkur were allowed to come back to their houses on con- dition that they stayed 5 days in the Gharibabad Health Camp and were, together with their clothes, bedding and property, thoroughly disinfected. The period of detention was afterwards reduced to 2 days. On 29th May, as Gharibabad was fast filling and no fresh cases of plague had occurred either there or in New Sukkur among the people who had been granted permission for temporary re-occupation, the Plague Committee consented to permit permanent re-occupation of all parts of New Sukkur except Frere Street, Babarki Bazar, Gunga Lane and Pound Street, where the plague had raged most fiercely and most corpses and rats had been found. The conditions under which re-occupation was allowed were as follows: Persons from Shikrpur, Lrkhna, and Jacobabad might return to their houses with- out being detained or disinfected, provided they brought certificates of one month's con- tinuous residence from the Chief Plague Authorities of these towns. Persons returning from beyond the Shikrpur District were also allowed to re-occupy on production of similar certificates from the Collector, Deputy Commissioner, or Assistant Collector of the district concerned. Other persons coming from the Shikrpur District or the Khairpur State were required to remain under observation at the Gharibabad Health Camp for 3 days and be disinfected together with their clothes and baggage. The period of detention was afterwards reduced to 2 days. On 7th June as no case of plague was discovered among the new arrivals in the town by the daily house-to-house visitation parties of Hos- pital Assistants and soldiers, the period of detention at the camp was reduced to 'such period not exceeding 48 hours as will enable the person's clothes and belongings to be dis- infected.' B 1135-33
?130 On 8th Juno all those who had left their houses in New Sukkur and Gharibabad, but had not gone outside Municipal limits, were allowed to re-occupy without being detained under observation or disinfected. From 12th June, when the Mohurrum was over, the fugitives began to return from all directions, and on some days as many as 500 presented themselves for disinfection at the Ghari- babad Camp. On 26th June as all went well, the prohibited streets in New Sukkur were thrown open, and the period of detention at the camp was reduced to 24 hours or 'such period not exceeding 24 hours as the disinfection process may occupy.' The system of granting red printed passes for the re-occupation of houses on production of a disinfection certificate from the Gharibabad Camp is still in force. The red pass shows the number of men, women and children in the house; it is pasted on the door post so that the Plague Superintendent and the medical inspection parties as they go their rounds can readily compare the number of occupants actually present in the house, with the number shown on the pass. More than 75 per cent. of the New Sukkur people have now returned, and  Gharibabad is almost full again. From 17th May up to the present time the disinfecting arrangements at the Gharibabad Health Camp have been in charge of Ro Bahdur Showkising, Divisional Forest Officer. Since the 26th June, as the rush of people had become very great, he has been assisted by Ro Bahdur Chandumal, Huzr Deputy Collector. Men of the Wiltshire Regiment superintended the boiling until the detachment left Sukkur on 15th June. Mr. Showkising has an ample staff of assistants. Clothes and bedding are boiled for half an hour in huge iron cauldrons, and furniture and property that would be spoiled by boiling are syringed with solution of mercury perchloride. The superintendence morning and evening of disinfecting operations on such a vast scale has been a most laborious task, and Mr. Showkising is entitled to great credit for the thorough way in which the work has been carried out. Daily medical inspection of the inhabitants still continues. 14.    From 10th May there have been daily house-to-house  visitations in  every  quarter of the town. The Plague Superintendents are responsible for this. A Hospital Assistant and a highly paid member of the Collector's Office establishment is attached to each Superintendent. Until the detachment of the Wiltshire Regiment was withdrawn 3 soldiers used to accompany each visitation party. Surgeon-Lieutenant Gwyther exercises general supervision over all the visitation parties and moves from quarter to quarter of the town every morning. These arrangements ensure the medical examination of every person in the town once a day. Only one case of plague, and that a doubtful one, has been discovered by these visitation parties. This was on 2nd June. The patient was a boy and he was discharged cured from hospital in less than a week." 6. The following paragraphs regarding the special measures taken in Rohri after the formation of the Sukkur-Rohri Plague Committee are extracted from a report by Mr. Mountford, I.C.S.: Measures    adopted  for  dealing with the plague in the town. "Compulsory notification of deaths from fever and plague had been in force in the town from the start as also examination of dead bodies, burning and burial grounds. These orders had been first of all passed by me under my special powers and was again re-passed under Act III of 1897, when the rule was sanctioned by Government. It was a matter of first import- ance to enforce this rule and this was borne in mind. On the 6th April one Sabhago was prosecuted by me for not reporting his brother's case and was punished by me with one month's simple imprisonment. On the 5th May 1897 one Mulchand was similarly punished and since then cases were regularly reported, although as a rule when the buboes had well developed. Later on all cases of fever were regularly reported. In the initial stages of the plague the inmates of the same house only were segregated, while the neighbours were ordered to remove elsewhere pending the disinfection of their houses. The plague house was dis- infected according to rules and holes 4 feet square cut in the roof. Subsequently the holes cut were 6 feet square. In every case the plague-house remained vacant for 10 days, except in the first few cases when 8 days was the limit. The segregation of neighbours to the health camp was ordered from the 5th April, 12 days before the first local case, and it was carried out without exception in every case. At first only two houses each side were segregated, but as cases occurred in some instances in the third house a day or two after 6 houses were removed to the health camp all round the plague-house. There was a certain amount of opposition at first as the people considered this a needless hardship, and for some days the surroundings of a plague house were vacated before the case was reported. This presented a new danger, as infected neighbours were running away to other parts of the town bearing infection with them; accordingly I treated all houses in which the run- aways were discovered as plague houses and segregated the inhabitants of the sheltering house and some of the neighbouring houses. The result was that when in the next case the
131 neighbours ran away to another quarter, the inhabitants of that quarter gave immediate information and the pernicious practice stopped almost immediately. After a while when persons began to return from the health camp and told how they were treated, the opposition to segregation broke down, and except in a very few cases the neighbours were willing enough to go when they saw there was no help for it and that no exceptions were allowed, except in the case of invalid women. Indeed in one or two cases the neighbours were found packing up their traps ready to go to Dalho of their own accord. The largest number of persons segregated in any one case amounted to 140, but the average is only 31 on account of several cases having occurred in the same houses. At first the cases occurred in no particular part of the town, but after a while the quarters of Thadha Matai, Vachwari and Thatharki showed a distinct preponderance of cases over the rest of the town. The first which had declared 8 cases was closed on the 1st May, the second had declared 5 cases and was closed on the 6th of May, the third had declared 3 cases but was close to the first quarter. It was therefore closed on the 7th May. The quarters were then thoroughly disinfected. The first quarter and the third were not opened until the 11th of June, but the Vachwari quarter, which was in another part of the town, was opened on the 29th May or 3 weeks after. Since their disinfection no case has occurred in these quarters. On the 17th of June the Lallas' quarter was closed for 5 days pending its thorough disinfection, as it was feared that the plague had taken a hold in the quarter owing to 3 cases occurring in rapid succession. Some 250 people were sent to the health camp and the quarter thoroughly disinfected. They were then allowed to return except those who lived in the same street in which a case had occurred. Since then the plague has not made its appearance in this quarter. In addition to these measures some individual streets were closed. Jajka street had declared 4 cases on the 4th and 7th May. It was closed from the 4th May to the 11th June. Mathradas' lane declared one case on 10th May and I found a dead rat in an adjoining house. This lane was closed from that day and was not opened until the 11th June. Dhaga street declared 5 cases by the 12th May and was therefore closed. As no case occurred in its vicinity it was opened after an interval of 14 days. In the meantime these streets were thoroughly disinfected and the plague has not re- appeared there. It is by such stringent measures and by segregating the occupants of whole streets at a time for 10 days at the health camp that the plague has been got under. The population of Rohri, which consists of 9,000 souls at ordinary times, never, even at the height of the plague, fell below 5,000." 7.   The following table of indigenous cases of plague and deaths from plague in Sukkur is extracted from the report of the Commissioner : Week ending        Cases. Deaths. 26th February 1897  4 1 5th March,, 6 8 12th     ,, 14 9 19th     ,, 28 19 26th     ,, 97 76 2nd April,, 105 56 9th     ,, 111 75 16th     ,, 87 59 23rd     ,, 42 50 30th     ,, 17 16 7th May  ,, 13 8 14th    ,, 6 5 21st    ,, 4 5 28th    ,, 1 1 4th June  ,, 1 1  Add-12th        1  Add-7th 1  February.   July. Total    ... 537 391 B 1135+
?132 CHAPTER II. MEASURES TAKEN IN THE MOFUSSIL. SECTION I. Provision of Disinfectants, Inspecting Staff, &c. Dr. J. Lowson of the Colonial Service, and Surgeon-Major Reade and Surgeon-Captains Beveridge and Borradaile of the Army Medical Service, all of whom had had experience of the plague in Hongkong, were sent out from England by the Secretary of State, and arrived in Bombay in the last week in February. The two junior officers, Surgeon-Captains Borradaile and Beveridge, were sent to Karchi and Poona, respectively, to assist the Commissioner in Sind in the former and Mr. Rand in the latter, and Surgeon-Major Reade and Dr. Lowson were attached to the General Department of the Secretariat, which was manag- ing plague operations under the direct control of His Excellency the Governor. The part taken by the latter two officers (who were styled Joint Plague Com- missioners) in plague administration in the Mofussil, included giving advice regarding disinfectants, preparing a memorandum for general information and instruction regarding plague, making local inspections and giving detailed advice. 2.    As regards disinfectants, inquiries were made at the suggestion of the Joint Plague Commissioners regarding the existing stock of the principal disin- fectants in all districts in the Presidency: disinfectants were obtained from all local Governments in India who had any to spare: large purchases were made, specially for Poona City, in the Bombay market, and the Secretary of State was requested by telegram to immediately despatch to India 10 tons of perchloride of mercury (corrosive sublimate) and 5,000 gallons of crude carbolic acid.    The Executive Engineer, Presidency, was constituted storekeeper for disinfectants, and officers were authorized to indent therefor on  him.    He was required to obtain the permission of Government in the General Department for the supply of disinfectants other than those specially authorized, or for the supply of any disinfectants to officers other than those generally authorized by Government. 3.    The general information and advice on plague, prepared by the Joint Plague Commissioners, and widely circulated by Government to their officers, is given below: It should be thoroughly understood that while this embodies general principles advo- cated by the Joint Plague Commissioners, considerable discretion must be used in applying them to particular localities, and that whereas a certain rule may be found useful in some places, it might be totally unsuitable for application to others. (1).-PREVENTIVE   MEASURES. These are mainly the ordinary dictates of sanitation. (a) Drains and sewers should be thoroughly flushed with a strong stream of water. Do not use disinfectants for this purpose; it is merely wasting them. (b) The death-rate must be closely watched. An increased death-rate must be looked upon with suspicion, unless there are local circumstances which can account for it. Surprise visits might be made to houses in which there are known cases of illness. An increased death-rate necessitates strict investigation. (c)  In cases of death, where a  suspicion exists that it may be due to plague, the body should be examined  by a doctor   or medical subordinate.    In towns where there  is  an available medical staff, all bodies should be examined.    This examination is most important as conveying the earliest information of the importation of the disease. Notification of death should be made compulsory; and as far as possible the cause of death also. All cases of sudden fever, swelling of glands in neck, armpits, or groins, cough with pain and oppression of chest should be reported at once to the authorities. Notification should be made compulsory, and means taken to let the inhabitants know it is compulsory. (d)  In towns and villages rats undoubtedly convey the disease from house to house and from district to district.    Means should therefore be taken to destroy as many as possible; the danger arising from their presence should be pointed out to the inhabitants.     All dead rats should be burnt.   When  dead rats are found in an uninfected district, they should be
?133 examined by a medical man and preparations made for bacteriological diagnosis.    (See note at end.) (e) Burning of all excreta should be carried out when feasible; in any case it should be buried. Public latrines should be frequently whitewashed. (f) Overcrowded and insanitary houses should have immediate attention paid to them. In the case of the former, part of the inhabitants should be turned out and housed elsewhere, whilst insanitary houses should be closed until the defects have been remedied. (Authority- Rule 11, Government Resolution No. 1728, dated 29th March 1897.) The free entrance of light and air is of the first importance, and obstructions to these should be freely removed. (Authority-Rules 12 and 27, Government Resolution No. 1728, dated 29th March 1897.) (g) The inhabitants should be informed of the efficacy of disinfectants in stopping the spread of the disease when they are thoroughly applied, and instructions for disinfection freely distributed. This refers to clothing and houses and their contents, especially to floors of houses. After touching a patient and especially clothing  soiled by excretion, the hands should always be thoroughly washed in a   disinfecting   solution.    Excretions of  all kinds are  the chief source of infection. (h) The inhabitants of villages should be urged to prevent the entrance of all persons who, they have reason to believe, have come from infected areas. The arrival of such persons should be immediately reported to the nearest Police author- ities, who should take instant steps to disinfect the person's clothes and baggage, after which he should be segregated for nine days. Handbills should be distributed amongst the inhabitants of a district, pointing out the virulence of the disease and the rapidity with which it spreads, so that they should know the danger they will run should the disease be introduced. The necessity for segregation of people from infected areas that the customs of the country admits of, or a perfect system of daily observation combined with personal clean- liness and municipal sanitation, should be impressed on all, as being important factors in preventing the entrance of the disease and its spread when once imported. (Authority for acting-Rule 25 of Government Resolution No. 1728, dated 29th March 1897.) (i) All stagnant pools of decomposing organic matter in the neighbourhood of habita- tions should be immediately filled up with fresh earth. All accumulations of filth and rubbish should be burnt or buried. (2).-PREPARATORY. (a) Hospitals for the sick and segregation huts for the probably infected should be erected close together so that the segregated may visit their sick relatives at intervals. The proximity of hospitals to the segregation camps is essential, as it will tend to diminish objections on the part of the populace to these methods if all the family are housed in practically one camp. (b) In selecting a site, the following matters require attention; (1)   Good water-supply. (2)  Site where wet weather  will not flood the patients out, or make  matters too uncomfortable for attendants. (3)  There should be facilities for the removal of the large amount of water required for washing purposes, &c. (4)   Disposal of excreta. (5)  Easy access. (6)  Proximity to burying ground and burning ght. (7)   Easy isolation. (c) Sheds will have to be erected for certain main groups of castes, with a partition between males and females. When hospitals and segregation huts are built by private members of the community, close supervision is necessary to see that their arrangements are of a sanitary description, which includes proper isolation. (d) Administration huts should provide accommodation for doctor, apothecary, dispen- sary, female nurses (if any), ward attendants, dhobis, cooks, night-soil coolies, camp fol- lowers, kitchen and disinfecting room. Each hut should have a board hung up denoting for what purpose it is being used. An observation hospital hut is also necessary. Segregation camps should have their huts small and numerous rather than large and few. (c) A stock of the following disinfectants should be laid in: (1)  Carbolic Acid. (2)   Corrosive Sublimate. (3)  Quicklime. (4)  Chloride of Lime. B 1135-34\?\
134 Carbolic acid and corrosive sublimate may be procured from the Executive Engineer, Presidency. These disinfectants are the best for use in plague. (f) Large cauldrons should be procured for disinfecting clothes, &c., by boiling, as this is the best and cheapest method of disinfection for articles which are not seriously spoilt by the process. Barrels cut in two form most effective wooden tubs in which corrosive sublimate disinfection can be carried out. Do not use metal buckets for corrosive sublimate solutions. (g) The hospitals should be only partially equipped, if stores exist where the remainder of the equipment can be procured rapidly. (h) A suitable burying ground should be selected; a separate one for plague burials alone is recommended. (i) Arrangements for the organization of- (1)  house-to-house visitation parties, (2)  removal of sick and probably infected, (3)  removal of dead (sometimes necessary), should be made.    The sanitary staff may require strengthening for whitewashing and disinfecting processes if plague breaks out.    Suitable ambulances will have to be procured for the sick. The principal difficulties are- (1)  Procuring native medical assistance. (2)  Irregularity of houses preventing successful searching. (3)  Procuring female assistance, hospital accommodation, &c., for purdah women. (4)  In addition to usual native obstruction, the prevention of free handling of dead bodies. (5)  Labour. If an epidemic has commenced and labour is scarce, it has been proved to be sound policy to utilize it all at once on building accommodation in preference to going on with town work. Prior to plague breaking out, it is advisable that a proclamation should be issued to the inhabitants that certain measures will be adopted in the way of isolation and segregation, but that every precaution will be taken to preserve caste distinctions. Each community might be invited to erect their own hospitals and segregation huts, but at the same time they should be clearly given to understand that these institutions will be under European supervision. The necessity should also be impressed on them of removing their sick at once to hospital, both on account of the better chance of recovery and the less chance of compulsory measures being carried out which might interfere with their caste system. It cannot be too strongly impressed on all that, provided the above measures are carried out, the first cases of sickness isolated at once, the people immediately in contact with them segregated and the house thoroughly disinfected, the probability of the disease assuming epide- mic dimensions will be greatly lessened, and this will be proportional to the thoroughness with which the work is done. Roughly speaking, the main links of the chain by which the disease is spread are- (1)  Human beings, (2)  Infected houses, (3)   Rats, (4) Clothing of the infected, always remembering that man is the great factor in spreading it over a distance. To non-professional plague authorities the general signs and symptoms of plague may be summarised thus:-To commence with, there is usually high fever with considerable headache, which may be either throbbing or boring in character. There is frequently a feeling of chilliness which may amount to a severe shiver, with severe pain in back and limbs occasionally. The pulse generally rises to over 100 per minute, full and easily felt in the early stages, but weak, more rapid and difficult to feel in the later stages of the disease. Respirations are also increased in number, rising from a normal of 15 to 18 up to 20-30 or more per minute. In adults the glands of the groin, armpit or neck are usually enlarged and tender; in children the neck or armpit glands are more frequently affected than those of the groin. In the early stages there may be a dry hacking cough without any sputum. In later stages the sputum may be copious, thick or thin, and sometimes blood-stained. A feeling of intense oppression or weight about the heart and stomach is frequently complained of. Delirium comes on early in the disease, and may be of a quiet and stupid or very violent type. It is shown by incoherence of speech, inability to pro- trude the tongue properly, and tardiness and tremor in doing so, as also inability to concen- trate attention on what one says to him, being unable to fix his eyes straight on the ques- tioner's face. The eyes are generally somewhat inflamed (suffused) and occasionally jaun- diced. A tottering gait is usually well-marked early in the disease, walking along a straight
?135 line usually being an impossibility. Inability to retain excreta must be viewed with suspi- cion, as this frequently occurs in plague. These are the main symptoms. Carbuncles, boils, hmorrhagic. spots, &c., are so seldom met with that little attention should be paid to them outside hospitals. (3).-WHEN PLAGUE HAS BROKEN OUT. (a) All sick should be removed at once to hospital, and relatives and friends occupying the same room or who have been exposed to the infection should be taken to the segregation camp close to the hospital. Any person who can be proved to have been in contact with the sick person should be detained also. In first cases of the disease authorities should segregate large numbers of those living in the same house. (Authority-Rule 7 of Government Resolution No. 1728, dated 29th March 1897.) (b) If there is any disinclination on the part of the populace to notify cases of plague or suspected plague or to bring their sick to hospital, more stringent measures will have to be adopted in the shape of house-to-house visitation by search parties and compulsory removal to hospital and segregation camp. At the beginning and the end of an epidemic comparatively large numbers of people should be segregated, as these are the times for its greatest necessity, not to mention the fact that accommodation will not be strained then. (c)  Thorough disinfection of the house from which a case has been removed should then be carried out and the house closed until the inhabitants have completed their segregation period of nine days.    The contents of the house must also be disinfected.    Nothing should be allowed to be removed  until disinfection  has  taken place -particular attention must be paid to this. (d)  The inside of all houses in the infected district should be limewashed as a sanitary measure.   In this case good chloride of lime is preferable to quicklime. Good chloride of lime spread freely on floors will undoubtedly lessen the chance of infection of a house, especially by rats; and even after a case has occurred in a human being in that house, it will lessen the chance of infection of the healthy.    In an   infected district this should be carried out in all houses. (e)  After the segregation period has ended the people may resume occupation of the house, presuming that the disinfection has been carried out properly. In an epidemic all cases of fever should be treated as suspicious and removed for obser- vation; they usually turn out to be plague. The patient has a better chance of recovery by this procedure, and the chance of surrounding friends becoming infected is very greatly lessened. (4).-DISINFECTION. Infected rooms in houses.-In all of these there should be a preliminary disinfection by chlorine before an attempt is made or allowed to remove anything in the house. This is done by first sousing the walls, floors and contents of the house with water. Then add one pint of water to one-third of a pint of sulphuric acid and pour this on to a pound and a half of chloride of lime in an earthenware vessel. All windows and doors should be closed and holes closed by paper before the materials are mixed. The above amount suffices for on thousand cubic feet -say, a room eight feet high and twelve feet by ten. If the house be of the better class, only the room which is infected should be treated thus; if a bad house, all the rooms should be treated and the house shut up on the certificate of a Medical practitioner. Many native houses, however, cannot be treated thus. Another method of chlorine disinfection may be used, but this requires more laborious preparation. Take eight ounces of common salt and two ounces of dioxide of manganese and add them to a mixture of two ounces of strong sulphuric acid and two ounces of water. This suffices for a room of the size mentioned above. In this case also the house and its contents should previously be rendered moist. Instead of this chlorine disinfection, if hand pumps and corrosive sublimate or carbolic solution be at hand, disnfection can be carried out by these agents. Good mops may be used almost as effectually as hand-pumps, but the work will proceed more slowly. The room must be washed down by hand pump with a solution of corrosive sublimate (4 oz. of corrosive sublimate and 1/2 lb. of common salt to 30 gallons of water) or carbolic acid solution (one quart to 25 gallons of water with a small handful of soft soap added to enable it to be mixed pro- perly); all old clothing and bedding is to be taken out and burnt; all good clothing to be dipped in one of the disinfecting solutions for half an hour or into boiling water and thoroughly boiled for at least 30 minutes. Any partitions, shutters, &c., ordered to be removed by a medical officer are to be burnt in the street; all crevices, angles of walls, junction of floor with wall, are to be thoroughly mopped with a disinfectant solution. If the floor is composed of earth, it should be treated with a disinfectant solution and then removed to a depth of two inches. After this has been done the walls and roof should be whitewashed.
136 Feeding and drinking utensils and other house gear lying on floors should be rinsed in carbolic lotion and put out in the sun whilst the house disinfection goes on. The officer in charge of the party may order part of the roof to be removed if he considers it necessary for admission of light and air. The outside of the house does not require limewashing. In non-infected rooms of infected houses the chlorine or first fluid disinfection need not take place, but after whitewashing the floor should be thoroughly swabbed out with some of the disinfectant solutions. The earthen floors in non-infected rooms need not be removed at the pre- sent time. In infected houses where grain is stored the chlorine disinfection should always be attempt- ed and with a double strength of chlorine-grain bags should be lightly sprayed with water beforehand. After opening the house the grain bags should be removed and exposed to the sun for two days, whilst loose grain is simply spread out on boards or slabs of stone in the sun for the same time. All the lower class inhabitants should be enjoined to take all their clothes to be disinfected either in one of the solutions or in the boiling water. All stagnant filthy pools are to be filled up with earth. If they are evidently badly pollut- ed they should be treated with some of the disinfectants on the spot and then filled up. A care- ful search should be made for all filth, and when discovered it should be treated with quicklime and buried by the scavengers or removed to the night-soil dept. If any fires are close by, the safest and best method is to take all such filth and burn it along with other rubbish. The necessity for thorough and systematic disinfection should be impressed on all subordi- nate officers. Partly puckka huts-i. e., stone or mortar walls with cocoanut-leaf or other temporary roof-should be disinfected as follows: The roofs should first be removed and the leaves exposed to the sun-being occasionally turned during the time taken for disinfecting, &c. The floor should be mopped with corrosive sublimate solution and also the lower foot of the walls-particular attention being paid to the crevices and the junction of the walls to the floors. Any partitions should be removed and either burnt or whitewashed. The walls should then be whitewashed. The roof should be replaced about the fifth day afterwards and the hut may then be re-occupied. Good quicklime only should be used. Where corrosive sublimate is scarce for mopping thoroughly, limewashing the floor is the next best thing to do. To all corrosive sublimate solutions some aniline blue should be added; this will assist to prevent the solution being used for potable purposes. Where dead rats are found in an infected house they should be burnt and a careful search made for rat-holes. If any are found, free application of disinfecting solution is necessary. In houses with wooden floors and wainscoting these should be turned up to dis- infect the rat "runs." When dead rats are found in any house it should be disinfected: here good chloride of lime spread on the floors is of great service (see above). Where practicable the house should be evacuated for a time. [N.B.-Compensation should be paid early, and before destroying anything let the people know compensation will be paid where necessary.] (5).-HOSPITAL. The hospital should be built on open ground, freely exposed to the sun and air. Isolation is imperative so far as human intercourse is concerned. The floor, if possible, should be made of some non-absorbent material that can be flushed down with water; if of earth, chloride of lime should be freely sprinkled over it daily. Ventilation must be carefully attended to by leaving open spaces between the walls and the roof. The huts should face the prevailing wind and should be erected in echelon. On admission, the clothes of the patient are to be boiled in water for at least half an hour and then hung up in the sun to dry. Any spare clothes and bundles which are brought with him must be similarly treated. The patient should have a bath or be washed down if his con- dition will permit of it. The clothes of any relative or friend who is permitted to remain with the patient should also be disinfected in a similar manner. As a rule only one friend should be allowed to act as attendant on a sick person. Non-attention to cleanliness of patients' clothing is one of the causes of infection in hospital. Disinfectants must be freely used in the hospital, all ward utensils being frequently treated, as also all bedding. Cotton wool should be used for wiping up all discharges and then burnt. Urine and fces should be mixed with liquid disinfectant and afterwards burnt. Spit cups
?137 should be provided in all cases, some carbolic acid lotion being poured into each, as the sputum is a known vehicle of infection. Tumblers, feeding-cups, &c. should be frequently dipped in disinfecting solution, or even allowed to remain in it when not in use, especially where friends do the nursing. Any friend nursing a patient must be treated as a hospital attendant and not allowed to go back and forward to the segregation hut. Segregation camp sweepers and attendants should be kept separate from hospital attendants. The inside walls of huts should be frequently whitewashed. All bed linen should be disinfected before being washed, mattresses destroyed if much soiled, if not, laid out in the sun for a day or two before being again used. A sheet or towel soaked in carbolic or corrosive sublimate solution should be always hang- ing up in a convenient part of the room for attendants to wipe their hands with. All wounds of the hand should be carefully treated. If hospital fittings are not of a substantial character with polished surfaces they should be frequently whitewashed, e. g., beds, tables, commodes, &c. (6).-SEGREGATION CAMPS. These camps should be formed to house suspected infected persons. These must be kept segregated for ten days, but this period may have to be shortened according to the size of the camp and the numbers to be segregated. Five days should at least be insisted on, as in those already infected the disease will show itself probably in the early days. Arrangements will have to be made for the proper hutting, feeding and conservancy of these people. The following rules for segregation camps are generally applicable: 1.    A segregation camp should be divided into  sections for  each  day's  arrivals, according to the number of days it has been decided to enforce segregation. No intercourse between the different sections is to be allowed. 2.    A shed must be provided at entrance to camp containing waiting, bath, and dis- infecting rooms.    One camp section should be used as a hospital enclosure with space for two hospitals, one for plague and one for observation cases. A shed or sheds should also be erected in this enclosure for the segregation of those people who have occupied a hut in which a case of plague has broken out. 3.    All arrivals must be carefully inspected and as far as possible temperatures are to be taken.    For this purpose cheap clinical thermometers must be provided. In all cases requiring removal to the observation sheds, precautions should be taken as if they were cases of plague, until finally diagnosed. 4.    The segregated people should be encouraged to remain as much as possible  in the open air and to eat their meals outside the sheds.    The superfluous clothing should be hung up to dry in the sun. The sheds should be constantly inspected and kept quite clean. 5.    On admission to camp all clothes (including those in wear), bundles and baggage must be boiled in big cauldrons for 30 minutes after the water arrives at boiling point or passed through a steam disinfector for 20 minutes.    Articles which cannot be boiled or would be spoiled in this process should be immersed in carbolic acid solution (1 in 40)  or corrosive sublimate solution (1 in 1,000). Bedding and other contents of bundles which cannot be treated by fluids should be put out in the sun every day during the period of detention; if belonging to a person who sub- sequently develops plague, they should all be burnt. The carbolic acid solution is made by adding half a gallon of crude carbolic acid to 20 gallons of water, with enough soft soap to ensure the thorough admixture of the acid with water. The corrosive sublimate solution is made by adding 3 ounces corrosive sublimate to 20 gallons of water. A handful of common salt should also be added to this solution, and a few grains of aniline blue to colour it. Every person should be given a bath on admission to the camp. 6.    Medical inspection of the segregated should be made daily, or oftener if possible. 7.    All excreta (urine and fces) should be burnt, or buried in a trench with quick- lime or chloride of lime.    Chloride of lime should also be used to   mix with the fces in the latrines preferably to carbolic powder. 8.    No intercourse must be allowed between the segregated and those outside; and guards for this purpose must be posted.    Those whose duty it is to bring provisions to the camp must be particularly looked after. B 1135-35\?\
138 9.    When a case of plague occurs in camp,  the people in immediate contact should be moved to the segregation hut.    The hut in which the case occurred should be thoroughly fumigated and disinfected.    The cooking and drinking utensils should be washed out with some disinfectant. 10.    Before leaving the camp the clothes should again be sterilized, if time permits. 11.    The supply of water should be carefully supervised;  the drinking water to be boiled.    A guard should be placed over the well or water-supply to prevent pollution. (7).-BURIAL. A plague corpse is a focus for infection, more especially if it is a case that has died out of hospital. All religious rites and ceremonies should therefore be curtailed as much as possible. The body should be wrapped in a cloth which has been soaked in carbolic lotion (1 in 40) or perchloride of mercury lotion (1 in 1,000). All handling or touching of the corpse should be discouraged, except by those accustomed to carrying out the last offices of the dead, and these should be given facilities for cleansing their hands afterwards in some antiseptic lotion. The grave should be 7 feet deep. If a number of bodies are buried together, it is advisable that quicklime should be freely used. The ground used for burial purposes should be light and porous, to ensure that air and moisture may freely pass through. The burial ground should be well away from any water- supply. The orifices of the body, mouth, nose, &c., should be stuffed with cotton-wool or tow that has previously been soaked in perchloride of mercury solution. Every attempt should be made by local authorities to get satisfactory death certificates accompanying each corpse: no plague operations can ever be complete without this. These should be collected at the burial or burning grounds for statistical purposes. (8).-DHOBIS. Very strict supervision should be kept over Dhobis, as their profession frequently brings them into contact with clothing which may be infected. In any case Europeans should see that all their clothes are washed in their own compounds when plague exists in the neighbourhood. Government Resolution No. 1160 of 4th March deals with this question in Sind only. (9).-NATIVE SERVANTS. The native servants' quarters of European houses should be inspected and their sanitary condition attended to, and afterwards frequent visits made to them to see that no plague-stricken refugees are hidden in them. The owners of these houses should be requested to carry this out for their own benefit and safety. It is very little trouble to take temperatures of all servants, daily. Results will repay trouble. (10).-SUGGESTED PRECAUTIONS FOR TROOPS EMPLOYED ON PLAGUE WORK. Segregated in suitable camp. Sober men to be chosen. Clothes to be changed on return from plague duty; the suit that has been worn to be hung up in the sun. Daily inspection of working parties by a Medical officer; those with signs of fever or debi- lity to be struck off work. Hands and face to be inspected for abrasions. A good breakfast to be supplied before starting work. Arrangements should be made to provide a midday meal in cases where the men cannot return to camp for this meal. Putties should be worn to prevent the dust from infected houses coming in contact with the legs. It should be impressed on the men that a fruitful mode of infection is through abrasions on the skin, and all such should be reported at once to the Medical officer. A supply of carbolic lotion, 1 in 40, should be sent with each search, whitewashing, and demolition party, and after work the men's hands should be swilled over with this preparation. Disinfectants should be freely used in the camp. The whitewashing and disinfecting parties should be warned not to enter an infected house, if possible, before at least some preliminary disinfection has been carried out,
?139 A bath, with some phenyle in it, on return from work is desirable. Sea-bathing to be encouraged. Drinking water and milk to be boiled before use. The wearing of thick gloves by the whitewashing and demolition parties would be a useful precaution. A carbolic acid gargle should be supplied to the men when on work. It is generally difficult to make them use it, but every man should have the opportunity of preventing his infection as far as possible. Clothes should not be sent to the dhobi until disinfected. This applies especially to coats and trousers. Several cases of disease have been traced to this source of infection. (11).-RESUME' OF GENERAL RULES UNDER EPIDEMIC ACT.) (No. 1728-1201-P., dated 29th March 1897. (3)  Plague Authority may detain travellers by rail or sea. (4)  May detain person leaving infected area. (5)  May appoint inspecting officers for roads. (6)  Notification of sickness or death. (7)  Detention and examination of persons in same house as sick or dead. (8)  Power to treat any death as due to plague. (9)  Removal of sick and segregation of probably infected. (10)   Shutting up plague house. (11)  Overcrowding in houses. (12)  Insanitary houses. (13)  Burn plague huts. (14)  Route of funeral and place of burial. (15)  Assessing property and compensation. (16)  Police assistance. (19)  Disinfection of persons and belongings. (20)  Stoppage of caste feasts and fairs. (21)  Notification by medical men. (22)  Persons on demand to give names and addresses. (23)  Disinfection at funeral. (24)  Examination of road travellers. (25)   Observation camps outside villages. (26)  District Magistrates may make restrictive measures. (27)  Make holes in walls and remove roofs. (28)  Evacuation of an infected locality. (29)  Prevention of intercommunication bet ween places. (30)  Care of food and drink. (31)  Prohibits unauthorized removal of plague cases. (32)   Prosecution under Section 188, Indian Penal Code. To Medical Officers.-Rats' spleens sent for diagnostic purposes should be taken from as freshly dead animals as possible. A small bottle of alcohol should have some cotton- wool placed in it and the spleens then dropped in. If no alcohol is at hand, a 1 in 2,000 corrosive sublimate solution should be used. Send to Joint Plague Commissioners, Secretariat, Bombay. 4. As regards local inspection in the Mofussil it may be observed that this duty would under ordinary circumstances have been entrusted to the Sanitary Commissioner and the five Deputy Sanitary Commissioners of the Presidency. The former officer, however, though he was able to make occasional visits to plague-infected places and indeed gave valuable advice from time to time, was for the greater part of his time fully employed on work at famine relief camps. Of the five Deputy Sanitary Commissioners, one was employed on famine and other duty in the southern part of the Presidency; another, Surgeon- Captain Lloyd Jones, was stationed in Poona city and was engaged in searching houses both before and after the constitution of the Poona Plague Committee; a third, Surgeon-Captain Arnim, was confined to Karchi city, being appointed a member of the Plague Committee for that place; a fourth, Surgeon-Captain Dyson, was given charge of plague operations in the highly-infected town of Bulsr
?140 and its neighbourhood in the Surat District; and the fifth, Surgeon-Captain Anderson, was similarly employed in the highly infected villages in the south of Slsette Island in the Thna District. It became necessary therefore to find other plague-inspecting officers for Sind as well as the Presidency proper. For Sind the officers selected were Surgeon-Major R. Baker, I. M. S., and Surgeon-Captain Borradaile, A. M. S., and for the Presidency proper three officers were appointed, viz., Surgeon-Major A. W. Street, I. M. S., D.S.O., who had charge of the railway inspection measures, and Dr. Lowson and Surgeon- Major W. Reade, A. M. S., whose duty it was to visit highly infected places, advise the local officers and report to Government the results of their inspec- tion. The inspecting plague officers in Sind were placed directly under the Com- missioner, and those in the Presidency proper directly under Government. 5. Government having arranged to confer sufficient legal powers on their offi- cers and to give them full advice and instruction as to the methods to be adopted, it only remained to provide further officers and funds. The want of medical officers of all grades had been felt from the beginning: but additional officers were obtain- ed from time to time from the Government of India, leave was stopped and officers were recalled from leave, and twelve nurses were sent out by the Secretary of State. As regards funds, Government promptly made advances of money from time to time by telegram to all officers who required it-a course rendered necessary by the impecunious condition to which many local bodies had been reduced. SECTION 2.-Camps of Observation. 1.    Abundant evidence was received at an early stage that plague was being spread by the movement of the people.    It was found impossible to arrange for widespread  medical inspection of so thorough a  character   as of itself to be sufficient to check the spread, and further measures for the detention under observation of suspected persons, in which class almost all  persons coming from a highly infected area  might   be   included,   were   found  necessary  in several parts of the Presidency proper  and  Sind.    In  outlying  villages  in the mofussil, the residents were encouraged to  keep strangers from infected places  out of their  village  sites-a practice which they are in the habit of adopting for self-protection in the case of cholera  epidemics; but  in  certain areas further measures of the nature of modified land quarantine were adopted by  the  authorities, in exercise of the powers conferred  on them under the Epidemic Diseases Act, to (1) prohibit communication between one place and another and (2) impose quarantine at one place against another.    As has already been mentioned at the end of Section 1 of Chapter III, Part I, the rules confer- ring these powers were considered objectionable by the Government of India, and in lieu of them a new rule empowering plague authorities to detain suspected persons  under observation   was  eventually  issued  on the 15th June.     The quarantine  arrangements previously in force, however, had not gone beyond the detention of suspicious persons under observation.     The power  to impose quarantine was exercised by District Magistrates in numerous places  in the Presidency.    When plague was recognized to be severely epidemic in the city of Poona, people began to leave that city  for other cities in the Deccan in  large numbers.    To check the immigration and to prevent the introduction of the disease by persons in whose systems the disease was incubating, the Collector of  Sholpur,  the   district through which the  G. I.  P. Railway  runs  after leaving Poona, as early as the 12th February imposed quarantine at the Sholpur Railway station and supplemented it a few days later by  quarantine at the stations of Brsi Road and Mohol.    Camps of observation were established at these places, but at the latter, though a camp was at first considered desirable for the purpose of checking the rush of people to the Pandharpur fair, it was subsequently abolished and arrivals at   Mohol were conveyed to the camp at Brsi Road.    Certain persons were exempted from residence at the camps on their giving satisfactory  assurances that they would  remain in  their  houses for eight days, during which daily inquiries would be made regarding their state of health.   Suitable sanitary arrangements were made at the camps;  a Hospital Assistant was deputed to each of them in addition to the Assistant  Collector in
?141 charge; provisions were supplied and free rations given to those who could not afford to pay for their own food. No plague cases were detected at the camps, but the Collector reports that the arrangements made had an immediate effect in diminishing the number of travellers. 2.    Similar arrangements were made by the Collector of Ahmednagar.    On the 12th February the Collector telegraphed to Government that the number of arrivals from Poona was increasing and asked for sanction (which was accorded) to the expenditure of Rs. 3,000 for the construction of a quarantine camp in case one became necessary later on.    On the 9th of  March, 2 cases of plague, both of which had come from Poona, were discovered at  Bhingr, which  is close to  Ahmednagar.   As it had become known that rigorous measures  with the aid of the military were to be taken in Poona for the suppression of  the plague,  it was recognised  that  the  influx  of  fugitives from that  city was certain to largely increase in the course of a few days.    On the 10th March the Collector issued a proclamation imposing quarantine from the morning of the following day and placing the arrangements in charge of his Personal Assist- ant, who was assisted by the Civil Surgeon and a Hospital Assistant.    Special rules were made for the exemption of persons who could be trusted to present themselves for medical examination, and the Collector's Personal Assistant was given discretionary power to exempt any person from detention.    The daily number of inmates of the camp varied from 50 to 170.    A marked increase of arrivals from  Poona  was at first observed, but when the quarantine arrange- ments became widely known the numbers largely decreased.    In his plague report the Collector remarks as follows: - " I venture to think that the camp has served its purpose well. It is true that out of the numerous arrivals from Bombay, Poona, and other infected places who were detained therein, only 2 were attacked with the plague. But it is not unlikely that the detention of travellers in a healthy camp, where sanitary dwellings were provided, checked in some instances the development of the disease. It is at any rate certain that no plague cases have occurred in Ahmednagar amongst persons arriving after quarantine was put in force, whereas imported cases were, on the other hand, becoming numerous before quarantine was adopted. This seems to have been worth securing." 3.    The important hill station of Mahbleshwar, which is the seat of Govern- ment in the hot weather months, was at the beginning of March exposed to the risk of infection in consequence of an unusual rush of Native fugitives from Poona, many of whom were known to have come from highly infected parts of the city. The Superintendent of the station, Surgeon-Major C. Monks, in anticipation of sanction imposed quarantine-a measure which he describes as having had the result of checking this rush in the most marked manner.    The three roads and the hill paths were guarded and a plague hospital and camp of observation were established in addition to  medical inspection posts.     The arrangements were at first of a  rigorous nature, but  were speedily  modified  with a view to substituting for detention, in as many cases as possible, a system under which persons were required to attend daily at the Civil Hospital for medical inspec- tion for eight days after their arrival on the hill.    Another camp of observation was established at Dandeghar on the ghat road leading to Panchgani, a smaller hill station in the  neighbourhood, for the protection of both Panchgani and Mahbleshwar.    Surgeon-Major Monks in his report on the subject remarks as follows:- "Although only one case of plague was intercepted, I consider that the measures taken were of great use. The woman who succumbed to the malady was going to an overcrowded house in the middle of the bazar, where a centre of infection spreading into an epidemic might have been established; but the chief advantage consisted of the effect which the announcement of quarantine at Mahbleshwar had on the plague-stricken population of Poona, who had begun to flock to the hill, but who ceased to do so as soon as they learned that seven days would have to be passed in a camp of observation before the station could be reached." 4.    Camps of observation were also established at the city of Stra, in the district of Bijpur, and in the Kolhpur State.    The arrangements in the latter were of a very complete nature.    The following are extracts from a letter from B 1135-36\?\
?142 the Political Agent, Kolhpur and Southern Martha Country, No. 492, dated 26th July 1897, on the subject:- " 6. On 8th February, I went to Miraj and saw the special segregation hospital there in which one patient had died and one was still suffering. While at Miraj, I was given to understand that a large influx of families was expected into Miraj and Sngli as the plague in Poona was assuming serious dimensions, and I immediately repaired to Sngli, which (with Miraj) is the gate of the Southern Martha Country, and arranged for an observation camp to be erected there, and in the meantime caused notices to be issued in the news- papers that all persons coming to Sngli or to Miraj or to Kolhpur from the northern direction would be detained under observation for 8 days in the respective camps. 7.    The Sngli  camp being ready by day break on  Thursday  the 11th February, all passengers booked to that station were lodged in it, while all persons arriving at Sngli by road were also detained in this camp.    Meanwhile, the Miraj Chief after some demur began to collect materials,   and on 18th idem his observation camp  was ready and all passengers booked to Miraj  from the northern side were detained.    In the meantime, the more elaborate preparations for the Kolhpur camp at Shirol Road Station were being carried on and the camp was ready for occupation  on the 24th idem.    On the afternoon of that day, however,  some   Konkanis from Svantvdi who  had  been  on a pilgrimage to Narsoba's Wadi were attacked with cholera, practically on the station-platform, and one  of them, having dragged himself to the well which had been built for the plague camp, fell into it and the well was of course polluted.    Fortunately   the Hospital   Assistant,  Nurse, ward-boys and dressers who were ready on the spot for the plague camp, took these cholera patients in hand under the directions and   personal superintendence of Dr.   Sinclair,   the Darbr   Surgeon, and   saved as many as they could, but  13  died out of the 20  attacked. The remaining 7, when sufficiently convalescent, were conveyed to the Kolhpur Hospital. A new well was built and the observation camp was opened at Shirol Road  Station on the 2nd March and all passengers passing through  to Kolhpur from the north were derailed and detained there. 8.    Simultaneously, another observation camp was established at Amba on the road from   Ratngiri to Kolhpur and all   passengers were  kept there for 10 days, while all the other ghat roads were watched, and in this way the whole of the Kolhpur territory as well as the Southern Martha Country was guarded from the north.    Although for some time it was difficult to avoid occasional leakage, yet the above-mentioned restrictions, at any rate, prevented the large influx of fugitives from the plague-stricken districts which would otherwise certainly have   taken  place   into the   Native   State towns   of Kolhpur and the Southern Martha Country, and more than this, the news of these restrictions spreading far and wide no doubt prevented people from Bombay and Poona coming south- wards at all in any numbers, and this no doubt saved Belgaum, Dhrwr, Hubli, &c., from invasion by fugitives. 9. After a time people began to resort to tricks of all kinds in order to run the blockade, and it became necessary to detain all passengers from all directions and place them in the observation camps of the respective stations to which they were booked, while the roads, bridges, fords and even fields were guarded and only bon fide marketers or persons who could show their villages to be within 5 miles were exempted from detention. In all the other Southern Martha Country States, Jamkhandi, Kurundvd, Jath, Mudhol and Rmdurg, small camps were erected and all persons arriving from outside the States were detained under observation for 8 days. 10. Thus by degrees a complete blockade was established and no one could enter Kolhpur or Southern Martha Country State territory without a pass, and no passes were given except to officers travelling on duty, and these were only given on condition that they travelled 1st class and left their servants in the observation camps for 8 days. The result of the above restrictions, so far as it is possible to attribute immunity to human measures, has been eminently satisfactory. Not a single case of plague has occurred in Kolhpur or the Southern Martha Country since the above measures were adopted, except in one village Mauerajuri, belonging to the Chief of Ichalkaranji, the situation of which deprived it of the advantages of our restrictive rules. * * * * * * * * Observation O'amps. 13. During the five months since the first of these camps was established, and although numbers of persons came to them straight from the infected towns, there has not been a single case of plague in either of them. The camps have all been built and kept up on the same principles. In the first place, all persons as soon as they have arrived have been made to take off all their clothes and get into a hot bath, while their clothes were boiled in chlorinated lime, and all the rags they may have possessed have been promptly burnt, com- pensation being given for any real loss, and in cases of persons whose clothes themselves were rags and unfit even to be washed, they have been provided with other clothes gratis.
?143 All food is free except for those whose religious ideas prevent their accepting it, and they are charged a nominal sum daily. The food is prepared by cooks provided for the purpose, one cook and one cook-house for each denomination, the different castes being strictly considered. The sheds themselves are situated in the hottest places that could be found for them, far away from trees and only near enough to water to prevent hardship. The sheds are of matting and thatched, and there is a shed for each day's arrivals and the arrivals are disposed of accordingly, and the occupants of the different sheds are not allowed to communicate with each other. Each person on arrival is given a printed ticket showing his name and date of arrival and a similar placard is placed upon the door of his lodging. He cannot obtain a railway ticket at the station without showing his quarantine discharge. Of course all men and women have separate accommodation except in the case of families if they are desirous of being together, and their wishes are considered as much as possible. The drinking water is all boiled before the people are allowed to drink it and the sanitation of each camp is carefully attended to. Each camp is in charge of a Hospital Assistant, who has under him a female nurse, ward-boys, dressers, &c., in proportion to the size of the camp, while the police arrange- ments are under a special police constable with a sufficient number of policemen to prevent any one leaving the camp unauthorisedly. 14. I have personally inspected the camps periodically and attended to all complaints, but the State authorities have been most careful to provide for the comfort and prejudices of the persons detained and the system has been throughout wonderfully popular. His High- ness the Raja has spared no expense and the Diwan and Doctor Sinclair have spared no trouble in regard to the arrangements for the people detained in the observation camps, while the Chief of  Sngli has cheerfully agreed to every suggestion, and his officials, Dr. Godambe and Mr. Bhide (then Acting State Karbhari), have personally laboured to make the observation camps not only useful as protection against the disease, but also comfortable for the inmates, and it is a noticeable fact that not a single case of plague has been import- ed into Sngli." 5.    In British Gujart, the disease in an epidemic form was virtually confined to a portion of the Surat District.  The district of Broach, which lies immediately north of  Surat,  was protected,  amongst other  things, by camps of observa- tion, while Prdi, the southern tluka of the Surat District, though imminently exposed to the risk of infection from the Portuguese district of Damaun, where plague was raging, was protected not only by camps of observation, but by what is  known as the Damaun cordon.    The Salt Department at all times guards the Damaun frontier with a view specially to preventing the smuggling of illicit salt, and maintains a large number of  men. for the purpose.    This force was strengthened and used for the purpose of giving effect to a proclama- tion issued  on  March 26th, by which the District Magistrate of Surat prohi- bited intercommunication between  places  on the Damaun side and those on the British side of  the cordon.    The line as finally drawn, 38 miles in length, was watched by a force of 324 men.    Applicants for permission to enter British territory were medically inspected and made  to  bathe in  a solution  of  disin- fectants; their clothes were boiled and they were detained for three  days in a special camp before being permitted to enter the general camp which was capable of holding about 100 persons.    Every effort was made to discourage  a  general movement of the population from Damaun, but nevertheless the camp had at times as many people as it could accommodate.    The rules as regards egress from or ingress into Damaun and as regards the transport of goods were at first very strict, but were subsequently modified.    The efficiency of the arrangements, which  were controlled by  Mr. Judge, Assistant Collector of Salt Revenue, was extraordinary, as is indicated by the immunity of the Prdi Tluka from plague when compared with the 3,000 cases which are believed to have occurred in Damaun, which is geographically a portion of that tluka. 6.    When the severe epidemic of plague occurred in the Cutch State, it became necessary to take special measures to prevent a spread to Kthiwr and through that Agency to Northern Gujart.    The remarks of the Political Agent, Kthiwr, on the measures taken by him are quoted below:- "The virulent outbreak of the disease at Mndvi in Cutch, which is only a few hours' voyage from, and in daily communication with, the western ports of Kthiwr, called for increased watchfulness against the import of the disease through the Kthiwr ports opposite the Cutch coast. Strict injunctions were therefore issued to enforce medical
?144 inspection of all passengers arriving at the ports and their detention at observation camps for a period of 8 days. Returns of daily arrivals were called for in order that the influx might be carefully watched. The ports at which such observation camps were established were notified and landing at other ports where such arrangements could not be made was prohibited." 7. In Sind, camps of observation were established at numerous places in the Karchi, Hyderabad, and Shikrpur Districts. The remarks of Surgeon-Captain Milne regarding the measures at Shikrpur, a large city imminently exposed to the risk of infection from Sukkur, where plague was raging and the inhabitants whereof were flying in all directions and carrying infection to other places, are quoted below:- "The medical inspection of travellers by road or rail having proved to be a very delusive means of protection to the town, at the request of the inhabitants of Shikrpur the District Magistrate approved of quarantine being imposed against three infected areas in Sind, viz., Karchi, Hyderabad and Sukkur. The quarantine was by rail only. The ingenuity of the native traveller, however, was not greatly taxed in finding means to evade this quarantine. He either bought a ticket for the station nearest Shikrpur and then marched in by road, or he adopted the simpler plan of taking a ticket for an intermediate and unaffected place and re-booking to Shikrpur. This being represented to the District Magistrate, he was pleased to approve of quarantine being imposed against all Sind. A series of rules defining quarantine were drawn up and published in the Sind Gazette. The rules described what persons were to be allowed free entry to Shikrpur, the persons to whom passes were to be issued, and the period for which quarantine would last. The object of quarantine was obvious, viz., the detention of all persons under the observation of a medical officer for a period ranging from 5 to 10 days. If during the period fixed upon no symptoms of plague developed, he was allowed to enter the city. In carrying out the quarantine the following measures were adopted. All passengers by rail, whether from the north or south, were on their arrival at Shikr- pur taken to the camp of observation. The camp of observation consisted of about 100 huts. These huts were arranged in ten rows of from 8 to 10 huts each. All persons arriving on the same date were put into the same row of huts. In front of each hut was placed a ticket with the names and numbers of the persons in it, the place from whence they came, and the date of arrival. The camp being arranged in this methodical manner, no confusion or disorder ever resulted, and it could be seen at a glance how long each person had been in quarantine and how long he still had to stay. The detention of travellers by rail was a comparatively easy matter-the detention of travellers by road the most difficult : at each road leading into Shikrpur just at the quarantine boundary, and at many intervening spaces, a quarantine post was established. This consisted of 3 policemen and 2 munshis, and it was their duty to turn back all persons approaching Shikrpur unless provided with a pass signed by a responsible officer. Should the person wish to proceed to Shikrpur, he was conducted by a policeman to the camp of observation and then detained for 10 days. All the approaches to the city being thus carefully guarded, it was a matter of great difficulty for any one to pass into Shikrpur without detection. A great help to this was the good will of the people. Should a person by any chance have been able to pass the quarantine boundaries and enter the city, it was almost a matter of certainty that his arrival was reported at a very early date to the responsible officers. As the family with which he had been living was looked upon in the light of presumably affected persons, all were removed for the usual period to the camp of observation. A few cases of this kind had a most wonderfully deterrent effect upon travellers. It was found of course that the police and munshis occasionally tried to blackmail travellers ; but the summary dismissal of a munshi and the punishment by fine of a police- man had a very chastening effect upon them. The comfort of the person in the camp of observation and to see that they were in no way tyrannized or blackmailed by the subor- dinates in charge were matters of great solicitude to the medical officer. Each hut was 15 feet long by 10 feet broad. The walls were made of reeds coated with a thick layer of mud, and each hut was provided with a verandah and an enclosed space for women if required. For ladies and gentlemen of the better class, a house made of sun-dried bricks was provided.
?145 This was over 100 yards apart from the rest of the camps. For another class of Native gentlemen who could provide houses for themselves in isolated places, a good deal of liberty was given in the choice of such places, and it may be said that in no case did they abuse the liberty given them. As it would have been a matter of great hard- ship to a poor person to be shut up in a camp for 10 days without providing him with means to earn his livelihood, a subsistence allowance of 3 annas a day was given to all. A Bania's shop was provided for them, a large staff of sweepers and bhisties was engaged, and every means taken to soften the asperities of the situation. Permission was also given to their friends and relatives to see them during the afternoon, but they were carefully kept apart by a ditch 3 feet wide and 5 feet deep. That a certain amount of blackmailing occurred in the camp at one time was known to the medical officer, but until a European subordinate was engaged to take over the charge of the camp he was powerless to prevent it. The success which followed the imposition of quarantine at Shikrpur has been a matter of surprise to all under whose observation it has come. When it is remem- bered that the plague was raging in a very bad form at Sukkur, only 20 miles distant, and all the neighbouring villages had been tainted by the same dreaded disease, it is very difficult to explain how Shikrpur enjoyed such an enviable immunity. That quarantine had a very great deal to do with it cannot be denied; but whether it was the direct or indirect effect which induced this is more difficult to say. There is no doubt it got well noised all over Sind that Shikrpur was very difficult to get into, and that even when any person did get in, it was no protection to them as they were liable at any time to be taken off at once to the camps of observation and kept there for 10 days. Thus the indirect action of quarantine contributed power- fully towards this immunity. But even quarantine would have been useless had it not been supported by the good will and co-operation of the people of Shikrpur themselves. The reports of the devastation caused by the plague in Karchi and Sukkur had in- stilled a very wholesome fear in their hearts. They were ready to submit to many privations and to the curtailment of their liberty, provided it seemed to them to be for the common good. They were not unnaturally very jealous of any liberty being given to outsiders to enter and leave Shikrpur and not given to themselves. It fell rather more heavily on some people than on others, notably on the Bhang and opium contractors. To these, however, and to the contractors on Public Works, such as canals, a considerable amount of freedom of movement was given latterly, as they would otherwise have suffered very severely. It is very interesting to note the exact figures relative to the number of plague cases that got into Shikrpur before and after the imposition of quarantine. From the 1st to the 31st of March, in all 22 cases of plague occurred in Shikrpur. Quarantine was imposed on the 1st of April, and from that date to 30th April, when the last case of plague occurred, only 6 cases were discovered. Of these 6 cases, 2 had entered Shikrpur before quarantine was imposed, 2 cases were caught at the quarantine stations on trying to enter the city, and the last 2 cases were local. Thus it may be said that quarantine was in every way successful, as no case of plague entered Shikrpur after its imposition. SECTION  3. Other measures in the Mofussil. The general nature of the measures taken in the mofussil for the suppression and prevention of the spread of plague in the hot season of 1897, apart from the arrangement for railway and sea traffic inspection, camps of observation, and encouragement to villagers to prevent strangers entering their village sites, is in- dicated in the rules quoted in Section 1 of Chapter III, Part I, by which Govern- ment conferred powers in their officers to take the action which they were advised was necessary. The power to prohibit pilgrimages and fairs was freely used by District Magistrates, and in the cases of the Thna and Poona districts Govern- ment by a special order prohibited all such gatherings of people. The powers to stop intercommunication between villages was found to be useful in cases in which two neighbouring villages, one only of which was infected, were separated by a creek or river, such as Kelva and Mhim, and Chinchni and Trpur in the Thna District. The compulsory evacuation of infected villages was enforced with success in many villages, but specially in Sind, where it was an essential feature of the system adopted; and in that province also the experiment of stop- B 1135-37\?\
146 ping booking from certain railway stations in or near highly infected areas, except under special passes, was successfully adopted by the Commissioner on several occasions in anticipation of sanction. The measures taken by local authorities in Sind and in certain portions, either highly infected or specially liable to infection, of the Presidency proper, are sketched in some detail in the collection of reports which forms Part III of this compilation.
PART   III. (SELECTED REPORTS BY GOVERNMENT OFFICERS).
?HISTORY OF THE PLAGUE IN SIND. On the 3rd October 1896, the Karchi Chamber of Commerce addressed the Commissioner in Sind through their Chairman, the Honourable Mr. McLellan, suggesting that precautionary measures against the introduction of plague from Bombay should be taken, such as subjecting the passengers of vessels arriving to a medical examination. The imposition of quarantine was not recommended. Next day, a letter was received by the Commissioner in Sind from the Principal Medical Officer, Sind District, inquiring as to the state of the law in respect to dealing with vessels and passengers infected with plague. The Honourable Mr. James on the 5th idem communicated with Government by telegram, and under Notification dated 13th October 1896, No. 4530, Government published Rules for Quarantine against Plague in the Port of Karchi. Under these rules, no communication with the shore was permitted till the Health Officer of the Port had ascertained by inquiry from the Com- mander whether any person on board had suffered from plague. If there had been no plague, pratique was granted. If there had been plague, the passengers and crew were to be removed to the Quarantine Station for a period varying from 8 to 15 days. The Commissioner in Sind immediately took steps, in consultation with the Principal Medical Officer, Sind District, and the officers of the Port, to increase the accommodation at the Quarantine Station at Manora and to provide extra Police for enforcing the restrictions imposed. To consider these questions, a Meeting of officers assembled at Government House on the 16th October under the presidency of the Honourable Mr. James, and it was arranged to fit up the hulk Manora for Europeans and to erect sheds for 300 Native passengers in addition to the accommodation for 100 already existing, the expenditure to be divided between Government, the Port Trust, and the Municipality. The two latter bodies subsequently intimated their consent to contribute one-third share each. The operations were entrusted to Mr. Jackson, the Officiating Port Engineer, and, with commendable despatch, he reported on the 24th October that everything was ready for occupation. *Spent by the Port Engineer...Rs. 6,517. Spent by the Health Officer... ,,   5,136. These proceedings were reported to Government, and by Government Resolution No. 5202, dated 26th November 1896, General Department, Govern- ment sanctioned the estimated expenditure for temporary quarantine accom-  modation and also the expenditure for estab- lishment and other expenses to be incurred by the Principal Medical Officer, the cost * to be divided as proposed. Government approved the entertainment of the additional Police, the exact strength and cost being finally sanctioned by Govern- ment Resolution No. 1672, dated 2nd March 1897, Judicial Department. The Port Trust placed a steam launch at the disposal of the District Superintendent of Police. The Rules required that healthy ships to secure pratique must carry a Medical man. One or two coasting steamers neglected this rule, and on board other steamers death from plague had occurred. Thus, a considerable number, between 600 and 700 persons at a time, were detained in quarantine, necessi- tating increased accommodation. The Collector of Karchi, at the instance of the Honourable Mr. James, early in December, made arrangements for the supply by private charity of food to those persons in quarantine who were indigent. The administration of the Quarantine Rules and arrangements was supervised by the Principal Medical Officer, Sind District. On the 16th December, while on tour, the Acting Commissioner in Sind received intimation from the Health Officer, through the Collector of Karchi, of what was reported to be a "doubtful" case of plague. A Brahman cook, aged 16 years, resident for 9 months in Karchi, stated to have taken ill about the 4th December, was reported on the 8th to the Health Officer to be suffering B 1440-1
?2 from bubonic fever. There was high temperature and a bubo. The same evening the patient was removed from Rampart Road, Bandar Quarter, to a house in Maoji Street, Ranchor Quarter, where next morning he died. Thus early began that removal from place to place which to the last was difficult to deal with. The Acting Commissioner directed definite medical inquiry; but on the 18th he received the Health Officer's report dated the 12th, which left no doubt that the disease had broken out in Karchi, and the facts narrated below were reported to Government. An old servant of the firm of Radhakishn Tejbhandas & Co. died on the 11th December after, it was said, a 12-days' illness. Another servant of the firm, aged 28, also living in the Old Town Quarter, was seen by the Health Officer on the 11th and found to have a temperature of 103 and swellings in both groins. In a house close by, in which four persons had died in the course of a few days, including a child seen by the Health Officer on the 11th, another child, aged 5 years, was found sick. On the morning of the 12th, the Health Officer took the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Sind Registration District, to view the cases. On the 19th December, at their usual weekly Meeting, the Medical Board declared plague epidemic in Karchi. Their report reached the Acting Com- missioner on the 22nd, and was the same day communicated to Government by telegram, and the Principal Medical Officer was asked for daily reports of attacks and deaths. These facts leave little doubt that, from the beginning of December 1896, the disease had got a footing in Karchi. There was nothing in the mortality statistics to indicate the presence of the disease :-  Week ending DEATH FROM ALL CAUSES.    AVERAGE DEATHS OF  5 YEARS ENDING 1895.      Total. Daily Average. Total. Daily Average.  6th October 1896 83 12 65 9 13th     ,,   51 7 56 8 20th     ,,              61 9 58 8 27th     ,,   59 8 58 8 3rd November 54 8 62 9 10th     ,,   59 8 65 9 17th     ,,              72 10 69 10 24th     ,, 74 11 67 10 1st December 80 11 70 10 8th       ,,  85 12 81 12 15th     ,,  86 12 82 12 22nd    ,, 104 15 102 15  The usual deaths amongst cases classed "imported" are wanting in the history of the introduction of plague into Karchi. Since October, there had been numerous arrivals from Bombay in Karchi. The Health Officer states that there was medical examination of passengers on board healthy vessels, but there was nothing to prevent persons slightly affected with the disease walking ashore. The Quarantine Rules had failed to protect Karchi, and it was useless to maintain them. The question was mooted by the Principal Medical Officer in his letter to the Commissioner in Sind, dated 4th January 1897, and was brought to the notice of the Government of India a little later by Messrs. Mackinnon, Mackenzie & Co. The Municipality were in favour of more stringency, by imposing 10 days' dentention on all arrivals, and the Principal Medical Officer and the majority of the Managing Committee of the Chamber of Commerce were in favour of maintaining the existing rules. After carefully considering these questions, the Acting Commissioner informed Government that the disease was thoroughly
?3 established locally, and that there was no evidence of any imported cases occurring, and therefore the imposition of a more rigid quarantine was un- called for. In his opinion a searching medical examination of passengers departing from Bombay, and an equally rigorous scrutiny at Karchi, should be substituted for the present rules. It was singular that, notwithstanding the detention of between 1,500 and 1,600 persons arriving at Manora, not a single case of plague had been detected. Government approved these sugges- tions, and by Notification No. 592, dated 3rd February 1897, the Rules of 13th October 1896 were amended so as to introduce compulsory individual medical inspection, and the compulsory isolation of any sick discovered, and the segregation of persons in immediate contact with the sick or with any one who had died, and suspicion was made sufficient authority for action. The Port Officer, Commander Shopland, had questioned whether much faith could be placed on the class of Medical officers that could be procured for a temporary job on board a steamer for Rs. 100 per mensem, and he had little doubt that plague had been introduced through allowing vessels to land passen- gers freely when no case of sickness was reported. The voyage from Bombay need not take longer than 36 hours. Up to the end of December 1896, 63 cases of plague, all local, were reported in Karchi. 51 of these cases occurred in the Old Town. The deaths reported were as under :- During week ending 10th December ...              ...               1  ,,             ,,   17th    ,, ...              ...               9  ,,             ,,   24th    ,, ...              ...               21  ,,             ,,   31st    ,, ...              ...               28 or a total of 59. In a telegram received on 1st January 1897, Government directed that arrangements should be made for medical inspection of passengers at Karchi and the principal Railway stations in Sind. The Principal Medical Officer was requested to arrange for efficient inspection, and on the same date, the 1st, all District officers were required to adopt, in consultation with the Medical and Railway officers, such measures as might be possible to prevent infection spreading. On the same date, the Collector of Karchi was asked to return from his tour to Karchi to supervise measures necessary to prevent infected persons leaving and the disease spreading, whether within or without Karchi, and Mr. Giles most promptly responded and remained -at head-quarters throughout the epidemic. Meanwhile, the Municipality of Karchi had not been idle. It appears that early in October 1896, the Health Officer, Dr. Kaka, called attention to the necessity for special sanitary vigilance, and on the 16th December following he addressed a letter to the President of the Municipaliy, representing that he had already experienced opposition, and the residents of houses where cases had occurred had flatly refused to permit disinfection of the rooms occupied by the sick. Dr. Kaka, therefore, strongly urged the necessity for increased powers, advocating (1) compulsory notification of sickness by the inmates of the house and by the medical attendant, (2) compulsory seggregation of the sick in spe- cially provided hospitals for each community, (3) compulsory disinfection and limewashing, (4) destruction of infected articles, as clothing, bedding, &c. Next day, a conference was held at the house of Ro Bahdur Alumal Trikam- das, B.A., Deputy Educational Inspector, where several of the headmen of the Hindu sects were present, and at which the President, Engineer and Secretary, and the Health Officer of the Municipality attended. Here Dr. Kaka's pro- posals underwent considerable alteration. Dr. Kaka said he would not object to allow patients to be segregated in their own houses, " but in the case of the very poor and in the case of tenement houses where more than one family resided," it would be absolutely necessary to remove the patients to isolation hospitals. On the 21st and 23rd December, the Corporation passed resolutions omitting compulsory notification of sickness by residents and limiting com- pulsory removal to hospital to cases where, in the opinion of the Health Officer or of any duly qualified Medical practitioner, the sick person was without proper segregation accommodation. Where the Health Officer or any
?4 such Medical practitioner  certified there was proper segregation, the patient was to remain in the house. The Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Surgeon-Captain Arnim, who had been active in visiting cases, on the 19th December reported the existence of plague in Karchi to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of Bombay, and also wrote to the Municipality, suggesting that every effort should be made to procure information of sickness, and that, "where possible and in cases where accommodation is unsatisfactory, attempts should be made to isolate the patient." The Sanitary Commissioner, Surgeon-Lieut.-Colonel Clarkson, writing on 25th December, strongly advocated compulsory isolation of the sick. The attention of Surgeon-Captain Arnim and of the Karchi Municipality was, on 31st idem, called to this letter, and the immense value of isolation, and a copy of it was also despatched to all District officers. It was requested that daily reports might be submitted for any place where plague might unfortunately appear, and "isolation should be everywhere promptly enforced." On the 1st of January  1897, the Acting Commissioner received a copy of a letter addressed by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner to the Sanitary Com- missioner, Bombay, giving a full account of the state of affairs up to December 30th. As far as local conditions allowed, cleaning and disinfection were being efficiently and energetically carried out by the Municipal executive. Suitable houses in the town had been set apart as caste hospitals, which would provide for patients who did not possess spacious and well ventilated private dwellings of their own. Surgeon-Captain Arnim added- "There is a marked opposition among the Municipal Commissioners and the inhabitants of the town to the complete isolation which the removal of the sick to the Lyari isolation sheds would necessitate; indeed, there is reason to believe that, at present at least, the feeling among the townspeople would not admit of the segregation of all cases at the Lyari sheds." All were working with energy and system. His inquiries had failed to trace the disease to any source outside Karchi. The Deputy Sanitary Com- missioner thought that, most probably, the disease had been prevalent in the town previous to the date upon which attention was drawn to the first two cases. On the 1st January, a copy of the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's letter was sent to the Collector of Karchi, stating that, with a trifling exception, the Acting Commissioner saw nothing to object to in the Municipal resolu- tions, but it should be incumbent on householders to give notice of plague cases. In giving sanction to the Municipal resolutions, the Acting Commissioner judged it advisable to proceed immediately to Karchi to ascertain how  far the Municipality were  in   a  position to carry them into effect, and particularly in what attitude the Municipality  stood  towards the  Muhammadan  population. He arrived in Karchi early on the morning of the 3rd January, and at once called upon  the Principal Medical Officer, and Surgeon-Colonel  Bainbridge kindly consented to accompany the Acting Commissioner on a tour of inspec- tion through the native city.    Mr. Giles, the  Collector  of  Karchi,   Surgeon- Lieut.-Colonel Henderson,  the  Civil  Surgeon,   Surgeon-Captain Arnim,   the Deputy  Sanitary   Commissioner,  Dr.   Kaka,  the  Health  Officer,  and others were of the party.    It was gratifying to observe that Surgeon-Captain Arnim's description   of  Municipal   energy  was  even  less  than  the  facts  warranted. The disinfection of rooms in which deaths occurred was  most thorough, and to Dr. Kaka is due the very high credit of the free use of perchloride of mercury as a disinfecting agent from the commencement of operations.    In those early days, the saturation of houses and the watering of streets was excessive, but that was almost immediately remedied, and one of the popular complaints of that morning was removed.    The buildings called caste hospitals were empty.    It was clear to every one that they could only be filled by compulsion.    A meeting was convened at  Government  House on the  afternoon of the 4th, at which the Collector, the Medical officers named and the Municipal executive, including Mr.
?5 Tahilram, the President, and Mr. Strachan, the Engineer and Secretary, were present. The Acting Commissioner had consulted these officers. The Collector considered that Section 73 of the District Municipal Act was inadequate to deal with the disease and there was no provision of law to render compulsory notification of plague legal. The Honourable Mr. James, in a letter of 30th November 1896, had expressed a similar opinion that, under Section 73, compulsory segregation of the sick would be unauthorized. The Principal Medical Officer, the Collector of Karchi and the President of the Municipality, as also Mr. Strachan and Dr. Kaka were of opinion that no segregation of sick was possible without com- pulsion, and that in the present state of the public mind compulsion would not be the best way of meeting the epidemic. In fact, it would be the worst possible means to adopt. As a scientific method, the Civil Surgeon and the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner advocated segregation, but considered compulsion neces- sary, and that it would be met by opposition. The Acting Commissioner reviewed the position with great care, chiefly in view of the fact that there were, according to the last census, over 51,000 Muhammadans to some 42,000 Hindus, that the former had probably still further increased the disparity of numbers in the interval, and that it was practi- cally a Hindu Municipality who would have the task of enforcing rules in the teeth of the Muhammadan majority, a majority composed largely of a fanatical congeries of tribes and nations, not one of whom had listened to the proposal for caste hospitals, nor was there a Muhammadan hospital in existence. Asked how the Municipality proposed to carry out their rules, the reply was "The Police." And the Acting Commissioner silently resolved that if the Municipality were to pass rules hateful to both Hindu and Muhammadan, at once retire to the back- ground, and leave the Police to fight with the people, he would prefer the rules should be his own, the personality his own, and before attempting to drive a crowd of terrified and panic-stricken people, he would be quite sure he could treat the sick when they were segregated. He had seen the effect in cholera and famine of crowding numbers without carefully prepared arrangement, and determined to meet Hindu with Hindu and Muhammadan with Muhammadan, and, if possible, to win the confidence of both before resorting to compulsion. On the 4th January, immediately after the Meeting, the Collector was informed that the Acting Commissioner was unable to sanction the compulsory removal clause as it stood. The clause, read with the directions, left a door of escape for the rich and none for the poor, and these would ignorantly and fanatically resist compulsion. Government were informed that the fear of this impending compulsory seizure of the sick had already produced something like panic: medical aid was being rejected, sickness was concealed, and the popula- tion hostile. Surgeon-Colonel Bainbridge had concurred that it would be inadvisable to resort to compulsion. The segregation must be effectual, or it must be abandoned as impracticable. The Municipal President and the Engineer and Secretary had warned that a reign of terror would certainly follow resort to force, and better results were to be expected from conciliation. It came to this-either sick people must be dragged from their homes by force and opposi- tion be met by force, or else this terror of compulsory removal must be allayed and sympathy and conciliation take its place. The success of segregation depended upon the population being more or less consenting, not opposed, to the remedy. The Muhammadans, for example, would not even set a house apart. A Muhammadan Medical officer would greatly strengthen the Municipality, and an effort would be made to render the hospitals, if possible, popular. A valuable suggestion from Surgeon-Lieut.-Colonel Clarkson was placed before the Meeting, and accepted by the Municipality, that the town should be divided into districts and a Medical officer be appointed to each, to see every case of suspected plague before removal, and an Inspector, whose duty it would be to find out the cases. The Municipality immediately appointed Inspectors, and these men proved most useful in securing correct and early information. The Collector writes in paragraph 24 of his report that he is still firmly convinced that the policy adopted at the time was the right policy: that, to a very considerable extent, it had the immediate effect aimed at; the people readi- ly opened their houses to visitation and disinfection, while the same conciliatory B 1440-2
6 policy continued led the people, who had unanimously rejected both treatment and segregation, to accept both. The Acting Commissioner returned to his camp, confident in leaving the Collector at the head of affairs, and hopeful that, now a breathing space had been obtained to exhibit the real sympathy felt by Government towards the suffering, the measures taken at Karchi would not be the signal for terror and panic, should plague spread in Sind, but would make it practicable to adopt greater stringency in other places. The Collector had one or two meetings with the Muhammadans, and pro- mised them a Lady Doctor and Muhammadan Doctors. Miss Duggan, a fully qualified Doctor, was appointed by the Municipality on the 8th January for pardah ladies. The Muhammadans generally acquiesced in the measures sanctioned, but when the disease crossed the Lyari into their quarter, as it did on January 10th, opposition was shown on the 18th, when the Health Officer wished to disinfect a house and to burn down a hut. The Collector went in person, acted with firmness and tact, sentenced the chief offenders, and enforced compliance. This was the only instance in Sind of obstinate resistance to authority, and it proceeded from the fisher class, who on previous occasions of epidemics had been difficult to manage. From the 1st January, the disease suddenly increased. On the 1st, the number of cases rose to 10, on the 7th to 20, and on the 14th to 34. On the recommendation of the Collector, the District Superintendent of Police abandoned his tour and devoted himself to organizing the Police arrangements. The infect- ed quarter was being deserted. Most fled by rail and ship; many to houses of friends, or to houses rented in other parts of Karchi. To intercept the local migration, the Collector, with the aid of the General Officer Commanding, established a Police and Military cordon between the City on one side and the Sadar Bazaar and the Cantonments on the other. This cordon was valuable in checking the general influx that would have taken place. The formation of Health Camps was the subject of much demi-official correspondence. Mr. Strachan, the Engineer and Secretary, lent himself with his usual energy and capacity to the erection of huts on a site across the Lyari, but remote from the Muhammadan settlements, while Mr. Tahilram, the President, and the Collector were persistent in their efforts to persuade the Nasarpuris, a sect of well-to-do Hindus, occupying good houses in the Old Town, to move into the Camp. For these people to live in mat huts was a degradation from which they shrank. Eventually, they agreed to move, but only on their own conditions. These were wisely agreed to. To get the Old Town Quarter completely evacuated and set an example that would silence prejudice were the objects in view. At this stage, compulsion would have scattered the population like sheep, and distrust of the authorities would have been spread through the land. The increasing daily death-rate caused the Acting Commissioner to hurry through some necessary business, and he relinquished the rest of his tour on the 23rd January. He arrived in Karchi to find the first Health Camp just occupied by some 2,000 Nasarpuris. The camp did Mr. Strachan very great credit. It was well laid out, with water-pipes and bathing platforms; in fact, the Municipality had spared no expense to make the camp attractive and convince the people that the desire was to save, not to kill. As an instance of the feeling at the time, a few days later, a party would not enter ready- made huts, saying the huts might be poisoned, but they accepted new mate- rials and made their own huts. It was not then known that plague affects the heart, and the sudden deaths of people, not apparently very severely ill, gave ignorant imagination its opportunity. On the 26th January, Surgeon- General Cleghorn, C. S. I., the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India, arrived to examine the measures taken. He was unfortunately obliged to leave next evening, re-called to attend the Venice Convention; but his visit was most beneficial in encouraging the efforts that were being made to get people out of infected houses. The following suggestions were made by Dr. Cleghorn :- (a) That Dr. Arnim should be placed in charge of the different camps, in which the population would require careful supervision.
7  (b) That a house evacuated should not be re-occupied until its interior had been thoroughly cleansed, disinfected and white-washed, and that these measures should be extended as widely as possible. (c) That permission to re-occupy a place not fit for habitation should be refused. (d) That over-crowding should be prevented. (e) That a Commissioned Medical Officer should inspect Railway pas- senger traffic from Karchi. The sequel proved that the first suggestion would have established the suc- cess of the Nasarpuri Health Camp experiment. Other camps, however, have conclusively proved what immediate results follow a camp managed as Dr. Cleghorn suggested under medical supervision. The disease was attacking new quarters, and it required the whole strength of the officers available, and Dr. Arnim was soon engaged with many others in a hand-to-hand struggle with the pestilence at its worst.     Total plague deaths. Week ending 10th December 1896  1  ,, 17th ,, ,, ......  9  ,, 24th ,, ,, ............  21  ,, 31st ,, ,, ......  23  ,, 7th January 1897  103  ,, 14th ,, ,, .........  159  ,, 21st ,, ,, .........  200  ,, 28th ,, ,, ... ... 181  ,, 4th February 1897  295  ,, 11th ,, ,, ...  263  ,, 18th ,, ,, .....  239  ,, 25th ,, ,, ......  217  ,, 4th March 1897  197  ,, 11th ,, ,, .........  207  ,, 18th ,, ,, ...  189  ,, 25th ,, ,, ... ... ...  188  ,, 1st April 1897 ....  192  ,, 8th ,, ,, ... 172  ,, 15th ,, ,, ..........  115  ,, 22nd ,, ,, .........  127  ,, 29th ,, ,, ......  86  ,, 6th May 1897 .........  65  ,, 13th ,, ,, ..........  52  ,, 20th ,, ,, ......  23  ,, 27th ,, ,, ......  20  ,, 3rd June 1897 .........  29  ,, 10th ,, ,, ......  7  ,, 17th ,, ,, .........  1  ,, 24th ,, ,, ... ...  2   On the 1st, 2nd and 3rd February, there was a sudden accession of plague cases. From the 28th January, the daily figures had been rising, but on these three days the number rose to 59, 49 and 56, respectively,-a record never subsequently reached. In fact, the epidemic in the first week in February attained its climax, and thereafter, though the outbreaks in new quarters partially obscured the fact, the disease gradually abated, as the marginally noted figures, taken from Dr. Kaka's reports, show. Or, taken by months, the mortality was as follows, recollecting that February is the shortest month :-  In December 1896 .........  59 deaths from plague. In January 1897 ... ...  743 ,, ,, In February ,, ...... ...  995 ,, ,, In March ,, ... ...  864 ,, ,, In April ,, . .....  538 ,, ,, In May ,, ... .. . . .  167 ,, ,, In June ,, ... ...  23 ,, ,, In July ,, ... ......  9 ,, ,,  The movements of the population corresponded with these figures. The exodus by road, and specially to encampments or villages in the neighbour- hood, was considerable, but figures are not available. The numbers entering and leaving Karchi by rail and sea are known, and the net difference between arrivals and departures is as follows :-    Population of 1891.  Net difference between  arrivals and departures.     Remaining  population In December 1896...98,195 ... -3,223  94,972 ,, January 1897 do. ...  -11,047  83,925 ,, February ,, do ..  -9,461  74,464 ,, March ,, do ...  -4,232  70,232 ,, April ,, do ...  +1,951  72,183 ,, May ,, do ...  +5,733  77,916 ,, June ,, do. ...  + 4,405  82,321
?8 leaving a net loss at the end of June of nearly 16,000 people. The full table is given in the Appendix B. As already stated, the figures for 1891 are much below the true population. In his final suggestion, Surgeon-General Cleghorn called attention to the necessity of more effectual control over this exodus.    As early as the first   week in January, a few days after his return to  Karchi,   Mr. Giles addressed the Principal Medical Officer, pointing out that the arrangements at the Karchi departure platforms  were not  stringent  enough.    On  the  8th,   the  Acting Commissioner wrote that the Government of  India seemed  very anxious that it should be made impossible for  any one ill with bubonic fever to get away from Karchi.    With this object, 4 European Travelling Inspectors,  engaged by the Collector to travel as far as Ddu Station with each train, had been sanc- tioned, and suggestions for strengthening the medical inspection were invited from the Principal Medical Officer.    On the same date, the 8th, a letter was received from the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Sind Registration  District, forwarding copy of a letter addressed to District officers, based on instructions received from the Sanitary Commissioner, Bombay, as to the necessity of watch- ing the arrival of trains at stations and intercepting any sick persons.    On the 4th,  Government had inquired by wire what arrangements were proposed, and on the 6th the Manager, North-Western Railway, telegraphed that the Punjab Government had taken precautions at Khanpur, Shershah and Raewind.    From a letter received from the same source on the 9th, it appeared that the Mana- ger, by request of the Director General of Railways, had on the 31st December 1896 wired to the Principal Medical Officer  to order inspection of passengers at principal stations in conjunction  with  the  Civil authorities.    Accordingly, on the 10th, the Acting Commissioner issued detailed directions to all District officers in  continuation of previous correspondence, informing them that the Principal Medical Officer had, in consultation with the North-Western Railway, issued instructions to the Civil Surgeons and Hospital  Assistants for medical inspection of travellers at  Karchi and all principal Railway stations in Sind. These arrangements required to be supplemented by watchfulness on the part of Revenue and Police officers.    Each District officer should make himself acquaint- ed with the arrangements made for his district, and, if in any way defective, he should  at  once  take  necessary  action.    Any  remissness  or  inability on the part of the Hospital Assistants to inspect or attend the arrival of trains should be promptly  brought  to notice of the officer to whom they were subordinate. The object now was, if possible, to prevent the disease spreading.    All   Munici- palities should be called on to take steps for their protection, and any suspicious case  entering  a town  should  be  promptly  reported  to  the  Medical officer. Attention was invited to the Railway Rules dealing with infectious cases, and it was pointed out that the sick man's relations or friends travelling with him should also be kept under observation.    Great care would have to be exercised that  sick  did  not   alight   at wayside stations  with the intention of avoiding medical inspection and  getting  to  their destination   by   road.    The  Railway Police and officials were asked to assist in preventing this.    At main stations, two sheds should be provided, one for sick and one for relatives.    Communica- tion with the town should be prevented, and everything clone for making the detenus as comfortable for the days of their enforced residence as circumstances would permit.    For this end, each Hospital Assistant should be allowed a small permanent advance from Municipal or Local Funds.    Magisterial and Police officers should be responsible for enforcement of segregation.    The Principal Medical Officer had been asked to arrange for examination by an experienced Medical officer of persons  detained on  suspicion.    The utmost consideration should be shown to all sufferers, and persons should not be forcibly  examined for glandular swellings, but if suspicious detained.    Females should in no  case be subjected to any bodily examination,  and the strictest  attention should be paid to their customs and prejudices. In forwarding a copy of the Circular to Government, the Acting Commis- sioner observed that these measures appeared the least stringent that could be of any use to check spread of infection, and, if the law did not justify them, he hoped steps might be taken to legalise the action taken. Government approved the measures, and this was communicated to all officers on the 6th February.
?9 On the 23rd January, the Acting Commissioner was able to reply to Government that the inspection of all passengers before leaving the Karchi City and Cantonment Stations and at one or two places en route, specially at Dadu and Sukkur, was careful and thorough. A European Inspector travelled as far as Dadu. At every station, passengers alighting were examined by a Medical officer, and at all principal stations isolation sheds were ready. Nearly every Municipality had provided itself with rules under Section 73 of the District Municipal Act, and all had been active in cleaning up. Segregation was to be insisted upon up-country. The immediate evacuation of an infected house and the camping out of the inmates, and similar evacuation by the entire com- munity of an infected quarter, coupled with systematic house-cleaning and white washing, and burning of all rags and rubbish under European supervision were means likely to prove effectual. A copy of this report was forwarded to all District officers and the Principal Medical Officer. The Manager,  North-Western Railway,  had  suggested  Dadu  and Ruk Stations for the principal medical examination of trains.    Ruk was impracti- cable,  as  no  adequate supervision could  be exercised.    At  Dadu,   the  trains arrived by day-light.    The Principal Medical Officer was, on the 10th January, asked to arrange for medical inspection of all passengers in the train on arrival at Dadu in the manner suggested by the Manager,   and enquiry was made whether careful medical  inspection  of  persons  leaving  Hyderabad  Railway Station by the new Rohri-Kotri line had been arranged, as it seemed probable that persons would utilise that route to evade Dadu.    The Acting Commissioner further suggested the desirability of placing a Commissioned Medical Officer on special duty to supervise medical inspections at the Karchi  Stations, and on the Railway generally.    The  Principal  Medical  Officer replied that, on the 12th January, he had telegraphed to the  Surgeon-General,  Bombay, for a Commissioned Officer.    On the 26th January, a very full report  was received from the Principal Medical Officer, detailing  the arrangements he had made. Surgeon-Lieut-Colonel Henderson, the Civil Surgeon, Karchi, reported that, from the evening of the 13th December 1896, inspections were being held at Karchi.    There was inspection of all  passengers  leaving   Karchi by both up-mails, first at the City Station by a Hospital Assistant and afterwards at the Cantonment Station by the Railway Apothecary.    The Civil Surgeon had on several occasions been present, and the Principal Medical Officer had paid a few visits.    Since December, inspections had been ordered at-  Kotri from the 2nd January. Jacobabad from December 26th. Laki                 ,,     ,,     Shikrpur  ,,     ,,      ,,     22nd. Ddu              ,,     ,,     Sukkur     ,,      ,,     ,,  30th Hyderabad     ,,      ,,     Rohri      ,,    ,,  ,,     January 2nd. Pad Edan       ,,        ,,     Reti        ,,         ,,     ,,       ,, Ruk                 ,,     ,,  The chief inspections were made by day-light at Kotri, Dadu, Sukkur and Jacobabad ; at other places, the examinations were subsidiary. Since the 14th January, down-trains were also being examined. Medical subordinates in charge of Dispensaries were also examining at Sehwan Mirpur Khs. Tando Adam. Ghotki. Tando Alahyar.  Lrkhna. At Jungshahi, the station for Tatta, a special Hospital Assistant had been posted from the 7th January. Isolation and segregation sheds had been con- structed by the Municipal and District authorities, and in some instances by the Railway. On the 27th January, the Political Agent, Cutch, was informed by telegram that the Cutchi quarter of Karchi was affected, and Cutchis were leaving Karchi by steamer, and it was advisable to take precautions. The weak spot in these arrangements was, however, the need for a Commis- sioned Medical Officer, and this Surgeon-General Cleghorn pointed out. This want was supplied on receipt of Government telegram dated 6th February. The Principal Medical Officer was requested to arrange for platform inspections B 1440-3
?10 by Commissioned Medical Officers. The Principal Medical Officer immediately directed the Civil Surgeons at Karchi, Sukkur and Hyderabad, and at Shikr- pur the Assistant Surgeon, to conduct the examination personally. A second examination at Dadu by a Commissioned Officer was, however, urged, as both trains arrived by day-light and the extra 10 hours gave the fever time to deve- lope. On the 8th, the Principal Medical Officer telegraphed for two officers. By the 15th February, Surgeon-Lieutenant A. Gwyther was posted at Dadu, where was a bungalow and a refreshment room and a segregation camp, and Surgeon-Lieutenant M. R. J. Rainier was posted to Karchi City and Cantonment Stations. Detailed rules for their guidance were drawn up and issued by the Acting Commissioner, in consultation with the Principal Medical Officer, on the 20th February, and were approved by Government Resolution No. 1093- 563-P., dated 27th February 1897, General Department. These two officers performed their tedious duty most conscientiously. From the middle of February, therefore, it became very difficult for any sick persons travelling by rail to escape detention, and many passengers were so detained. Surgeon-General Cleghorn's recommendation as to the thorough disinfec- tion of houses had been, as already stated, anticipated to a certain extent by Dr. Kaka, but a visit to the city on the 25th January of the Acting Commis- sioner, accompanied by the Principal Medical Officer, the Civil Surgeon, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, the Municipal authorities and the Collector of Karchi, followed by another inspection on the 27th with the Collector, con- vinced all that the disease was making rapid strides. It appeared necessary to secure that the increase of work did not lead to delay in disinfection and to in- different and hurried work. Accordingly, on the 25th January, Police Inspector Brown was ordered by urgent telegram from Sukkur. On the 27th, Mr. P. R. Cadell, I. C. S., was summoned by wire from Lrkhna, and Mr. H. S. Lawrence, I. C. S., who happened to be in Karchi, was detained at head-quarters. The Collector notes (paragraph 45) that Surgeon-General Cleghorn recorded a favourable opinion on the plague operations in progress at the date of his visit, and it may be convenient here to summarise what was then being done. The measures were thus described in a telegram to Government, dated 20th January :- Cleansing and disinfecting streets and gullies. Vigilant house-to-house inspection. Supervision of burial and burning grounds. Thorough disinfection [with per-chloride of mercury (1 in  1,000)]  of plague-infected houses. Destruction of infected clothing. Infected huts burnt down. Large camps ready, and inhabitants of infected quarters being induced to move into them. Air admitted into  ill-ventilated  rooms  by  breaking  holes   in  roof or walls. On the 20th January, the Collector applied for the loan of 20 subordinates competent to superintend a general cleaning of vacated tenements, many of which contained property left behind by the owners in their flight. In the Collector's opinion, it would carry great weight with the populace if these subordinates were invested with Magisterial powers. Accordingly, on the same date, the Acting Commissioner informed the District Officers in Sind that the Municipality of Karchi were about to undertake this systematic cleaning and disinfecting of all houses in plague-infected quarters, and requested them to despatch Revenue subordinates of standing sufficient for investment with responsible powers. On the following day the Collector of Customs, Mr. Coghlan, was similarly addressed. The Municipality agreed to pay a deputation allowance of from Rs. 15 to Rs. 30 per mensem, according to salary. These measures were reported to Government by telegram. The Customs men joined immediately, and most of the others arrived in Karchi during the first week of February. Among the first was Mr. Phillipowsky, of the Customs House, who proved of great
?11 assistance. The 20 subordinates were duly obtained by the hearty co operation of the Collectors and Deputy Commissioners, and were invested with Magiste- rial powers by Government Resolutions dated 1st and 15th February. Mr. Cadell had been summoned in order that the work in Karchi might be sub-divided under responsible officers,  and on the 30th January it was arranged with the Collector that the infected portions of the town should be divided between Messrs. Lawrence and Cadell and Inspector Brown, with separate Sanitary establishments and Revenue subordinates allotted to each. Thus began that sub-division of the town under Superintendents which proved the backbone of plague management. Mr. Gloster, I. C. S., Joint Judge, joined a few days later of his own accord, and allowed of still further sub-division of the worst part. On the 6th February, in a letter already quoted, the Acting Commissioner had informed Government that a further object in placing officers of the rank of Assistant Collector in superior charge was that it was desirable by the free movement of officers of tact and position among the people to endeavour to allay the panic. At the end of January the situation was this. Though the disinfection of individual rooms was being carefully done with per-chloride of mercury (1 in 1,000), the best possible disinfectant, the work had fallen into arrears. One advantage of quick disinfection was that it usually hastened evacuation. When work was in arrears people were not leaving their houses quick enough, and one after another of a family fell victims. And there was no medical treatment. It was considered of paramount importance to cleanse and disinfect the shut-up houses, because at this stage the strain had so far broken down the Municipal organisation that  it had become impossible to ascertain with cer- tainty all the houses in which sickness or death had occurred. It was therefore decided to take up the work street by street, and do each house from base- ment to roof systematically. But no sooner had the first Superintendents been appointed and their gangs of masons and coolies-each gang under a Revenue subordinate as Supervisor, with disinfectants, ladders and limewash- been supplied than it was found that a hard day's work from sunrise would barely enable them to overtake the preceding night's sickness and mortality. And this was essential so as to use the cleansing as a means of turning out the surviving members of the family. Dr. Cleghorn's assurance that turning out the healthy was the right policy, and should be continued, came at the right moment. Only, instead of attempting to empty the first infected portion of the town in the hope that the disease might be thereby localised, the prime object was now to empty each house immediately it became infected; that is, the sick person was left in the house with one or two relatives in attendance, and the rest must be moved. The disease, though no longer confined to the Old Town and rapidly developing in the adjacent Market and Napier Quarters, was still central, and every exertion was to be made to secure immediate disinfection, rapid removal of the healthy, and at least some treatment for the sick. But, to do anything at all, it was primarily necessary to win the public confidence. On the 1st February the town was visited with Mr. Tahilram, the Presi- dent, and Mr. Framroz, the Mukhtyarkar. There had been during the preced- ing 24 hours the unprecedented number of 59 cases and 51 deaths. Messrs. Lawrence, Cadell, and Brown were found full of work. Next day, the Judge, Mr. Hart-Davies, though on the eve of retirement, nobly volunteered, and thereafter till he left moved among the people, side by side with the Acting Commissioner, with excellent effect. The people recognised that, when the Judges, Messrs. Hart-Davies and Gloster, worked with the Executive and Muni- cipal officers in their streets, a great effort was being made for their relief. The 2nd of February had dawned on 50 deaths, and the 3rd broke with 51. It was the climax, as already said. Messrs. Gloster and Barker, Abkri Inspec- tor, were allotted sub-divisions, and Surgeon-Captain Arnim was asked to take charge of the Sadar Bazar. The Sadar Bazer was at that time quite free, but it was the commencement of appointing Superintendents in advance of the plague, so that the disease might find no filth wherein to lodge and germinate. Soon the streets all over Karchi were almost impassable for heaps of burning rubbish
?12 and carts removing what would not burn, while limewashing by owners or Municipal agency became nearly universal. Surgeon-Captain Arnim was specially successful in getting the owners and occupiers to do the work person- ally under repeated inspection, and this example was quickly followed and so relieved the overstrained officers. On the 4th there were 43 deaths, on the 5th 35, but the 6th recorded 58 cases and 52 deaths, and new efforts were called for. But it was the extreme point touched, and the disease began to yield, and never afterwards got out of control. Mr. Crouch, the Public Prosecutor, had, unsought, quietly added himself to the band of Superintendents, and Mr. Cum- ming, the Port Trust Secretary, was another valuable addition, every man working the whole day long, meeting at the Denso Hall; or other appointed spot, between 6 and 7 A.M., to get the returns of the day before and muster gangs, and working on till dark, only returning for breakfast. By the 11th February, the arrear work in disinfecting houses in which plague cases had occurred had been overtaken, and from that date the systematic cleaning of houses in which cases had not occurred was commenced. The scenes were heart-rending. In one little close of respectable houses, all within a few yards, 21 plague death-marks could be counted-6 and 7 deaths in one house. There had been a stampede of the healthy families from the badly infected places, and many had removed with their first sick relative to other parts of the town, but there was no panic in the sense that anything was noticeable in the streets. Only when houses were entered was the state of affairs disclosed, and then it was good to see the devotion, ignorant though it was, with which the survivors would lay out their dead and attend the funeral. The Acting Commissioner endeavoured, for the sake of example to the people and the preservation of the workers, to insist on disinfection, by spraying in the manner appointed by Doctors Kaka and Arnim, preceding the advance into the houses. But there was as noble and devoted a band of officers and men as could be gathered together, whom nothing would restrain. As an example of the intense anxiety of these days, after a long morning with Messrs. Hart-Davies and Cadell, in the evening it was reported to the Acting Commissioner that Mr. Cadell was down with fever. The Civil Surgeon was sent for, and took the temperature. It was normal-not plague; but the shock to the Acting Commissioner when he saw the officer he had summoned sudden- ly, as it were struck down, he will not easily forget. At that time, the immunity of Europeans was not realised, and the Acting Commissioner had served under his well-known father Colonel Cadell, and the son followed the father in disregard of danger. With the increased mortality, it was feared there might be careless bury- ing, and with increased stringency that bodies might be surreptitiously re- moved. From the beginning of January, one or two Police had been posted, but from the 3rd February the District Superintendent of Police was requested to take the burial and burning grounds under his personal supervision, and there- after the Police returns became a very useful addition to the daily Municipal record, allaying any suspicion lest deaths might be escaping record. In the letter to Government dated 6th January, it was stated that the presence of a thoroughly competent Muhammadan Medical officer would greatly strengthen the Health Officer. The Principal Medical Officer had been able to supply one of the best in Sind, Sheikh Abdul Rahman. This Hospital Assistant came from Mirpur Khas, and soon commanded respect. Government were good enough to procure an Assistant Surgeon Subhan Ali from the North-Western Provinces, and the Municipality obtained Mr. Fazul Ahmad, a private practitioner, from Amritsar. All these were at work by the first week in February in the Trans-Lyari Quarter. The Trans-Lyari Quarter is separated from the town of Karchi by the broad, sandy bed of the Lyari. On the flats beyond, are clustered 20 settle- ments of poor Muhammadans, of different tribes,-fisher people, Sidis, Mekrnis, Pathns, Baluchis, Brahuis, &c.,-each in their separate village. 12 of the settlements are mostly only reed and mud-plastered huts. The remaining eight are of inferior houses of a permanent type. The sites of the huts are
?13 held on leases from the Municipality, terminable at one month's notice. Among these people, numbering at the census over 22,000, but estimated now at over 30,000, or one quarter of the present estimated population of Karchi (124,000), plague did not show itself till the 10th January, when two cases occurred, and up to the end of January cases were few and isolated. But, with the beginning of Februay cases multiplied rapidly, and on the 6th February there were 22 cases and 17 deaths. With the first indication of coming trouble, resort was at once made to the contemplated employment of Muhammadan agency. Sardar Khn Bahdur Muhammad Yakub, Deputy Collector of the Nara Valley, who had done distinguished service in the suppression of the dacoities in the Thar and Prkar District a year ago, was sent for and placed in charge of the quarter, as though it were a sub-division. To assist him, Mr. Giles recommended Khn Sheb Rasul Baksh, a very happy selection, who was brought from his Mukhtyrkarate of Kambar in the Lrkhna Sub-division. A few Muhammadan Supervisors were added. The Sardar at once set to work to get hold of the tribal headmen and to provide segregation huts, with Mr. Strachan's ready aid, for each tribe. On the 3rd February, also, a telegram was despatched to Government, asking for a loan of a lakh of rupees for the Karchi Municipality and for the deputation of two gazetted Medical officers. The Assistant Collectors and other officers working in the town were becoming pretty well known, and it was hoped that access to the sick might now be obtained if a Medical officer moved about in their company. In writing to Government on the same day (February 3rd) it was stated that the compulsory removal of the sick would probably be the most effectual of all remedies, and was the one advocated by the Medical officers; but it was hopeless to work counter to the popular feeling, and the Muhammadans were so far particularly obstinate. A rule had been promulgated by the Municipality that an infected house was to be compulsorily vacated by the surviving inmates. These, it was found, cling to their house till as many as 6 or 7 deaths practically annihilate the family. Government responded immediately, and Surgeon-Lientenants Niblock and Cornwall reported themselves on the 12th February. The Acting Commissioner told them that two duties of the utmost importance lay before them. They were to induce people to come to hospital, and they were by their acts to give the lie to the stories in circulation that the aim of Government was to stamp out plague by poisoning the sick. Right nobly they discharged the trust. Next morning the Acting Commissioner missed Surgeon-Lieutenants Niblock from his side. The young doctor had discovered a house full of sick, and was already at work arranging the helpless. Presently, he was to be seen with an attendant carrying a small box, rigged up as a little portable medicine chest, going his rounds, welcomed by nearly all, and the effect of the treatment was electric. Dr. Cornwall was doing the same splendid service across the Lyari. Without hospitals, without appliances, asking for no help, and ignorant of the language, these young doctors in a few days had won free entrance everywhere. First the sympathy and fearlessness of the officers, moving among the people with gentle firmness, and then the healing treatment and the all-day long devotion and skill of these two young Medical officers convinced the poor there was nothing to dread. With doctors in the city and doctors at the Railway stations, patients began to be taken to the Civil Hospital. Mr. Giles visited the hospital and, finding plague patients in the same compound with the ordinary civil sick, he arranged with the assistance of Mr. E. Giles, the Educational Inspector, for making the Government High School, next door to the Civil Hospital, available for ordinary patients, while the Civil Hospital became the Plague Hospital. Throughout the plague and wherever it broke out, the schools were the only large suitable airy buildings available. Many a head of a department might have hesitated. To Mr. E. Giles the most hearty thanks of the Province are due for placing freely at disposal Colleges and Schools, thus enabling the best possible accommo- dation to be given to the sick in the approaching heat of Sind, and saving Government and the Municipalities a heavy expense. Government approved the arrangement by wire, and Surgeon-Lieut-Colonel Henderson, with Surgeon. F 1440- 4
?14 Lieutenant Niblock's  assistance,  soon had a fully equipped Plague  Hospital, of which subsequently Surgeon-Lieutenant Niblock took charge. The Pleaders and other Native gentlemen had been desirous to give a farewell entertainment to Mr. Hart-Davies. Mr. Hart-Davies begged that, in consideration of the suffering around, the money might be devoted to some public object. A Meeting was called at Governent House, and it was decid- ed to raise a Relief Fund, so that those working among the people might be placed in funds. Mr. Motiram Advani, Barrister-at-law, kindly undertook the task of collecting. The ladies of the station gave a successful concert in the Frere Hall, and eventually Mr. Advani produced the substantial assistance of some twenty thousand rupees, for which he deserves the gratitude of many. Each Superintendent was at once supplied with a permanent advance. Furniture was placed in the Plague Hospital, and stimulants and food and comforts were liberally supplied, and soup kitchens opened across the Lyari. One thing was yet lacking, and that was nurses. The good work done by the Convent Sisters in the Famine Hospital in Bangalore was recollected. Sister Heriberta, of the Karchi Convent, with the approval of the Revd. H. Jurgens, responded without hesitation, and in a few days the Sisters were heartily wel- comed by Dr. Henderson, who had made, with Mr. Advani's help, every arrange- ment for their comfort. The Sisters occupied the upstairs or European wards of the hospital and lived there for several months, nursing the 60 to 100 sick below by day and by night, and entered on the dangerous duty with happy self- sacrifice. They were soon beloved. Later on, they were joined by several nurses paid from the Charitable Fund and were assisted by the two Misses Carey of the Zenana Mission. The agreement was that there was to be no mention of religion. The light that shone from the healing of the sick under such loving ministration could not, however, be hid. Another act also impressed the Native community. Special prayers were offered in Church from Sunday, the 14th February, and on the 19th February a special intercessory service was held by the Revd. F. Sandberg in Trinity Church, which was largely attended. The first fortnight of February was a time of earnest battling with a foe that literally walked in the darkness. His Excellency the Governor on the 11th flashed a message that cheered all, thanking all for the determined efforts to fight the plague, and that Hs Excellency was watching with closest interest. While this battle with pestilence was being fought in Karchi, cleanliness against dirt, light against darkness, fresh air against foul, scattering against overcrowding, and a free use of disinfectants, there were signs of coming trouble in other places. For a time the hope prevailed that, with rigorous segrega- tion, the germs would not thrive in the dry climate of Sind. Nor was this hope altogether fallacious. On the 27th January a circular was issued, inviting attention to deaths from plague increasing up-country, and notably at Hyderabad, Kotri and Tatta. So far, no local cases had occurred, but it was essential to prevent any person suspected of plague entering a town, and isolation, segregation and disinfection, with provision of huts and health camps, were recommended. Surgeon-General Cleghorn, through the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, pointed out the extreme importance of compulsorily removing the healthy persons from an infected house, and the letter was forwarded on the 29th to all District officers. The Sanitary Commissioner, Surgeon-Major Clarkson, in a letter dated 4th February, urged the removal of the sick person from the house in all cases. The circular of the 27th had stated that, if it could be done, it was better to remove the sick persons, and that all the clothes and bedding, including the wearing apparel actually worn, of the family should be disinfected. These directions to District officers appeared to leave them full power of action, and were therefore not modified. From first to last there oceurred in the Karchi District, outside Karchi, no more than 238 cases and 178 deaths. Of these, only 53 and 41 were local
?15 cases and deaths. The disease only took root in Ttta, with which its Railway Station Jungshahi must be included, and in Kotri. Ttta is a town of about 10,000 inhabitants, about 13 miles from Jungshahi. It is a favourite resort of the upper classes of Karchi, and is on the main route to Cutch. From the middle of December to the week ending the 19th February, 31 cases and 21 deaths, all imported, had occurred in Ttta. The influx then appears to have ceased, and no more deaths were reported till plague broke out locally in the week ending the 26th March. Thereafter the outbreak was local, and practi- cally ceased early in May. That the epidemic was kept out of the town so long was due to the unsparing and well-directed efforts of the Assistant Collector, Mr. M. D. Mackenzie. To that officer is also due the credit of starting the first observation camp. Persons were medically inspected at Jungshahi, and not allowed to hire conveyances for Ttta unless certified as healthy. On arrival at Ttta, they were taken to the Camp and not allowed into the town. Cases were consequently hidden away in Jungshahi, and about the third week in February a sharp little local outbreak was the result. There is only a population of some 200. Mr. Mackenzie at once appeared on the scene, adopted energetic measures of evacuation and thorough disinfection, and there were no more cases. The local cases in Ttta began, as stated, towards the end of March and, though never exceeding 4 or 5 a week, caused grave anxiety for five weeks. Mr. J. P. Vaughan, I. C. S., succeeded Mr. Mackenzie on the 23rd April, when the disease bid fair to seize the town in earnest. TTTA LOCAL CASES.                                   Cases. Deaths. Week ending 26th March 2 2         "            9th April 1 1         "          16th    " 4 3         "          23rd    " 5 3         "          30th    " 4 5         "         7th May 2 3         "         14th    " 1 1 Mr. Vaughan,  having had no plague   experience,   was   first taught by the Collector in  Karchi  and then  sent  to  Ttta with   Surgeon-Major   Baker, a trained gang of disinfectors  under  a  selected Supervisor, and   a  nurse.     The above figures depict the rapidity  and  thoroughness   of   their work, as in   the week ending the 30th April the number of cases went down instead of going up. Kotri is   on  the Indus and is the Railway  station for  Hyderabad, from which place it is separated  by the river and a  couple of  miles of road.    It is a small town  of   about  8,000  inhabitants,   and on   Mr. Brayson, the   Deputy Collector in charge, devolved the difficult duty of protecting the place.      As in Ttta, up to the third week in February, dropping cases  came in from   Kar- chi,  deterred probably by the medical examination on the steam ferry from going to Hyderabad.    Then there was a lull, and not till the week ending the 26th March did the first local case show itself at the same time with cases imported from Hyderabad, where the disease had just broken out virulently. Mr.   Brayson made  Kotri his  head-quarters, and, well  assisted by  Assistant Surgeon McMullen of the North-Western Railway, defended his charge from the simultaneous incursion from Karchi and Hyderabad, and,  by enforcing segregation in huts, got rid of the local cases for 17. With the passing of the Epidemic Diseases Act had come increased powers. Sanction to the following measures, which were all already in operation under Municipal Rules, was solicited by telegram on the 9th and granted by Govern- ment on the 11th February:- The Commissioner and District and Sub-Divisional Magistrates were empowered to act or to empower any person by name to act as follows: (a) Enter or break open any house or room, day or night, disinfect, limewash, collect and burn rags, rubbish, pull down, burn, open walls or roofs, burn suspected bedding, clothing and other articles, and disinfect persons or their property. (b) Order persons or classes of person to leave certain place for another, or prohibit leaving given area, prohibit communication
?16 between certain areas, prohibit entrance of persons within prescribed area, make regulations for inspection of travellers by land or water and, if necessary, their detention and segregation, and destruction of suspected articles. (c)  Direct that any place for supply or preparation or storing of food be closed, or the food removed, if so permitted. (d)  Direct compulsory   notification   of   sickness   or   death  from  any cause. (e)  Value and   pay  compensation  for  all bedding,   clothing,  &c.,   or temporary huts destroyed, and after summary inquiry of any valuable article or house. (f)  To give notice to  house-holders or   occupiers within 48  hours to limewash and clean   their premises or specified parts, and to burn or collect dirt, rags and rubbish for cartage. The Commissioner was also empowered to delegate the following  powers to any person by name: (a) Remove any person suffering or   suspected  to be  suffering  from plague, or likely to have contracted  the disease, to   any place; detain him till permitted leave. (b) Prohibit re-occupation of any house without permission. (c)  Regulate removal, burial or burning of corpses and general conduct of funerals. (d)  Prohibit import or export of specified articles. (e)  Determine in what manner and by whom any  expenses,   including compensation, be defrayed. Lastly the Commissioner might make subsidiary rules to carry out any of the above powers, and might require any Municipality to act in any of the above ways in such manner as the Commissioner might prescribe and to employ such establishment as deemed necessary. These powers were so very wide that on the 17th February a circular was issued, desiring that every officer and subordinate should recollect that excep- tional powers carry with them increased responsibility, and the powers must be used with consideration, tact and judgment, and only be put in force when and so far as the necessity for preventing spread of the disease required. On the 19th January the Collector of Hyderabad, Mr. C. G. Dodgson, I. C. S., had reported the arrangements made for cleaning Hyderabad town and other large towns in his district, and for medical examination and detention on the steam ferry across the Indus and at principal Railway stations.    On the 5th February, the first* local cases in Sind, outside Karchi, were reported by the Assistant Collector, Mr. N. B. Divatia, of the Hla Sub-division of the Hyderabad District, to have occurred at Tando Alahyar, a Railway station and Municipal town of over 4,000 people.    Five such cases had occurred during the last fortnight of January, and four had proved fatal.    The Collector of Hyder- abad was  asked to report whether segregation of  the healthy   found in the infected house  and  isolation  of  the sick had been rigorously enforced, and whether disinfection was thorough.    These, being the first local cases, caused anxiety.    The reply received was that a man arrived in Tando Alahyar from Karchi on the 10th January and died of plague on the 12th.    His two sons, who had not been to Karchi and who lived with him, fell ill, and they died on the 19th.    In an adjoining house, practically all one building, two persons who had also neither left the town, were attacked and died on the 26th.   Mr. Divatia went to Tando Alahyar on the 7th February, and found that clothing and bedding had been burned and houses disinfected.    On his arrival he introduced segregation, and the Collector's commendation of his work was borne out by the fact that, though Tando Alahyar continued to be a source of anxiety till after the middle of April, yet cases were only on one occasion in excess of one a week, and the total cases and deaths did not exceed 18 and 15, respectively-a testimony to Mr. Divatia's prompt enforcement of orders.    There was no other local outbreak in the Hyderabad District.
?17  On the 17th February inquiry was requested as to the accuracy of the returns from Hyderabad town that all cases occurring were imported. At that date, 33 cases and 28 deaths had been so described, as under :-   Cases.   Deaths. Week ending 8th January ...     2 2       " 15th     " ...         ...     9 8       " 22nd     " ...         ...     5 5       " 29th      " ...         ...     3 2       " 5th February ...         ...     3 3       " 12th      " ...         ...     6 5      " 19th      " ...         ...     5 3                            On the 10th February the Collector had been asked to give up his tour and make Hyderabad his head-quarters, which he did immediately, reaching Hyderabad on the 17th. With the exception of a flying visit to Tando Alahyar on the 27th and 28th, Mr. Dodgson remained at Hyderabad till his health obliged him to take furlough. On arrival, Mr. Dodgson found much Municipal activity, though the measures he had urged during a visit paid to Hyderabad at the end of January had not progressed so rapidly as he had hoped. The President of the Municipality is Mr. Hiranand, who, like Mr. Tahil- ram in Karchi, stuck to his post, and evinced a true appreciation of the gravity of the visitation and the necessity of active and cordial co-operation on the part of the people. The disease was new, and the measures must be new. At the end of January, house-to-house inspection was commenced by Municipal officers, and in the middle of February the town was divided into 10 divisions, each of which was placed, at the suggestion of Surgeon-Major R. Baker, the Civil Surgeon, in charge of a European officer, the Military officers cordially volunteering to assist. Each divisional officer had working under him one or two sub-divisional officers, who were mostly Municipal Commissioners. The efforts of these officers were directed to cleaning and limewashing the 12,000 houses that composed the town. In passing, it may be remarked that this work, as in Karchi, was most carefully executed. In a letter received from the Civil Surgeon on the 9th February, Surgeon- Major Baker remarked that the cases were as a rule treated in their own houses and after the case ended, the house, bedding, &c., were dealt with. The attention of the Collector was drawn to this remark. If the Municipality wished to escape the scourge, they must at the very beginning isolate the sick and segregate the family and attendants. If this could not be done by taking the whole family, including the sick person, to sheds outside the town, then the healthy members must be made to vacate, leaving only necessary attendance. No per- sons arriving from Karchi should be allowed to enter the town till they have been under observation for 10 days. A copy of these instructions was sent for guidance to the Collector of Shikrpur and to the Deputy Commissioners. Mr. Dodgson acted with energy. He insisted on the Municipality making house- to -house inspection a reality, and stated that, where the sick person was not too ill to be moved, the removal to sheds would be enforced. He explained that detention against arrivals from Karchi had already been discussed with the Civil Surgeon and the President, but owing to the subterfuges that would be resorted to after a day or two, it would be impracticable to recognise a person as hailing from Karchi. Later on, at Shikrpur, this difficulty was met by stopping everybody, but at this  period of the epidemic the authorities had enough discontent to deal with inside the town. On the 23rd of February Mr. Dodgson proceeded to take action himself, and with the assistance of Mr. Hiranand, the President, he caused the evacua- tion of about 100 families from a group of houses where cases had been increas- ing. On the 17th February, Surgeon-Major Baker had noted that the interval in one case of 18 days after arrival from Karchi was a questionable " im- ported" case. On the 26th, or three days after the commotion occasioned by the evacuation, the first two local cases occurred, though not reported till the 28th. During the week ending the 26th February, there were no cases, local B 1440-5
?18 or imported.    Then began   the plague, though   at first, as in  Karchi,  very slowly :-                                         Cases. Deaths. For week ending   5th March ...    3 2       "        "          12th     " ...    7 7 Mr. Dodgson found that a large family of goldsmiths had allowed 3 deaths to take place in their house before the news spread. He reported that all the houses had been disinfected and cleaned, the plaster scraped off walls and floors, and the roofs taken off. All the inmates had been promptly removed to camps outside the town, with the exception of two Native ladies, and all the neighbour- ing houses to each infected house had been vacated. Gangs of coolies had been placed under the divisional officers, and depts for lime and disinfectants esta- blished in convenient spots. On the 19th February a copy of a telegram was received from Government urging the importance of watching roads leading from infected places. These instructions were on the 20th sent to all District officers, with the sug- gestion that Police should be stationed under a responsible officer at suitable points to stop and send for examination by a Medical officer any one with severe fever trying to enter the town. The Collector of Karchi was asked to take steps at, say, a distance of a day's journey from Karchi on the main road to detain any sick or suspicious persons attempting to leave Karchi. On the 17th February a report  was received from the   Civil Surgeon, Sukkur, Surgeon-Major Corkery, stating that a case of plague was reported on the 12th idem, and in the face of great opposition he had removed the patient, a girl of  10 years old, accompanied by her mother and brother, to the sheds prepared for such cases.    Dr. Corkery disinfected the house.    This was the first case of plague reported from Sukkur, and the first case of forcible removal of a patient anywhere.    The result is significant.    Ominous silence followed, and soon it appeared that the people of all ranks had banded themselves together with one accord to defeat the authorities.    On the 26th February, Dr. Corkery report- ed that besides the one case which he saw and removed, a few suspicious fatal cases had occurred which were not brought to notice and which the relatives had palmed off as deaths from natural causes.    A very large number of the population immediately deserted Sukkur.    There was a rush of the healthy to Shikrpur, but the measures there and in other big towns were more or less dreaded, and the bulk of those who had sick in their familes-and there appear to have been many-fled to the neighbouring villages.    The country is well cultivated in that part of Sind, and villages are pretty close together.    A day or two after the removal of the girl, the sister-in-law of a Municipal Commis- sioner took the disease and was immediately secreted in a village 5 miles off, where she died, poor creature, "possessed of the devil," as her brother-in-law pleaded.    How many  perished in these  villages  before their  condition was- known and help could reach them it is difficult to say, but in the Sukkur Tluka the excess of reported deaths over the normal was 436.    The fugitives also crossed over to the left bank of the Indus, and infected Rohri and the villages in its neighbourhood.    Some  10,000  people  are  said to have thus suddenly decamped. Surgeon-Major Corkery set himself to find out the truth. He traced one family to Rohri, where 4 deaths occurred. Spies were placed over a suspected lane in New Sukkur. A sick man was caught as he was being placed in a boat with a temperature of 105 and delirious. This was on the 25th. Next day, the 26th February, the same date on which the first two local cases occurred at Hyderabad, a search was made in the lane. One dead boy and two sick were found, and these were removed to the isolation sheds, and the other inmates to the health camp. There was only slight opposition. Clothing and bedding were burnt, and the houses fumigated and locked. It is to be regretted that the Municipal Commissioners of Sukkur lent no assistance. The Collector of Shikrpur, Colonel Mayhew, was asked to go to Sukkur, his head-quarters.    He had already been there, and anticipated the request.
?19 Sukkur, like Karchi, shows no imported cases. All were local, and, though Karchi people went to Sukkur, none were traced to have died of plague. By the 12th February, when the girl was discovered, there must have been a good many sick in Sukkur, to give rise to the panic that followed her removal. In the neighbouring town of Shikrpur, plague measures aroused no panic, because the townspeople had no sick in their households. The early figures for Sukkur are-                                    Cases. Deaths. For week ending 12th February 1 0             "               19th       " 0 1             "               26th      " 4 1            "                5th     March 6 8            "               12th        " 14 9 On the 3rd March it was evident that plague had broken out at Hyder- abad as well as at Sukkur, and a telegram was despatched to both Collectors, pointing out that, local plague cases having occurred, migration of the popula- tion would commence, and medical inspection of all departures by rail should be arranged, and at exits by road Plague Authorities should be stationed to detain sick and suspected for medical examination, and no plague case be permitted to depart. A second chain of inspecting stations should be made at suitable points at 10 to 15 miles distant, and every effort made to prevent sick persons travelling. Any sick found to be detained in hospital. On the 4th March, the measures to be adopted were recapitulated for the guidance of the Collectors and to strengthen their hands. Private hospitals were the alternative to forcible removal, but always a discretion was left. The Collector of Hyderabad reported that 16 medical students were being placed on the main roads leading from Hyderabad, assisted by Police. Nice huts were erected for them, and it thenceforward became very difficult for any sick person to get away. The Hyderabad-Rohri Railway Station and the steam ferry across the Indus were carefully watched for departing families. The burial and burning grounds were under close supervision, and no conceal- ment was now possible. The exodus of healthy persons was most desirable, the town being overcrowded. The Collector of Shikrpur reported that he had established cordons, but the rush had taken place and guarding the roads was of little use. It was pointed out that this was true enough, but as each new street got infected some would still try to escape the measures being taken, and this must be checked. The arrangements for examination of passengers leav- ing the Railway Station were also detailed. Sukkur and Rohri are practically one place, connected by the Lansdowne Bridge over the Indus, and with railway lines to Hyderabad, to Karchi, to the Punjab, and to Shikrpur and Baluchistan. A more dangerous spot for an outbreak of plague could hardly be named, and with the large important town of Shikrpur, teeming with Karchi, Hyderabad and Sukkur fugitives, and having business connections all over India and as far as Bokhara in Central Asia, situated within 25 miles of Sukkur, the progress of the epidemic was watched with the keenest anxiety, and the resources of the Province were strained to check its apparently resistless march northwards. The Principal Medical Officer was asked to permit Surgeon-Major Baker to visit Sukkur and assist Surgeon-Major Corkery in making a thorough house- to-house inspection. Surgeon-Major Baker arrived at Sukkur on the 8th March, and under date of the 12th idem reported that he had found 2 plague cases in the isolation camp and 20 persons in the health camp, one of whom had just developed plague. Old Sukkur, where the wealthier portion of the community lived, and which was separated from New Sukkur by the European and Railway quarters, was not deserted to any appreciable extent, but three-fourths of the inhabitants of New Sukkur had left for the surrounding- villages. On the 10th March, Mr. W. H. Lucas, I. C. S., who had just been relieved at Jacobabad by Mr. M. D. Mackenzie, was put in orders as Personal Assistant to the Collector of Shikrpur, as no extra establishment had yet been sent there and Mr. Cadell had been taken for Karchi. But the Collector did not
?20 then see the necessity, and Mr. Lucas was directed to proceed to Karchi to acquaint himself with plague administration there. On the 23rd, Surgeon-Major Baker, having been placed on special duty, visited Shikrpur and with the Collector inspected the arrangements there. Surgeon-Captain C. Milne, I. M. S., had been deputed to Shikrpur on the 19th March owing to the occurrence of imported cases, of which to the date of his arrival 14 cases had occurred, and because of the increasing death rate. Surjeon-Captain Milne at once, of his own motion, began examining the dead bodies, and where any objection was made called in Lady Doctor Nash. This thoroughness elicited the fact that the increased death rate was largely due to the increased population, and the mortality was mainly among insufficiently nourished infants and very old people. Search parties had been instituted, and their working was improved during Surgeon-Major Baker's visit. There was an excellent spirit of co-operation among the people, and this must be attri- buted to the healthy influence of Mr. Dayaram Gidumal, the Judge, and Mr. Mohsin Badrudin Tyabji, the Joint Judge, seconded by the City Panchayat and the local officials. Mr. Mules, the Deputy Commissioner of Jacobabad, had imposed detention under observation at Jacobabad with success. This was now asked for by the people of Shikrpur and was now sanctioned. Writing on the 19th February, the Collector of Shikrpur had concurred with the Acting Commissioner that the quarantine then imposed should be removed, and the experience of Surgeon- Captain Milne soon showed that, without European supervision the quarantine would not have been successful. By the time detention was re-imposed, the leaders of Shikrpur society were determined to make it effectual. All through, Colonel Mayhew gaye himself heart and soul to the defence of Shikrpur, and reposed in Surgon-Captain Milne and Surgeon-Captain E. S. Clark, A. M. S., who was subsequently sent to assist, the most unstinted confidence, which maintained their authority unquestioned. Meanwhile, in Karchi improvement was perceptible. Disinfection of houses was up to date and general cleaning in full swing, and the unaffected quarters were being taken in hand in advance of the attack. Surgeon-Captain Arnim was now fully occupied, having in the middle of February been placed in charge of the suburban quarters in addition to the Sadar Bazar. The Deputy Sanitary Commissioner was so valuable as a general guide that it was found impossible to give him charge of the Nasarpuri Camp, which was looked after by Mr. Strachan. Indeed, at this time every one's strength was being put forth in the endeav- our to limit the area infected. Major Morris, Karchi Artillery Volunteers, Port Trust Engineer, took charge of Kiamari and Manora. He segregated every case with extreme care, but cases at Kiamari did not cease till the old village of huts was burnt and the people disinfected and moved to a new site by the Plague Committee. The Manager, North-Western Railway, Colonel Brackenbury, R. E., paid a visit to Karchi on the 18th February and organised the protection of the Railway quarter, and throughout, as will appear, lent the fullest aid of his Department to the Civil officers. Mr. Giles had arranged with the Railway administration for special trains to run between Karachi and the two neighbouring stations of Landhi and Malir, where he and several of the European merchants had erected camps. By this means, subordinate officials and office clerks and coolies were safely housed out of reach of infection and were able to come to work daily. This was a very successful scheme, and a great boon to the mercantile firms who were being deserted by their establishments. Major Morris was similarly active in protecting the shipping. By the end of February, the Collector reported that few cases now remained undiscovered, and hence the removal of the healthy was at once universally carried out. To this must be attributed the progress that was being made as shown in the decreasing mortality, as also to the sick being rapidly brought under medical treatment. At this time, Surgeon-Captain Borradaile, A. M. S.,
?21 arrived from England. His report on the measures in Karchi and the Acting Commissioner's report on the rest of Sind, which that officer drafted, were submitted to Government, and throughout Surgeon-Captain Borradaile lent very cordial assistance and readily volunteered for any duty. In Sukkur, the stringent removal of the sick had led to the sudden flight of some 10,000 people. In Hyderabad, its most rigorous enforcement, under the determined action of Mr. Dodgson, was failing to check the outbreak. In Karchi, it was gradually being introduced, and in some quarters, as Kia- mari, was insisted upon from the very first by Major Morris. Under Sardar Muhammad Yakub Khan in the Trans-Lyari quarter, where he had to contend with much fanaticism among the Muhammadans, isolation of the sick was only becoming possible, but by the middle of March segregation of infected families was the rule. Segregation camps under the magic wand of Mr. Strachan sprang up everywhere. In these days it was necessary to humour prejudice by having the huts near each community. It was a long time before the fancied degradation of living in a hut was subdued, and to the last the better classes disliked it, as was natural. Early in March, the need for a Convalescent Home, to get the recovering patients out of the depressing influence of the mortality of a Plague Hospital and to relieve crowding, became pressing, and Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Hender- son, to whose solicitude and organisation the hospital owed much, suggested that the newly built and unoccupied Lady Dufferin Hospital should be utilised as the convalescent ward. It was just opposite the Plague Hospital, and in every way suitable, and upstairs had accommodation for European and other patients who could not be treated in the Plague Hospital. The Committee agreed, and the happy faces of the convalescents testified to the wisdom of the change. The 19th of March, the crowning day to the Sardar's work across the Lyari, saw the voluntary removal by the Muhammadan communities of all their sick, and 80 patients were during the day safely deposited in the isolation sheds, and all came under medical treatment. Mr. Giles, who had devoted himself to this quarter, was justly proud of the great achievement. Some 40 mal- content families withdrew to some distance, and from that date there was no reluctance but eagerness to isolate every case throughout the villages of the large Trans-Lyari tract. The Jail is a striking example of segregation. It is situated in the heart of the town, and for some time plague circled it. Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Henderson had taken very careful precautions. No new-comers were admitted till stripped and bathed, and re-clad in fresh clothing and kept for some days apart by themselves. Notwithstanding, one prisoner caught plague. He had been 5 months in jail. He was removed to the Plague Hospital and recovered. It is supposed a warder may have introduced the germs. No other case occurred. Nor did any case occur in the Hyderabad Jail, where, also, Dr. Jackson was minutely careful over every detail. With plague broken out at Hyderabad and Sukkur, and threatening at Shikrpur, and villages in different quarters occasioning anxiety, the dearth of officers made itself felt. Some of the staff given to Karchi must be withdrawn and their places supplied, and more Medical officers must be obtained. As the disease approached Cantonments, it seemed desirable also to re-consider the position in Karchi itself. Just about this time, the Bombay Plague Committee was formed. Something of a similar character for Karchi seemed to offer exactly what was required. On the 10th March, a memorandum was drawn up, pointing out that, though plague in Karchi had been held in check, it had not been stopped and was constantly re-appearing in a new quarter. It was clear that the best results had been obtained by separation between the sick, the possibly infected and the healthy, and to the perfecting of this separation, to efficient guarding of the camps, to house-to-house searching, the full strength of the administration should now be directed, and the memorandum closed by suggesting the assistance of the Brigadier-General. A large Meeting of Plague officers assembled on the 12th, at which the Principal Medical Officer was present. The opinion was strongly in favour of working on existing lines. B 1440-6
?22 The plague was decidedly not gaining ground, the arrangements for dealing with it were gradually being made more stringent, and, beyond pushing the removal of the sick to hospital, no change was required. It should be mentioned that at this time the private hospitals were begin- ning to fill, and that Seth Vishindas, a wealthy and philanthropic citizen, quite fearless of plague, was constructing what developed into the best private hospi- tal in Karchi, where he generously received Hindus and Muhammadans alike, having separate wards for each, and supplying medical and other attendance, food and medicine at his own expense. The removal of the sick difficulty, which had been such a mountain in the way of effective remedies, had thus quietly disappeared, and, as the Collector remarks, a few days later the sick were being removed to hospital as a matter of course. On the 20th March, His Excellency the Governor of Bombay, Lord Sandhurst, G. C. I. E., arrived, and, after inspecting all that had been done, appointed a Plague Committee for Karchi, consisting of Brigadier-General T. A. Cooke, Commanding Sind District, as President, with the Collector, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner and Mr. Strachan, of the Municipality, as Mem- bers, though the last named was added a day or two later. This measure was like the relief of a beleaguered garrison. Not only did His Excellency's approval encourage every one, but the General immediately threw himself heart and soul into the work, brought to bear the whole strength of the Military, with unli- mited officers and men and habits of rigid discipline on the existing material, and soon had the population under thorough control. In their first sittings, the Committee had the advantage of the counsel of Surgeon-Major Reade, one of the Joint Presidency Plague Commissioners. He suggested the bathing and disinfecting sheds for arrivals at each camp, the disinfection of all bundles and baggage brought to the camp, and similar arrangements on leaving. These suggestions were most carefully elaborated by the Plague Committee. Disinfection of the person and personal clothing had previous to this been in the background, the getting of sick and healthy out of the infected houses, and the disinfecting and cleaning of those houses absorbing all the time of the workers. Now immediate transference to hospital and camp was working smoothly, and it was possible to perfect that control of the camps to which Surgeon-General Cleghorn had invited attention. This thorough and painstak- ing disinfection of the clothing and bathing of the persons in tubs with a mix- ture of Jeyes' fluid in the water soon extended up-country with marked effect. On the 25th March, the first Military search party went out. It was very carefully organised and admirably managed, the Civil officers accompanied by Medical men taking charge of each party. The General had carefully in- structed the men, and from that day forward there was no need for the slightest apprehension, either that the soldiers would not deal tenderly, or that the people would not welcome them. Not a complaint was ever preferred. Mr. Dodgson responded to the invitation to meet His Excellency, and returned to Hyderabad versed in all that was being done and proposed to be done in Karchi. Surgeon-Major Baker, now on special duty, on the 28th March presented a report of the state of affairs in Sukkur, which showed, as he expressed it, that the local organization was not abreast of the disease. The Plague Committee being now well established at Karchi, it was possible to spare an officer, and Mr. Cadell was despatched that evening to Sukkur to the assistance of the Collector. Surgeon-Lieutenant A. F. W. King, I. M. S., had already taken charge of the two Plague Hospitals at Sukkur. Mr. Lucas, I. C. S., was also placed under the orders of the Collector of Shikrpur, and with Surgeon-Major Baker started for Sukkur on the 29th. Surgeon-Major Baker had reported that the chief difficulty in getting anything done at Sukkur was the general panic and flight. Accordingly, 200 to 300 trained Karchi coolies and masons, under Supervisors, were sent up by train by the ready aid of Mr. Giles and his indefatigable Mukhtya'rkar, Khn Bahdur Framroz, together with a supply of per-chloride of mercury. The delay in sending Mr. Lucas to Sukkur had after all not been lost time. Mr. Lucas had spent some time in Karchi, had seen the soldiers at work, and the disinfection machinery well started, and was thoroughly competent to introduce the system cut and dry.
?23 He received carte blanche powers, and the Collector placed the plague administra- tion in Mr. Lucas' hands. At the same time, on the advice of Surgeon-Major Baker, it was arranged with General Cooke to despatch 30 British soldiers of the Duke of Edinburgh's (Wiltshire) Regiment, under a specially selected officer, from Hyderabad to Sukkur. General Cooke arranged everything with the utmost celerity, and some long-abandoned barracks were immediately put in such order as was possible, and furniture and commissariat were provided by rail. Lieutenant A. E. Beadon went in command. The following table will exhibit a  somewhat  striking  similarity  in   the outbreaks at Hyderabad and Sukkur :-                            HYDERABAD.  SUKKUR.  Week ending                   Local  Local   Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. 26th February 1897   4 1 5th March "                 3 2 6 8 12th     " " 5 4 14 9 19th     " " 42 29 28 19 26th      " " 40 27 97 76 2nd April " 33 25 105 56 9th      " " 117 58 111 75 16th    " " 119 104 87 59 23rd    " " 75 68 42 50 30th    " " 49 40 17 16 7th May " 37 32 13 8 14th   " " 13 12 6 5 21st    " " 8 8 4 5 28th   " " 1 2 1 1 4th June "  2 2 1 1                                               Add 12 Feb.  1 Add 7 July    1 Total     544 413 537 391  The period of intensity in each case was 8 to 9  weeks, and the beginning and ending of the epidemic almost synchronised. The Acting Commissioner left Karchi on the  1st April  and first  visited Hyderabad.    He paid two other visits to Hyderabad, but it will be convenient here to finish the history of the Hyderabad outbreak.    Hyderabad, like Karchi, consists in part of a closely packed old town, with narrow lanes and blind alleys. Its situation upon a hill and its dry climate  would, it was hoped, be unfavour- able to the epidemic, and considering that Hyderabad had a population of nearly 55,000 in 1891 and was now packed with Karchi fugitives,  and probably con tained not less than 65,000 people, the expectation was not disappointed.    The first local cases had been removed to hospital.    The inmates of the infected houses were all carefully segregated in a camp outside the town.    The inmates of houses surrounding the infected house for a considerable area were removed. The value of this last measure was proved by the great quantity of dead rats afterwards discovered in the shops and  houses opened for  cleaning.    Had the inmates been sleeping in these rat-infected-rooms, the mortality would in  all probability have been severe, whereas as inmates of the camps they altogether escaped.    For four weeks, Mr. Dodgson, assisted  by the Military officers and his Civil staff, by the Sessions Judge, Mr. Knight, I. C. S., and by a strong body of volunteers, among  whom   was   Mr.   Hesketh,   Principal  of  the   Sind College, fought the plague and kept  the  weekly mortality almost level.    Mr. Dayaram   Gidumal,   the  Judge  of Shikrpur in Hyderabad, also lent valued assistance.    He established a private hospital on  the Native Library premises, and entrusted it to the superintendence of the Revd. A. Canney, of the  Church Missionary Society, and Miss Pigott, Zenana Mission.    By his request, also, Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel    Henderson  took  a   general   medical  supervision. A Committee of leading Native gentlemen supplied all that was needed, and
?24 the percentage of cured, 4171, testifies to the devotion of the staff. This was about the percentage reached by the Karchi and Sukkur Government hospitals. This private hospital was opened on the 19th March, and on the 24th idem the Government High School buildings were opened as a General Plague Hospital, under Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Henderson, assisted by nurses obtained from Calcutta. Both hospitals were closed on June 15th. Still the disease spread. Persons feeling the dreaded symptoms would hope to escape by fleeing to another portion of the town, till they got over the dread of hospitals and sought asylum there. Rats also tried to leave infected houses, but were in large numbers exterminated by the pestilence. Clothes and bedding, in spite of all precautions, would be smuggled away. As one woman said when questioned as to the clothes of a child that had died, " Oh no, they were not in the house. They had been given to the poor." Or a Banya, whose little shop, where a death had occurred, was being emptied, watching articles being listed and then burnt in the street, when it came to the bag of grain protested. The Superintendent explained how it had come in close contact with infection. "Well," said the Banya, "don't burn grain; at least, give it to the poor." Close supervision had also to be kept over the disinfecting coolies to prevent the appropriation of infected articles ordered to be burnt by the Superintendents, These remarks exhibit how little the idea of contagion has penetrated the Native mind. With the week ending the 9th April, plague broke through the barriers. Cases trebled and mortality doubled. The over-strain proved too much for Mr. Dodgson's health, and most reluctantly he had to take furlough. Mr. Gloster was sent up from Karchi, and Mr. Steele, the Deputy Commissioner of Thar and Prkar, who was to succeed Mr. Dodgson, spent a few days in Karchi, learning the plan of campaign. Mr. Dodgson's last act was to recommend a Plague Committee, and this was constituted by Government on the 9th April, with the Collector as Chairman, and Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Henderson, Major Price, Commanding the Station, Surgeon-Captain Cater Jones, A. M. S., and Mr. Hiranand Khemsing, President of the Municipality, as Members. The Committee did admirable work, and, as in Karchi, it minimised correspondence and promoted united, well considered effort. The camps were brought under the control of European soldiers and non-commissioned officers. These camps had been carefully laid out and very systematically worked by Surgeon-Captain Cater Jones, who devoted himself to the efficiency of their management and the comfort of the inmates. Tickets showed the occupants of each hut, with full particulars, so as to avoid constant reference by the inspecting officer to the registers which were kept in the camp office. The Observation Shed for any sickness, disinfectants, provision arrangements, were all well ordered. With the increase in attacks, the population re-commenced flight from Hyder- abad, but, with the minute precautions taken to watch every outlet, the sick scarcely attempted to get away, and, as Mr. Steele writes, the exodus of the healthy here as everywhere contributed to that abatement of the epidemic which began from the middle of April and rapidly continued till plague disap- peared. The last case occurred on the 2nd June, the very day that the last case occureed in Sukkur. With the abatement, the tactics of the Committee were reversed. This was ever the case with plague. Scarcely were dispositions made than modi- fication was called for to meet some new development. A returning instead of a departing population had to be dealt with. Till the house had been certified fit for re-occupation by the Superintendent of the quarter, no family could be allowed to enter, and morning by morning inspections were made to see that there was no unauthorised dweller and no sickness among the permitted residents. Nor would the Superintendent allow entry till the family was certi- fied to be disinfected. Some 23,000 persons passed through the disinfecting depts, where the arrangements for women and children were very complete. To all this minute care and to the great heat prevailing must be attributed the fact that plague did not anywhere re-appear, and the Committee were able with fair rapidity to reduce the establishments. The personal fatigue to all the officers in supervising their quarters was very great, but fatigue and heat and unpleasant surroundings were cheerfully borne.
?25 Meanwhile, the villages were being overhauled lest plague were anywhere smouldering. Mr. J. C. Pringle, I. C. S., a young officer who had distinguished himself in the city, was placed on this duty. He was very careful in his inves- tigations, but so good was the net round Hyderabad that, as already said, few sick found their way out, while the healthy were not kept in, with the result that the Hyderabad District, excluding Hyderabad itself and Tando Alahayar, where 18 cases occurred, escaped with only 37 plague cases among a population of between eight and nine hundred thousand people. Two visits were paid to Shikrpur and three to Sukkur during April and May. The work was being done well, and there was little to do but be thank- ful that so fine a body of officers had been provided, animated with the one mind to clear plague from the Province and suspicion from the people. At Sukkur, as elsewhere, the sick were accommodated in some of the best buildings in the town, the schools having been placed freely at disposal by the Education- al Inspector, and the best comforts and nourishment that could be procured were provided, while the nursing was that of the motherly Sisters of the Lady Aitchison Hospital, Lahore, generously spared and eager for the service, assisted by the Zenana Mission ladies. When one of these Sisters caught the plague (happily she recovered) it was pleasant to hear of the interest taken by the ex- patients in her recovery, and at any time a visit to a Plague Hospital was re- warded by the grateful looks of the sufferers towards their nuises and the beam- ing faces in the convalescent wards. While the sick were thus accommodated, usually in the centre of the towns, instead of being banished to some dreaded lazaretto, it was remarkable that the Plague Hospital attendants and guards, and even the relatives of the sick, enjoyed almost complete immunity. One of these nurses, Miss Horne, in Karchi, besides Sister Isabel at Rohri, took the disease, but she also recovered. Under proper management, the disease seemed paralysed and innocuous. Not a single European worker took the disease, and the only instance of a pure European taking plague was a little daughter of a Sergeant living at healthy and sea-blown Manora, and that case was accounted for by the cook having plague in the compound and the child running about bare-footed. The Police and Native soldiers probably owed much of their safety to their boots. The camps were, of course, unpleasant in that heat of Upper Sind which to be in any way realised must be felt. The huts were, however, as substantial protections as could bo got. Mr. Gwyther and Mr. Rickie, of the North-West- ern Railway, and later on Mr. Strong, did prodigies of rapid work. It suggest- ed itself to them to utilise sleepers, and huts made by sinking sleepers in the ground, and across these uprights placing a roof of sleepers covered with mud, were multiplied by the hundred at little expense. Water was laid on to the camps, and paved and enclosed bathing places provided. Shops moved them- selves bodily in, and with a few screens for the better classes life was bearable. Of the results of some of these camps, one or two instances may be quoted, as they illustrate the way plague was summarily checked in many quarters all over Sind. Gharibabad was the worst infected corner of New Sukkur, accounting for 106 cases of plague in the three weeks ending the 19th April. On the 15th, there had been 6 cases, on the 16th 6 cases; but on the 17th Mr. Lucas encircled them with a cordon of men of the Wiltshires and quickly removed the entire population of nearly 600 to the health camps, where next day all were disinfect- ed. Not another case occurred. The camp inhabitants were free to go about their business as usual, but most worked at their trades in the camp. There was individual medical inspection twice daily. Limji Charhi was another plague-infected quarter of small size, but giving 4 or 5 cases daily among only some 300 people. On the 26th April, they were similarly moved and disinfected. The plague disappeared from that day. The inhabitants of these camps were detained for 30 days to permit Mr. Cadell, who commanded the disinfecting gangs, to finish the work of house. B 1440-7
?26 cleaning, so that when the population returned not a nook or corner had escap- ed the perchloride of mercury, and not a rag or rubbish heap remained, while walls inside and out shone with limewash, with which disinfectant had been mixed, and light and air penetrated to the darkest recesses through holes in walls and roofs. Both in Karchi and Sukkur, Mr. Cadell's work was most thorough and systematised, his subordinates being carefully trained by himself. Amid the great heat, he spent the whole day in the solitude of the empty quarter with his gangs of men, toiling to cast out the dirt of years. The result was that there was no re-appearance of plague when the streets were again tenant- ed by a living multitude. As at Hyderabad, the return was most carefully watched, and the new-comers were all taken to the camps to be disinfected and observed. This detention was necessary because so many deaths had occurred in the villages. Mr. Lucas' hands had been strengthened by a strong contingent of officers. Plague had to be kept out of Shikrpur, and should it get a footing there it was desired to have officers ready to put into the town, and plague had to be beaten back, if that might be possible, from the Punjb frontier. The frontier station is Reti. At Dharki, the next station south and only some 15 miles from the boundary, a sudden and sharp outbreak occurred-34 cases and 24 deaths in all. Surgeon-Major Baker and Mr. Mountford, I. C. S., the Assistant Collect- or in charge of the tluka, were on the spot immediately. Some good work had already been done by the local authorities, and the people had segregated themselves under trees. A disinfecting gang was organised, all the inhabitants removed, the houses systematically cleaned, the people re-placed, and the public health restored. Mr. Pringle had been moved up from Hyderabad, and was again selected for, the duty of clearing plague out of the villages in the Sukkur Tluka. Mr. Lucas had done a great deal of preliminary enforcement of orders by Special Plague Inspectors. Mr. Pringle, after visiting every village, was able to comfirm the intelligence that plague was in May confined to two villages in the Sukkur Tluka and had never been local in more than three or four. These two villages gave some trouble, but yielded eventually to the effective method of turning out the population, and disinfecting and cleaning the houses, and after the re-occupation there were no more cases. This reads easy, but May in Upper Sind represents the worth of the workers who stayed not to rest till their task was done. The result of the Gharibabad exodus was widely known, and the villagers quietly accepted the same remedy. On the opposite bank, Mr. Mountford, I.C.S., was in charge of the Rohri Sub-division, and defended the bridge and watched the river with determination ; but the Sukkur fugitives in their sudden flight had slipped across and infected several villages within 2 or 3 miles of Rohri. Cases were occurring towards the end of March, and by the middle of April the left bank, including Rohri, was badly infected. Mr. Mountford was reinforced by Lieutenants Leith, Hislop and Bailey, who were unsparing in their movements, and with the aid of Hospital Assistants the sick were treated in sheds under trees and made as comfortable as possible. Mr. Mountford's arrangements in Rohri were admirable. He held the disease thoroughly well in check all the time, and the bulk of the population remained, so that the town at no time looked empty. Mr. Mountford went on the plan of emptying thoroughly particular streets. He always got good information of sickness, and carried the sensible part of the townsfolk with him, and his administration was thoroughly successful. All these weeks, Surgeon-Captain Milne, now helped by Surgeon-Captain Clark, was both defending Shikrpur and preparing for outbreak. The in- habitants got two excellent Plague Hospitals fully equipped, one for Hindus and one for Muhammadans, and spent a good deal of money in providing the neces- sary quarters for nurses and attendants and renovating the buildings selected. The Government Plague Hospital was also in readiness and received the few imported cases. Large camps were standing to receive the population of the
?27 area to be immediately vacated wherever plague might make its attack. The railway and road approaches were rigorously guarded, and every new-comer found himself in the observation camp. Even if ingenuity had aided his reaching a house, concealment did not last long. The people were thoroughly determined that no plague should enter, if they could help it, and some one or other always conveyed a hint to Dr. Milne, and the travellers and the shelterers were soon in the huts. The examination of every dead body was another strong deterrent to any person taking a sick relative to Shikrpur. The Deputy Commissioner of Jacobabad tells a story of a plague child being conveyed into his town in a carpet bag. But such incidents were rare. As a rule, after the first scare, people presented themselves at hospital, or were brought by friends, or gave intimation, and the danger of the disease spreading became every day less as the towns and villages set themselves against admitting strangers, and the desire to run away with the sick gave way to the feeling that they could nowhere be better cared for than in the hospitals, Government and private. By the aid of Messrs. Rickie and Strong, of the North-Western Railway, large steam disinfectors were erected at Shikrpur and Sukkur and a smaller one at Rohri. To these disinfectors, bathing sheds were attached. A train- load of passengers was turned out, all their effects passed into the steam chamber, while the passengers bathed in disinfectant tubs, and so the pas- sengers were passed on to the Punjb and to Baluchistan. Surgeon-Captain Milne turned his steam disinfector to the useful purpose of making all the washermen in the town carry their bundles to it, when the soiled wearing apparel of the whole town was thus thoroughly steamed. Whatever he did, Surgeon-Captain Milne did methodically and with the keenest eye to any weak spot in his defence; but, as he says himself, the safety of Shikrpur is primarily due to the attitude of the people led by the Judges, Messrs. Dayaram and Tyabji, and seconded by the City Magistrate, Ro Bahdur Choithram, Ali Baksh Muhammad Husein, Mr. Chainrai Kalro, of the Charitable Dispensary, Lady Doctor Nash, of the Lady Dufferin Hospital, and Mr. Mathieson, Engineer and Secretary of the Municipality. No crafty cunning was set to work to defeat the measures taken. On the contrary, any attempt was exposed. Sukkur was a terrible object lesson of what concealment of plague led to, and the attitude of the people from first to last was exemplary, nor could they have been better served than by Surgeon-Captains Milne and Clark. The Thar and Prkar and Upper Sind Frontier Districts escaped with 3 and 4 cases of plague, respectively. The Deputy Commissioners very early took precautions, and persons seeking to hide a sick relative found no welcome. Mr. Mules' arrangements at Jacobabad were very thorough, and he was among the first to depend upon an observation camp as a deterrent. It would be impossible to mention all the Deputy Collectors and Mukhtyarkars who, throughout their charges, with the co-operation of the people, cleaned and whitewashed the villages till officers on duty have once and again been so struck that, from remote corners of Sind, they have reported the thoroughness of the cleansing undertaken. Conspicuous, however, as much exposed to danger, was the town of Larkhna on the railway line and rushed at by the Sukkur fugitives. The Deputy Collector, Khn Bahdur Sadik Ali, and the Mukhtyarkar, Ro Sheb Jagatrai, carried out the instructions with intelligent thoroughness, and after a long period of anxiety brought the town safely through (though there were 20 imported cases). In the rest of this Deputy Collector's charge only one imported case occurred. The extent of the plague in the Province of Sind is exhibited in the table below. There were 6,063 cases and 4,779 deaths. The population of the Pro- vince was returned in 1891 as 2,871,774. During the cholera epidemic of 1892, the three districts of Karchi, Hyderabad and Shikrpur lost 14,659 per- sons by cholera. Of the number attacked by plague, nearly 79 per cent. succumbed:-
?28 Total Plague Cases and Deaths in the Province of Sind. Locality. IMPORTED  INDIGENOUS  TOTAL   Percentages of Deaths to Cases.   Cases.  Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths.  Karchi City   4, 181 3, 398 4,181 3,398 81.27 Karchi District.        Tatta 32 21 21 20 53 41 77.36 Jungshhi 18 9 10 8 28 17 60.71 Kotri 27 17 17 8 44 25 56.82 Other places 108 90 5 5 113 95 84.07 Total, Karachi District 185 137 53 41 238 178 74.79 Total, Karachi District, including the City of Karachi  185 137 4,234 3,439 4,419 3,576 80.92 Hyderabad District.        Hyderabad  42 38 544 413 586 451 76.96 Tando Alahyr  5 4 13 11 18 15 83.33 Other places  37 33   37 33 89.19 Total, Hyderabad District  84 75 557 424 641 499 77.85 Shikrpur District.        Shikrpur 27 18 5 3 32 21 65.63 Sukkur    537 391 537 391 7281 Abad, Tluka Sukkur 6 3 39 29 45 32 71.11 Rohri 32 16 119 72 151 88 58.28 Thati, Tluka Rohri 3 3 47 33 50 36 72.00 Miani Baghat,    26 15 26 15 57.69 Tluka Rohri        Tando Mir Muhammad  Hasan, Tluka Rohri 4 1 16 15 20 16 80.00 Lrkhna 20 14   20 14 70.00 Khairpur Dahirki, Tluka Ubauro   34 24 34 24 7059 Other places 47 41 34 21 81 62 76.54 Total, Shikrpur District 139 96 857 603 996 699 70.18 Thar and Prkar District  3 2 ... ... 3 2 66.67 Upper Sind Frontier  3 2 1 1 4 3 75.00 Total for the whole Province of Sind 414 312 5, 649 4,467 6,063 4,779 78.82           The weekly total of cases and deaths, imported and local, in each district and in the chief towns and villages attacked, will be found in the appended table, marked A. With the exception of a few imported deaths, the Khairpur State remained clear of plague, which was most creditable to the precautions taken by His Highness the Mir's administration. His Highness also considerately offered the services of his Assistant-Surgeon, when he heard doctors were required in Karchi, but being the only Medical officer it was thought better that the Assistant- Surgeon should remain where he was in case his services became necessary in the State. As already stated, the last plague cases in Hyderabad and Sukkur occurred on the 2nd of June. The town of Rohri and the whole district of Shikrpur were free of plague by the week ending the 25th June, though one death took place in hospital on the 30th June. The Hyderabad hospitals were closed on the 15th, and the Sukkur and Rohri hospitals on the 30th June. Plague lingered fitfully in Karchi till the 27th July, when it finally ceased, and the last case was discharged from hospital on the 6th August. In accordance with the terms of the Venice Sanitary Convention of 1897, 10 days must elapse from death or discharge of the last case. By Notification No. 4039, dated 17th August 1897, the City, Cantonment and Harbour of Karchi and the whole Province of Sind were declared free from infection by plague, and on the 5th September there were thanksgiving services in the churches of all denominations at Karchi. The approximate expenditure incurred in connection with the plague is detailed, so far as is at present possible, in Appendix C. The total amounts to
?29 about six lkhs of rupees, of which more than half was spent in the Karchi District, one lkh in the Hyderabad District, and one and three quarter lkhs in the Shikrpur District. The pleasing task remains of endeavouring to acknowledge the services of the officers through whose instrumentality, under divine blessing, the plague disappeared after being epidemic during a little more than seven months. During the plague, no officer rendered more valuable and conspicuous service than Mr. Robert Giles, the Collector of Karchi. To him first the thanks of the Acting Commissioner are pre-eminently due for experienced, unre- served advice, well considered suggestions, and the ability and determination with which he prosecuted to a successful issue whatever he undertook. On him fell chiefly the heavy burden of controlling plague operations in Karchi, and whatever success is due to those measures largely belongs to him. To General T. A. Cooke, Commanding Sind District, the Acting Commis- sioner would respectfully offer hearty thanks for the appreciative way in which the General has spoken of all the officers serving under him. From the day he took charge, the General and the Plague Committee were most active, first in house-searching and then in turning out people from badly infected quarters and providing new accommodation. Not only places in Karchi, but every place  within reach to which temporary colonies had migrated and where plague ap- peared was visited and thoroughly dealt with. The camps were concentrated and placed under European supervision and Military guards. The disinfection arrangements for the clothing were most successful, and the arrangements at the port for the disinfection and detention, where necessary, of arrivals are admirable. The General used the Military-officers and men-freely, and the advent of this large establishment, controlled in every detail and all working together, had an almost immediate effect in diminishing the number of cases. With General Cooke must be mentioned Surgeon-Captain Arnim and Mr. Strachan, C.I.E. The former, before the formation of the Plague Committee, has already been mentioned for the help he rendered in cleaning and disinfecting and in taking charge of quarters, and thereafter General Cooke and Mr. Giles testify to the valuable aid received. The latter was the executive officer of the Municipality to whom every one turned, and he met all demands with promptness and temper. The water-supply and the public buildings of Karchi will long remain a record to Mr. Strachan's exceptional ability, and his work during the plague added to his reputation. Mr. Tahilram Khemchand, the President of the Karchi Municipality, greatly assisted in explaining the necessity of the plague measures to the people, and to him the thanks of the Acting Commissioner are specially owing for loyal support. As the Collector states, Mr. Tahilram set an example of personal courage and loyalty to the measures that alone would have made him conspicuous, but he was also valuable for his constant presence in the city and in bringing the full resources of the Municipality to the aid of the Superin- tendents. Dr. Kaka, the Municipal Health Officer, was extremely active in visiting the houses of all plague cases reported and seeing that the prescribed measures were taken, and to him is due the credit of procuring daily a fairly accurate return of the cases and deaths occurring during the preceding 24 hours, a return that soon was worked up to a high degree of accuracy. In this work, Mr. C. McIver assisted by his supervision of the burial and burning grounds and by the readiness with which he lent his Police to aid all operations. For this and for the cordiality with which he personally undertook any duty, the Acting Commissioner would offer Mr. McIver his thanks. There was no panic among the Karchi Police, and Assistant Superintendent Rook and the Inspectors and European Constables all did good service. The Collec- tor specially mentions Inspectors Nedou, Jashanmal, Khushaldas and Samson, and Chief Constables Rahimdad and Pir Muhammad, and Constables Mathieson and Miles. As assisting the Plague Committee, the General prominently mentions Major Bayly, D. S. O., Assistant Adjutant-General, Superintendent of the B 1440-8
?30 Sadar Bazaar and Cantonments, and Captain Mennie, 30th Bombay Infantry, their indefatigable Honorary Secretary. And now follows the long roll of that fine body of officers, the Superintend- ents of quarters, on whose shoulders rested every thing, in whose hands all authority was concentrated, and who each and all worked with tact, energy and patience the whole day long, week after week, month after month, with the same painstaking attention to detail, the same gentle compulsion and persuasive decision, first turning people out of their houses and then putting the people safely back into their houses, till at length they were rewarded by success and the confidence of the people. Mr. P. R. Cadell, I. C. S., both in Karchi and afterwards at Sukkur, did splendid work, the worst quarters in each falling to his share. His cleaning of Gharibabad in Sukkur was a fine bit of work under trying heat. Messrs. Gloster and Lawrence did excellent work in the worst infected quarters from the beginning, and were conspicuous for the method of their arrangements and the authoritative weight that they lent to the Superintendents generally. To the work of these three officers must be attributed that change in the attitude of the people which prepared the way for medical treatment. They were seconded in the city by the Secretary to the Port Trust, Mr. R. H. Cum- ming, and by the Abkri Inspector, Mr. G. J. Barker, who each had an independ- ent charge. Mr. Crouch, the Public Prosecutor, voluntarily undertook a distant charge, and visited it daily, while Major Morris was indefatigable at Keamari. Later on, Mr. Doig, the Chief Engineer, Lieutenant-Colonel Mayne, 30th Bombay Infantry, Mr. Forrest Brunton, Manager of the Tramways, Lieutenants Anderson, 30th Bombay Infantry, Law, 1st Wiltshire Regiment, Rambaut, R. A., and Dalby, 1st Wiltshire Regiment, did excellent service. In the Trans-Lyari extensive and troublesome district, Sardr Khn Bah- dur Muhammad Yakub was in responsible charge, and his remarkable success is one of the most gratifying episodes in the history of the plague, and this distinguished officer has again earned the thanks of Government. Under him, Khn Sheb Rasul Baksh worked with energy and tact, as did the Muhammadan Doctors, Assistant Surgeon Subhan Ali, and specially Hospital Assistant Sheikh Abdul Rahman and Mr. Fazul Ahmed. The work of the Civil Surgeons, Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonels Henderson and McCloghry, has been noticed in the report, as also the services of Surgeon- Lieutenants Niblock, Cornwall and King. All these were in charge of Plauge Hospitals. Of the untiring devotion of these Medical officers to the sick, it is impossible to speak too highly. To the Nursing Sisters and the Nurses and the ladies who helped, the Acting Commissioner would tender his respectful thanks for their ready and devoted aid in an hour of great need and in a work of danger. They and the doctors have done a great work in demonstrating to the people the determi- nation of Government to do all that was possible to abate the plague and all that was possible to succour the sufferers. After Sister Heriberta, Miss Horne must be mentioned, for she returned to her work in the Plague Hospital after her recovery from plague. In charge of camps are mentioned Surgeon-Captains Bray, Rivers and Fleury, A. M. S., each of whom did thorough work, and passed the population through with attention to every detail. The thanks of all Karchi are due to Surgeon-Captain Jenney, I. M. S., for his able and thorough arrangements under the direction of the Plague Committee to prevent, if possible, the introduction of plague into Karchi through arrivals by sea. The observation camp is supervised by Lieut. Law. Upon these officers, and upon Surgeon-Lieutenants Niblock and Cornwall, who watch the town, the sickness and the mortality, very great responsibility rests. They are all careful officers and specially selected. The train examinations at Karchi still continue as an additional precaution, and one very necessary against arrivals by land or coasting boats from Cutch. Throughout the plague, Surgeon-Lieutenants Rainier and Gwyther, I. M. S.,
?31 and Surgeon-Captain Clark were deputed to the duty of medically examining the passengers by trains, and to their careful work, disagreeable as it was and at hours that kept them early and late at the Railway Stations, must be ascribed the decided check very early given to the movement of the sick. Assistant- Surgeon McMullen, at Kotri, also was useful in this work. In this work, too, were associated the Lady Doctors, Miss Duggan and Miss Nash, and one or two Nurses. And in every possible way the Lady Doctors were most helpful-in searches, in treating the very few Pardah sick, and in giving confidence by their mere presence. The successful exertions of Mr. M. D. Mackenzie and Mr. Vaughan, I. C. S., at Tatta, where they were well aided by Diwan Shiwandas, the Vice-President of the Municipality, and of Mr. Brayson at Kotri, where Seth Lalchand, a Municipal Commissioner, maintained the camp at his own cost, have been narrated. To Seth Vishindas, of Karchi, a very special tribute is due, both for building and maintaining at his own charges a temporary hospital, where all castes were welcomed, and which was well managed to the last, and also for establishing grain shops in the camps and in several parts of the city at a time when, owing to the flight of the Banias, or petty shop-keepers, grain was getting dangerously scarce. This benevolent gentleman sold the grain at cost price, and personally supervised both shops and hospital, and is entitled to the special notice of Government. The Acting Commissioner tenders to him his hearty thanks. And also to another gentleman, Mr. Motiram Advani, is special recognition due, who in an incredibly short time produced ample funds for the Plague Relief Fund, and then rendered the signal service of expending the money in the most judicious and careful way, so that the sick and the Nurses lacked nothing, and, so far as he could ascertain; the indigent and the orphan were helped. Passing to other districts, Mr. Dodgson, I. C. S., the Collector of Hyderabad, worked with an energy and judgment that had already won the Acting Commis- sioner's high commendation, when the over-strain, to some extent caused by the  attitude of the upper classes who failed in the commencement to understand that plague results from the transgression of certain laws, obliged him to take furlough and leave his unfinished task. Mr. C. E. S. Steele, who acknowledges in unqualified terms the assistance he received from Mr. Gloster, took charge of the Collectorate, and carried his heavy and extensive charge safely through the crisis, displaying qualities that won him general confidence. With him were associated Surgeon-Lieutenant- Colonel Henderson, of whom mention has been frequently made, Major Price, Commanding the Baluch Regiment, and Surgeon-Captain Cater Jones, A.M.S. Major Price rendered the full assistance of the Military, and himself took charge of a part of the town. Surgeon-Captain C. Jones organised and manag- ed the camps. Of both officers the Collector speaks highly, and also of Mr. Hiranand Khemsing, the President of the Municipality. To Mr. Hiranand it was specially due that the plague measures were supported by the Municipality and that the opposition already alluded to quickly subsided. These officers were assisted by Mr. Knight, I.C.S., the Judge, who took charge of a quarter, Mr. Rieu, I.C.S., who also is specially mentioned by Mr. Steele as having pre- pared the Hyderabad report, by Captains Fowler, Tighe and Southey, and by Lieutenant Dyke, by Mr. Divatia, by Messrs. Hesketh and Bayliss, and by Surgeon- Major Avetoom and Surgeon-Captain Jackson. Several Municipal Commis- sioners also helped, among whom Mr. Kauramal did specially good work. The Collector also favourably notices the work done by Diwns Manghirmal and Thawardas, Mr. Rozare, A'bkri Inspector, Mr. Chuharmal, Public Prosecutor, Mr. Contractor, Head Master, Mr. Kotwal, Municipal Secretary, and Messrs. Tarachand and Poredi, Health Officers. Of the work of the Revd. A. Canney, C.M.S., and of Miss Pigott, Zenana Mission, in Mr. Dayaram's Plague Hospital notice has been taken. In the Shikrpur District, Mr. W. H. Lucas, I. C. S., did a splendid bit of work. The Collector awards him high praise. Surgeon-Major Corkery and Mr. Ingle, the Secretary to the Municipality, both Members of the Plague
?32 Committee, of which the Collector was President, worked snuparingly. Mr. Mountford, at Rohri, conducted the operations most successfully, and with an amount of personal labour that secured to him the sympathy of the town. He was well assisted by Mr. Tiloksing Jethsing, the Municipal Secretary, of whom Mr. Mountford speaks highly. Surgeon-Lieutenant King, whose management of the Plague Hospitals has been noticed, was helped by the Sisters Seraphina, Izabel and Louisa, by Nurse Murray, and by Miss Driscoll and the other Zenana Mission ladies. Among other helpers in the operations are mentioned Mr. Bahadurji, Sub-Judge, the late Mr. Harrison, of the Indus Conservancy, a very earnest worker, Mr. Hayter, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Mr. Dracup, Mr. Rochiram, the City Magistrate, who deserves credit for taking his son to hospital and his family to the camp, Mr. D'Abreo and Ro Bahdurs Choithram Girdhardas and Chandumal and Khn Bahdur Pir Baksh, Deputy Collectors, Ro Sheb Kimatsing, Mukhtyrkar, Seths Suliman and Motandas, the only two Municipal Commissioners who stayed to aid, Sanitary Inspector Marker and Hospital Assistant Benjamin. Mr. Cooke, District Superintendent of Police, and Mr. Marston, Assistant Superintendent, conducted the Police duties well. Ro Bahdur Shaukiram, the Divisional Forest Officer, was very active in looking after the comfort of the camps. Lieutenant Beadon and the men of the Wiltshire Regiment deserve special thanks, as do also Lieutenants Leith, Hislop and Bailey. The Acting Commissioner cannot forget the support rendered by the Principal Medical Officer, Sind District, at a time of great anxiety, and begs to thank him for it. Mr. E. Giles, Educational Inspector, merits special thanks for the full assistance of his Department; and to Messrs. Dayaram Gidumal and M. B. Tyabji cordial acknowledgment of their voluntary service must also be conveyed. The able and willing assistance afforded by Surgeon-Major Baker has been frequently acknowledged by the Acting Commissioner, and to Surgeon-Captain Borradaile, also, thanks are given for his readiness to assist. The Acting Commissioner would also beg permission to thank Colonel Brack- enbury, R. E., the Manager of the North-Western Railway, and the officers of the Railway, Messrs. Tickner, Bean, Rickie, Strong and Gwyther, for unstinted active practical help. To Captain Finney, R. I. M., the Port Officer, the thanks of the Acting Commissioner are also due. The Collector of Karchi speaks of much help received from K. B. Framroz E. Panthaki, the Mukhyrkar of Karchi, and Mr. Phillipowsky, of the Customs, was a good Supervisor. Many names have been left out. Where all Departments united forces, it is difficult to mention every one, and the Acting Commissioner is aware that, even where plague never appeared, Deputy Collectors and Mukhtyrkars worked hard to protect their charges. The Acting Commissioner has endeavoured to present a picture of the whole, but with this Report must be read the Report of the Karchi Plague Committee, in which General Cooke describes with fuller knowledge the opera- tions subsequent to the formation of the Plague Committee. To the troops employed, to the Royal Artillery, to the Wiltshire Regiment, to the Baluch Regiments at Karchi and Hyderabad, to all ranks, the thanks of Government are due, not only for doing unusual work well but for mixing among the people kindly. General Cooke set an example of personal courtesy that was followed by all. That the contact has raised the British soldiers in the estima- tion of the people there can be no doubt whatever. The European population of Karchi met the approach of plague without fear or clamour, with a quiet helpfulness and confidence that were of the utmost assistance in allaying panic among the Natives. To the people the Acting Commissioner would offer his thanks for the patient trustfulness with which the plague measures were tolerated, and the general submission with which inconveniences were put up with.
?33 The co-operation of the people was the main factor in any success attending the plague measures, and the plague, though it has doubtless left many sore hearts, has left few bitter ones, and the Acting Commissioner trusts many grate- ful ones. It has represented the Government to the people in a new and strik- ing attitude, sending forth its officers of all Departments to heal the sick and stand between the pestilence and the population, and the effect must be to draw  the ties closer, and awaken new thoughts in the minds of the multitude. To Mr. J. Sladen, I. C. S., Assistant Commissioner, Mr. Wingate is deeply indebted, and latterly also to Mr. H. S. Lawrence, I. C. S., for bearing with marked ability a great share of the burden of the work of the Province, besides assisting in the special work caused by the plague. They were ably helped by the Assistant Commissioners, Mr. Whittle and Ro Bahdur Choithram, who worked unceasingly to get necessary work through and avoid arrears accu- mulating. To the Head Clerk, Mr. Cross, and to the whole office who have worked so hard, and who do credit to the training they have received in past years, the thanks of the Acting Commissioner are given, and specially to Mr. Tahilram, the Plague Clerk. Upon Mr. Quanbrough, the Superintendent of the Commissioner's Press, and his staff, devolved very heavy work, which they, like the Commissioner's office, most cheerfully undertook. In conclusion, the Acting Commissioner would desire to say that, if any success has been attained, it is due to the magnificent sense of duty which has inspired all officers. If this report fails to convey the admiration and thank- fulness which the Acting Commissioner feels towards the very fine body of officers serving in Sind, it is the fault of his pen. He is conscious of an earnest desire as the events pass in rapid succession to name those chiefly associated with each detail of the operations. A. WINGATE, Karchi, 21st September 1897, Acting Commissioner in Sind.
34 APPENDIX A. Plague Statistics for the whole Province of Sind. Locality. WEEK ENDING 11TH   WEEK ENDING- 18TH   WEEK ENDING 25TH   WEEK ENDING- 1ST   WEEK ENDING 8TH   WEEK ENDING 15TH    DECEMBER 1896.   DECEMBER 1896.   DECEMBER 1896.   JANUARY 1897.   JANUARY 1897.   JANUARY 1897.    Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total.  Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Karchi City   2 1 2 1   10 10 10 10   26 26 26 26   35 30 35 30   124 124 124 124   181 157 181 157 Karchi District.                                     Tatta       3 1                       8 3 1 1 9 4 Jungshahi                                     Kotri                               1    1  Other Places                               4 4   4 4 Total, Karachi District       3 1                       13 7 1 1 14 8 Total Karchi District (including                                      the City of Karchi)   2 1 2 1 3 1 10 10 13 11   26 26 26 26   35 30 35 30   124 124 124 124 13 7 182 158 195 165 Hyderabad, District.                                     Hyderabad                         2 2   2 2 9 8   9 8 Tando Alahyar                               3 2   3 2 Other Places                   1 1   1 1 1 1   1 1        Total, Hyderabad District                   1 1   1 1 3 3   3 3 12 10   12 10 Shikrpur District.                                     Shikrpur                   1 1   1 1       1 1   1 1 Sukkur                                     Abad, Tluka Sukkur                                     Rohri                                     Thati, Tluka Rohri                                     Miani Baghat Taluka Rohri                                     Tando Mir Muhammad Hasan, Tluka                                     Rohri                                     Lrkna                                     Khairpur Dahirki, Tluka Ubauro                                      Other Places                                     Total, Shikrpur District                   1 1   1 1       1 1   1 1 Thar and Prkar District                                     (Mirpur Khas.)                                     Upper Sind Frontier                                     (Jacobabad.)                                     Total for the whole Province of                                     Sind   2 1 2 1 3 1 10 10 13 11    26 26 26 26 2 2 35 30 37 32 3 3 124 124 127 127 26 18 182 158 208 176
35 APPENDIX A.-continued. Locality.  WEEK ENDING 22ND JANUARY 1897. WEEK ENDING 29ND JANUARY 1897. WEEK ENDING 5TH FEBRUARY 1897. WEEK ENDING 12TH FEBRUARY 1897. WEEK ENDING 19TH FEBRUARY 1897. WEEK ENDING 26TH FEBRUARY 1897.  Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total.  Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Dated. Karchi   218 206 218 206   200 181 200 181   320 297 320 297   284 269 284 269   273 235 273 235   264 205 264 205 Kara'chi District.                                     Tatta 2 4   2 4       4    4  6 8   6 8 7 4   7 4       Jungshahi 2 1   2 1 1    1  3    3   2    2 2    2  8 5 3 2 11 7 Kotri 3 1   3 1 4 3   4 3 1 1   1 1 2 2   2 2 1    1        Other Places 4 4   4 4 3 3   3 3 14 9   14 9 8 9   8 9 9 6   9 6 8 8   8 8 Total, Karchi District 11 10   11 10 8 6   8 6 22 10   22 10 16 21   16 21 19 10   19 10 16 13 3 2 19 15 Total Karchi District (including the 11 10 218 206 229 216 8 6 200 181 208 187 22 10 320 297 342 307 16 21 284 269 300 290 19 10 273 235 292 245 16 13 267 207 283 220  the City of Karchi).                                     Hyderabad District.                                     Hyderabad 5 5   5 5 3 2   3 2 3 3   3 3 6 5   6 5 5 3   5 3       Tando Alahyar 1 1 2 2 3 3   2 2 2 2   1 1 1 1                   Other Places 1 1   1 1             1 1   1 1 1 1   1 1       Total, Hyderabad District 7 7 2 2 9 9 3 2 2 2 5 4 3 3 1 1 4 4 7 6   7 6 6 4   6 4       Shika'rpur District.                                     Shikrpur                   2 1   2 1             Sukkur                     1  1     1  1   4 1 4 1 Abad, Tluka Sukkur                                     Rohri ...............                                 1 1 1 1 Thati, Tluka Rohri                                     Miani Baghat, Tluka Rohri                                     Tando Mir Muhammed Hasan, Tluka                                     Rohri.                                     Lrkhna                   1    1              Khairpur Dahirki, Taluka Ubauro                                     Other Places                         1 1   1 1       Total, Shikrpur District                   3 1 1  4 1 1 1  1 1 2   5 2 5 2 Thar and Prkar District (Mirpur                         1 1   1 1        Khas.)                                     Upper Sind Frontier (Jacobabad.)                                      Total for the whole Province of Sind 18 17 220 208 238 225 11 8 202 183 213 191 25 13 321 298 346 311 26 28 285 269 311 297 27 16 273 236 300 252 16 13 272 209 288 222
?36 APPENDIX A-continued.  Locality. WEEK ENDING 5TH MARCH 1897. WEEK ENDING 12TH MARCH 1897. WEEK ENDING 19TH MARCH 1897. WEEK ENDING 26TH MARCH 1897. WEEK ENDING 2ND APRIL 1897. WEEK ENDING 9TH APRIL 1897.  Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total.  Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Karchi City .   246 200 246 200   289 200 289 200   251 200 251 200   271 185 271 185   263 189 263 189   199 161 199 161 Karchi District.                                     Tatta              1    1    2 2 2 2       1 1 1 1 2 2 Jungshahi 1 1 1 2 2 3 1  3 2 4 2         1  1    2 1 2 1    1  1 Kotri  1 1   1 1       1    1  4  1  5  2 4 1 1 3 5    1  1 Other Places . 9 9   9 9 7 6   7 6 9 7 1  10 7 3 2  1 3 3 10 5 3 3 13 8 7 5   7 5 Total, Karchi District 11 11 1 2 12 13 8 6 3 2 11 8 11 7 1  12 7 7 2 4 3 11 5 12 9 6 5 18 14 8 6 1 3 9 9 Total, Karachi District (including                                      the City of Karachi)  11 11 247 202 258 213 8 6 292 202 300 208 11 7 252 200 263 207 7 2 275 188 282 190 12 9 269 194 281 203 8 6 200 164 208 170 Hyderabad District.                                     Hyderabad     3 2 3 2 2 3 5 4 7 7   42 29 42 29   40 27 40 27 5 5 33 25 38 30   117 58 117 58 Tando Alahyar    1  1    1 2 1 2       1 1 3 1 4 2    1  1   1  1  Other Places        4 3   4 3 1 2   1 2 1 1   1 1 7 5   7 5 13 10   13 10 Total, Hyderabad District   4 2 4 2 6 6 6 6 12 12 1 2 42 29 43 31 2 2 43 28 45 30 12 10 33 26 45 36 13 10 118 58 131 68 Shikrpur District.                                     Shikrpur        6 4 3 1 9 5 1 1  1 1 2 10 9   10 9 2 1   2 1 2    2  Sukkur    6 8 6 8   14 9 14 9   28 19 28 19   97 76 97 76   105 56 105 56   111 75 111 75 Abad Tluka Sukkur                                     Rohri 3 2   3 2 2 2   2 2 1 1   1 1 13 8   13 8 1 1   1 1 3 2   3 2 Thati, Tluka Rohri        2 1   2 1              1    1       Miani Baghat, Taluka Rohri                                     Tando Mir Muhammad Hasan, Tluka                                     Rohri                                      Lrkhna              1 1   1 1 5 4   5 4 13 8   13 8  1    1 Khairpur Dahirki , Tluka Ubauro                                     Other places              1    1  3 3   3 3 5 4   5 4 4 1   4 1 Total, Shikrpur District 3 2 6 8 9 10 10 7 17 10 27 17 4 3 28 20 32 23 31 24 97 76 128 100 21 15 105 56 126 71 9 4 111 75 120 79 Thar and Prkar District (Mirpur                                      Khs) .                   2    2   1    1       Upper Sind Frontier (Jacobabad)             1 1   1 1   1 1 1 1       2 1   2 1 Total for the whole Province of Sind 14 13 257 212 271 225 24 19 315 218 339 237 17 13 322 249 339 262 42 28 416  293 458 321 45 35 407 276 452 311 32 21 429 297 461 318
?37 APPEISTDTX A-continued. Locality. WEEK ENDING 16TH APRIL 1897. WEEK ENDING 23RD APRIL 1897. WEEK ENDING 30TH APRIL 1897. WEEK ENDING 7TH MAY 1897. WEEK ENDING 14TH MAY 1897. WEEK ENDING 21TH MAY 1897.  Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total.  Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Karchi City    177 122 177 122   167 120  167 120   114 81 114 81   85 64 85 64   49 44 49 44   40 23 40 23 Karchi i District.                                     Tatta    4 3 4 3   5 3 5 3   4 5 4 5   2 3 2 3   1 1 1 1       Jungshahi ... .....                                     Kotri ...... ..... 4 3 1  5 3   4 3 4 3 1  3 1 4 1  1 5 1 5 2 1  2 1 3 1 1 1   1 1 Other Places ...... (a)7 (a)7   7 7 2 2   2 2 2    2   2 1 1 1 3 1 1   1 1       Total, Karachi District  11 10 5 3 16 13 2 2  9 6 11 8 3  7 6 10 6  3 8 5 8 8 2 1 3 2 5 3 1 1   1 1 Total, Karachi District (including th                                      City of Karchi) ....... 11 10  182 125 193 135 9 2 176 126 178 128 3  121 87 124  87  3 93 69 93 72 2 1 52 46 54 47 1 1 40 23 41 24 Hyderabad District.                                     Hyderabad ..... .   119 104 119 104 1 1 75 68 76 69   49 40 49 40   37 32 37 32   13 12 13 12 1 1 8 8 9 9 Tando Alahyar ....   1 2 1 2   1  1                          Other Places .... 2 3   2 3 1 1   1 1       3 2   3 2  1    1       Total, Hyderabad District .. 2 3 120 106 122 109 2 2 76 68 78 70   49 40 49 40 3 2 37 32 40 34  1 13 12 13 13 1 1 8 8 9 9 Shikrpur District.                                     Shikrpur 2    2          2  2     1  1             Sukkur ........   87 59 87 59   42  50 42 50   17 16 17 16   13 8 13 8   6 5 6 5   4 5 4 5 Abad, Tluka Sukkur .....       3 2 15  8 18 10 2  11 4 13 4 1 1 9 8 10  9   4 7 4 7    2  2 Rohri ....         18  8 18 8   22 9 22 9   20 17 20 17   19 16 19 16 1  8 5 9 5 Thati, Tluka Rohri ..... . 1 1 4 1 5 2   14 7 14  7   9 12 9 12   13 9 13 9   6 3 6 3   1 1 1 1 Miani Baghat Taluka Rohri .....   8 2 8 2   10 7 10 7    2  2   4 3 4 3   3 1 3 1       Taudo Mir Muhammad Hasan, Taluka                                       Rohri ....       4 1 5 1 9 2   7 10 7 10   2 3 2 3   1  1        Lrkhna ....                                     Khairpur Daharki, Tluka Ubauro ..   18 11 18 11   9 8 9 8   5 3 5 3    1  1   1  1        Other Places .... 15 18 4 8 19 16 2 4 3 3 5 7 9 9 8 4 17 13 4 3 14 7 18 10 1  1 2 1 3 2       Total, Shikrpur District .. 18 14 121 76 139 90 9 7 116 92 125 99 11 9 81 60 92 69 5 4 75 57  80 61 1 1 42 33 43 34 1  13 13 14 13 Thar and Prkar District ......                                     (Mirpur Khs.)                                     Upper Sind Frontier ........                                     (Jacobabad.)                                     Total for the whole Province of Sind. 31 27 423 307 454 334 13 11 368 286 381 297 14 9 251 187 265 196 8 9  205 158  213 167 3 3 107 91 10 94 3 2 61 44 64 46 (a). Include one case and one death which occurred in an open space in deh Malir, tluka Karchi, but regarding which the date is unknown. They were reported by the Collector on the 11th April 1897. B 1440-10
?38 APPENDIX A.-continued  Locality. WEEK ENDING 28TH  MAY 1897. WEEK ENDING 4TH  JUNE 1897. WEEK ENDING 11TH  JUNE 1897. WEEK ENDING 18TH  JUNE 1897. WEEK ENDING 25TH  JUNE 1897. WEEK ENDING 2ND  JULY 1897.  Imported. Indige- nous. Total. Imported. Indige- nous. Total. Imported. Indige- nous. Total. Imported. Indige- nous. Total. Imported. Indige- nous. Total. Imported. Indige- nous. Total.  Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Karchi City   38  21 38 21   27 27  27  27   7 6 7 6   2 1 2 1   4 2 4 2   2 2 2 2  Karchi District.  Tatta ...               1  1 1  1                   Jungshahi                                     Kotri ...                                     Other Places  1  1   1 1                               Total, Karchi District ... 1 1   1 1         1 1 1 1                   Total, Karchi District (including the City of Karchi)    1   1   38   21   39   22     27   27   27   27     8   7   8   7     2   1   2    1     4   2   4   2     2   2   2   2 Hyderabad District.                                     Hyderabad    1  2 1 2   2 2 2 2                         Tando Alahyar                                     Other Places ...                                     Total, Hyderabad District      1   2   1   2     2   2   2   2                         Shikrpur District.                                     Shikrpur                                      Sukkur    1 1 1 1   1 1 1 1                      1   1 Abad, Tluka Sukkur ...                                      Rohri ...  4  7 5 11 5 1  9 3 10 3   4 4 4 4 3  8 2 11 2   3 2 3 2       Thati, Taluka Rohri ...                                     Miani Baghat, Taluka Rohri.     1    1                                Tando Mir Muhammad Hasan, Tluka                                      Rohri    1 1 1 1                               Lrkhna                                     Khairpur Dahirki, Tluka Ubauro ...     1   1   1   1                               Other Places  1 1 2 2 3 3   1  1 1 1             1 1   1 1       Total, Shikrpur District ...  5  1  13  10  18  11  1   11  5  12  5    4  4  4  4  3   8  2  11  2  1  1  3  2  4  3     1   1 Thar and Prkar District (Mirpur Khs)                                     Upper Sind Frontier (Jacobabad)                                     Total For the whole Province of Sind  6  2   52  33  58  35  1   10  31  41  34    12  11  12  11  3   10  3  13  3  1  1  7   4  8  5     2  3  2  3
39 APPENDIX A------continued. Locality. WEEK ENDING 9TH JULY 1897. WEEK ENDING 16TH JULY 1897. WEEK ENDING 23RD JULY 1897. WEEK ENDING 30TH JULY 1897. TOTAL.  Percentage of Deaths to Cases.  Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total. Imported. Indigenous. Total.   Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths.  Karachi City       2 2 2 2   4 2 4 2   5 4 5 4   2 1 2 1   4181 3,398 4,181 3,398 81.27 Karachi District.                                Tatta                          32 21 21 20 53 41 77.36 Jungshahi                          18 9 10 8 28 17 60.71 Kotri .                          27 17 17 8 44 25 56.82 Other Places                         108 90 5 5 113 95 84.07 Total, Karachi District                         185 137 53 41 238 178 74.79 Total, Karachi District (including the                                 City of Karachi),   2 2 2 2   4 2 4 2   5 4 5 4   2 1 2 1 185 137 4,234 3,439 4,419 3,576 80.92 Hyderabad District.                                Hyderabad .                          42 38 544 413 586 451 76.96 Tando Alahyar .                         5 4 13 11 18 15 83.33 Other Places                          37 33   37 33 89.19 Total, Hyderabad District                         84 75 557 424 641 499 77.85 Shikarpur District.                                Shikarpur . .                         27 18 5 3 32 21 65.63 Sukkur                            537 391 537 391 72.81 Abad, Taluka Sukkur .                         6 3 39 29 45 32 71.11 Kohri                         32 16 119  72  151  88  58.28 Thati, Taluka Rohri                          3 3 47 33 50 36 72.00 Miani Baghat, Taluka Kohri                            26 15 26 15 57.69 Tando Mir Muhammad Hasan, Tluka                         4 1 16 15 20 16 80.00 Rohri.                                Lrkbana                          20 14   20 14 70.00 Khairpur Dahirki, Taluka Ubauro                            34 24 34 24 70.59 Other Places                          47 41 34 21 81 62 76.54 Total, Shikarpur District                         139 96 857 603 996 699 70.18 Thar and Prkar District (Mirpur                                 Khas.)                         3 2   3 2 66.67 Upper Sind Frontier (Jacobabad.)                         3 2 1 1 4 3 75.00 Total for the whole Province of Sind.   2 2 2 2   4 2 4 2   5 4 5 4   2 1 2 1 414 312 5,649 4,467 6,063 4,779 78.82 A. WINGATE, Acting Commissioner in Sind.
40 APPENDIX B. Statement showing Arrivals and Departures by rail and sea for the town of Karchi. Month. Population according to census of 1891. ARRIVALS  DEPARTURES Difference between columns 5 and 8. Estimated population.   By rail. By sea. Total. By rail. By sea. Total.   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10           December 1896 (10th to 31st) 98,195 7,907 3,621 11,528 11,820 2,930 14,750 -3,222 94,972 January 1897  98,195 8,529 2,552 11,081 16,955 5,172 22,127 -11,046 83,926 February  98,195 7,451 1,629 9,080 10,706 7,834 18,540 -9 460 74,465  March  98,195 7,147 1,487 8,634 6,916 5,950 12,866 -4,232 70,233 April  98,195 5,276 3,325 8,601 3,815 2,834 6,650 +1,951 72,184 May  98,195 5,878 4,355 10,233 3,200 1,301 4,501 +5,732 77,917 June  98,195 7,716 1,950 9,666 4,284 977 5,261 +4,405 82,322 Total 98,195 49,901 18,919 68,824 57, 698 26,998 84,697 -15,873 82,322 APPENDIX C. Statement showing approximate Expenditure incurred on Plague Operations in Sind. District. EXPENDITURE FROM    Municipal Funds. Local Funds. Provincial Revenues. Total. REMARKS. Karchi,      Karchi Municipality *1,84,595  1,27,734 16,095 3,28,424 * Expended by the Karchi Munici-  pality and includes Rs.42,560 outstanding against them.  Expended by the Plague Com-  mittee out of Rs. 1,30,000 placed  at their disposal by Government. Kotri Municipality 4,000   4,000  Expended by the Collector of Karchi out of Rs. 16,500 placed  at his disposal by the Commis- sioner in Sind.             Tatta Municipality 4,000   4,000  Local Fund areas     No details available. Sums small. Total 1,92,595  1,43,829 3,36,424        Hyderabad.      Hyderabad Municipality 61,512    28,210 92,722  Includes Rs. 15,000 liabilities still to be met.  Received from Government Rs.  25,500 and from the Commissioner  in Sind Rs. 3,000 = Rs. 28,500. Other Municipalities 3,211   3,211  Local Fund areas  3,416 227 3,643  Total 67,723 3,416 28,437 99,576  Shikrpur.      Sukkur Municipality 1,19,868       1,24,101 Government placed Rs. 500 and the Commissioner Rs. 1,000 at the Collector's disposal. Shikrpur Municipality 24,000  $20,000   4,233 44,000 Still to be paid. Other Municipalities 3,916   3,916  Local Fund areas  295  295  Total 1,67,784 295 4,233 1,72,312  Thar and Pirkar     No details available, but sums in- Upper Sind Frontier      significant. GRAND TOTAL  4,28,102 3,711 1,76,499 6,08,312  A. WINGATE, Acting Commissioner in Sind.
?No. 1579 OF 1897. FROM F. S. P. LELY, ESQUIRE, I. C. S., Commissioner, N. D.; To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, General Department. Ahmedabad, 30th July 1897. SIR, In compliance with Government Resolution No. 3015/2269-P of 2nd June, I have the honour to forward the marginally noted papers giving in detail for each district of the Northern Division a history of the recent outbreak of plague and the measures adopted for its suppression. 1.    Collector    of    Thna, Mr. Logan's No. 5017 of 12th July  with  appendices from Surgeon-Captain Anderson. 2.    Collector    of     Surat, Mr. Moore's No. 1496 of 22nd July  with   appendices from Surgeon-Major        Nariman, Surgeon-Captain         Dyson, Mr. Seddon, and Mr. Judge. 3.    Collector    of   Broach, Mr. Candy's No. 481 of 25th June. 4.    Collector     of    Kaira, Mr.   Bagnell's  No.  2700  of 13th July. 5.    Collector of Panch Ma- hls, Mr. Doderet's No. 2680 of 3rd July and No. 836 of 4th March. 6.     Collector   of   Ahmed- abad, Mr. Gibb's No. 2581 of 12th July. 7.    Report by Mr. Gilbert on Bndra with the Collect- or's forwarding memorandum No. 4367 of 19th June 1897. 2.    So far  as  we can  learn   from statistics,   the disease  in its advance up-country began in October with Kalyn, Thna and Bndra, being three places of chief resort in Bombay. Then it spread to Balsr,  Kurla, Surat  and various other towns and villages of the Thna District con- nected   with   Bombay,   in  almost  natural  sequence. Amalsd (in Surat District)  got it, being the home of many Bombay servants.    Rander, which has not much direct communication with Bombay, got it in January from,    it   is   said,   the   Gikwr's  town   of  Variv. Damaun, which was perhaps protected at first by the Portuguese cordon, inefficient though it was, received its  first  cases  in  a ship from Karachi, and  in the person of a refugee from  Bulsr at the  beginning of March.    Infection from Bulsr town is clearly account- able for violent outbreaks in April and May in sur- rounding villages, especially in three of the sea-coast, chiefly inhabited by fishermen.    The districts of Broach, Kaira  and Panch Mahals remained free, except for a few imported  cases  in the two  former  which  were easily dealt with.    Kaira and the Panch Mahals have scarcely any connection with Bombay, but the immu- nity of Broach is not so intelligible. Ahmedabad, though farther from Bombay  by 150 miles and though pro- tected by a longer gauntlet of inspections, had almost as many cases as Surat, owing to the fact that all trains were completely emptied there, and no case could slip through uncaught. Being introduced, the disease spread with a varying rapidity and to a vary- ing extent which bore a distinct relation to the promptitude with which efficient measures were taken in hand, but were also affected by conditions not yet cer- tainly understood. It gradually disappeared throughout the month of May. 3.    Thus there were the following centres :- (1)    The environs of Bombay up to (in this Division) Kalyn on the east and the Vaitarna river on the north. (2)    Damaun territory, (3)    Bulsr town and neighbourhood. (4)    Amalsd. (5)    Surat, including the neighbouring town of Rnder. (6)    Ahmedabad. 4.    The special facts of these several areas are contained in the reports herewith submitted, and need not be retailed by me.    The theory indicated in B 1084
?2 in several of the papers is (1) that the disease is spread solely by infection or contagion independently of local sanitary conditions, except perhaps that it is favoured by excess of water-supply; (2) that the agents of conveyance from town to town and from village to village are human beings and their kit, and from house to house, rats also. This is supported on the whole by a consider- ation of the practically immune areas between the centres above mentioned, viz., between the Vaitarna river and the southern limit of the Bulsr Tluka; (2) between the north of Jlalpor Tluka and the city of Surat ; (3) north of the Tpti river up to Ahmedabad. The first of these began, as Mr. Logan points out, at the extreme limit of the local trains to and from Bombay, i. e. at the extreme point of daily flux and reflux of population from and to Bombay, and it ended in the neighbourhood of Bulsr, which was the home of many Bombay people and, therefore, their place of refuge. The second area had practically no communication with Bombay, and the third but little. 5.    There must, however, be local conditions making for or against the disease, which as yet have hardly been guessed at. For instance, in the first of the above immune areas lies Udvda to which troops of Prsi families resort for religious purposes.   There is no obvious reason why it should have escaped, while Trpur, a village of, to all appearance, exactly similar conditions, should have been heavily hit.    In Naopura there were no cases of plague, as described by Mr. Gilbert in paragraph 10 of his report, though it was raging in the slaughter-house close   by and in other parts of Bndra. Before any firm precautionary measures had been begun either in Bulsr or Prdi towns, a large number of Bombay people had come into the latter, though not so many as into the former; yet Prdi was entirely free in February when Bulsr was reeking with infection.   In Bulsr Tluka, the brunt of the attack (400 cases out of 552) fell upon three villages.    The remaining 152 cases were distributed among 23 villages, and the rest of the tluka altogether escaped without any obvious reason.    The good fortune of Broach town has been already noticed. 6.    The experience gained by such experts as Surgeon-Major Nariman and Surgeon-Captains Dyson and Anderson will enable the proper authorities to draw up directions as to the method and materials of disinfection, the treatment of the sick and other details which will enable us to deal with a future outbreak with a more certain hand.    I would limit myself to a few general conclusions which, it seems to me, should be drawn for future remembrance- (1)    Salvation lies in  dealing with   the  very  first  cases promptly, thoroughly, and resolutely, isolating the patient and disinfecting not only the premises, but (as pointed out by Surgeon-Captain Dyson, paragraph 31) the circumjacent area.    The success achieved in the cities of Surat and Ahmedabad are signal instances of this. (2)    Subject to the above, we should make every effort to understand and minimize the hardships and gain the confidence of the people.    Some of our arrangements   pressed heavily.    There are   few Englishmen   who would receive with equanimity an order that they must stay 10 days under observation or that their baggage was to be burnt because they had omitted to notice some printed rule.    There  is a great deal to   be said for the ignorant Musalmn of Bulsr (though not for the author of the lie) who sincerely believed that if his wife or son were taken to the public hospital, they would be ground down into ointment.    It has been shrewdly said that the Oriental would sooner we heard his story than granted his request, and the epigram is specially apt in plague work, which touches so closely his domestic and personal life and is often opposed to sentiment only.    Ordi- narily, an English officer who shows that he understands and appreciates the popular objections has half won his battle though he may not be able to make a single concession.    I of course suppose we are dealing, not with men who are steeped in  sedition, but with the Gujartis and most of the country folk throughout this Division.    Mr. Seddon says: "Yet it seemed to me that most difficulties could be got over by listening to what the people had to say and talking to them patiently and in a friendly manner.    They did not agree, but they were pleased and mollified.    They could hardly be expected to agree, for their fatalistic creed taught them that the plague was
?3 decreed by Providence and that the hour of each man's death was unalter- ably determined." These are wise words and it is a subject of pride to me as Acting Commissioner of the Division to know that so many of our men realized their truth. Mr. Seddon himself at Rnder, Mr. Hudson in Slsette and Surgeon-Captain and Mrs. Dyson at Bulsr are notable instances. I personally know that in February in Bulsr everything done by Govern- ment was viewed by the Musalmns with a fear and abhorrence which might through sheer panic have led to rioting, but as I am informed, in May when the leaders flocked to the station to wish good-bye to Mrs. Dyson and express their gratitude, the scene was most affecting. 7.    Following out these principles :- (1)    When concealment of plague is suspected, house to house visita- tion becomes a duty, with careful precautions. (2)    Free liberty should be given to each community within reason- able limits to establish and manage their own hospitals, provided only the great end of segregation is attained.    As a fact, free access may be allowed to  relations, for few will  come-often  not enough to tend the sick-and in any case prohibition  of any kind does far more harm than good by arousing suspicion. (3)  Except perhaps when dealing with single houses, healthy inmates of suspected houses should not be forced to move, for that is undertaking a task which is sure to create much irritation and cannot be successful at the best, for most of the ejected people only go to the houses of friends in other quarters, and so, if tainted,   only hasten the spread of infection.    They should, however, be encouraged to go out and build  huts for themselves, the very poor being assisted to do so.    If Surgeon-Captain Dyson is right, the evacuation of even houses in which cases have occurred is of minor conse- quence, provided they and all clothes and bedding are well washed with a solution of corrosive sublimate or similar disinfectant. (4)    There is a diversity of practice about the destruction of houses. My own opinion is that a house, even if  "kutcha,"   should never be burnt or otherwise destroyed, save in very exceptional cases.    It raises a prejudice against the plague work and furnishes a starting point for the tales of the sedition monger.    Nor is the step necessary if (according to Dr.  Dyson) a solution of corrosive sublimate is freely used or (according to Mr. Gilbert) the place is unroofed and exposed for some time to the sun. (5)    Among the villages, there should be no attempt against the wish of the people to establish central hospital camps.    Every village should be allowed to make   its own segregation   arrangements, provided   they  are effective.    This they will gladly do, as a rule, while any order to carry the sick to a strange place will not be carried out and will simply lead to con- cealment. (6)    A vigorous use of Rule 29 by the Ptels as " plague authorities " is an invaluable means of keeping out the plague.   It is to my mind of special interest as a revival of the old spirit of self-help which is far more robust and  genuine than the artificial modern   expedient of " self-government." To it Mr. Logan attributes (paragraph 69) the safety of the inland villages of his district and, undoubtedly,   it was the   chief factor in saving the area between the Vaitarna river and the Pr river, and in checking the spread inside the Bulsr Tluka.    The  example of  Christian Kurla (Mr. Logan s paragraph 18) and the hamlets  of Agsi   (paragraph 23)   are   also   most instructive.    At first the people   were   afraid  of  getting themselves into trouble under the law, but on being assured as to this, and encouraged to act,  they set  themselves to fight their  own battle  with a will.    In Prdi town they went so far as to withstand the entry of the camp of the Deputy Collector in charge  of the tluka, coming as it did from an infected part. In many villages they called in a "Bwa"  and made him draw with reli- gious ceremonies a line around the inhabited site which it was forbidden to cross under penalty of excommunication.    Unfortunately, as mentioned by Surgeon-Captain Dyson, they were not  so  strict in  preventing  some of
?4 their number from going to infected places for labour or for marketting; and so, in spite of all, some of the villages in Bulsr Tluka were ravaged. (7) The sea quarantine rules worked well, and that they warded off danger through the sea ports may be inferred from the fact that in Damaun, where there were no such rules, or they were easily evaded, the disease was first introduced by ship from Karachi. 8. With regard to  expenditure, I take  this opportunity of respectfully protesting against the injustice of assessing so  much  upon the Local Boards whose  means  are so small and who will thereby be crippled for useful work for a long  time to come and of totally exempting the bodies to whom, more than to any one else, the trouble is owing, viz. the Railway Companies. Former out- breaks  of  plague have been destructive enough within their own limited areas, but this time the whole of India has been endangered owing to the ready com- munication which  exists between Bombay and all other parts of the country, It seems unfair that the Ahmedabad Municipality, for instance, should  have to bear the sole cost of housing and  treating a crowd of people who have no local claim  whatever, simply because they  are cast up at the station by the Railway Company who have carried them from Bombay for the sake of profit. 9. It would be false delicacy to conceal the fact that in this the people's hour of trouble, scarcely one of those who pose as their leaders came forward to  save them from death, although patriotic and educated men would have been specially valuable as interpreters of the teachings of science to the ignorant masses. The Municipalities abjectly broke down when they were not dissolved by the flight of most of the members. It is a pleasure to me to be able  to mention individuals who saved the national character. The Honourable Mr. Ranchodll Chotll, C.I.E., in Ahmedabad co-operated with his usual wisdom and good sense.    The same may be said of Ro Bahdur Chunill Venill, C.I.E., at Broach. Mr. Kuverji Bhaids, a broker in Bulsr, came forward at  a very  critical time and worked strenuously and successfully to establish a hospital and induce his fellow towns- men to go to it.    Mr. Bulkhids, Mr.  Abdul Razak and Mr. Jivanji Dulabh, the two latter Municipal servants at Bulsr,   were indefatigable   and  deserve much credit.    Mr. Merwuji Jehngirji at Santa Cruz must be mentioned with distinction,   and  praise  is  also  due  to  Mr. D. J.   DeMonte  and  Mr.  Antone Gonsalves  at Vesve and Mr. Ramzanbhai Rahimbhai at Kurla.    Ro  Sheb W. G. Dndekar, Vice-President of the Mhim Municipality, showed an interest in the protection of his native place.    In Bndra, the  command was  entrusted by Government  to  the  capable  hands  of Mr. Gilbert.    He  was assisted  by Messrs. Little, DeMonte, E. Howse;  N. Fattehally,  Kharas,  Smeetham, B. M. Malbri, and Inspectors Newman and Baila Nryan.    The gentle and devoted service of sisters Magdalene, Katherine and Elizabeth and of Miss Ritchie needs no comment here.    Bulsr owes much of its deliverance to the unfailing tact and sympathy of Mrs. Dyson.    Lastly, may be mentioned Mr. Pestanji, an excellent Inspector in Bndra, who caught  the   disease while in active   and conscientious discharge of his duties and died of it. 10.    The names of those Government servants which have been   brought to notice by the Collectors will, I trust, be  marked down for special recognition, I would add the name of Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Bartholemeuze at Ahmed- abad.     Surgeon-Major Mistri at Broach also  did his duty.     With very few exceptions, all whose services were demanded, whether Europeans or natives, worked actively and effectively.    Owing to the novelty of the situation and the pressure of events, the regular lines of administration were somewhat upset, and there was some confusion of authority, but nothing could have been more admir- able than the self-sacrifice and loyalty which actuated all ranks and avoided all appearance of friction. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, F. S. P. LELY, Acting Commissioner, N. D.
?GENERAL PLAGUE REPORT. No. 5017 OF 1897. FROM A. C. LOGAN, ESQUIRE, I. C. S., Collector of Thna; To F. S. P. LELY, ESQUIRE, I. C. S., Commissioner, N. D. Thna, 12th July 1897. SIR, I have the honour to make the report called for by Government Resolu- tion No. 3045/2269 P.' dated the 2nd ultimo, and by your memorandum No. 1185, dated the 11th idem. 2.    I divide my report into the following heads:- A.-Measures taken to exclude the plague. B.-The arrival, progress and decline of the plague. C.-Measures adopted to suppress the plague. D.-Measures taken to prevent the transport of the plague about the district. E.-Cost of the plague. F.-The plague authorities. A.-Measures taken to exclude the Plague. 3.    The necessity of taking measures to keep the plague out of this district was recognised by the executive at the earliest moment.    On September 30th, 1896, very soon after the existence of plague in Bombay had been disclosed, the Collector, Mr. Candy, wrote to Surgeon-Major Kirtikar, the Civil Surgeon, requesting his advice as to the measures to be taken, and after a brief correspond- ence between those two officers and the District   Superintendent of Police it was resolved on October 2nd that the Superintendent should place constables to watch passengers alighting from Bombay   at Thna,   Bndra, Kurla and Kalyn, the four chief Municipalities on the Railways.    It was directed that at Thna all sick passengers should be taken to the Civil Hospital, and on the same day letters were written to the Presidents of the other three Municipali- ties requesting them to prepare schemes for dealing  with the  plague.    The arrangements for watching the stations were made just in time and soon bore fruit, for on the 8th October an imported case of plague was detected at  the Thna Station and another in Kalyn Town.    On the 10th October the Collector warned the President of the Bassein Municipality of the danger to that town from its insanitary state, and suggested that Rs. 500 should at once be voted for precautionary measures. 4.    On October 1st the Secretary to Government, General Department, had written to the Collector enclosing an extract from a report of the Surgeon- General to the effect that Municipalities like  Thna and  Bndra should take steps to recognise the disease, should it break out, by appointing local practition- ers as health officers and by insisting at the various cemeteries and burning grounds on an accurate description of the disease from which the patient had died.    Copies of this letter were immediately forwarded to the Presidents of the two Municipalities for the necessary action. 5.    On the 13th October, in a letter No.  1518 of 1896, the Commissioner, N. D., drew the Collector's attention to the plague (or bubonic fever as it was B 833-1
?2 then called), and in impressing on all Municipalities, especially those on the Railway, their responsibilities in the matter, sanctioned, in anticipation, the adoption of the following measures under Section 73 of the District Municipal Act, 1876:- (a) Measures for the compulsory removal of persons suffering from plague to special hospitals. (b) Measures for the disinfection of goods and luggage arriving from Bombay. (c) Measures for the destruction or disinfection of infected articles, and for dispensing with the notices of entry into house required by certain sections of the Act. The conferment of these powers was at once communicated to the Muni- cipalities of Thna, Bndra, Kurla, Kalyn and Bassein, and the "absolute necessity" of having special hospitals for the plague was insisted on in the forwarding memorandum. 6.    Thus by the middle of October, before the plague had obtained any foothold in the district, all the chief Municipalities  except Bhiwndi had re- ceived ample warning, and had received powers which though not fully sufficient, inasmuch as compulsory examination of travellers by road or rail was not in- cluded, were nevertheless such as would have enabled Municipalities  deter- mined to exclude the plague, and not too fearful of the turbulent Prsi or Bania who threatens a suit "in the High Court" as the penalty of feeling his pulse, to have kept the pestilence at arm's length for a considerable period.    If the plague obtained an early entrance into nearly all of these places it was because the municipal committees were almost everywhere averse to taking any action, however necessary or legal, which would offend the susceptibilities of the people and were indifferent about taking any action at all.    At places like Thna and Kalyn, where there were energetic official Presidents or Vice-Presidents, much was done by those officers; but at places like Bassein  and  Bhiwndi, where the resident head  of the municipal  executive was a non-official Vice-President, nothing was done.    As a general rule on the appearance of the plague the muni- cipal committees virtually dissolved themselves by the flight of the  majority. So far from the Municipalities proving in any way competent to deal with  the plague, it may be said that in many places the plague put an end to municipal administration even before Government by the issue of the Plague Rules under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, superseded the remnants of those bodies by its own Plague authorities. 7.    On the  22nd October copy  of a telegram from the Judicial Depart- ment, No. 237-M., was received in this office, forbidding the examination or detention at stations of persons who showed no signs of sickness.    The telegram was couched in judicial language which terrified the Hospital Assistants and others appointed for the inspection of travellers, and, I fear, prevented the deten- tion of any but the most pronounced cases of plague, until the publication of the Plague Rules. 8.    By the end of October the following arrangements had been made in the chief towns:- Thna.-(1). The Municipality had voted Rs. 1,000 for expenses. (2). Two Hospital Assistants provided by the Surgeon-General had been put on the Railway stations and the Police were co-operating with them. (3). A plague hospital had been erected outside the town. Bndra.-(1). The Municipality had voted Rs. 1,200 for expenses. (2). A Hospital Assistant on Rs. 50 had been engaged, apparently to watch the station. (3). A plague hospital had been erected and special committee ap- pointed. Kurla.-(1). The Municipality had voted Rs. 500 for expenses.
3 (2). Arrangements had been made to watch the station and grave- yards. (3). A plague hospital had been erected. Kalyn.-(1). The Municipality had voted Rs. 1,000 for expenses. (2). Four Inspectors had been appointed at the station. (3). A plague hospital had been erected. Bassein.-(1). The Municipality had voted Rs. 150 for expenses. (2). A Compounder had been engaged to watch passengers at the  station. 9. During November and December the plague began to make its appear- ance here and there, as will be shown in detail below, and accordingly on the 15th December I instructed the Bhiwndi and Mhim Municipalities to take the measures described in paragraph 5 above, and inquired of the other Munici- palities whether the arrangements previously adopted by them were being main- tained. All Municipalities were called on to make immediate reports of cases as they occurred. The replies were generally to the effect that the necessary measures were being taken ; but in fact, as afterwards appeared except at Thna and Kalyn, the inspections of passengers were practically a farce and the rules about segregation were a dead letter. Inquiries of the Superintendents of the Railway Police showed that the Police on both lines had ordered-to look for and detain cases, but that the Companies' servants did nothing. 10. To guard against infection from fugitives by road from Bombay a chauki for inspection was set up at the Sion Causeway on February 1st and a similar chauki at the Mhim Causeway about March 15th. The cost of the first was borne by the Local Board ; that of the latter by the Bndra Municipality. B.-The Arrival, Progress and Decline of the Plague. 11. I think it convenient to begin this part with a table showing all the places in Thna which have had a case of plague in them (imported or local) with the dates of the first and last discovered cases, and the total number of cases and deaths in each place. In this table the places are arranged in the order of the first ascertained cases :- Village. Date of first known cases. Date of last case of plague. IMPORTED. LOCAL. TOTAL.    Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths.  1896. 1897.       1. Kalyn  October 6 June 30 49 33 29 22 78 55 2. Thna   8 May 28 41 28 149 90 190 118 3. Bndra   26 June 2 62 59 875 738 937 797 4. Kurla  December 4 May 23 69 59 426 371 495 430 5. Bhayndar  Early December. April 23 1 1 93 72 94 73 6. Chinchni  December 10 May 20 1 1 328 265 329 266 7. Bhiwndi   11 July 3 5 3 483 428 488 431 8. Bassein   24 June 9 30 19 467 358 497 377 9. Agshi  24  5 12 12 142 126 154 138  1897.        10. Mulgaon January 1 April 27 2 2 102 72 104 74 11. Sopra  2 May 11 5 5 131 97 136 102 12. Shhpur   2 March 14 2 2   2 2 13. Khochivre   7  included in Mulgaon. 14. Wgholi  8 January 8  1 1   1 1 15. Bolinj  12  12 1 1   1 1 16. Trombay  26 May 16 6 5 20 14 26 19 17. Chembur  27 June 19 21 14 35 20 56 34 18. Mld  27 May 30 5 2 35 29 40 31 19. Pahadi  29 April 23 2 2 1 1 3 3 20. Watar  29 February 19 2 1 1  3 1 21. Mhim  29  7 2 1   2 1 22. Veswe  30 May 11 4 2 212 203 216 205 23. Dhnu  30 March 17 2 1   2 1 24. Kelva February 2 May 2 2  49 41 51 41
?4 Village. Date of first known cases. Date of late case of plague. IMPORTED. LOCAL. TOTAL.    Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths.  1896. 1897.       25. Nargol  February 4  February 4 1 1   1 1 26. Kaular Budruk   5  5   1 1 1 1 27. Plghar   5  5 1 1   1 1 28. Wda  5  5 1 1   1 1 29. Poisar  6  1 1 1  2 1 30. Gholvad   7 February 7 1 1   1 1 31. Borivli   13  13 1 1   1 1 32. Old Kurla   14   included in Kurla.     33. Sauta Cruz (Dnda) .  15 April 22 3 1 18 9 21 10 34. Umbargaon   15 February 15 4 4   4 4 35. Andheri  16 April 27 3 3 33 28 36 31 36. Manori  16 June 20 3 3 57 42 60 45 37. Kiravli  16 May 9    4 3 4 3 38. Dtivre   17 February 17 1 1   1 1 39. Vadavli (Salsette)   18 March 18 2 2 2  2 4 4 40. Shelar  18 February 26   7 7 7 7 41. Tarpur   26 May 19 1 1 121 115 122 116 42. Vadawli (Bassein)  27  6   35 34 35 34 43. Nirmal   27 February 27   1 1 1 1 44. Umbrale  27 May 4 1 1 11 11 12 12 45. Juchandra  27 February 27   1  1  46. Marole March  2 May 27 2 1 33 28 35 29 47. Gondavli.  3 March 21 6 6   6 6 48. Wssind  4  5 2 2   2 2 49. Yedvan  6  6 1 1   1 1 50. Kause   6  6 2 2   2 2 51. Chulne   12  12   1 1 1 1 52. Kalgaum  14  14 1 1   1 1 53. Mudd  18 May 11   61 57 61 57 54. Mhul  19 June 2 2 2 11 9 13 11 55. Jeweli  20 March 20 1 1   1 1 56. Asangaon  22  22 1 1   1 1 57. Sandor   23 April 5   2 2 2 2 58. Ngaon   25 June 9   101 69 101 69 59. Shahad   27 March 27 2 2   2 2 60A. Bndra slaughter-house   27 May 14   41 32 41 32 60B. Kirol   28 March 28 2 2   2 2 61. Ghtkopor   29  29 1 1   1 1 62. Kolhe Kalyn   29 June 2   15 5 15 5 63. Kalwa   29 March 29 1    1  64. Javsai   29  31 2 2   2 2 65. Patntembhi  April  5  May 22  1  12 6 13 6 66. Ri-Murdhe   7  22 1  13 7 14 7 67. Uttan  8  9 1 1 1 1 2 2 68. Malwani  9  10   7 5 7 5 69. Tulinj  9 April 11   4 3 4 3 70. Nila-More   9  25   7 3 7 3 71. Ghiwli   9 May 5   29 25 29 25 72. Dongari   11 April 11   1 1 1 1 73. Kaular Khurd  13  13   3 3 3 3 74. Koprad  13  13   2 2 2 2 75. Kudan  15  15   1 1 1 1 76. Virr   17 May 2   2 1 2 1 77. Goregaon  18 April 22   2 1 2 1 78. Murbd  19  19 1  1   1 1 79. Nanale   20 May 8   7 3 7 3 80. Ju  24  16 1  17 6 18 6 81. Kolhivli   28 April 28 1  1   1 1 82. Anjur  29 May 1   3 1 3 1 83. Mardeo May  7  7   2  2  84. Akshe   8  8   1 1 1 1 85. Gas   9   12   2 2 2 2 86. Vile-Padle   10 June 25   3 1 3 1 87. Giring   14 May 18   2 1 2 1 88. Gandhari   25  25 1  1   1 1    Total  384 304 4,256 3,477 4,640 3,781 12. I understand that it has been asserted by some persons claiming certain authority that the plague has or may have a local origin in certain conditions of the food or dwelling of the people. The history of the epidemic in the Thna District gives the most flat contradiction to any such theory. There is not an atom of evidence that the plague was a spontaneous develop- ment in any place in this district, while there is clear evidence as regards prac- tically every affected place that it was brought from other affected places. Whether it is communicated by the process called infection or contagion, if
?5 there is any really scientific distinction between these processes, is for medical experts to say: but there can be no doubt that the Thna plague entered every place by the agency of persons, clothes or rats which had become infected else- where. The various facts detailed below are marshalled to prove this, for it appears to me that unless the history of the present epidemic establishes the two facts that the plague can be carried from place to place, and that unless so carried it will not arise in any place, the time spent in writing this report will have been thrown away. 13. I am indebted to Surgeon-Major A. V. Anderson, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner of the Western Registration Circle, for a series of brief but valu- able reports on the introduction of the plague into each of the principal places in the district except Kalyn. I forward these reports in original, but extract the leading facts in the following paragraphs. I take the places in the order in which I have entered them in the table in paragraph 11 above. Kalyn Municipality: Po- pulation 11,685. 14.    Kalyn.-The report for this town has  been   written  by Assistant Surgeon R. R. Dadina, the official Vice-President of the Municipality. About 1,500 persons flying from Bombay to escape the plague took up their residence in Kalyn, and many of them continued to go in and out of Bombay daily in pursuit of their avocations.    The first recorded case of plague in the town was that of a Bania from Mndvi who arrived in Kalyn on October 6th, and was discovered to have plague on the 8th.    Between that date and the 28th February following, twenty other imported cases were discovered at various times either on the station or in the town, but owing to the extreme vigilance of Dr. Dadina and the segregation and disinfection which he strictly enforced in the face of much murmuring and some Municipal opposition, the disease got little opportunity to spread and no local resident was at first affected.    The first resident affected was a ward-boy of the plague hospital, who  caught the disease on the 1st March. This was obviously from his contact with the sick.    The next local case occurred on the 16th March in the person of a Brahmin boy, son of a Sub-Overseer at Bhiwndi, where the plague was then raging.    The boy must have got the plague either through his father, who used to go to Bhiwndi daily, or from contagion which was then being spread in his street-the Cloth Bazaar-by diseased rats. The Cloth Bazaar was one of the streets to which the fugitives from Bombay had mostly gone to  reside, and most of the imported cases had  occurred  there. Early in March the rats began to die in the houses of this street; and on the 20th March  three local cases were reported from houses where rats had died.    The number soon increased to six, and then the Vice-President turned out all the residents of the street and disinfected the houses with streams of carbolic solu- tion through the fire-engine.    This of course stopped the plague there; the only other case in it being one of a person who had remained concealed in a back-room when the others left.    The case of this street is evidently one where infected matter from imported cases, which had escaped notice when the patients were segregated, had infected rats, and these in their turn infected the residents. From time to time between April 16th, the date of the last case in the Cloth Bazaar,   and the 30th June local    cases   occurred   here   and   there   in    the town; the total number from first to last being 29.    The Mahomedan commu- nity which forms a large proportion of the population of Kalyn had hardly any cases, which I attribute to the fact that the Mahomedans of Bombay did not fly much from the plague, and the Banias and Lohanas who brought it into Kalyn had little to do with the Mahomedans there.    The case of Kalyn is a striking instance of how a place may be kept nearly unharmed by plague by extreme vigilance, although situated on the very high road of infection (between Bombay and Bhiwndi) and destitute of all the elements of European sanitation.    Any person who alleges that plague springs naturally from dirt or grain will have to explain (1) how it was that it did not attack any local resident of Kalyn until 21 cases had been imported into the town, and rats had begun to die in the street to which the imported cases mostly came, (2) why the first batch of local cases was in that locality, and (3) why the merest handful were attacked out of the thousands who lived in the same conditions of dirt  and food.    The  percentage of local cases on the normal population of Kalyn was only 02.    The theory that B 833-2
?6 the plague is  contagious   and  that  prompt segregation and disinfection  will suppress it, explains all the known facts, while the other theory explains none. Thana   Municipality:  Po- pulation 17,459. 15.    Thna (Slsette).-The  information  for  this and the next   places  is taken chiefly from Dr. Anderson's reports. As at Kalyn great numbers of Bombay fugitives had come to Thna and were daily going in and out of Bombay. As already mentioned the first imported case known was that of a Lohna from Mndvi, on October 8th. He was sent to hospital and infected nobody. The next case detected was a Hindu boy also from Bombay on December 8th. The third and fourth cases were detected on the 9th January in the persons of a Bania and his wife who had come from Mndvi about a week before they got sick. They were not removed from their house. The fifth case came from Chinchpogli on January 17th and the sixth on January 20th. In this last case the man had come from Bombay to a neighbouring village a few days before, but was driven out by the villagers when they found he was sick. The seventh case was imported from Ddar on January 25th. The eighth was that of a Parsi woman who had left Bombay 22 days before and had not left Thna since; but her relations went in and out. This somewhat resembles the case of the Bhiwndi Sub-Overseer's son in Kalyn, and several other cases will be noted below where infection had ap- parently been conveyed by the clothes of a healthy person. The ninth case occurred on February 2nd and was called the first local case; but the victim, though a resident of Thna, went daily to the Custom House in Mndvi, where no doubt he contracted the disease. The tenth case came from Bombay on February 3rd: the eleventh was similar to No. 8 above, inasmuch as the patient had been a fortnight in Thna and was apparently infected by her relation who went daily to Bombay, though none of them were reported sick. Hitherto no local resident was known to have caught the plague in Thna, but on February 7th a Brahmin who had supplied water to the ninth case got the plague, and Dr. Anderson regards this as the first undoubted local case. On the 8th and 9th three more local cases occurred among Brahmins and Banias and thenceforward local cases were numer- ous. Here as in Kalyn the local cases were preceded by a large number of imported ones, and as the death-rate for December was nearly double and that of January more than treble that of the previous year, it is possible that many im- ported cases had been successfully concealed. But considerable allowance must be made for the grossly inaccurate registration of previous years and the large increase of the population. It will have been noticed that there were intervals of precisely a month between the first, second and third imported cases. I take this to be evidence of the inefficiency of the Railway examination under the paralyzing conditions of the telegram already quoted. Few cases were detected at the stations at any time in the first months. The last case of plague in Thna was reported on the 28th May 1897. Altogether 149 local cases occurred, a figure of which the smallness is inexplicable if insanitary conditions could create plague. The percentage of local cases on normal population was only 0.8. So far as local conditions can create susceptibility to plague (which is a different thing), I should be inclined to ascribe the comparative immunity of Kalyn and Thna to their scanty water-supply. Kalyn depends chiefly on wells and Thna on a small Tank; so that neither town is in the way of becoming water-logged and thereby feverish.  Bndra  Municipality:  Po- pulation 18,317. 16.    Bndra  (Slsette)-Is for all practical purposes  a part of Bombay, and it is impossible to trace the sequence of local to imported cases with the same clearness as can be done in Kalyn and Thna. Before December only two cases were reported-one a Mhr on October 26th, and the other, a Khoja, on November 24th, and both were imported from Bombay. But as the mortality in November was nearly double that of the previous year, it may be assumed that a number of plague cases had escaped notice in that month. Five or six thousand refugees from Bombay are said to have sought shelter in Bndra, and as probably half the ordinary population of the town has its daily business in Bombay the means of infection were ample, and infection was inevitable. The first local cases which occurred on December 3rd were those of two Native
?7 Christians who are reported to have been in daily communication with Bombay and may have become infected  there; but Doctor Anderson's remark in the case of one of them, a toddy-drawer, that rats had died in the house a week previously, may indicate that  there had been an infected visitor and perhaps an unreported case either in this or some adjacent house previously.    Four other cases occurred in this house.    Then another toddy-drawer, who had been about the infected house, got the plague, then the people of the adjoining house, and presently those of other houses in the vicinity.    This was a clear case of plague spreading from house to house in the absence of segregation.    The next group of houses attacked was also inhabited by Christians.    These were all in Bndra proper, which is nearest to Bombay.    The Pli quarter, which comes next going northwards,  was infected  at the beginning of January, the  Chuim quarter, which lies beyond, at the beginning of February, and Dnda, which lies still further north, about the middle of that month.    Thus there was a regular progression of the disease in the direction from Bombay.   A curious circumstance about this progression is that the death of rats is usually recorded as preceding the first recorded cases in each place.    The natural presumption that concealed cases had occurred in each quarter, whereby the rats were infected, is rebutted by the fact ascertained by me from the Vice-President that the excess mortality of November-January described by Doctor Anderson was  confined to Bndra proper.    It seems clear therefore that Pli, Chuim and Dnda had no plague till the rats brought it, and that here we have a "Rat's Progress" from south to north through the successive quarters of the town, infecting one after the other.    The exodus apparently went beyond Dnela to Snta Cruz, where rats died in the middle of February, and to Ju and Tra villages about 2 miles north of Dnda, where rats began to die early in April.    The percentage of local cases on normal  popula- tion in this town was 4.7.    Bndra has an excellent and plentiful  water-supply from the Bombay main, and (without being able to make any great boast) is probably on the whole the most sanitary town in the district.    It suffered, however, more heavily than any other municipality in the district as will be seen by referring to the list in paragraph 69 below. Kurla Municipality-Popu- lation 11,469. 17.    Kurla (Slsette).-This town  is like Bndra practically a  suburb of Bombay, to which a large part of the population habitually resort for business, and it became the home of two or three thousand refugees. The first reported case which occurred on December 5th was that of a local resident, but he had contracted the disease while attending the funeral of a relative in Bombay on December 2nd. The next case was that of a cart-driver who went daily to Bombay. The third, fourth and fifth reported cases between December 23rd and 28th were all of persons who came with the plague from Bombay; but as Doctor Anderson has pointed out the mortality returns for December, when compared with those of the previous year, imply a very considerable number of concealed cases. The fact clearly is that at first in Kurla as in Bndra, and to some extent Thna practically, only those cases were reported which it was impossible or no one's interest to conceal. Consequently the imported cases recorded are rather evidence that importation was going on than evidence of how importation produced local cases. We probably do not know of all the imported cases and of half the local cases which first occurred, and therefore there are gaps in the sequences of the latter on the former. In Kalyn where vigilance was hawk-eyed from the first and few, if any, cases escaped notice, the sequence is clearly established. The first reported case among the local residents of infection probably contracted in Kurla itself occurred on January 1st in a chawl of mill- hands and after that the local cases became too numerous for general conceal- ment. Kurla is a very dirty town, but the percentage of local cases on population was only 3.7 per cent. 18. Close to Kurla, and part of same Municipality but separated by a dis- tance of about a quarter of a mile, is Old Kurla, a Christian village. The inhabit- ants of this quarter combined to exclude all residents of the  infected quarter and had such success that their village almost escaped the plague. Early in April, however, some rats died in a house at the end of the village nearest to New Kurla; and on the 8th two cases of plague occurred, though not in that house. The people then moved in a mass into sheds; but two more cases occurred in the
8 sheds, and subsequently three cases occurred among people who had gone back into the village to clean up their houses. This seems a clear case of a village being infected by rats who had brought the poison from an infected place. Bhayndar village-Popula- tion 2,697. 19.    Bhyndur (Slsette).-This is  a village situated on the B. B. & C. I. Railway in Slsette on the south bank of the Bassein creek. The first case here, which occurred early in December, and was never reported, was one of a Chris- tian who frequented Bombay and Bndra, and had returned from a visit to the former place with plague on him. The next case a week later was of a Hindu Bania who went daily to Bombay. The third known case which occurred on January 5th was perhaps one of a kind of which several instances have occurred, viz., where a person is infected by other persons who have been in infected places, though without becoming sick themselves. The victim in this case had never left Bhyndar, but her husband had been to Bombay. However the probability that she was infected by her husband's clothes seems weak, since she did not fall ill till nearly a month after his return from Bombay; and as the possibility of local infection existed owing to the two previous cases I would not lay stress on this case. The next victims in January were respectively this woman's daughter and three Christian neighbours, showing that the house had become a centre of infection, and ultimately the whole village became infected. The percentage of local cases on population was 34. Chinchni  village-Popula- tion 4,785. 20.    Chinchni (Dhnu).-Chinchni lies on the sea coast,  about 40 miles north of Bhyndar, but received infection about the same time by the arrival of a Sonr woman from Bombay on December 10th. She got fever and died within 7 days; but the resident Hospital Assistant never having seen plague took the disease for pneumonia.    The next case, also called pneumonia, was imported by a Brhmin from Bombay on January 17th.    After the 20th dead rats were reported in various adjoining houses, and on the 25th a Bania died in the house next but one to that of the first Sonr case.    On the 29th another local case occurred in a house in which dead rats had been found  and from this date cases became common in the Bania Bazr, where all the above cases had occurred.    Thence it spread throughout the village and into the adjoining village of Trpur.   The Hospital Assistant, whose report being of some value, is appended, after describ- ing the division of  Chinchni into   quarters inhabited by  Banias,  Mngelas, Mhomedans, Palse Brhmans, Lohrsand Wdwals, adds:    "It was observed during the time that the plague took portion by portion, cases not occurring in that portion where it had ceased."    The last remark is a  little Irish,  but the Hospital Assistant really means that the plague almost took one quarter at a time, and when it had been extirpated in one place by turning the people out of their houses and segregation,  it broke out unaccountably in a new quarter. As it was reported at the beginning of the epidemic that many of the castes, e.g. the Mangels and Mahomedans, were rigorously excluding  outsiders from their streets, I am inclined to think that the spread of the plague from quarter to quarter was largely due to rats.    That rats were travelling about the village with the plague is certain from the fact that no less than  26 deal ones were found at a  somewhat late stage of the epidemic in the roof of  the dispensary, a building in the north of the village and fairly isolated.    I  am convinced that rats are a most potent factor in the distribution of the plague,  and are the last and worst enemy that the plague authority has to combat.    The percentage  of local cases on population was 68. Bhiwndi Municipality-Po-            pulation 14,387. 21.    Bhiwndi.-The first cases reported from this town were as follows:- December 11th.-A Parbhu from Bombay. "         13th.-Servant of the Parbhu. "         17th.-A Musulman from Bombay. "         24th.-A Mrwri local resident. "         24th.-A Bania living near the Mrwri. "         26th.-A Bania living near the last, after which rats died and cases became general in that quarter of the town. Numbers of Banias from Mndwi had come to live in the town, and though no
?9 cases among them are recorded the mortality returns for December show an un- explained excess of 11 deaths over the previous year's actuals after deducting the avowed plague cases from the total mortality. Of the two local cases on December 24th the Mrwri used constantly to go into Bombay and the Bania lived in a house full of Mndvi people. In February the epidemic got into the Mahomedan village called Nizmpur, which forms the northern quarter of the Municipality. In many instances, such as Bndra and Bhiwndi, and to some extent Chinchni, the epidemic took a northerly course; but I trust that no one will make use of this remark to explain its course by the breeze or any similar fancy. The reason appears to be simply this, that these places are on the north bank of creeks and have their bazrs of course near the water. Now this plague has been emphatically a Bania's plague, and, as such, has invariably attacked the market place in the first instance. If it was to travel at all, there- fore, it must travel northwards. The course of the epidemic in Bhiwndi was very rapid and comparatively short. The mortality returns give no ground for suspecting any plague deaths before December 10th, yet by the end of that month the disease was thoroughly established, and after killing 430 people it ceased entirely on April 15th. The cases shown in the table in paragraph 11 as occurring in July were all import- ed from Kalyn; Bndra, where the plague began at least a month earlier was not free for about a fortnight later; and Kurla, which was affected about the same time as Bhiwndi, did not get free till the middle of May. In point of attention Bndra and Kurla under European supervision had the advantage of Bhiwndi, and the flight of the populace will not explain matters wholly, because the Mahomedans, who form nearly half the population, did not fly. Nothing in the sanitary condition of the town explains the mystery, for Doctor Anderson describes the sanitation as  "bad," and the "abundant water-supply and no drainage" which he notes are apparently fostering conditions of plague. I am inclined to attribute the rapid decrease of the plague among the Hindus to their general flight at an early date, and among the Mahomedans to the strict seclu- sion of families among the large Konkani community in Nizmpur and to the open air lives of the weavers, who form the rest of the Mahomedan community. Gadding women have no doubt come next to rats as the carriers of plague from house to house; but the Pardanishin Konkanis were safe from this danger. I must not omit calling attention to Dr. Anderson's remark that during the epidemic all the rats deserted Bhiwndi, but were beginning to return at his visit there in May. It is of course not likely that these sagacious animals would remain in a plague-stricken place till they were all exterminated. An emigration of rats might explain the sudden outburst of plague in Shelar, a village two miles from Bhiwndi, on February 18th, just at the time when the plague had established itself throughout Bhiwndi. But there is no evidence that the death of rats preceded the Shelar cases, and as Bhiwndi was the bazr town for the villagers, they had ample opportunities of catching the plague without the aid of animals. Bassein Municipality--  Population 11,291 22.    Bassein.-Although not on the Railway, Bassein early became a place of refuge for fugitives from Bombay; and one of these, a Christian woman who came on Christmas day, deve- Population 11,291 loped plague on the 27th December.    The next two cases on the 30th December and 3rd January were also imported from Bombay; the fourth, on January 11th, was from Bndra. Two more imports from Bombay were recorded, and then apparently the first local case on January 13th. But this man had just returned from a visit to Bombay. Then followed ten more im- ported cases, all from Bombay, between January 16th and February 7th, and then the first really local case on February 9th in the Ppri quarter. There had been two imported cases in the house of this person on January 20th; so here is a clear case of imported contagion. Another local case occurred in the neighbourhood the same day, and thenceforward cases were frequent in Ppri. The first acknow- ledged local case in Bassein proper occurred on the 8th in the person of a boy who had touched the corpse of an imported case two days before. As far as the evidence goes, therefore, the connexion of the Bassein plague with that of Bombay is proved very clearly; but it must be remarked that the mortality statistics of January and February show that the actual plague deaths in each of these months must have been three or four times as great as those recorded by this B 833-3
?10 supremely inefficient Municipality. The inference is that a great many local cases arising out of those of the strangers have escaped notice, and the links in the sequence of cause and effect thus lost. The percentage of local cases on population in Bassein was 41. The towns of Bhiwndi and Bassein, both at a distance of many miles from the Railway, were capable of easy protection from the plague as compared with Kalyn and Thna; and there is probably nothing in the sanitary or domestic conditions of the two latter to render them appreciably less favourable to the development of the pestilence. The differ- ence in results is due no doubt wholly to the difference in administration. Thna and Kalyn had the immense advantage of resident officials at the head of the municipal organisation, while Bhiwndi and Bassein were under the control of non-official Vice-Presidents; in other words, the administration was wholly in the hands of idle and incompetent Secretaries. Both these towns have to thank the liberality of local self-government for the deaths of hundreds of persons who might otherwise have been saved. Agshi Village.- Population 7,538. 23.    Agashi (Bassein).-This is a  small market town  in the north of -Bassein tluka and received infection from Bombay simultaneously with the head-quarter town. A Sonr came from Bombay with the plague on December 24th. On January 8th, a Lohr brought a second dose of the disease, and on January 16th, a third case of importation from Bombay was recorded. The first local case occurred on January 25th, in a house where Bombay people were residing. None of these are known to have had the plague; but rats had died in the house short- ly before the case occurred. It may be observed in this connection that, apart from the question of infected clothes or other articles being brought from Bombay, slight attacks of plague from which the patient soon recovered would probably pass unnoticed. The fifth reported case occurred on February 2nd, in a house adjoining that of the fourth case, and shortly afterwards cases became common. It should be remarked that Agshi consists of about 12 hamlets situated at various distances round a central bazaar. The plague was confined to the bazaar and the dwellings in its immediate neighbourhood. The residents of the outlying hamlets protected themselves by excluding outsiders and escaped entirely. The Agshi bazaar had probably too few rats to send the disease far. The percentage of local cases on the population of Agshi was 19; but this is taken on the whole population of the hamlets. The incidence on the actually affected area must have been 3 or 4 times as great. 24. Mulegaon (Bassein).-This is practically a quarter of Bassein town, and was infected from the neighbouring quarters. The first imported case was a Christian woman from Bassein. Khochivre is a hamlet of this village. Sopara Village.- Population 1,605. 25.    Sopra.-This is the market town for the centre of the Bassein tluka. The first four recorded cases between January 3rd and February 6th all came from Bombay: the fifth on March 3rd was imported from Bhiwndi, the sixth on the same day from Bassein, and the seventh and eighth a few days later from Bhiwndi. There was thus ample explanation of the first really local case which occurred on March 8th, and was soon followed by others, although, as Doctor Anderson observes, there is no known connection between the imported and first local cases, and no rats are known to have died. Here, as at Agshi, the epidemic was almost confined to the central village, though on February 27th it spread into Umbrale, which immediately adjoins it. The houses in Umbrale, however, are more detached than those of Sopra and the plague did little damage there. 26.    Khochivre (Bassein).- This hamlet of Mulgaon got its first infection from Bombay early in January in the person of three Kmtis.    The Bhandris, with whom these Kmtis lived, next got the infection, and then other Bhandris; and in the middle of March the plague spread into the Koli quarter of the village.    Vadavli and Kiravli (Nos. 37 and 42 of the list in paragraph 11)  were both infected by immigrants from Khochivre. 27.     Wgholi and Bolinj, both villages of the Bassein tluka, received each only one imported case, fugitives, respectively, from Bhiwndi and Bndra.
?11 Trombay Village.- Population l,714. 28.   Trombay  (Slsette).-This village is one of the southern parts of Slsette in daily communication with Bombay and could not expect to escape wholly. The first case on January 26th was a Post Office clerk from Bombay, and three other imported cases occurred between February 8th and 18th. The first local case on February 27th was in the family of a Customs clerk, who lived in the same chawl with case No. 1 above. The clerk himself died on March 8th, and subse- quently dead rats were found in the chawl. Dr. Anderson reports that up till then no rats had died in the village, so this is a case of men bringing the disease first and infecting the rats. The percentage of local cases on the population of the village was 17. Chembur Village.- Population 2,023. 29.    Chembur (Slsette) is a village near Kurla and supplies many hands to the Kurla mills. However, the first case, on Janu- ary 27th, came from Bndra, and the second, two days later, from Bombay. The next three cases on January 31st and February 2nd, though of local residents, were all apparently infected in Parel, where they went to work daily. From February 2nd the infection spread among the inhabitants themselves. The percentage of local cases on population was 1.7. Mld Village,- Populationl,836. 30.    Mld (Slsette).-This is a station on the B. B. & C. I., and like most other places on that line in the tluka was resorted to by many fugitives from Bombay. The first case, on January 27th, came from Bombay: the second, on January 29th, was a Bombay refugee, but it is not known whether he had been in Bombay shortly before the attack. The third case on February 21st came from Bombay : the fourth on February 23rd was a person who went daily to Bombay, and the fifth, sixth and seventh cases, the last on March 16th, were also cases of Bombay people. The first local case on March 18th occurred in the neighbour- hood of imported cases. Dead rats were not noticed in this village till after the first local case. The percentage of local cases on population was 19. 31. Pahdi (Slsette) next to Mld, and Watar (Bassein) near Agshi show each two imported and one local case and require no special remark except that the first imported cases came to each place from Bombay. Mhim Municipality.- Population 6,960. Kelwa Municipality.- Population 4,362. 32.    Mhim.-This town lies  on the coast about 6 miles  from  the Rail- way, and comprises within its municipal limits the neighbouring village of Kelwa, from which it is divi- ded by a small creek. Mhim is interesting and also extremely important as illustrating the escape of a town from plague chiefly on account of its natural unhealthiness. Its reputation for fever makes it one of the most unpopular stations in the district, and on this account it was avoided by fugitives from Bombay, who flocked in preference to Bassein, Chinchni and other places. Only two cases occurred in the town, both imported, the one on January 29th from Bombay and the other on February 7th from Vesve. But lest any theorist should argue that there was something in the air or soil of the town incompatible with the generation of plague-germs, the village of Kelwa, on the opposite side of the creek to which many refugees came, had 49 cases. The first case there,on February 12th, was brought from Chinchni, the second on the same day from Bombay.    The third and fourth cases in one house on February 22nd are interesting.    Several Shimpis (or tailors) from. Bombay had come and stayed three days in the house of two local Shimpis and then went away, apparently in good health.    But after the arrival of these men rats died, and five days after their departure their hosts fell sick.    The visitors  evidently infected the rats either through their clothes, or because they themselves had slight plague ; and the rats infected  the hosts.    A similar case  occurred a few days later in a Kunbi family.    Four or five Bombay people came and stayed one night at a Kunbi's  house and left apparently  in  good  health ; but four  days after, on February 27th, a girl in the house developed plague.    In March local  cases be- came  common.   The percentage of such cases  on population   was 11,    The safety of Mhim during the epidemic at Kelwa was secured by prohibition of any intercourse between the two places.    It is a most fortunate circumstance, as helping to baffle unscientific theories of spontaneous generation, that the most   malarious town in   the  district,  although well in   the way   of con-
?12 tagion, had contagion sought it, escaped almost untouched by the disease, while places of salubrity like Bassein on one side and Trpur and Chinchni on the other suffered severely. Nothing but the absence of importation on a large scale explains this immunity. As regards rats, Doctor Anderson makes the interesting observation that dead rats were discovered in a Bania's house in Mhim on February 12th and in two school-houses on March 30th and April 1st. As all these places were instantly disinfected no cases followed. The imported cases of January 29th and February 7th may explain the first appearance, and in the other cases the rats may have come from Kelwa. The discovery of dead rats in these schools, a school at Mld and the Chinchni dispensary seems to show that these animals sometimes seek refuge in uninhabited places, as if re- cognising that their sickness is connected with the habitations of men. The next stage would be to desert a town altogether as they are also reported to have done at Bhiwndi and Bndra. Vesve    Village-Popula- tion, 4,747. 33.    Vesve (Slsette).-This is a populous and very crowded Koli village orten called Versova. The first case, on January 30th, was imported from Bombay by a brother of the Customs Krkn of Vesve, and a school-master who lived with the village talti and had attended the sick man got plague himself on February 5th. But on February 2nd the talti's nephew living in the same house had got the plague, evidently through the school-master though before the latter showed it. The next two cases on February 11th and 13th were a Christian and Khoja both of whom got infected in Bombay ; on the 17th the epidemic got among the Kolis and began to spread. Rats had previously died in the Koli- wada, and probably brought plague from the infected houses in the other part of the village, though as the Koli fishermen would be in constant communication with Bombay and Bndra it is quite possible that there had been concealed cases among them before the first reported one. It is noticeable that although the first reported cases were in Christian and Mahomedan houses, these sections of the population suffered very little in comparison with the Kolis. The latter class, which are everywhere independent and troublesome, refused to submit to segregation or disinfection and created a serious riot on March 7th when the Assistant Collector and his staff were beaten and driven out. Strong measures were instantly taken, and nearly the whole Koli population were forced to vacate the village and live in sheds in the fields. This did not, however, check the epidemic for some weeks, most of the cases reported in March and April about 176 in all being cases of infection in the sheds. This shows that when a com- munity has got saturated with the disease mere change of residence will not cause it to disappear. The percentage of local cases on population was 4.4. 34. Dahnu.-A small town where only two imported cases were reported deserves no particular notice except to say that being beyond the limit of local trains, it was not inundated by Bombay refugees and thus was in no great danger. Kelwa has already been dealt with in paragraph 32 above. The local case in Kowlar Budruk was infected in Bombay, and the next five villages in the list, having only about one case apiece all imported from outside, need no remark. Santa Cruz hamlet : Popu- lation, 442. 35.    Santa Crnz (Slsett).-This village being part of Dnda, (of which the rest is included in Bndra Municipal limits) has been described in the weekly reports under that name. It is about 2 miles from Bndra. The first two cases, which occurred on February 15th, were of local Christians, but dead rats had been found in the house a few days before. As the village swarmed with Bom- bay refugees it is quite possible that there had been one or more concealed cases whereby the rats were infected, or those visitors may have been part of the swarm then proceeding northwards from Bndra according to the hypothesis in paragraph 16 above, The next cases were all among Christians who were infected from the first family. The percentage of local cases on normal popula- tion was 4.0. 36. Umbargaon.-The four cases shown against this place were all taken sick or dead out of the train. The indifference of the Railway Companies to the booking of infected persons at the beginning of the epidemic was scandalous. Many that were taken out of trains in this district must have been visibly sick when booked.
?13 Audheri village- Population 1,035. 37. Andheri (Slsette).-This village, a few miles north of Bndra on the B. B. & C. I., was overrun with Bombay fugitives, and the first plague case, though called local, was that of an East Indian who went daily to Bombay and got infected there. Considering the hundreds of people who went daily in and out of Bombay from this village it was impossible for it to escape infection and only extreme attention prevented a much greater loss of life. Doctor Anderson has not reported on this or the next villages; but Mr. C. Hudson, the Assistant Collector, has made brief reports on them. Manori village.- Population 2,945. 38. Manori (Slsette).-The first two cases in this Koli village came in February from Mhim in Bombay and the next in April from Warli. It was this last case about April 10th which really poisoned the village, as it gave rise to another in the same house, and then to many in the neighbourhood. The epidemic was stamped out in the second week in June after a run of two months. The percentage of local cases on population was 19. 39. Kiravli (Bassein).-This is a suburb of Bassein town, and the first case there caught the infection in the Ppdi quarter of Bassein, where plague was raging. 40. Dativre in Mhim and Vadavli in Slsette require no remarks, having no local cases. Shelar, a village about two miles from Bhiwndi, has already been dealt with in paragraph 21 above. Trpur village.- Population 3,070. 41. Trpur (Mhim).-This large village is separated only by a creek from Chinchni and got infection thence. The first case on February 29th was a Bania, who attended the funeral of one of his relations in Chinchni: the next case on March 12th was also apparently due to infection at a funeral and proved a source of infection to the neighbours. On March 29th a labourer brought further infection from Chinchni and after this local cases were common. Here the plague travelled south. The percentage of local cases on population was 39. 42. Vadavli (Bassein).-The first case in this village was really imported from Khochivre, and was apparently shown as local merely because the man had built himself a shed at Vadavli. In several other villages imported cases have been entered as local because the victim had lived for a few days in the village before he showed the plague. 43. Nirmal (Bassein).-The one case shown against this village received infection in the Ppdi quarter of Bassein town. 44. Umbrale (Bassein).-This is practically one with Sopra, and the fact that it became infected when the plague was raging in the streets of Sopra needs no explanation. Curiously, however, the first case in this village was im- ported from Agshi. 45. Juchandra (Bassein).-The local case reported was that of a settler from Bassein who had come eight days before he showed the plague. Marole village.- Population 2,017. 46. Marole (Slsette).-A certain Christian at the end of February cele- brated his daughter's wedding and invited a number of persons to his house from Bombay. A few days after rats died in the house, and then the master got the plague and died. This is another of the many cases where apparently healthy persons have brought infection from an infected place. On the 5th March a woman, who had been at the wedding, also died, showing that the infection must have been strong. Three others of the first cases were apparently infected in Bombay. The percentage of local cases on population was 16. 47. The Andheri hospital was in Gondavli (Slsette) and all the cases shown against this village are patients brought there. The cases against Wasind (Shhpur) were fugitives from Bombay. 48. Yedvan (Mhim), Kowse (Kalyn), Kalgaon (Umbargaon), with only imported cases require no remark; and the Chulne (Bassein) case as explained by Doctor Anderson was really a Bassein imported case. B 833-4
?14 Mudd village- Population 1,359. 49. Mudd (Slsette).-This village was spelt Mudha or Mudh in some previous reports. Although no imported cases are shown against this village there is no doubt that it got a double dose of infection from outside: first from Bombay and then from Vesve. In March a man came from Bombay to stay in a house in the Kunbi quarter: in four or five days rats began to die in the house, and although the inmates immediately went into sheds one of them got the plague. The visitor was still there, apparently well, and only left after the case occurred. This seems a very decisive instance of a healthy man carrying infection with him somehow. The Koli quarter was infected about the same time by fugitive rioters from Vesve who were harboured in some of the houses. It is curious that in this case too rats began to die as soon as the visitors arrived, though none of the latter are said to have actually had the plague on them. The percentage of cases on population was 44. Mahal village- Population 1,328. 50. Mhul (Slsette).-One of the hamlets of this village was infected by an Agri woman who caught plague in Bombay and brought it to Mhul on March 19th. There were several subsequent cases in this family; but as the villagers had meantime cleared out into sheds the infection did not spread. In Mhul itself the first case on May 18th was that of a Customs peon who got plague at Mtunga, and the next case was infected by him. There was only one other case and the percentage on population of both hamlets was only 0'8. 51. Jaweli (Kalyn) and Asangaon (Shhpur) record only one imported case apiece, and Sandor (Bassein) with two local cases is almost a part of Bassein, and got its infection thence. The first case was really imported from Bassein, Nagaon village- Population 1,170. 52. Nagaon (Bassein).-This village is not far from Bassein and the first case of plague in it occurred in the person of a Koli woman who used to take fish to Bassein and Kho- chivre. Rats then began to die in the vicinity of the infected house and as usual with Koli villages the infection spread rapidly. 53. Shahad (Kalyn), Kirol (Slsette) and Ght Kopar (Slsette) had only imported cases and require no special notice. Kolhe Kalyn Village- Population 2,042. 54. Kolhe Kalyn (Slsette).-This village, also called Kalina, is close to Kurla and supplies the mills there with some of their employs. Of the first three cases, two, that of a Mhr named Pandu and of a Christian named Luis were due to infection contracted in Kurla, where these people went daily; but of the first in time, that of a Christian named Bastiao, I can get no further information than that rats died in his house shortly before his illness. Like the others he probably went to Kurla for work; but it is of course possible that rats actually brought the infection into Kolhe Kalyn as they undoubtedly did in Old Kurla. The percentage of cases on population was only 07. 55. Kalwa (Slsette) and Jaosai (Kalyn) had only imported cases from Thna and Bombay, respectively. Pamtembhi village-popu- lation 1,497. 56. Pamtembhi (Mhim)-The first case on April 5th was that of a Khoja who came sick from Chinchni, but was driven out next day by the villagers. On the 10th the Kumbhr, in whose house the Khoja had stayed, died of the plague and on the 16th and 17th four other cases occurred in that house and the neighbouring ones. The people were then turned out by me and Mr. Leggatt, but four or five cases occurred in the sheds. After an interval of freedom lasting nearly a month a woman got plague while cleaning an infected house and gave it to a friend. The percentage of cases on population was only 08. Rai Murdhe village- population 2,594. 57. Rai Murdhe (Slsette).- This double village is between Bhyndar and Bassein and had therefore every chance of infection. The first cases in Ri caught infection in Bhyndar. The percentage of cases on population was only 05. 58. Uttn (Slsette).-This village lies between Ri and Manori, and the two cases were infected in those villages.
?15 59.    Mlavni (Slsette.)-The first case was that of a cartman who returned from  a  trip;   but it  is  not known where he  was infected.    He  infected  an attendant, and the attendant, a relation. 60.    Tuling (Bassein.)-The first case was the servant of a Sopra merchant who  got  the  plague in Sopra and brought it  to Tuling, whither his master had fled. 61.    Nila More (Bassein).-The first case here was that of a woman who got plague in Sopra and brought it to Nila More. Glaivli village- Population 888. 62.    Ghivli (Mahim).-This village is only about a mile from Trpur and got infected on April 29th, when plague was bad in that place. I visited the village at once, but was unable to find out how the first victim had got infected; however, in spite of the declaration of the villagers that they kept quarantine against Tr- pur, there can be no doubt that these hard drinking Mangelas must have gone into Trpur for liquor. The village was turned out, and the residents of the infected neighbourhood were made to live on one side of the village, while the rest of the people went to the other. All the cases after the first occurred in the sheds, and almost exclusively in the families from the infected neighbourhood. At the very commencement I had these people's clothes disinfected with carbolic acid in my presence; but this measure did not prevent the occurrence of nearly a score of cases among the group. It was somewhat disheartening as they protested that the washing was intended to poison the clothes, and the results did not confute this theory. The percentage of cases on population was 3.2. 63.    Each of the next six places show one or two local without any imported cases; but in every instance the infection of the first case at least was acquired in an infected place. At Dongari (Slsette) the infection was acquired in Bassein, at Kawlar Khurd (Bassein) in Bassein, at Koprad (Bassein) in A'gshi, at Kudan (Mhim) in Trpur, at Virr (Bassein) in Sopra, and at Goregaon (Slsette) in Andheri (first case) and Bombay (second case). The Murbd case came from Kalyn. Nanale village. 64.    Nanale (Slsette).-The first case here was that of a Koli woman whose husband was lying sick of the plague in Trombay ; and the two next were also cases of plague contracted in Trombay, to which the sufferers daily resorted.    They seem all in fact to have been Trombay fugitives living in Nanale. Ju Village- Population 1216. 65.    Ju (Slsette).-The first recorded case was on April 24th in a Christian house; but Mr. Hudson, the Assistant Collector, states that there had been three suspicious cases among the Christians before Easter (which fell on the 18th). If there were cases of plague the mysterious deaths of rats which Dr. Anderson records as happening before the case of the 24th are easily explained without recourse to the theory of a " Rat's Progress," touched on in my 16th paragraph. The case of the 24th is interesting, as the owner of the house in which the rats died left it for ten days and was quite free from plague until he rashly returned to the house before it had been disinfected. In the neighbouring hamlet of Tra the first case was of a Christian who was constantly going to the badly infected Dnda : the next was a Dnda Khoja. The infection spread from the Christians to the Kolis, and when Mr. Hudson pulled down the first infected Koli hut, he found the floor undermined by bandicoots. These were no doubt the channel of com- munication between the Christians and Kolis. The percentage of local cases on population was 1.3. 66. Passing over Kothiwle (Kalyn) with only one imported case, the last seven villages on the list each show one or two local cases only; but the explana- tion is that given for the six villages in paragraph 63 above. The cases at Anjur (Bhiwndi) were apparently infected by fugitives from Bombay who settled there, though no case among those fugitives was reported ; those at Mardes (Bassein) in Bombay; that at Akshe (Slsette) was probably not plague; of those at Gas (Bassein) one was infected in Sopra and the other in Thna ; the Vile-padle (Slsette) cases were those of two servants of Bombay Pa'rsis : the first Girinj
?16 (Bassein) case was infected in A'gshi, and the second (if it was really plague) was in the family of the first. The Gandhari (Kalyn) case was imported from Kalyn. 67. It will thus be seen that there has not been a single instance in this district where there is even a remote suspicion that the plague had a spontaneous origin. In practically every case infection can be traced either to a stranger from an infected place or to a local resident who visited an infected place. 68. A glance at the accompanying map will show not merely that the plague adhered to the Railway, but that it almost confined itself to the area traversed by the local trains, the limits of which are respectively Virr and Kalyn. The following list of the number of places in each tluka which had a case of plague bears this out :- Slsette 32 places. Bassein 24  ,, Mhim 8  ,, Kalyn 7  ,, Dhnu 6  ,, Bhiwndi 3  ,, Shhpur 3  ,, Vda 1  ,, Murbd 1  ,, It is still more strikingly shown if places with local cases only are taken:- Slsette 27 places Bassein 22  ,,  Mhim 5    ,, Bhiwndi 3    ,, Kalyn 1    ,, Dhnu    1    ,, Shhpur 0 Vda 0 Murbd 0 The fact already observed that this plague was essentially a Bania or trad- ing class plague sufficiently explains why it went further along the B. B. & C.I. than the G. I. P., the former being the line by which Gujartis naturally fly. The only places north of the local trains which were seriously affected-Kelwa, Chinchni; Trpur and Bhiwndi-have large Pndherpesha population and were resorted to by fugitives from Bombay of the trading classes. The sea-faring population were an additional danger to Kelwa and Chinchni owing to their intercourse with Bombay and the infected ports in South Thna, but the cases of plague brought by boats appear to have been few. 69. As regards the intensity of the plague in different places the following list is made of the principal places, showing the percentage of local cases on the normal population :-   Percent. 1.    Ngaon         (Bassein)  8.3 2.    Sopra           (  ,,    )  8.1 3.    Chinchni       (Dahnu)  6.8 4.    Bndra         (Slsette)  4.7 5.    Vesve          (    ,,    )  4.4 6.    Mudd           (   ,,     )  4.4 7.    Bassein         (Bassein)  4.1 S.    Santa Cruz  (Slsette)  4.0 9.    Trpur        (Mhim)  3.9 10.    Kurla           (Slsette)  3.7 11.    Bhyndar      (   ,,    )  3.4 12.    Bhiwndi       (Bhiwndi)  3.3 13.    Ghivle          (Mhim)  3.2 14.    Andheri        (Slsette)  3.1 15.    A'gshi         (Bassein)  1.9 16.    Mld           (Slsette)  1.9 17.    Manori         (  ,,   )  1.9 18.    Chembur       (  ,,    )  1.7 19.    Marole           (   ,,   )  1.6 20.    Ju               (  ,,    )  1.3 21.    Trombay      (   ,,   )  1.1
?17 22. Kelva (Mhim) 1.1 23. Thna (Slsette) 0.8 24. Mahul (     ,,     ) 0.8 25. Pamtembhi (Mhim) 0.8 26. Kolhe Kalyn (Slsette) 0.7 27. Ri Murdhe     (     ,,     ) 0.5 28. Kalyn (Kalyn) 0.2  The first twelve, with, the exception perhaps of Santa Cruz, have this in common that they either have an artificial water-supply like Bandra and Kurla or have water at no great distance below the surface of the ground. With the two exceptions of Santa Cruz and Sopra, they are all also within sight of salt water. The latter consideration is not in my mind of the slightest consequence ; it is simply the result of the fact that most places within reach of local trains are either on the sea or a creek. Thna, Kalyn, and Kelwa, which are situated on creeks or the sea, suffered very slightly, and numbers of similarly situated places like Mhim, Dhnu and Umbargaon escaped local cases altogether. I am not prepared to deny that the proximity of water to the soil, by creating a feverish habit, may not render inhabitants of such places more susceptible to plague once it is brought ; but even this I doubt ; for Mhim, which is notoriously malarious, escaped altogether, and though the whole garden belt of Bassein is thoroughly water-logged, almost the only places in that tluka which appear in the above list are places with crowded bazaars, and in those places the disease practically confined itself to the bazaar, leaving the neighbouring hamlets untouched. On the other hand, of the 15 Slsette villages in the list, at least half are places where water is far from the surface, and A'ndheri which was one of the worst affected, was so badly off that a charitable Prsi had to set up a stand-pipe connected with the Tansa main to prevent a water famine. The fact that the interior of the district escaped scathless is due, in my opinion not to its being dry, though that may be generally true, but to the fact that firstly the small villages of the Kunbis offered little accommodation to fugitives from the towns, and secondly that owing to a printed proclamation issued from this office to every village, the villagers exercised a strict quarantine against all strangers. So far was this carried that the people of Wada actually petition- ed against the transfer of a krkun from Bhiwndi to their tluka on the ground that he might bring the plague ; and on one occasion an Educational Inspector was kept in vile durance which was only terminated on a telegram from this office. I have little doubt that the escape of the villages surrounding Poona was due to similar action by the villagers. I was myself inclined to think, at the beginning of the pestilence when the clamours of empirics filled the air, that a dry soil might be a protection, but looking at the general experience of the Slsette tluka, which is generally dry, I have now little doubt that if the plague had been conveyed into the interior of the district, it would have proved as destructive there as on the coast. 70. The intensity of the plague appears also to have borne no perceptible ratio to general sanitary conditions. Villages or small towns are naturally less insanitary than large towns ; yet ten out of the 14 worst affected places are villages, and some of them like Santa Cruz and Ghivle are not large villages. Of the towns Kurla, Bassein and Bhiwndi certainly, and Thna and Kalyn probably, are less well attended to by their Municipalities than Bndra. Yet all these places suffered less severely than Bndra, and Kalyn hardly suffered at all. The only satisfactory explanation of the intensity is the liability to infection by a constant stream of immigration, minus promptness and vigour in segregation. Given accommodation for high caste natives and easy distance for Bombay, infection was everywhere a certainty ; and the degree of it depended, I should say, almost entirely on the degree of efficiency in the machinery for stopping the spread of infection. Bndra, Kurla, Bassein and Bhiwndi suffered heavily, because plague entered them two months before municipal government, which meant inefficiency and neglect, was superseded by the plague authorities. Thna and Kalyn owed their comparative immunity to the vigilance of the officials from the beginning. The Koli villages of Nagaon, Vesave, Mudd, Ghivle, Manori, &c., require a word to themselves. It has been supposed that the intolerable stench of rotten fish, with which every house in these villages reeks, may have rendered the Kolis susceptible of plague. Looking at the B 833-5
?18 fine physique of these fishermen I should doubt if their houses have much lowered their vitality; but I think it probable that the amount of dried fish they keep in their huts may render the huts more liable to be infested by rats than other houses, and that the plague may have become more generally disseminated among them through this cause. This theory may of course be confuted by any one who can show that rats do not eat dried fish; and if it fails then I can only suggest the inveterate indifference of the Kolis to all precautions in their families as the cause of the undoubtedly wide dispersion of the plague among them as compared with other castes. They were keen to keep strangers out of their villages; but resented any attempt to enforce segregation among themselves when the plague once got in. 71.    Since writing  the foregoing paragraphs I have  received  a  report No. 2419, dated the 26th ultimo, from Dr. Anderson, giving his general conclu- sions about the plague.    He imputes more importance than I am inclined to do to a water-logged soil as giving " infective power" to the plague, and of course his opinion is entitled to great respect.    He does  not believe that the plague can arise spontaneously anywhere ; and after that is the great error to be com- bated.    I am glad to see that he holds the same theory of the "Rat's progress" through Bndra that I had independently arrived at from consideration of the evidence.    A copy of his report is appended. 72.    A glance at the table in paragraph 11 shows that most of the places which were infected after January,  were only lightly affected ; but it should not be argued from this that increase of temperature has anything to do with the fluctuations of plague.    In all the places which received early infection the plague was at its worst in February and March, and if it declined in April it was yielding not to the sun but to the plague authorities.    The reason of the generally lighter sufferings of villages infected in February-May was that the machinery for repressing the plague being then in order, segregation of the early cases was promptly attended to, and the villagers were either made to vacate their villages or did so of their own accord. 73.    As a letter from the Government of India in the preamble of Govern- ment Resolution No. 1786, dated the 1st April last, seemed to express surprise at the occurrence of cases of plague more than 9 days after persons had left in- fected localities to live in sheds, I may observe that numbers of instances of the kind have occurred in the district.    As already mentioned above 176 persons at Vesve got plague in their sheds from a week to six weeks after they had left their houses, and Mr. Gilbert reports that he personally took at least 70 Kolis into his hospital at Bndra from sheds in which the people had been living for more than 10  days, (and that cases occurred among Christians who had left their houses more than a month before.    At Trpur at least 29 people got plague more than 10 days after they went into sheds, and there were over a dozen instances of the same thing in Ghivle and Pamtembhi.    Other cases occurred in other places.    In all cases, of course, infection had been carried into and kept in the camps ; but the facts show that if infection is taken into segregation camps it will run through them much the same as it runs through villages, and there, fore that a dirty house is not a necessary condition of infection. 74.    The following table shows the fluctuations of the plague during the period of its existence between October and June :-              IMPORTED. INDIGENOUS. TOTAL.  Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. October 1896 4 4   4 4 November       December 25 25 72 47 97 72 Fortnight ending 15th January 35 35 92 61 127 96 Week ending 22nd January 2 2 78 60 80 62 Do.          29th     do. 12 10 101 71 113 81 Do.            5th February 14 11 138 113 152 124
?19       IMPORTED. INDIGENOUS. ???AL.   Cases.  Deaths.  Cases.  Deaths.  Cases.  Deaths.  Week ending 12th February 15 18 191 132 206 150 Do.           19th       do. 72 48 233 213 305 261 Do.           26th       do. 25 24 282 229 307 253 Do.           5th March 8 7 257 227 265 234 Do.           12th    do. 32 28 277 235 309 263 Do.           19th     do. 24 18 277 251 301 269 Do.           26th    do. 28 20 345 285 373 305 Do.           2nd April 27 17 410 356 437 373 Do.           9th   do. 10 9 359 305 369 314 Do.          16th    do. 14 7 287 224 301 231 Do.          23rd    do. 13 7 268 214 281 221 Do.          30th    do. 5 3 190 132 195 135 Do.            7th May 6 3 148 139 154 142 Do.          14th    do. 2 1 82 60 84 61 Do.           21st    do. 3 3 82 66 85 69 Do.          28th    do. 2 2 38 24 40 26 Do.             4th June 1 1 20 13 21 14 Do.          11th   do. 2  15 12 17 12 Do.          18th   do. ... ... 8 6 8 6 Do.          25th   do. ... ... 4 1 4 1 Do.           2nd July ... ... 2 1 2 1 Do.            9th   do. 3 1 ... ... 3 1 Total    ... 384 304 4,256 3,477 4,640 3,781  Owing to imperfect reports it is not possible to give weekly figures before the middle of January, and it is to be feared that the total number of deaths at first was not fully reported. From the beginning of February, however, the figures may be considered accurate. The epidemic reached its climax in the last week of March, after which there was a steady but slow decline till April 23rd  and then a rapid decline of about 50 per cent. each week till the end. The apparent arrest in the week ending 21st May was not  real ; but merely due to the inclusion of 41 cases from the Bndra slaughter-house which be- longed to a month previous but had not been punctually reported by the officer in charge, who was under the Bomby Plague Committee, The difference in the total for the week ending April 2nd as compared with the total (382 local cases) shown in my weekly plague reports is due to the inclusion of certain Vesve figures which had not previously been reported by the Talti. C.-Measures adopted for the suppression of the Plague. 75.    The measures taken or professed to be taken by the various Municipa- lities for the exclusion of the plague have already been described, and their total failure in every instance except those of Kalyn and to some extent Thna has clearly appeared from the foregoing paragraphs.    By the end of January it was becoming clear that in spite of their powers the Municipalities were unable to do anything effective, and that the rural areas, where no powers existed, were certain to be widely attacked.    The Epidemic Diseases Act III of 1897 had there- fore become necessary, and the rules under it, of which the first draft prepared by the Commissioner, N. D., reached this office on 13th February, first gave the District officers the powers necessary to combat the epidemic.    The Commis- sioner himself visited Thna at this juncture and under his directions and with the advice given by the Sanitary Commissioner and Deputy Sanitary Commis- sioner, both of whom with Surgeon-Captain Hudson, the Civil Surgeon, were called into Council, a plan of campaign was at once set on foot. 76.    It was resolved that the segregation of the sick and of their families in hospitals and quarantine camps should be rigorously enforced as essential to the suppression of the epidemic, and orders for the erection of the necessary
?20 hospitals and sheds in each affected place were given. The affected area was partitioned out among the available European officers: the Civil Surgeon took Thna, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner Kurla, the First Assistant took the infected villages of Slsette, and the 2nd Assistant those of Bassein and Dhnu, while Mr. Gilbert gallantly volunteered to take Bndra, and I myself took Bhiwndi to assist the District Deputy Collector in charge. The history of Bhiwndi illustrates so well the utter uselessness of our Municipalities and the necessity and beneficence of the Plague Rules that it may be given here in some detail. 77. The Bhiwndi Municipality consists of Pndarpeshas and Musalmns who were all strongly opposed to any interference with " domestic life " and up to the end of January had done nothing to cope with the evergrowing plague, although they had been directed on December 15th to take all the measures sanctioned by the Commissioner, N. D., in his No. 1518, dated the 13th October 1896. The Assistant Surgeon had of his own motion built a small hospital shed; but no one had been taken there except a beggar. Having ascertained the state of things by a personal visit, I issued on January 27th an injunction to the Municipality under Section 37 of the District Municipal Act, 1873, to do the following things:- (1) Furnish the hospital shed and guard it from fire. (2) Build sheds for the isolation of families. (3) Entertain a Hospital Assistant on Rs. 50. (4) Enforce the lime-washing of all houses and granraies. (5) Build a ring of Chaukis round the town for the examination of all persons entering or leaving. (6) Enforce the segregation in hospital of all plague-stricken persons found entering or leaving, and of all such persons in the town certified by the Assistant Surgeon to be proper subjects for isolation. (7) Appoint a special committee of three to enforce these orders. These measures were sanctioned by the Commissioner, N. D., in a letter No. 8, dated the 29th January; but the Municipality absolutely refused to make any rule for the segregation of the sick. Most of the elected members had previously run away, but enough returned to outvote the officials. The arguments put forward by Hindus and Mahomedans alike were that segregation was against religion, and could do no good inasmuch as "life and death were not in the hands of men but of the Creator." This resolution which amounted to a sentence of death on the town was passed on February 1st; and I should have applied for the immediate suspension of the Municipality if the passing of Act III of 1897 had not, by virtually suspending all Municipalities in plague- stricken places, rendered this step unnecessary. 78. As soon as the first Plague Rules referred to above were received a sufficient number of hospital and segregation sheds were erected under my orders and a plague establishment was got together with some difficulty. I was delayed a few days at Thna to see the sheds run up there also, and to impress on the leading natives that segregation was going to be carried out whether they approved it or not; but on February 19th, I moved camp to Bhiwndi. The first news was that the Mahomedans were not only refus- ing to let their sick be taken to hospital, but were compelling the Hindus also to refuse; and accordingly I started out the next morning, with the District Deputy Collector, the Mmlatdr and the Assistant Surgeon, and compulsorily removed all the sick persons I could find. These were not many as most cases died shortly after attack and some had disappeared in the night; but the lesson was useful, and when I entered the Mahomedan quarter I found the leaders more disposed to make terms than to fight. After some wearisome colloquies and the bringing up of a body of armed Police from Thna, I finally got these and all other recalcitrant sections of the community to agree to erect their own hospitals in places approved by me and to take their sick there, under penalty of their being otherwise taken to the Government sheds. The Konkani Maho- medans selected farm buildings or stores in isolated positions and the other
?21 sections and castes built sheds; and having made the people thoroughly under- stand that every plague case must go to hospital and every infected house be vacated for nine days for disinfection, I left the town in the charge of the District Deputy Collector and the Assistant Surgeon on the 27th February. Shortly afterwards I appointed a gunner on furlough as Chief Inspector on Rs. 65 per mensem to put a little English stiffness into the administration, and I believe he did excellent work. Within the month after my visit to Bhiwndi, 22 patients were taken to the Government hospitals and 34 to the caste hospitals, and 94 families went out into the segregation sheds. The orders therefore did not remain a dead letter, and Bhiwndi, as already observed, became wholly free from plague before the middle of April. 79. What was done at Bhiwndi was being simultaneously done every- where, and with the same results sooner or later. In every infected place segregation sheds were erected and all infected houses compulsorily emptied for disinfection. There was some murmuring at first, but no forcible resistance anywhere, except at Vesve, where a violent riot occurred on the 7th March. The prejudice against allowing the sick to be taken to the Government hospitals everywhere diminished rapidly, and practically disappeared in places like Thna, Kurla and Bndra, where there were European doctors in charge. Elsewhere the upper castes and some of the lower preferred to build private sheds and sometimes rejected treatment by the official doctors; and no objection was made to this as long as isolation was secured. Discovery of the sick was ensured by house-to-house visitation and by the punishment under the Plague Rules of those who failed to report cases. The task of emptying the houses was much facilitated by the voluntary flight from the towns of most of the Pudharpeshas, and in the villages of nearly all the inhabitants. A village wholly deserted except by the dogs and the fowls was a common sight in all the affected tlukas. So thoroughly did the people begin to understand the benefits of segregation that in March and April whole villages would abandon their habi- tations at the occurrence of one case of plague or even an alarm of dead rats; and I have known a case where those villagers who left on the first day would not permit the approach to their camp of those who left the day after for fear the latter should have absorbed any poison by their delay to fly. The fugitives built themselves huts of grass or matting in the open fields round the village and often lived in these without complaint for two or three months. It is proof of the prosperity of the fisher classes (Kolis and Mangelas) which suffered severely in the plague, that although they wholly stopped fishing when turned out of their villages and spent most of their time getting drunk, they were able to live for two or three months in this idle way without the slightest sign of destitution. Yet prices were double their normal figure, and these very people had six months before made the rise in prices a ground for piracy and riot, and had been given nominal sentences for their crimes by the Court of Sessions on the ground that they were driven to crime by imminent starva- tion. But as a matter of fact in May their bins were still full of grain. 80. The hospitals consisted of barracks of matting or grass with thatched roof, each barrack containing five or six compartments, about 8 x 10 feet each, sometimes divided by party walls and sometimes not. They were either wholly or partially open in front, and in the back wall there was ample ventilation by an open ridge under the eaves or windows. Until the weather grew hot the general complaint about them was that they were too airy and cold; but the Sanitary Commissioner considered these qualities essential to plague hospitals. One barrack was usually reserved for the observation of doubtful cases. The sheds for the families of the sick were generally built near the plague sheds and in much the same style; but they were rarely occupied anywhere. It was found that the family of a sick man had seldom any great desire to go and live near him, and usually preferred to build their own sheds in distant places. The general indifference of the natives to their sick and dead, indeed, was a fact which surprised most of us after the loud protestations when the rules first came out; and if I were inclined to base a conclusion on my experience in this plague, I should charge the natives with callousness towards their relations. But allowance must be made for the fact that the plague has at all times ended in destroying family ties. ? 833-6
?22 81.    When the patient had been  removed  and   the  family  cleared   out, disinfection was effected by removal of the roof or part of it, by squirting a solution of carbolic acid (1 in 100) or corrosive sublimate (1 in  1,000) through garden syringes over the floor and all the interior walls and roof, and finally  by lime-washing walls and floor.    At first fumigation with nitric acid and copper or chlorine was attempted before the roof was removed; but this was  generally abandoned as practically useless in inexperienced hands, and the first step taken was to let in as much light and air as possible.    After the publication  of  the Joint Commissioner's notes in March I issued orders that floors were to be dug up as described in the notes after saturation with disinfectants, and this was generally done until May, when the Commissioner objected.    There is this, and I think only this, to be said in favour of digging up the floors, that if  the plague authorities do not do it, the people are very likely to  do it themselves after their return to the houses in order to replace the white-wash by the usual cowdung coat, and if any bacilli had managed to escape  the carbolic acid   and the white-wash they might be turned up in this process.    But the risk seems infinitely   small  inasmuch as the  bacillus  cannot  possibly  burrow  (being a mere cell), and as a matter of fact no evil results have occurred in Kurla or Bndra, where surface disinfection only was  carried out.    I believe, therefore, that digging up, which is troublesome, and is generally badly done, may safely be omitted, if there is a second visitation of the plague. 82.     All the clothes  and bedding of an infected person  were invariably burnt at his death or recovery, and the clothes of the rest of the family were either boiled or   soaked  in   a  solution   of  carbolic   acid.    Families   were   not allowed to return to their houses until the following three conditions had beer complied with, viz. :- (1)  The house had been thoroughly disinfected. (2)  Nine days had elapsed since the  members of the   family were exposed to any kind of infection. (3)  All  clothes had been   disinfected in the   presence of a  plague authority. As a matter of fact when a house was once vacated it was rarely re-occupied within a fortnight, and families often stayed out for a month or two without showing any particular wish to return. 83.    For greater security all the houses in the immediate neighbourhood of an infected house were usually treated as suspected, and were disinfected  in much the same way.    In view of the excursions of rats this was highly advis- able, and it led to the whole or the greater part of each infected place getting a thorough cleaning up.    The masses of dirt which were brought out of the better class houses were surprising.    It  seems  to  be  the  custom   to  sweep everything up into corners and leave it, and the accumulation of these corners formed great heaps before the houses when the plague officers had them properly swept out. 84.    The hospital returns submitted to Government by the various officers in charge of hospitals, including the Kalyn and Plghar Railway Hospitals, show 2,775 cases and only 1,068 deaths, or 38.4 per cent.,   but  no  reliance should be placed on these figures as showing the percentage of cures in hospitals. Not only the Railway Hospital figures, but those of some other hospitals, such as Bassein, show large numbers of merely suspected cases which never turned into plague at all.    The proportion of deaths on cases throughout the district was 81 per cent., and that of  the hospitals generally was probably not much below this when suspected cases are excluded.    The four hospitals which were in trustworthy hands show better results:-  Percentage of deaths. Kalyn               ... 51.6 Kurla 63.8 Bndra 65 Thna 68.4 but I do not feel sure that even here no merely suspected cases were included.
?23 85.   The following table shows the number of houses disinfected, excluding Bndra, for which Mr. Gilbert kept no count, and some small villages :-             No. Place. Number of  houses disinfected.  No. Place. Number of houses disinfected.   Slsette Tluka.   Bhiwandi Tluka.  1 Kurla 188 26 Bhiwandi 391 2 Thna 245 27 Shelar 5 3 Bhyndar 187 28 Anjur 3 4 Mudd 191    5 Chembur 36  Bassein Tluka.  6 Vesave 154    7 Andheri         165 29 Bassein 914 8 Wadhavli           6 30 Sopra                 174 9 Marole 19 31 Agshi 192 10 Kirol 3 32 Khochivre          ... 164 11 Uttan 14 33 Nagaon 97 12 Mlawni 147 34 Kiravli 13 13 Ri Murdhe 72 35 Girinj                   2 14 Dongari 7 36 Kavlar Budruk ... 1 15 Ju 203 37 Do.    Khurd   ... 3 16 Mld 254 38 Sandor 4 17 Akshe 12    18 Manori 154  Mhim Tluka. 19 Trombay 17    20 Vilepadle 2 39 Kelve 73 21 Kolhe Kalyn   ... 6 40 Trpur 511 22 Kandiwli 7 41 Ghivli 14 23 Mahul 66 42 Pamtembhi 64 24 Ghtkopar 1  Dhnu Tluka.   Kalyn Tluka.        43 Chinchni             933 25 Kalyn  88       Total    ... 5,802  Including Bndra and the small villages, the number of houses disinfected can not have been much under 7,000. 86.   Inoculation was performed by Doctor Haffkine at my request at Bndra and Andheri on the March 20th.    About 125 people, including Mr. Hudson, the Assistant Collector, and myself, were inoculated that day.    On April  25th Surgeon-Major Lyons inoculated 235 people, including Mr. Leggatt at Trpur ; and on May 10th, at a second visit to the same place, he inoculated 358 more. Two fatal cases of plague occurring after inoculation have already been reported to Government and no others are known to me.    If in another visitation inocu- lation is to be squarely tested an officer who knows the process must be placed under the orders of the Collector. 87.    There were  few  cases  of plague among the  persons  employed to examine, carry or attend on plague-stricken people.    I do not think that the total number of such cases exceeded six in the  whole district.    This immunity was no doubt principally due to the constant use of disinfectants in the plague sheds.    Unless the doctors have facts to the contrary, I should be inclined to theorise that most natives got plague through abrasions in their feet, owing to their habit of walking about their houses bare-foot and that the immunity of us, Europeans, who all walked recklessly into infected houses, was chiefly due to our boots.    Mere proximity to infected things does not seem to be dangerous, at least to Europeans ; for Mr. Hudson, Mr.  Leggatt, Mr. Mead and myself have repeatedly collected with our sticks or riding whips heaps of rags, clothes and even  biers from infected houses or burial-grounds and have stooped over them to set them alight, without the use of any disinfectants.    All experience, in fact, seems to show that the bacillus does not travel through the air at all ; and that even if he touches the skin he requires an abrasion of some sort before he can get in.    I dare say this is all well established among scientific men ; but
?24 the idea of "tainted air" is widely spread among the public and caused more than one of our plague hospitals at the beginning of the epidemic to be pulled to the ground by infuriated people who lived to leeward of them. 88. I saw among the convalescents in the plague hospitals three or four people who had become deaf or dumb through plague; and I believe that simi- lar instances have occurred in Bombay. As fas as my casual observation went neither extreme youth nor extreme age conferred immunity; but I presume that the pathology of the epidemic may be left to the Civil Surgeon who is reporting separately to the Surgeon-General. D.-Measures taken to prevent the transport of the plague about the District. 89. On the 5th March I issued a Marthi circular to all Ptils (of which a copy is attached) warning them to allow no strangers to enter their villages without a previous quarantine, and instructing them how to treat plague cases if they occurred. I have no doubt that this circular did much to prevent the plague from getting into East Thna, for it is certain that a rigorous watch was kept on strangers and that sick travellers were not allowed to enter the villages. 90. At Railway Stations the following staff was maintained to watch the trains. On the G. I. P. there were at Kurla 4 Inspecters and peons, and at Thna 3 Hospital Assistants and several peons. At Kalyn there was the pro- vincial inspection, and for every station the Station Master was appointed a plague authority to detain cases and hand them over to the Ptil. All Station Masters on the B. B. & C. I. were similarly empowered and there were special inspectors at the following places: Bhyndar (a Parsi ship's doctor), Bassein (a private practitioner), Sophala (an inspector), and Boisar (an Inspector); and at Plghar there was the provincial examination. The inspectors at the various stations managed to catch a few cases of plague; but only one Station Master even seems to have found an opportunity of using his powers. 91. An attempt was made to isolate the whole island of Slsette from the rest of Thna; and for this purpose all the exits were guarded by chaukis at (1) Thna Bridge, (2) Kolshet Ferry, (3) Ghodbandar Ferry, (4) Parshik Ferry, and (5) Belpur. These no doubt served their purpose in deterring people from trying to fly by road or water; but the plague was from the first chiefly a railway traveller, and was carried by rail beyond Slsette in both direc- tions. In my opinion experience has demonstrated the insufficiency of any measures of inspection except the "long inspections" of Kalyn and Plghar, and I trust that if the plague revives in Bombay, Government will order the long inspections to be made at Bndra and Kurla. It is no objection to say that this will interfere with the local passengers. They are precisely the class that brought most of the plague into Thna, and if local trains cannot be stopped altogether during an epidemic, everything should be done to discourage the passengers by them, and so prevent the exodus that infected Slsette and Bassein, The railway companies should be made to pay the whole expense of these exami- nations and should repay themselves by raising the prices of local tickets. 92. These same local passengers rendered quarantine impossible in the Slsette and Bassein Tlukas; but measures of that nature were tried with success in Mhim and other tlukas. In March, when plague began to get serious in Kelva, intercommunication between that village and Mhim was forbidden under Rule 29 of the Plague Rules published with Government Resolution No. 1728-1201-P, dated the 29th March 1897, and the prohibition was easily enforced by a chauki on the bridge which divides the two places. This prohibi tion was cancelled on the 22nd May. On the 14th of April the villages of Trpur and Chinchni were cut off from all communication except under passes, with the rest of the Mhim and Dhnu Tlukas to which they respectively belong. A copy of the Notification is attached. On May 6th, as plague had ceased at Chinchni but continued at Trpur, communication between the twin villages, separated only by a bridge, was forbidden. These villages were thrown open to one another and the rest of the world on the 24th May after the plague had ceased in both. The orders were enforced with much difficulty by chaukis of Musalmns, passes being granted first by Mr. Leggatt as long as his camp was there, and then by the respective Mmlatdrs. On April 14th, at the request of the Mhim Municipality, quarantine, or rather observations for 9 days, was imposed on all travellers entering the town except officials. A copy of the notice
?25 and rules accompanies. Similar camps of observation were sanctioned for Umbargaon and Bhiwndi on the 21st April and 25th April respectively, and were removed at the beginning of June. None of the apprehensions of the Government of India in the telegrams preambling Government Resolution No. 1976, dated 12th April last, have been verified in the case of these camps. 93. By a notification of the Commissioner, N. D., dated the 21st March, under Government Resolution No. 1211, dated the 6th idem, quarantine against boats was established in 15 of the principal parts of the district, in fact wherever there was any establishment to work the rules. The notification is still in force but has not led to any perceptible results, though it may have helped to deter infected people from travelling by sea.  94.    In March the officers of the Salt Department began to utilise their salt  cordon to keep infected persons from entering the Thna District from Daman, which was rapidly becoming a hot-bed of plague.    On the 30th March the Governor of Daman made a complaint to me of the severity of   the cordon ; but the necessity of keeping uniformity with Surat prevented me  from  making any of the concessions he desired, and the cordon is still maintained.    It has no doubt been of the highest use in keeping the plague out of Umbargaon. 95.    The Railway Inspectors at Kalyn and Plghar may briefly be noticed here, though they are not in any way under my control.    These were established on  February   12th, with  a  Commissioned  Medical   Officer  and   12  Hospital Assistants at each place ;  but the staff was modified more than once afterwards. The number of persons taken out at each place with plague has up to the present been : Kalyn    . . . ... 182 Plghar ... ...    50 During February, March and April these examinations undoubtedly prevented an immense amount of infection from getting from Bombay and Thna into Gujart and the Deccan. They have not been of any great importance to the Thna District as both were purposely placed at the outer limit of the local trains. E.-The Cost of the Plague. 96.    In consequence of the plague the ordinary staff of the District (excluding the Kalyn and Plghar examinations) was increased by the following officers :-                                              From.   To. Pay and allow- ances for that period.    Rs. Mr. E. H. E. Leggatt, I.C.S., Personal Assistant February 26 June  1 2,669 "   W. S. Nabar, Special Plague Mmlatdr, Slsette "       22 "  30 795 "   H. J. Anti, Special Plague Mmlatdr, Bassein "       27 " 30 789 Hospital Assistant Mr. Gopal Ramchandrarao "       20 May  9 128 "                       Mallu Suraji "       23 " 16 187 "                      Nagindas Lallubhai "       25 " 30 165 "                      Balwant Hari "       26 " ... 163 "                       Prabhakar Vishnu "  28 " 11 136   Total Rs 5,032      Rs. 1 G.   R. No, 907- 375-p., dated 18th   February 1897 5,000 2 G. R. No. 1684- 1160-p., dated 26th   March 1897 5,000 3 G. B. No. 2555- 1973-p., dated 11th   May 1897 10,000  Rs. 20,000  In addition to the above, out  of the  Rs. 20,000  allotted to this District for plague by the three Government Resolutions mentioned in the margin, Rs. 17,088-10-0 have been  expended up to the 7th instant. Of this Rs. 8,457-5-9 have been expended in the Kalyn and Plghar Railway exami- nations and cannot be recovered, and of the remaining Rs. 8,631-4-3, I fear that little can be recovered owing to B 833-7
?26 the poverty of the District Board. The total expense of the plague to Government may therefore be roughly put down at Rs. 23,000; I have excluded the Rs. 9,000 advanced by Government to Mr. Gilbert for Bndra on the supposition that it will have to be repaid by the Municipality, if not the total expense of the plague to Government will be increased to Rs. 32,000. The expense to the District Board so far has been Rs. 8,752-3-6 and in addition the Municipalities must have spent approximately Rs. 25,000. F.-The Plague Authorities. 97. I have already mentioned the division of the district into plague charges. All the European Officers and Mr. Wasudeo Shiwaji Nabar, the Dis- trict Deputy Collector, who were the Chief Plague authorities for these charges worked with unremitting zeal and energy. The place of honour may be given to Mr. Reginald Gilbert, the President of Bndra, as a non-official and a volunteer. I have already fully commented on his work in sending on his special report. Mr. C. W. M. Hudson, the First Assistant Collector, had probably the most arduous task owing to the great number of infected places in his charge and the turbulence of the fisher population; but in spite of a riot in which he was seri- ously assaulted the operations in the Slsette villages were steadily conducted to a successful issue. In Kurla and Thna, Surgeon-Major A. V. Anderson, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, and Surgeon-Captain C. T. Hudson, the Civil Surgeon, had very heavy work, and performed it in a self-sacrificing way that I am afraid somewhat injured Dr. Hudson's health. I am specially indebted to Dr. Anderson for valuable advice during the plague, and for his excellent reports at the end of it. Mr. DuBoulay, who was in charge of Bassein at the beginning of the plague and got the machinery into work there, was succeeded by Mr. P. J. Mead, who, though a very junior officer, performed his plague duties with the most admirable efficiency. I had not intended to give my Personal Assistant, Mr. E. H. E. Leggatt, any plague work; but the exigencies of the time forced it on me and he undertook the duties of a plague authority with great zeal. Mr. W. S. Nabar remained in charge of Bhiwndi from the time I left it till the plague disappeared, and must share with the Assistant Surgeon the credit of its early disappearance from that town. Mr. W. C. Shepherd, the Assistant Collector, Kalyn Prnt, had less plague work than the other officers; but gave valuable support to Mr. Dadina, the Assistant Surgeon and Vice-President Kalyn, and curiously was the only European officer who contracted plague. The attack however was very slight. Surgeon-Captain Prall did excellent work at Bndra on which I have commented elsewhere. Mr. W. A. Dubois, the Dis- trict Superintendent of Police, gave valuable assistance in house-to-house visita- tiou to both Mr. Gilbert and Dr. Hudson, and took infinite trouble to make the necessary police arrangements everywhere. Mr. Ommaney, the Assistant Superintendent, also assisted in house-to-house visitations in Kalyn. I name Khn Sheb R. R. Dadina last; but I am not sure that he does not deserve the highest praise of any officer, for he alone practically succeeded in keeping the plague out of his charge by extreme vigilance and firmness. 98. Among the medical men who worked under the chief plague authorities mentioned above, I may specify for special commendation Dr. F. A. Moos, Assistant Surgeon, Thna, Dr. J. F. Gonsalves, Assistant Surgeon, Bndra, Dr. M. M. Vakil, Assistant Surgeon, Bhiwndi, Dr. M. S. Postwalla, Assistant Surgeon, Kurla, and Mr. M. P. Sathe, Hospital Assistant, Chinchni. Among the Mmlatdrs the greatest activity was shown by Mr. S. G. Mandlik of Mhim; and the Mmlatdr of Dhnu did good work at Chinchni; but the Mmlatdrs of Bassein and Slsette and the Aval Krkun of the former deserve a passing mention. The two special plague Mmlatdrs Mr. Waman Shiwaji Nabar and Hormasji Jamsedji Antia performed their duties to the satisfaction of the Assistant Collectors under whom they were employed, and deserve a considerable share of credit for the success of the operations in which they were engaged. Mr. Nabar had once to face rioters as well as the plague and has already received the commendation of Government for his conduct on that occasion. All the special Hospital Assistants did well except Gopal Ram- chandrarao who habitually shirked and finally deserted.
?27 99. I ought not to omit mention of the co-operation of the Customs officers under the orders of Messrs. Cotgrave and Thom, not only in the examination of boats, but on some occasions in other plague work. The Sir Krkun of Trombay deserves special mention for his usefulness as a plague authority in that port. 100. Among non-officials who gave voluntary assistance it gives me pleasure to name Mr. Mervanji Jehangir who made an able plague authority at Santa Cruz. Mr. D. J. DeMonte and Mr, Antone F. Gonsalves who gave valu- able aid at Vesve and Mr. Ramzanbhai Rahimbhai who gave Doctor Anderson similar assistance at Kurla. Some other Mahomedan non-officials at Bhiwndi and Trpur and a few Police Ptils who did good service have received small presents from the Commissioner, N. D's. grant for that purpose. The Brhmin Vice-Prsidents of the Mhim Municipality and Local Board took some trouble to keep the plague out of their town; but the Brhmins of the District as a rule stood aloof and offered no assistance to the plague authorities. A Committee of Brhmins was formed at Thna ostensibly to assist the Civil Surgeon, but after I rejected a ridiculous proposal that a Magistrate should be the Judge of plague little more was heard of them. 101. I regret that this report should be so long; but Government ordered that it should be comprehensive. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. C. LOGAN, Collector. BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS,
?REPORT BY MR. R. GILBERT ON PLAGUE IN BA'NDRA. 1. I left Bndra for Australia on 24th December 1896, and did not return till 12th February 1897. Plague broke out badly whilst I was absent. During that period Assistant Surgeon Gonsalves was Vice-President of the Bndra Municipality, and Chairman of the Special Plague Committee. I therefore requested him to be good enough to make a separate report as to what was done before I was appointed President of the Bndra Municipality and Special Plague authority: this I enclose. 2. I commenced plague work in Bndra about the 14th February. Gov- ernment placed at my sole disposal first Rs. 2,000, and soon after Rs. 8,000 more, to be spent by me for plague purposes, as I might think fit, and they gave me the fullest powers under the Infectious Diseases Act. I felt that unless I had at my personal disposal this money with the fullest powers it would be useless my undertaking plague work. 3. At this period the Municipal establishment was in a demoralised state, and the general Municipal business was being carried on in a perfunctory man- ner. The rates and taxes were not or could not be collected, the sweepers were more or less mutinous, the majority of the members of the Municipal Board had left Bndra, including most of those who belonged to the Special Plague Committee for dealing with plague. The money which had been set apart for plague purposes was nearly exhausted. It was impossible to get a quorum of the Municipal members owing to so many being absent, and the District Municipal Act had been drafted without providing any machinery for meeting a visitation of plague and its consequential results. 4. At this time there were some small hospital sheds in an excellent situa- tion on the Chapel Road close to and facing Mhim Bay. There were two men to look after the place, but there were no conveniences or proper accommodation for patients, and it seemed absolutely cruel to send patients there. I at once deter- mined other arrangements must be carried out as quickly as possible. Hand- bills in English and Marthi were distributed and pasted all over Bndra giving an abstract of the rules passed under the Infectious Diseases Act, and explaining the object of the rules. This was done so that no one should be able to say he was ignorant of the rules. 5. The Bndra Municipality is made up of a number of villages and hamlets, with open fields all around, on which the inhabitants could easily camp, and in fact upon which most of them did encamp. 6. I thought it best to have one good Central Hospital thoroughly equip- ped, with a staff of Doctors, Nurses, and a full Hospital Establishment, to which I could without any conscientious scruples force patients to go to against their will and the wishes of their relatives. I thought it also best to have some hospital sheds built at Dnda, as the inhabitants on the first outbreak of the plague there expressed a wish to have their own hospital sheds managed by themselves. 7. They like most of the other inhabitants of Bndra held the opinion which prevailed in Bombay that Government would cause every one to be poisoned who went to a hospital, and with a view to meet these people I consent- ed to build them sheds for their own sick, where they might deal with their sick as they liked. I regret I agreed to this. The sheds were built, but never used as a hospital. 8. I next had to deal with the Mahommedans. The Mahommedans in Bndra nearly all reside in Naopara (an exclusively Mahommedan village near the Railway Station) and in the slaughter-house-yard and near thereto. The slaughter-house is under the Bombay Municipality, but Mr. Saunders, the Superintendent in charge, asked for my assistance, and until the Plague Com- mittee were appointed and took over charge of the slaughter-house, in the middle of March, I supervised the slaughter-house also. I went to Naopara and got hold of the Moulvie, the Moolla, and same of the influential inhabitants B 1113-1
?2 and with them I went to the slaughter-house where we found the leaders of the butchers and had a long discussion, when it was agreed that I should jointly with the Bombay Municipality build hospital sheds in some rice fields near Naopara for the exclusive use of the Mahommedans to be managed entirely by themselves. 9. These sheds were built by the Bombay Municipality. When plague broke out in the slaughter-house, the Mahommedans refused to go there, and wanted me to build them a special hospital near the slaughter-house on some land occupied by a Christian encampment. 10. I may say here that on 14th March I met the Plague Committee at Bndra, and they took over the management of the slaughter-house, and put Veterinary Major Mills in charge, so that I had nothing more to do with the slaughter-house. The hospital sheds however remained at Naopara, but strange to say no cases of plague occurred in Naopara, although it was raging at the slaughter-house close by. 11. As there was no plague in the village, I did no house to-house visita- tion there. I asked one of our members, Mr. N. Futtehally, who was afterwards appointed a Plague authority, especially to look after Naopara. I occasionally went amongst them, and all expressed their greatest readiness to send their sick to this hospital. They were never however exposed to the trial. 12. The site selected for the Central Hospital was in the rice fields near Khar village. The question arose how to get a hospital erected. I wanted it at once. I could get no contractor in Bndra to erect it, so I went to Mr. Murzban, Executive Engineer of the Bombay Municipality, who sent me one of his men with materials. Afterwards however it was erected by our Municipal Surveyor departmentally. At this time Surgeon-Captain S. E. Prall, I. M. S., volunteered to do plague work. He was at once appointed a Plague authority, and he took over the management and equipment of the hospital. No one could have done it better or cheaper, and to Dr. Prall must be given all the praise of the starting and equipment of the hospital. It was designed by him too. 13. The Rev. Mother Superior at the Bndra Convent sent us two of the Sisters under her as Hospital Nurses. Messrs. Phipson & Co. sent us a present of portwine and spirits, the P. and O. Company sent us fifty blankets, and Mrs. Little, Mrs. Prall and Mrs. Gilbert made all the hospital clothing for the patients. Several firms in Bombay sent old cloth and samples which were useful in working up into clothes, &c. 14. Dr. Prall not only managed the hospital at first, but he also did a great deal of house-to-house visitation work. 15. The hospital was not completed till the 1st March. We could get it done no sooner, but if I had had it earlier, many more lives would have been saved in Bndra. 16. When I took over charge the Christians had nearly all gone into huts in the fields, most of them left their sick in the villages, and some few stayed behind in the village. The Dnela villagers had none of them gone into huts: this village contains 4,000 or 5,000 people. Those who were doing plague work in Bndra were only myself, Mr. Little, Dr. Prall, Dr. Gonsalves, Dr. DeMonte and the Municipal Inspectors. 17. We directed our attention to segregating the sick from the healthy. I assisted some of the poorer classes in building huts. All the villages round Bndra have hamlets of huts inhabited by Mhars; from none of these had the Mhars moved out. Plague soon broke out amongst the Mhars of Sherli village, and these went into huts erected near the seashore in a place selected by me. 18. It was quite a pleasure to deal with Mhars. They obeyed orders so readily; for instance, these Mhars moved out all their things to the new camp, and had the roofs off their huts within two hours of my giving the order. By the evening all were comfortable in temporary huts erected by themselves with material supplied by me. With the exception of one other case which occurred two days afserwards, these Mhars never had another case; the roofs of their houses remained off for over two months, leaving the inside fully exposed to the sun. They went back in May and had no other case.
?3 19. In March plague broke out amongst the Mhrs of Choin village, who behaved in the same way, but they had two or three cases afterwards in their camps. 20. In the Mhr hamlet of the Khar village there was no case of plague at all, and they were never moved out. 21. Dnda requires a chapter almost to itself. This place gave me more trouble and work than the whole of the rest of Bndra. 22. Plague did not break out in Dnda till about the 12th February. The villagers kept a cordon round their village, and only allowed a few of their number to go outside to sell their fish, and to bring in all that was required. The plague gradually moved north, and at last came to Dnda. When it did come it spread very quickly. Several boat-loads of villagers went off to Alibg, many went off to Jejuri, Trpur and Poona, including the Patel. 23. I remember one of the chief objections raised by the village priest to the hospital was that Mhrs would come there and would touch the sick and dead. 1 often thought of this afterwards when these villagers used to entreat me to send Mhrs to remove their dead relatives, and utterly refused even to touch their own dead parents, leaving the Mhrs to carry out the cremation. Caste goes to the wind on these occasions. 24. Most of the Dnda people camped in the fields round the village, whilst a considerable number camped at Snta Cruz. Some refused to go out at all, and some who did go out came back again by the order, they said, of their village god. I ordered every one to leave the village and camp outside. My orders were not obeyed, but when I went back in the evening to see if the people had gone, I found the men standing about with sticks in their hands. I called them together and told them that on the morrow every soul would have to go, even if I had to call out a regiment to enforce my order. I got some armed police on the morrow and a company of the 22nd Native Infantry marched through the village. The people then saw I was in earnest and obeyed. I had trouble with them thereafter, it is true, but my orders were always obeyed though reluctantly. 25. Only one man remained in Dnda, and he was a blind man whom I allowed to stay behind. 26. I allowed the Dnda sick to remain in the village with one or two relatives until the hospital at Khar was ready. In some cases the sick were put in little temporary huts just outside the village. Very often their relatives did not tend them. The dead were abandoned sometimes. Children were left with the dead and dying. Great inhumanity was shown by the Dnda people generally to their caste people, and I regret to say by the Christians too in some cases. They appeared to think it was the duty of the Municipality to remove and cremate the dead, to tend the sick, and to take care of and feed the children of the sick. I had three Police Sepoys to assist me for Dnda only. Two of them died of plague, the third I sent away for fear he should die also. 27. The Municipal Inspectors bad great trouble in getting the dead re- moved and buried or cremated. The Mhrs had just as much objection to touch- ing the corpses of those who had died from plague as had others, although they were liberally paid for the work. In fact they were often pressed for this work and made to do it, no other alternative remained open when the relatives refused to remove the dead and could not be found. 28. The Bndra Municipality were very fortunate in their Inspectors. The Head Inspector is Mr. Newman, a pensioned Sergeant, R. A. He did ex- cellent work and was fully occupied. He never shirked plague work, and in fact, as he often told me, he "defied the plague." The second Inspector under him was Mr. Pestonji, who did excellent work too, but alas ! he died of plague about the middle of March. A third Inspector, a Hindu named Balla Narayan, also did excellent work. Mr. Brewer, who was appointed a Special Inspector under me, also did good work in this respect. 29. The hospital sheds at Dnda were not ready till about the same time as the Khar Hospital, so that I could not properly segregate the sick until these
?4 were built. In the meantime fresh cases kept occurring amongst those encamp- ed in the fields. 30. Plague broke out badly in February in the Christian village of Choin, which was quite close to Dnda. The Choin people anxiously looked forward, at any rate in February, to the opening of the hospital, and in my rounds often anxious enquiries were made of me as to when the Plague Hospital at Khar would be open. In one family the father was the sole survivor till the day before the hospital was opened. He had tended all his family till be was struck down himself: he had no relatives to assist him: he remained under a tree till the hospital was opened. I promised him he should be the first in hospital, and he was. He lived for six days in hospital and died. He was one amongst a few in Bndra of the afflicted who expressed any gratitude for what I had done for him and his family. 31. The 1st of March was fixed as the day when the Khar Hospital would be ready. How anxiously did I look forward to its opening ! However, we could not take patients till the 2nd March. 32. On the 1st March it occurred to me it would be a good thing if I could get the Dnda villagers to go and see the hospital before it was opened when I could explain all we intended to do for them. Accordingly I went to their encampment and called them together and asked them to come with me to see the hospital. With trouble I got 20 men to go with me. We started off, when the women rushed at the men and would not let them go. I was therefore only able to get two to accompany me, named Bhendu aad Nagu, both influential men. They expressed themselves much satisfied and promised to call the people together, and advised them to take their sick there. Alas ! poor Nagu on the 17th of March came voluntarily to our hospital and his wife also; both died of the plague. In order to save Nagu, Dr. Prall sent in specially for Dr. Haff- kiue's new curative serum and he was dosed four times. Dr. Haffkine himself came and saw him, but alas he died. He was a great loss to me, because he was the one of the very few who assisted me. The only other of the Dnda men who helped was Cowasji Pestonji, who is interested in the liquor shop in Dnda. 33. On the 2nd March the hospital was opened. Many patients at once came voluntarily. Sister Magdalene and Sister Katharine were the Nurses, Mr. Bhowaniprasad Bhagwanlal was the Hospital Assistant, Mr. Pereira the Compounder. We had four military orderlies of the 22nd Native Infantry, a Brh- min cook, a Christian cook, several ward-boys, one of them, Bhagwan, who had been in charge of the Chapel Road sheds, and who was the most willing and obliging worker in the whole hospital. Our Medical staff-Dr. Prall, Dr. Gon- salves, Dr. DeMonte-attended the hospital gratuitously. We had everything in the hospital which was required and the arrangements were excellent. 34. On the second day we had 24 patients, and our shed was full. I at once built another shed which was used for women only. We then had accommoda- tion for about 40 or 50 patients. However, the patients died off rapidly, and I do not think we ever had more than about 30 at one time. 35. I got a second Hospital Assistant, but after remaining three days he ran away from fear. 36. Unfortunately the disease was of the worst type, and our patients died rapidly. This caused consternation outside, and we soon found that force was required to bring many of the patients into hospital. The people saw that those who went into hospital died and they preferred to die at home, or believed we poisoned them in hospital. 37. Even the Christians who knew that the Nurses were ladies of their own faith commenced to conceal their cases. This was partly due I believe to the fact that one or two had been cured who used some quack remedy and they were anxious to try this cure at home. In fact latterly the Christians nearly always concealed their cases and gave as much trouble as the Kolis. 38. The Dnda people often sent their cases into the village and concealed them. I had spies and others who used to give me information, and in this way we used to find them out and take them to hospital. I scarcely ever prosecuted
?5 them for concealing cases. I had not time to do it. Their encampment became very foul, they were very dirty in their habits, they generally eased themselves close to their huts, and the whole place became in a very insanitary state. I constantly had to make them move their huts. Any place I selected as a new site was as a matter of course objected to and all sorts of reasons given why they did not wish to go there. I short the Dnda people gave me as much trouble as possible and resisted as much as they dared all steps I took for their protec- tion. In order to conceal cases of plague amongst their women, these women were made to sit up and make " chaupattis " when I was seen coming. So often was this trick practised on me that I always specially examined those who were engaged in cooking. 39. About 400 Dnda people suddenly left in March and went into Bombay, where they remained for about three weeks. They came back to assist in disinfecting their houses. 40. Soon after the hospital was opened an old Mahomedan brought his grandson voluntarily to the hospital. He remained with him there till the patient was discharged cured. Three other Mahomedans brought their children with plague to the hospital, but these I allowed at their request to build their own hut close to the hospital instead of going into the hospital itself. 41. A large number of patients brought to the hospital would not take any food, drink or medicine in the belief they would be poisoned. Some patients would only take food and medicine when given by the Sisters. I was sad sometimes to see patients dying with their relatives standing by refusing to allow them to receive any medicine or hospital food, or allowing ice to be placed on the heads of those in high fever. 42. A little Hindu boy with plague was brought to the hospital: his mother and father came with him. It was distressing to see how she felt for her sick child. She would allow the child to have nothing but tea, no medicine or milk. She even refused to allow the child to be wet-packed when his tempera- ture was high. Everything was done to persuade her how foolish it was not to allow the child to be treated, but nothing could induce her to permit it. She fully believed we intended to poison the child, and night and day she and her husband watched over the child till he died on the sixth day. It was very dis- tressing to the Nurses and others to see cases of this kind. 43. As an instance of what people did do to avoid hospital, I may mention the case of a Hindu boy who lived at Santa Cruz. This boy directly he felt the first symptoms of plague walked with his mother by road to Bombay, eight miles or so, in order to avoid being sent by the plague authority, Mr. Merwanji, to our hospital. When he got to Bombay he found he was likely to be sent to a hospital there, so he and his mother walked back. They had to pass within 100 yards of the Khar Hospital, and going back the boy got just past our hospital and within half a mile of Santa Cruz, when he dropped from exhaustion. Then Mr. Merwanji heard of it and brought him to our hospital. He died of exhaustion in a few hours. 44. Many suffering from plague died very suddenly. They were well in the morning and dead at night. Sometimes corpses of those who had been attacked very suddenly were found in the fields: I saw one myself. 45. With so many fields round the place we had excellent places for segregation camps. I was able to induce Mr. Snow, the Municipal Com- missioner, Bombay, to give us free water for our segregation camps. Plague constantly broke out in the segregation huts. 46. The plague began to improve soon after our hospital was opened. This I think was our greatest benefit, and means of stamping out the plague. I could then enforce segregation most rigorously, and I did so in a thorough manner. I had personally to do a great deal of this work myself. 47. Plague did not commence in Dnda till the middle of February and in the end of February. This brought up our death-rate considerably, as the plague was very virulent then. B 1113 - 2
?6 For the week ending 5th February there were 46 cases in Bndra muni- cipal limits. For the week ending 12th February there were 77 cases. For the week ending 19th February there were 77 cases. The highest number of cases was 122 for the week ending 26th February, and 111 deaths. For the week ending 5th March there were 88 cases. For the week ending 12th March there were 82 cases. For the week ending 19th March there were 79 cases. On the 17th March we had 10 deaths. We never had double figures again after this. The improvement then set in rapidly. On the 1st April and two following days we had only one death a day. For the week ending 7th April we had 8 deaths. For the week ending 14th April we had 6 deaths. For the week ending 21st April we had 5 deaths. For the week ending 28th April we had 1 death. 48. After that we had two cases only, and then plague disappeared. Amongst the last of the cases was a Surti butler on Pli Hill, who had only arrived from Delhi fourteen clays previously and had only been to Bombay once or twice. 49.   Latterly the plague was of a much milder type, and many of the patients recovered. 50.    Within  400  yards  of Dnela on the other side of the creek is the village of Tara.    Strange to say, plague did not break out there till the end of April, when Dnela was quite free.    As I recognised the importance of getting rid of plague from the villages on the Bndra frontier, I welcomed patients from the surrounding villages and we gladly took them into our hospital.    We took several patients from several adjoining villages. 51.    The Plague  Committee also sent us suspicious cases from the Santa Cruz Railway Station.    They sent us many cases of ordinary fever, but only one case turned into plague, and he died. 52.    As many Dnela Kolis were encamped at Santa Cruz, I gladly took patients from there into our hospital. 53.    In order to disinfect Dnda and other villages I obtained the services of six R. A.  gunners, 1  non-commissioned  officer and 5   men.    These men I specially employed in disinfecting Dnela.    First they washed each house with corrosive sublimate (4 ozs. to 40 galls. water).    This they did themselves with the assistance of an attendant.    Then each house was limewashed by the owner with whitewash supplied to him free.    Each house had the roof taken off, but those which had double stories had only a few tiles off.  I did not pull up the floors because I believe it is worse than useless. 54.    The expense of employing European soldiers is almost prohibitive.    At the time I got those mentioned I could have got no other good men  to do the work.    The work was dangerous and it was well done.    The soldiers liked the work very much and were sorry to go back to  barracks.    I think  it is a pity they are not allowed to do the work for less pay and allowances, as I am sure they would gladly do it.    I had the soldiers for a little over a month, and during that time they disinfected every house in Dnda, about 400 in number. I regret I did not see Dr. Dyson's report before as to disinfecting the clothes  55.    I am inclined to think that in the case of all one-storied houses if the    roof is taken off allowing the inside to be  exposed to    the sun for a month or so, that is quite sufficient.    In    Dnda every house had the roof off for more than a R.G.       month except the tiled houses. 56.    Several boat-loads of Dnda people returned at the end of April from Alibg and Thal.    They were put in quarantine camps, but caused much trouble, as they   had not  been  used  to  plague discipline.    Any  site, however good, which I selected for them was of course objected to in the usual annoying manner. However, no plague cases occurred, and I allowed all to go back on 1st May. None
?7 have occurred since they have been back, and considering how well the houses were disinfected this is not to be wondered at. 57. His Excellency the Governor visited Dnda on the 30th April, and I told the people at the request of His Excellency that they could go in on that day, but none availed themselves of the permission. Some went back on the 2nd May, and by the 8th May nearly all had gone back, and the people went in for fishing most industriously. Before this they would not fish, as they said it was too far to carry their fish and nets, &c., from their camps to the bandar, a distance say of half a mile. 58. I destroyed very few houses in Bndra. With the rains so near it is impossible for people to get new huts built in time, and the absence of huts only means overcrowding and disease resulting therefrom. I destroyed one hut at Chimbai in which there had been 12 deaths. 59. We were very fortunate in none of our hospital staff being attacked with plague. The Sister Elizabeth, who was with us for a short time after Sister Magdalene got ill, died of plague contracted at the Plague Hospital, Mhim. 60. On the 20th of May the Khar Hospital sheds were pulled down and the hospital was moved to the bungalow kindly placed at our disposal by Dr. DeMonte, so that in case plague should break out again in the rains we shall be prepared for it. 61. My accounts have not been finally made up yet, and some accounts remain to be paid; but I calculate I shall have spent about Rs. 8,600 out of the Rs. 10,000 placed at my disposal by Government. The hospital took a consider- able portion of this. There is about Rs. 580 owing for hospital stores and medicines. Of these, a considerable part have not been used and have been taken to the new hospital bungalow for use there if required. A large sum was spent on firewood for cremation purposes. In every case when the relatives or castefellows asked for firewood for this purpose they were supplied free. The cost of firewood was about Rs. 5 per corpse; for each body moved by Mhrs Rs. 2 was allowed. I had also to pay burial charges. Disinfecting houses also ran away with a considerable sum of money. 62. In my rounds on horseback I always carried money with me. By paying ready money on the nail I was often able to economise and to carry out measures much quicker and better. 63. In February and March, jowlies, bamboos and labour ran up in price. This brought up the expense of the erection of a hospital rather more than it should have been. I spent about Rs. 200 in cleaning out a filthy tank at Naopara. The milk supply of Bndra comes from Naopna, and the buffaloes were drinking the filthy water out of this tank. The villagers contributed a portion of the expenses. 64. Plague in Bndra attacked the Koli fishermen in greater proportion than other castes. The Native Christians suffered heavily, even those who lived in large houses and were not overcrowded. About half the population of Bndra are Native Christians. 65. In Pali village 11 out of 12 in one family died. The survivor was a baby, they were well-to-do people, a Christian family, and not overcrowded. The Mhrs and sweepers did not suffer much from plague. 66. Several Prsis had the disease, but only two Europeans. The Maho- medans at Naopra escaped it, except I think in about ten cases before the hospital sheds were erected for them. In this village there are about 200 milch buffaloes kept: these buffalo stables are very dirty. I leave it to scientific men to find out whether the presence of buffaloes has any restraining influence in a plague epidemic. 67. In Dnda there were a number of dead cats, and I often found them dead in houses where there was or had been plague. Dr. Lowson sent the corpses of two sick cats killed in Dnda to the German Doctors for examination, but they pronounced these free from plague. I do not believe the pigs were attacked by plague. 68. Persons who had been in segregation camps for a considerable time caught the plague.
?8 69.    The end of February in Bndra was the worst period of the attack : in Bombay the commencement of February was the worst period. 70.    Several persons who recovered from the disease were badly blistered with some native medicine on the buboes.    I leave it to  Doctors to say whether this remedy is of any use.    At any rate I know many who applied it were cured. 71.    Assistant Surgeon Gonsalves kept the register of attacks and deaths from plague.    Every doubtful  case  was  returned as plague.   These total as follows, viz. :-  Attacks.  Deaths.   935  797   The Khar Hospital returns were as follows : -  Month. Remained on 1st.  Admitted. Discharged cured or otherwise. Deaths. Remaining. March  104 16 77 11 April 11 27 23 10 5 May 5 14 12 7  Total    145 51 94                  Four patients were inoculated  four times   each with Dr. Haffkine's curative serum.    All died. 72.    Latterly the plague being less virulent there were more recoveries.    It is possible those who recovered may have spoken of their good treatment in the hospital to their neighbours, and the  prejudice may  not be so great in future against hospitals should plague break out again.    It is impossible however to find out native opinion on the point.    Nearly all appear to be alive to the fact now that plague is contagious, but Government may rest assured that few will do anything to assist in suppressing another attack.    Assistance will not come from themselves, but I hope resistance at any rate will not be shown. 73.    I am under great obligation to and must thank those who assisted me in plague work,-to  Surgeon-Captain Prall for the great work he did  in the hospital and as a plague authority ; to Mr. F. A. Little, a very busy man, for the hard work he did in seeing houses were put in a sanitary state, and as one of my advisers ; to Assistant Surgeon Gonsalves and Doctor DeMonte for their work as plague authorities and as medical officers to the hospital.    I also have to thank Mr. E. Howse, Mr. N. Futtehally,  and Mr. Khars, who lately lent me their assistance as plague authorities, and to Mr. E. R. Smeetham, who was President of the Panch for valuing.    Mr. Dubois, the Superintendent of Police,  was kind enough to do  a lot of house-to-house visitation during his   stay  in   Bndra Mr. B. M. Malabari also assisted me in February in plague work whilst he was in Bndra. 74.    The Hospital Assistant, Mr. Bhowniprasad Bhagwanal, did excellent work and showed no fear.    He is a Government servant, and I should wish his good services brought to the notice of his superior officers.    Chief Constable Francis rendered me assistance in plague work also. 75.    Our Nurses consisted of Sister Magdalene and Sister Katherine.    Sister Magdalene got ill in April and had to go away, the late  Sister Elizabeth  took her place.    When she left, Miss MacDonald Ritchie, a volunteer, a trained Nurse who came out from England for plague work, took her work.    She remained at the hospital till its close.    Their work was the noblest of all.   We are under the deepest obligation to them, and nothing I can write will adequately describe the praise which is rightly theirs. BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS.
?Notes by Surgeon-Major A. V. Anderson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Western Registration District. In considering the spread of Bubonic Plague in the Thna District the most striking fact is the geographical distribution of the disease. The only tlukas showing indigenous cases are those on the sea-board, namely, Slsette, Bassein, Mhim, and Dahnu. In the Bhiwndi Taluka, Bhiwndi, Shelar, and Anjur all lie low on the banks of the creek, while in Kalyn Tluka, the only place where indigenous cases occurred, was the town of Kalyn itself on the shore of the Thna creek. No local cases occurred in any of the inland tlukas of Murbad, Shahpur, Vida, or Mokhda Petha, although imported cases were reported from all these, and many other imported cases in the outlying villages must have remained unreported judging from what had occurred in the towns and villages in which the disease became indigenous and could no longer be concealed. In the coast tlukas themselves, except in the immediate neighbourhood of Bombay, the towns and villages in which indigenous cases occurred lie west of the line drawn by the B. B. & C. I. Railway, that is, it was the coast towns and villages that have suffered. It is a notable fact that although imported cases have occurred all over the district, no indigenous case has been reported from any town or village lying more than five miles from the sea, or I should rather say from tidal waters; in other words, the disease became indigenous only in low-lying badly drained places with high subsoil water. With regard to the towns affected, Bndra and Kurla are practically suburbs of Bombay, and suffered equally with the adjoining parts of Bombay City. Thna, which is 14 miles from Bombay at the extreme north end of Bom- bay harbour, showed considerable resistance to the disease, the first imported case having occurred there on 8th October, while it was not till 9th February that the disease became indigenous, and even then the town escaped compara- tively lightly, only 191 cases having occurred in a population of 17,959. Thna is a very insanitary town with a scanty supply of drinking water. Kalyn, which is eighteen miles from Bombay, all along showed a remarkable power of resistance to the disease. Many imported cases occurred there and also 27 indigenous ones, several being only detected after death. It is possible that imported and indigenous cases occurred which not proving fatal escaped detection. The usual conditions required for the introduction of the disease were present, but the town practical- ly escaped untouched, even after some indigenous cases had occurred. Forty-nine imported and twenty-seven local cases occurred in a population of 12,608. The sanitation of Kalyn is defective, while the drinking water-supply is scanty. Bhiwndi, on the other hand, which lies about the same distance from Bombay as Kalyn, was quickly affected and suffered severely. The first imported case occurred on the 11th December and on the 24th December. The disease became indigenous in the town, only three imported cases having been previously reported. 485 cases with 430 deaths occurred in a population of 14,387. Bhiwndi is an insanitary town situated on the Bhiwndi creek and has an abundant water-supply and no drainage. All the other towns of the district which were severely affected, namely, Bassein, Agshi, Kelwa, Trpur, and Chinchni are situated on the sea-coast. The infective power of the plague poison appears to depend on local conditions, the one essential condition being a water-logged soil. B 1089
?2 With regard to the mode of conveyance of bubonic plague from place to place, it would appear that towns and villages remote from an infected centre become infected by human intercourse, while contiguous places frequently become infected by rats carrying and propagating the disease. The latter mode of infection is well seen in the history of the progress of the disease through Bndra, Pli, Chuim, Santa Cruz, and Joo, and also in the case of Old Kurla village which became infected by rats from New Kurla. In Bndra, which is practically a suburb of Bombay, the first local case occurred on 3rd December in a house in which dead rats had been found about one week before and the disease at once spread in this locality. On the same date another local case had occurred in another part of the town in a house where no rats had died. The disease did not spread in this locality, and it is possible that the infection had been caught elsewhere. In Pli dead rats were seen on the 6th or 7th of January, and the first case occurred on 13th January. In Chuim rats died in the beginning of February, and the first case occur- red on the 9th of February, although it was not reported till the 12th February. In Dnda in the same way dead rats were found in several houses prior to the outbreak of the disease on 11th February. The above four villages separated from each other by a distance of about half a mile are included in the Bndra Municipality. In Santa Cruz, two miles distant from Bndra, dead rats were found on 12th February, and on 15th February the two first cases occurred in the house in which the dead rats were found. In Joo, which is separated from Dnda by a creek, dead rats were found in a house about the 10th of April. The people thereupon removed to a shed for ten days and then returned to the house which had not been disinfected, and three days after their return the first case occurred in this house. It would appear that the Bndra rats spread the disease in the adjacent villages as they entirely disappeared from the town, and are only now, in the beginning of June, reappearing. Dead rats were in the same way discovered at an early stage of the local outbreak in the villages of Vela Prla, Andheri, Goregaon, and Padali, which form an almost continuous line of houses along the Bndra-Ghodbandar Road, the intervals between the various villages being at that time filled up by the sheds of Bombay refugees. The disease appears to have been carried along this line of road as it was carried in Bombay itself. In Old Kurla village, which is only separated from New Kurla town by less than half a mile of open fields, no case had occurred, though the disease was very prevalent in New Kurla during January, February, and March. On the 4th of April rats died in the house nearest New Kurla, and although that and some of the adjoining houses were vacated and disinfected, the first cases occurred in the village on 8th April. Here the presumption is that the rats came from New Kurla and carried the disease with them. In all other instances which I have investigated, we find a distinct history of the introduction of the disease by human intercourse. In most places as in Kurla, Bassein, Chembur, Trombay, Mald, Chinchni, Thna, Bhiwndi, Bhayndar, &c., we have a history of persons coming sick from an infected locality or falling sick a day or two after their arrival prior to the occurrence of local cases. In other instances we find the disease introduced by persons themselves in good health coming from an infected locality. In Agshi the first local case occurred in the person of a Shimpi woman, to whose house some friends from Bombay had come to live. None of these Bombay people were sick or were afterwards attacked.
?3 In Kelwa also the first local cases occurred in the person of two Shimpis to whose house some Shimpis from Bombay had come five days before. These Bombay people were in good health, and after staying three days they returned to Bombay. In both the above instances rats died in the houses after the arrival of the people from Bombay and before the persons living in the house were attacked. It would appear that rats are extremely susceptible to the disease, have a short incubation period, and propagate the disease locally. It is improbable that they intensify the poison, as in Mhim rats died in at least three different houses and no local cases occurred in the town. At Veswa a striking instance of the disease being carried by an apparently healthy person occurred. The first imported case at Veswa occurred on 30th January in the person of a Brhman who came sick from Bombay. The Brhman schoolmaster of Veswa visited this man while he was sick and attended his funeral on 31st January. The schoolmaster lived in the village Talti's house. On the 2nd February the Talti's nephew, who lived in this house, was attacked by plague, while the schoolmaster himself was not attacked till the 5th of February. In Marol also the first case occurred in a house to which a number of people had come from Bombay to attend a wedding. These people were in good health, and after staying some days they returned to Bombay in good health. Here also rats died in the house after the arrival of the Bombay people and before the first human occupant was attacked. Again in the village of Madhan, an isolated case occurred prior to the out- break there, in the person of a man to whose house a man from Bombay had come to live. Four or five days after this man's arrival rats died in the house and the people moved out into sheds. A day or two afterwards the local occupant of the house was attacked and died, while the Bombay man escaped.
?PLAGUE IN RANDER IN THE SURAT DISTRICT. Report to the Collector of Surat, by Mr. C. N. Seddon, I. C. S., Assistant Collector, in charge Chorsi Division. I have the honour to make the following brief report on the Rnder Plague. The first cases seem to have occurred last January. The disease was apparently brought from Bombay vi the Gikwdi village of Variv, where a good number of cases occurred. About 28th January I found that there had been some plague deaths at Rnder. The municipality thereupon appointed a sub-committee to take steps against the disease and voted Rs. 500 for expenses. Application was made to the Commissioner, N. D., for powers under Section 73 of Act VI of 1873. An isolated bungalow was adapted for segregation purposes. Arrangements were made to watch the entrances to the town and the railway station of Amroli. I was then transferred to the Olpd Division and Mr. Rand took over charge. Early in February allegations were made that indigenous plague cases were occurring. Mr. Rand made personal inquiries and the allegations were found to be true. The Ptil was severely reprimanded. By this time the Epidemic Diseases Act had become law. A European Inspector of Sanitation on Rs. 100 and three Prsis were appointed and a fresh site was chosen for a segregation camp. Mr. Rand being transferred to Poona, I took over charge again on 16th February. On 17th February a special general meeting of the municipality was held. The Plague Committee was authorized to spend the whole of the available balance. On 19th February I encamped at Rnder and remained there till 20th May. At this time cases had occurred almost entirely in three streets-Bhandri, Pkhali and Prekh Falias. Houses in which plague cases were known to have occurred were disinfected. The roof was partly removed and the earth floor was dug up and carted away. Bamboos and all kacha parts of the structure were also removed and burnt. The whole house was then thoroughly white- washed and the floor was sprinkled with carbolie powder. Except for the floor, the digging up of which I abandoned, this was the system of disinfection which was carried out almost to the end of plague operations. As after disinfection all houses were left open for a month, the two cleansers really employed were the sun and fresh air. Disinfection in this way is very effective. But it is also extremely destructive and is not one which I should now adopt. Fear of damage to his house tempts a man to conceal. It is, however, clear that it was the only system which I could then properly adopt, for it would never have done to have experimented in the dark while the plague was in proximity to the filthy city of Surat. Segregation was insisted on. There was never any real difficulty in carrying it out. The site selected in Mr. Rand's time contained a little bungalow, and three separate municipal sheds were also erected. The site and bungalow were most kindly given free by Mr. Mahammad Kasim Bharucha, a Bora Munici- pal Commissioner. Separate committees were allowed to build sheds for themselves within the limits of the segregation camp. High caste Hindus, Prsis and Mussalmns did so. All patients were allowed to have their own doctors if they liked. If, however, they preferred it, they could call in the Government Hospital Assistant or the Assistant Surgeon, Mr. Chunilal F. Dalal, L. M. & S. This latter gentleman's services were secured by the municipality. He was in charge of the segregation camp and he also did a good deal of other work. I shall have more to say about the doctors later on. To the rule that all plague patients should be brought to this segregation camp, one exception was made. The Mussalmns were allowed to build a separate shed apart for pardnishin women, the arrangements in which were subject to my approval. Both there and at the main camp proper arrangements for water, attendance, cleaning and guarding were made. With each sick person two attend- ants were allowed. The same two persons had to stay where they were till death or convalesence occurred. Their clothes were then thoroughly disinfected B 1240
?2 and they were allowed to go. At the camp there was always a supply of medi- cines, appliances, foods, disinfectants, &c. The sheds themselves were spacious and as comfortable as we could make them. But owing to their being cold during the nights of February and March and hot during the days of April, they were not really pleasant to the patients. I uow turn to the other arrangements in the town. All houses were ordered to be whitewashed by you. Extra vigilance was insisted on in the Sanitary De- partment of the Municipal staff which was also strengthened. Personally I do not believe in these measures, because I do not think there is any good in trying to rapidly clean up with the ordinary agencies, an old town sodden with the filth of centuries. Nor was it possible to insure a satisfactory and thorough limewashing. It was a different thing when I later on took in hand the town myself. Rewards were offered for information leading to the detection of plague cases. No such reward was ever claimed. The most vigilant inquiries were set on foot, through the Patil (who after his reprimand worked hard and behaved well), the Inspectors and friendly gentlemen. I may here mention that the European In- spector found the work more than he had bargained for, and I was forced to ask. him to resign. A Prsi from Ahmedabad was appointed in his place. The Mm- latdr of Chorsi, Mr. Bulakhidas Bapuji, and the Chief Constable were ordered to live at Rnder, and they did so until lately. Special vigilance was taken in the matter of disposing of plague corpses. In this matter as in others the Mahomedans were more difficult to deal with than the Hindus. Sheds were erected on the river bank to the north of the town for persons rendered temporarily homeless owing to ejection from plague-stricken houses. But there were two fatal defects in the arrangements made. It is easy of course to be wise after the event. But I am now writing a history of the disease. The plague gradually spread from the three streets to which it had been at first confined. The cases were few-two or three a day-and sometimes a couple of days would pass without a case being reported. But it was clear that the area affected was gradually extending. The Mchhis and Khrws of the Tewlawd were attacked. Isolated cases began to occur in Nishal Falia and near the Municipal Office. 1 turned the people of Bhandri, Pakhli and Prekh Falias out of the town. I subsequently turned out the inhabitants of Tewlawd. Several curious cases of death by miscarriage occurred. Several other sudden deaths were reported from certain usually harmless or prolonged diseases. I suspected the Hospital Assistant of helping to conceal cases. My suspicion deepened into conviction. I applied to you and you got him transferred. One of the fatal defects was removed. But though the defect was thus easily removed we had still to deal with its result-the habit of concealing cases. It was a critical time and stringent measures were necessary. Half a dozen persons suspected of concealing cases were prosecuted. They were convicted and heavily fined. There was practi- cally no further attempt at concealment. Up till now the plague had on the whole steadily increased. It never got really bad, but it constantly seemed to be on the point of doing so. I asked for the help of the sepoys of the 8th Bombay Infanfry, who were at Rnder. I turned out the whole of an area somewhat larger than that which had been hitherto touched by the plague-about one quarter of the town -and proceeded.to systematically clean it up with the help of the sepoys. The people had to live in mndvas outside the town. We built extra municipal shdes. All houses were emptied, their tiles were partly taken off and they were thoroughly whitewashed or treated with lotion. This work was to a large extent done by the people themselves. Where it was not done by them, the sepoys did it. The cleaning up and the airing were really thorough, and there were very few cases of plague after this in the town and none at all in the area that has been thus cleaned, though they continued to occur for some little time in the mndvas outside. Having cleaned the houses I decided to clean the people and their clothes. This was done by bathing and washing in solution  of  perchloride  of  mercury.
3 This disinfectant was chosen before I had heard of Dr. Dyson's success with it in treating houses. Whole castes were washed-Shrwaks, Suthrs, Dhobis, Mochis, Fakirs, sections of the Kunbi and Mussalmn populace. The results were excellent. The sepoys were not kept very long. Their work was soon over and they returned to Baroda. The people evicted were gradually allowed to return to their houses and Rnder very soon wore its ordinary aspect. The second fatal defect which I referred to was connected with the action taken or rather want of action regarding the relations of the plague-stricken- the "probably infected." They were at first not controlled in any way. Before I came to Rnder I believe the point was raised how far it would be possible to segregate these people, and Mr. Rand was against making the attempt on the ground that it was practically impossible. It would certainly have been very difficult. But there can be no doubt that our earlier measures were rendered futile by the neglect to prevent the spread of contagion in this way. It was perception of this fact which made me so anxious on every occasion to turn the people out of the town, and it was this which led me to adopt the wholesale disinfection of clothes. There is one thing which I must say. After being a month or so in Rnder I could naturally do things without serious opposition which could not have been thought of in the beginning. The total number of deaths from plague was 141 out of 157 persons attacked. The bulk of the victims was Hindu. The following table shows what happened:- Caste. Number of cases. Number of deaths. Caste. Number of cases. Number of deaths.    Hindus-contd.   Mussalmns 11 7 Dhobis 1 1    Mchhis 11 10 Hindus-   Bhandris 13 13 Shvak Wnias 42 40 Khrws 6 5 Kunbis ... 17 15 Other Hindus 17 17 Brhmans   20 17 Prsis 1  Ghnchis 8 7 Dheds 3 3 Mochis  ... 3 2    Suthrs ... 4 4 Total 157 141 It will be seen that very few Mussalmns were affected. This however was due to the fact that the disease originated at the end of the town opposite to where they live and gradually spread towards the centre. But it never reached the Mussalmn side where there were only a few isolated cases. Shrvaks suffered very heavily. These are people of incredibly dirty habits largely owing to their religious prejudice against destroying animal life. I am afraid that a good deal of animal life must have been destroyed when their clothes were disinfected. Of the persons who died from plague 55 died in their houses or elsewhere before being segregated, 86 died in the segregation hospitals, and 17 recovered and were discharged cured from the hospitals. Of the whole number 77 males and 80 females were attacked, of whom 71 males died and 70 females died. Mr. Chunilal Dalal states that he treated* 38 persons and of them 16 recovered and that 74 persons were treated in the general hospital by their own doctors and all died. Besides these, 5 women were treated in the pardnishin hospital, of whom 3 died and 2 recovered. Mr. Dalal's method of treatment was, I believe, dissection or excision of the gland and maintenance of the patient's strength by means of stimulants and good food. The measures taken for repression of the outbreak were naturally unpopular. The people were on the whole, however, very docile and amenable. The most * There is something wrong with Mr. Dalal's figures I fear. I think only 14 of his patients recovered and 2 women in the Mussalmn segregation place were under Mr. Dalal's treatment. Mr. Dalai has probably counted the few cases which came from Adjan.-C. N. S.
?4 pleasant to deal with were the sailor folk Mchhis and Khrws whose calling renders them accustomed to discipline, The most difficult to manage were the Mussalmns, whose religious customs, observances and prejudices seem to stand in the way of everything. All measures that are necessary are also 'harm.' There was slight disturbance one day in consequence of an order I gave. It was however rapidly quelled by the arrest of few men, who were charged with disobedience to the order before the District Magistrate. The case was subsequently withdrawn, and the withdrawal no doubt had a good effect. There was no real opposition to segregation though everybody disliked it. The burial rites of the Mussalmns were always a difficulty. Yet it seemed to me that most difficulties could be got over by listening to what the people had to say and talking to them patiently and in a friendly manner. They did not agree, but they were pleased and mollified. They could hardly be expected to agree, for their fatalistic creed taught them that the plague was decreed by Providence and that the hour of each man's death was unalterably determined. I received considerable help from several native gentlemen. Sardr Bahdur Shekh Amir was always ready to back me up. Utamram Jivanram, a well-known and well-to-do native doctor, gave me a good deal of assistance, and his knowledge of his town and his good nature were most helpful. He offered a bungalow for the segregation of high caste Hindu patients. Mr. Mahomed Kasim Bharucha, besides giving the site for the general segregation hospital free, was often present at the house disinfection and took a great deal of interest in it. Mr. Manekji Nasarvanji also did what he could to help. On the other hand I am bound to say that some of the Municipal Commis- sioners, notably the most loudly-voiced members, failed to give me the aid I expected. Of the officials, Ro Sheb Bulakhidas Bapuji, the Chorsi Mmlatdr, really deserves high praise. He was indefatigable and his position exposed him to all sorts of unpopularity and underhand attack. All sections of the police did excellent work, especially the sepoys. The Patil worked hard and well after his first mistake. The new Hospital Assistant, Mr. Hormasji Edalji, was perfectly trustworthy and also worked hard. Mr. Chunilal Dalal, the Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Segregation Camp, was (as he himself says) "very honest." He and the Hospital Assistant worked together most satisfactorily, though there must have been great temptations and no little unpopularity. If Government wish to recognise plague work, I think the gentlemen whose names I have given deserve it. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, C. N. SEDDON, Assistant Collector and President, Rnder Municipality,
?Notes by Surgeon-Captain T. E. Dyson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner in charge of Plague Operations in the City of Bulsr. BULSR TOWN. (a)  Origin and Spread. 1.    Bulsr, a port at the mouth of the Auranga River, is situated on the main line of the B. B. & C. I. Railway about 120 miles  north of Bombay, and contains a population of 12,999  souls.     Hitherto enjoying  a  reputation  for healthiness, the town was largely resorted to by fugitives from Bombay during the months of November and December 1896 and January 1897, and there is evidence to show that these visitors introduced the plague into Bulsr. 2.    The first recorded case in the town occurred in November 1896, when a Hindu weaver, a native of Bulsr, but living and working in Bombay, came to Bulsr on November 22nd, and died in his house the same day.    No other cases were reported for a month, until on December 22nd a grain-dealer arrived from Bombay and died in his house in Bulsr on the same day. 3.    Imported cases from Bombay were subsequently recorded as follows:- 3.    A Prsi girl on January 2nd, 1897. 4.    A Hindu weaver on January 7th, 1897. 5.    A carpenter on January 18th, 1897. 6.    A Prsi on January 31st, 1897. 7.    A Prsi on February 8th, 1897. 8.    A Mrwdi on February 14th, 1897. It should be noted that, with the exception of Nos. 6 and 8, all these people recovered or died in houses, acting as foci for the development and spread of plague in half a dozen places in the town. 4.    On February 7th, 1897, the  first local case was recorded in the person of a labourer, who probably contracted the disease while at work in the grain merchants'  quarter,  where it  will be   seen  plague was undoubtedly  present, though unrecognized, for a month before this date. 5.    The average monthly death-rate of the town is 35, and a reference to the death register shows the following figures:-            Deaths. November 1896 ...  ... ...  35 December 1896 ... ... ... 37 January 1897 ... ... ... 44 February 1897 ... ... ... 115 It has been stated that 4 cases only of plague were registered in January, of which 3 died; and from a casual glance at the death register it does not seem as if the disease had gained any firm footing in the town at this time. 6.    However, a detailed examination of the 44 deaths recorded in January shows that 16 occurred in the Chipvd and 4 in the adjacent Khumbhrvd and Golvd, three quarters where the epidemic first seriously attacked the town. There is little doubt that a proportion of these deaths were due to plague, and the entries of "Fever," "High Fever" and "Lung Disease" as causes of death, lend support to this view. 7.    As no serious preventive measures were adopted before February, it is easy to understand how the disease, practically undisturbed for at least a month, was able to strike deep root in the town,  and the subsequent history of the epidemic  shows  that full  advantage  was taken of this month's undisturbed possession. 8.    As shown above, the germs of plague must have been introduced into half a dozen quarters of the town in January and the early days of February, B 1087-1
?2 but in only one quarter, on the eastern side of the town, the grain merchants' quarter, did it take root at this time. 9.    This was probably due to the infection of the large colonies of rats to be found where grain is stored.    In my opinion these rats probably became infected through the excreta and dejecta of human beings, and they in turn conveyed the infection from house to house. 10.    This conclusion is strengthened by the fact that, as previously shown, plague  was introduced by fugitives from Bombay in November and December 1896, while the first appearance of dead rats is stated to have been in January. Moreover, numbers of dead rats were found in the grain quarter at the end of February and beginning of March-rats in all stages of decomposition, perfectly fresh bodies and dried-up remains of skin and bone, which latter must have lain in the houses for at least a month.    It will be seen later on that the spread of plague by rats has an important bearing on the question of house disinfection. 11.    The epidemic spread westward over the town, until by the end of March every quarter was attacked. 12.    The accompanying Chart A*shows the rise and fall of the epidemic from the time it was officially recognized as indigenous in the town, and it will be seen that the period of greatest intensity was from March 8th to April 11th. The decline after April 11th will be shown to have followed the progress of the disinfecting operations in the town. The records of temperature during the epidemic  show a mean maximum of 82 F. and a mean minimum of 72 F. (b) Plague Preventive Operatians. Precautions with regard to Travelers.  13.    There are three ways of access to Bulsr-rail, sea and road. In December last a medical inspection of passengers from the Bombay  side was begun, but not by all trains, and it was only since February last that passengers by all trains from  the Bombay side were subject to medical examination. 14.     The medical inspection of arrivals by sea was not begun  until  the middle of February.    There was no inspection of travellers by road either to or from the town.    As the epidemic subsided in the town, arrangements were made to prevent, as far as possible, any further introduction of plague. Passengers by every train alighting at Bulsr were subject to medical ex- amination. The crews of all boats coming up the creek were similarly examined, and guards of military or police sepoys were posted night and day at each entrance to the town, with instructions to detain any person who appeared to be ill for medical examination. Segregation of sick and healthy. 15.    Previous to my arrival in Bulsr sanction had been granted the various  communities to erect their own hospitals on approved  sites,  and Hindu, Mahomedan  and  Prsi   hospitals were in course of erection. 16.     In addition to these there were the municipal  and  railway hospitals. The arrangement and management of the caste hospitals was left to the separate communities, subject to general supervision by the Plague authority or a medical officer deputed by him; and although the system entailed  increased work on a staff already hard-pressed, yet this was more than compensated in the diminu- tion of concealed cases of plague. 17.     It soon became evident that the people had no objection to the segre- gation of their sick, provided the place of segregation was conveniently situated, and perfect freedom in the matter of treatment and attendants was allowed. 18.     At a later period, when the Mahomedan quarters were severely affected, permission was given for the erection of two more hospitals convenient to the houses and burial-grounds. * Not printed.
?3 So that, in a small town of little more than 3,000 houses, seven segregation hospitals were in use by the end of March. The style of shed built as a hospital was primitive in the extreme; but the rapid spread of the epidemic, added to want of labour, gave no time for the erection of more elaborate structures. Sheds for the segregation of the healthy were also provided; but as neither power nor means were available to enforce segregation in any one place, these sheds were not much used at first. 19. However, as many people willingly left their houses to camp in sheds of their own more conveniently situated than the municipal sheds, every en- couragement was given them. House Disinfection.  20.    During the first month, i.e., up to the last week in March, the routine   practice  of  disinfection was as follows:- (1)    Fumigation for three hours with sulphur and tar which, although probably of little use in the majority of houses, was a source of confidence to the labourers. (2)    Removal and burning of rubbish.    In some houses this operation took two or three days. (3)    Disinfection of floors, furniture,  clothing,  &c.,   with chloride of lime. (4)    Lime-washing of the entire building. (5)    Opening up the house to sun and air for a month. This plan proved perfectly successful, as shown by the fact that no fresh cases of plague occurred in the houses so treated after the return of the occupants. 21.    It had, however, several disadvantages:- (1)    It took up too much time.    The only labourers available were Kaliparj people, recruited by force from the 'neighbouring villages; and these men, absolutely untrained, had to be paid the wages of skilled work- men to prevent them decamping in a body.     It was impossible to get together more than 150 labourers on an average, who had to  build sheds for the sick and healthy and  disinfect and clean houses, and consequently the work in the town fell hopelessly into arrears. (2)    It was expensive in labour and material. (3)    It necessitated a prolonged evacuation of the houses.    This, in my opinion, was the greatest drawback, as sufficient shed accommodation could not be put up, nor were there any means of keeping the people in the sheds. Many people put up temporary shelters in their own yards, but more sought shelter with relatives or friends,  thereby conveying the germs of disease from one quarter of the town to another. 22. Some simpler plan of attack was necessary in order to combat the rapid extension of the disease, and therefore, acting on the belief that the virus of plague is conveyed from house to house chiefly by human beings and rats, it was decided to try some simple and efficient disinfectant only and abandon all more elaborate operations. Corrosive sublimate had been used with good results in other places as a preliminary disinfectant, and it was resolved to trust to it only, believing that, if it was effective in destroying the virus of plague, no further treatment of a house would be necessary. The first quarter of the town to be experimented on was the Nana Taivd containing 141 houses, of which ? were occupied by about 300 Mahomedans. This quarter was badly affected at the time, and all the people vacating their houses moved into sheds. Every house was then washed down inside and out with a solution of corro- sive sublimate (1 to 1,000) by means of hand pumps. Every article of furniture, bedding and clothing found in the houses was similarly disinfected.
?4 On completion of the houses, the sheds and their occupants, with all their bedding and clothing, were treated in the same way, and although this camp, at the end of the operation, seemed as if it had been drenched by a shower of rain, by evening everything was as dry as before the washing. The disinfection of this quarter was completed between March 29th and April 4th, and the people were allowed to reoccupy their houses on April 11th. 23. A reinforcement of 200 labourers from Bombay arrived on April 4th, and with their help other quarters of the town were rapidly taken in hand and subjected to the same treatment, with fire engines aiding the hand pumps ; but as the first experiment was still under trial, the precaution was taken to follow up the disinfection with lime-washing. After the Mahomedans of the Nana Taivd had occupied their houses for a week without any recurrence of disease, and the experiment had thus proved successful, all lime-washing was stopped, and no further treatment of houses was adopted beyond disinfection with corrosive sublimate. 24.    At a later stage, when it was possible to undertake the disinfection of streets and quarters before they became completely infected, it was not found necessary to disturb the occupants except during the operation of disinfection and for the few hours during which the houses were drying. 25.    The following statistics will give some idea of the results obtained :- Nana Taivd contains 141 houses, of which 50 were known to be infected. Two-thirds of the houses were occupied by about 300 people. Total number of cases of plague ...   93 Do.                do.       deaths    68 Disinfection begun March 29th, when daily average of  cases for pre- vious week was ...     4 Disinfection completed April 4th ;  daily average of cases from April 4th to 11th      5 After April 11th, 3 cases occurred, one of whom was an attendant on a sick relative, and another probably contracted the disease in another part of the town. Mota Taivd contains 151 houses, of which 58 were known to be infected. Total number of cases of plague    128 Do.                do.        deaths    98 At the time of disinfection, April 13th, the daily  average  of   cases was ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  5 After disinfection, the daily average of cases was 1 Nine cases in all occurred after disinfection was completed. Ghanchivad.-In the affected  area there are 92 houses,  in 19  of which cases of plague had occurred. In these 92 houses there were about 300 people. Total number of cases of plague ...                . . .                 . . .  30 Do.                do.        deaths . . .                . . .                 . . . 24 There was an average of 1 case daily up to the time disinfection was com- pleted, while after disinfection only 4 cases occurred. Khatrivd.-There are 180 houses in the infected area, in 43 of which cases of plague had occurred. Only ? of these houses were occupied by about 300 people. Total number of cases of plague     60 Up to time when disinfection was completed, April 17th, the daily average number of cases was      2 After disinfection for week ending April  24th    1 Subsequently 7 cases occurred. A reference to Chart A will show most graphically the continuous fall after disinfection with corrosive sublimate was begun. The Nana and Mota Taivds were deeply infected areas.
?5 In the Nana Taivd, out of 61 deaths 33 occurred among people who died in their houses after an illness of from 12 to 24 hours, and after every one had moved out into sheds, living practically in the open air, 15 cases occurred. In the Mota Taivd, out of 98 deaths 50 occurred after such short periods of illness that there was no time to remove the sick to hospital, and 31 cases occurred after the houses had been vacated. In these two quarters it was deemed advisable to have the houses vacated during the process of disinfection, so as to reduce the number of subsequent operations as much as possible. The Ghanchivd, which adjoins the Mota Taivd, was saved from any seri- ous infection, by rapid disinfection before the disease had got a hold, and here the inhabitants were not turned out of their houses. A similar result was attained in the Khatrivd, and without disturbing the occupants, and although subsequent cases occurred, necessitating a second or even third disinfection of one or two houses, the disease never reached epidemic proportions. In calculating the number of cases which occurred in any quarter, after disinfection had been completed, it is only right that a proportion should be deducted as representing those persons already infected at the time. 26. This plan of disinfection only seems to me worthy of a more extended trial should opportunity occur :- (1)    It is simple, cheap and efficient.    It means   a saving of time, labour and material, and further experience will probably show that, where corrosive sublimate is  used, a  weaker solution (1 to  2,000) is sufficiently strong for the purpose. (2)    It ensures almost complete immunity from infection to labourers. Before this method of disinfection was introduced, 12 cases of plague were known to have occurred among the labourers;  while afterwards  no cases occurred among the men who were solely engaged in disinfection. (3)    It entails a minimum of discomfort  and inconvenience on the occupants of a house. Corrosive sublimate possesses certain advantages over other disinfectants which appear to me to specially recommend it. It is cheaper than other disin- fectants. It is odourless, a great recommendation to natives. It is non-volatile, and therefore there is a greater chance of a permanently good effect being produced. Other suitable disinfectants would probably give equally good results, and it is not the disinfecting material, but the system I would specially bring to notice, a system whereby large areas can be rapidly attacked. 27.    In any disinfecting operations on account of plague it is  well  to bear in mind that people may carry the  virus of plague  to a house  and may also become infected from a house into which the germs of disease have  been con- veyed by rats. 28.    There are thus two factors to deal with-a human population,  above ground, whose movements can be more or less controlled, and an animal popula- tion, under ground, whose wanderings cannot be checked. 29.    Consequently it is not sufficient to follow   in the train   of the disease, disinfecting only where the disease shows itself by   its human   victims.    The attack should be directed from  all  sides and   over wide areas, thereby saving many houses and families from infection. Again, bedding and clothing seem to play an important part in the convey- ance of infection. This was well illustrated among the Mahomedans, among whom 46 cases occurred after they had vacated their houses. In several villages, too, separate communities were attacked after they had been living in sheds for some days, no doubt the results of infection from bedding and clothing. Therefore special attention to bedding and clothing is a matter of great importance. B 1087-2
?Notes by Surgeon-Captain T. E. Dyson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Gujara't Registration District. BULSA'R TA'LUKA ORIGIN AND SPREAD. 1.    Before proceeding to the  consideration of the spread of plague in the tluka, it is advisable to have a clear understanding of the terms "imported" and "local," as used in connection with plague. 2.    The former term is taken to include all cases occurring among the non-resident population of a village, while the latter includes cases occurring among the inhabitants of a village, although the disease may have been, strictly speaking, imported in both cases. This definition is purely artificial, but is necessary in order to clearly dis- tinguish between an outbreak of plague caused, for instance, by fugitives from an infected place, and one, equally due to importation, the result of intercourse between the inhabitants of a healthy and an infected village, 3.    There are 95 villages in the tluka of Bulsr, from 38 of which cases of plague were returned, making up a total of 703 cases and 522 deaths. Out of 703 cases, 552 were local and 151 imported, 142 being imported from Bulsr. Of 552 local cases, 281 occurred in one village and 246 in five villages. After the general exodus from the town, it was found that about 3,000 Bulsr residents were encamped in 51 villages of the tluka, the majority being camped within a radius of 5 or 6 miles from Bulsr. In 15 only of these 51 villages were cases of plague reported among the Bulsr people, while in only two of them is there any evidence that an epidemic of plague followed this importation. These two villages, Abrama and Tithal, are within two miles of Bulsr. In Abrama the first two cases of plague were imported from Bulsr in the persons of a Dubla and a Dhodia, who died respectively on the 22nd and 30th March. 4.    At the end of March dead rats were found in the Soutars' and Lohrs' houses, and the occupants promptly vacated their houses and went into sheds. Plague broke out among these people on April 14th, and in all 8 cases occurred, of which 7 were in two families. Subsequently dead rats were found in the houses of Brhmins, who left their houses at once, and among them also, although living in sheds, 11 cases of plague occurred. 5.    In Tithal imported cases of plague were reported on February 26th, April 12th and 28th, and between 8th and 12th of May dead rats were found in some Kolis' houses. Local cases among Dublas and Kolis were reported on May 8th, 12th, 22nd and 29th, and June 3rd. It is presumed the rats became infected through the first imported cases of plague and in turn carried the infection to the houses, among the occupants of which local cases subsequently occurred. A complete chain of evidence is impossible, and the possibility of a later infection by intercommunication with Bulsr cannot be excluded. This immunity  of  the  villages from infection by fugitives from Bulsr admits of explanation in the fact that the villages of the tluka are for the most part composed of scattered hamlets, affording abundant space for  strangers to encamp without encroaching on the inhabited areas. B 1088
?2 Moreover, the Ptils and villagers were warned against giving shelter in their houses to any persons coming from infected areas. Unfortunately the same precautions were not taken to prevent people from healthy villages, especially the labouring classes, visiting the centres of in- fection and thus carrying back to their houses the virus of plague. To this cause must be attributed the spread of plague in the villages. 6. Of the 38 villages affected with plague, in 27 the first cases were im- ported, and in 12 of these there was no spread of the disease, and no local cases occurred. In 11 villages all the cases were of local origin. There are thus 15 + 11 = 26 villages in which a local outbreak of plague, to a greater or less extent, occurred. It has been stated above that in only two of these villages, Abrama and Tithal, is there any evidence to show that the local outbreak was in any way connected with people coming from Bulsr. Omitting these two villages, concerning which details have already been given, there remain 24 villages about which some explanation of the entrance of plague is necessary, and careful enquiry proves conclusively that in the majority of these villages the inhabitants themselves were responsible for the introduc- tion of the disease either from Bulsr or some other centre of infection. With regard to 16 out of these 24 villages the evidence is clear that plague was introduced by some of the inhabitants visiting plague-infected places, while in 8 the evidence is doubtful, and in 5 of these 8 villages it is very doubtful of the cases reported were really plague. Labourers, some of whom were engaged in plague work in Bulsr, were responsible for the introduction of plague into 7 out of 16 villages. Out of a total of 552 local cases of plague, 400 occurred in three villages:- Magod   ... ... ... 281 Bhadeli Jaga Lala ... ... ... 64 Kosumba  ... ... ... 55       ---       400       --- And the fisherman class in each of these villages was most severely affected. 7.    There are one or two  peculiarities about these  fishermen which may to some extent account for the deep and widespread infection. Their houses are well adapted to serve as breeding grounds for the plague germ, for as a rule each house has only one door, and no window openings, while between the rafters and the tiles is spread a thick covering of grass to keep out all damp. There is thus a minimum of ventilation and almost complete darkness even at midday, two conditions under which the plague germ flourishes. Again, the fishermen as a class are well-to-do, have large families, in many cases several families occupy one house, and they accumulate bedding and cloth- ing to an extent seldom seen in an ordinary Hindu house. The virus of plague, introduced into these houses, would rapidly spread and infect all the bedding and clothing, so that it is easy to understand how, as actually happened, the epidemic continued for a time unabated, after the houses had been vacated and then people had taken to sheds, carrying their infected bedding and clothing with them. The possibility of the introduction of plague into the fishing hamlets by sea has not been overlooked; but inquiry into the origin of the first cases and an examination of the register of all boats' crews landing at Bulsr lends no support to this view. Moreover, a strict quarantine of 8 days was imposed on all boats coming from infected parts. 8.    The first  outbreak in Kosumba is  interesting as  showing how plague, once introduced into a village, can   become epidemic through the agency of rats. The first local case in this village occurred in the  person of a Hajm's wife who contracted the disease in Bulsr.
?3 She was attacked on March 8th and died in her house on March 14th. Be- tween March 20th and 24th dead rats were found in several of the Soutrs' houses, whereupon the whole quarter was evacuated, and the occupants camped in the field. The first case of plague occurred among the Soutrs on March 29th after they had been a week in sheds, and between this date and May 6th 31 cases were reported. In this instance also the vehicle of infection was probably the bedding and clothing. This theory is offered as a probable explanation of the origin of plague in Kosumba as in the two villages of Abrama and Tithal above mentioned. That an epidemic among rats preceded the outbreak among the people is certain, but the origin of the epidemic among rats is doubtful, and the theory here put for- ward admits of no direct proof. Plague was present in the tluka of Bulsr from the end of January to the first week in June, but prevailed in epidemic form from the middle of March to the middle of May. 9. Chart B shows the progress of plague in the tluka. Up to the beginning of March all the cases of plague in the tluka were imported from Bombay or Bulsr, but from March 1st the disease appeared locally in the villages, but in only 8 villages did the disease attain epidemic proportions, all these villages being within a radius of five miles from Bulsr. B.-Plague preventive operations. 10. Hired labour was not available in the villages, and the work of disin- fection had to be entrusted to house-owners themselves or to the police. Consequently the same thoroughness could not be ensured in the villages as in the town. The inhabitants of plague stricken villages, however, helped to check the spread of plague by readily vacating their houses on the first appearance of disease and, with few exceptions, offered no objections to, and with their own hands often carried out, the proposed measures of disinfection. Chief reliance was at first placed on prompt evacuation of houses and opening of them up to light and air, followed by limewashing, before re-occu- pation was allowed; and where these measures were promptly carried out there was no great spread of disease. At a later period, when disinfection by corrosive sublimate was introduced into the town, similar measures were adopted in the villages; but Jeye's Fluid was substituted for corrosive sublimate as no accurate measurments of ingre- dients are necessary in the use of Jeye's Fluid, the only instructions necessary being to mix sufficient of the Jeye's Fluid with water to form a milky solution, which will be strong enough for all purposes. Disinfection with Jeye's Fluid was begun in the tluka during the first week in April. Segregation of sick and healthy. 11. As before stated, the people of the villages willingly and promptly left their houses on the first appearance of plague, and showed equal eagerness in segregating all sick persons, so much so that in many cases the slightest symptom of indisposition became a pretext for isolation. With such anxiety on the part of the people to check any spread of plague, all idea of a central or a group of central hospitals was abandoned, and every village and hamlet was allowed separate segregation sheds. It was found that isolation of the sick at a distance of even 20 or 30 yards from the healthy answered every purpose, and deprived the most obstinate of any excuse for concealment of disease. C.-Medical Aspects. The disease presented the same features in the tluka as in the town, and some of the last cases which occurred were characterized by the same severity as during the height of the epidemic.
?4 The sick received little or no treatment medically beyond the exhibition of a few household remedies, and the death-rate was 74 per cent. compared with 78 per cent. in the town. The outbreak among the Soutrs of Kosumba village, which has already been alluded to, presented certain features worthy of note. The disease was of a mild type characterized by slight fever of two or three days' duration, and the formation of buboes, chiefly in the groin. Fully three-fourths of the 31 cases which occurred were of this type, and during one visit to the village I found two boys about 12 years of age, with buboes in the groin, whose fever had been so slight as to escape observation, and they had not been recognized as cases of plague. I am indebted to the Assistant Surgeon, Bulsr, for the statistics recorded under the medical aspects of plague.
?Extract from Notes by Surgeon-Major K. S. Nariman, Civil Surgeon, Surat, regarding Plague in the City of Surat. The first case of plague occurred in a Mahomedan boy, about 15 years of age, who was intercepted at the Railway station by the Medical Inspector and brought to the Contagious Disease Wards of the Civil Hospital on the 8th December 1896. He was a resident of Bombay and lived at Khra Kuwa. The boy had contracted the disease in Bombay. It was of eight days' duration. The symptoms were very mild and he was progressing very favour- ably, temperature having gone down to 996 and pulse 98; but all of a sudden on the third day of admission, as he was sitting up to drink some sodawator, he felt faint and dropped down dead. This was the first reported imported case. The last case was indigenous and occurred on the 11th May. Between 8th December 1896 and 11th May 1897 (a period of about five months) in all 114 cases were reported, exclusive of 13 under observation and discharged cured. Of the 114 cases 49 were imported and 65 indigenous. From 8th December 1896 to 21st February 1897 all the cases, 33 in number, were returned as imported. The first reported indigenous case occurred at Shpore Nran Tekra in a Brhmin boy, who was taken to the Segregation Ward of the Civil Hospital on the 21st February, where he died on the same day. On the same day another Brhmin boy, living in the neighbourhood of the first case, was taken to the Prakh Dharmshla, where he died on the following day (22nd). The father of the first case was attacked on the 22nd and died in the Prakh Dharmshla on the following day. A younger brother was attacked on the 24th and died on the 27th February. Thus between the 21st and 24th February three persons of the same family, father and two sons, and one person living in their neighbourhood, in all four persons, were attacked and they all succumbed to the disease. It is said that dead rats were found in this locality, but the family had not come in contact with any fugitives from Bombay. As soon as the first three cases were attacked with plague at Shpore, they were taken to another locality called Ambji's Chakla to escape detection, and, consequently, the houses in both the localities in which they had stayed were thoroughly disinfected, with the result that no fresh cases occurred there. The next place of infection was Nnpura Mchhivd, whence three children of the fisherman caste, two brothers and one sister, were brought to the Civil Hospital on the 25th February. Of these one died on the 27th February and the remaining two were discharged cured on the 11th March. On enquiry it appears that these children had come to Surat with their mother from Rnder, where the disease was then prevalent. The hut at Nn- pura in which the family had lived being just behind the sub-jail and being quite katcha, was completely destroyed, and, as a result, no fresh case has up to this time occurred in that locality. The woman was given Rs. 15 on the spot as compassionate allowance, and she was provided with the necessary bamboos and tiles to rebuild her hut. On the next day, that is, 26th February, Rudherpura, a place chiefly inhabited by fishermen, Darjis (tailors) and other low class people, appeared to be affected. On that day four fishermen were found dead in their houses. They appeared well nourished. On carefully examining their bodies no buboes could be seen. On carefully searching the locality the same day a fisherwoman was found suffering from plague. She had a bubo in the right armpit and her temperature had gone up to 102; she was removed to the Prakh Dharmshla, where she expired the next day (27th). B 1086
?2 Another fisherman was again found dead in the same locality the next morning (27th). Thus in two days five persons of the fisherman class were found dead in their houses and one found suffering from plague in Rudherpura locality. Some families of fishermen from Rudherpura went to live in the fields at Salbtpura Mahomadbg when they saw that the locality was infected, but here also they were not free from the disease, probably they had taken the germs of the disease with them. For on the 3rd March three of them were found dead in the fields and two were found ill; the latter were taken to the Prakh Dharm- shla, where they died on the next day. In the same locality (Rudherpura) a Darji boy was found dead on the following day, 28th February, and his mother was attacked with plague on the 3rd and expired on the 6th March, while his father, who was sentenced to simple imprisonment for not giving information of plague case occurring in his house, was attacked with plague in the jail on the 4th and died in the hospital on the following day. On the 5th mother of the last was taken ill and she also suc- cumbed to the disease the next day. Thus within a period of one week, that is, from 28th February to 6th March, four members of the same Darji family, viz., a boy, his mother, father and grand- mother, fell victims to the disease. Again in the same locality, on the 6th March a Pardeshi girl aged six years was attacked with the disease, and her brother, a boy four years of age, on the following day; both were taken to the Prakh Dharmshla Segregation Hospital, where the girl died on the 12th April, and the boy was discharged cured on the 9th April. The last case in Rudherpura was on the 17th March; a Pardeshi girl aged 13 was attacked and expired on the same day. As the epidemic thus appeared to be chiefly confined to Rudherpura locality, by the orders of the District Magistrate all the houses in that locality, about 79 in number, were vacated, and holes were made in the roofs of these houses by removing a number of tiles. The houses were allowed to be re-occupied after one month, but not a single case occurred after the re-occupation of the houses. Besides Rudherpura two other localities, viz., Sayadvd, Mchhivd and Asurbeg Dhervd, where in the course of a couple of days more than two or three cases had occurred, were ordered to be vacated in the beginning of May. From the former locality 22 houses and the latter 12 houses were vacated. They have been re-occupied since, but there has been no recurrence of the disease in these quarters. Gopipura, Haripura, Mahidharpura and Rugnthpura were also affected, but the cases were few in each locality and scattered over a very large area, not more than two or three cases occurring in any particular street.
?HISTORY OF THE BUBONIC PLAGUE IN AHMEDNAGAR, WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE MEASURES TAKEN TO PREVENT THE SPREAD OF THE DISEASE. Mortality from Plague in Nagar Town and District. There has practically been no bubonic plague in the town or district of Ahmednagar, except some 45 imported cases which arrived from infected centres, and which, owing per- haps in some measure to the precautions which were taken as soon as they were discovered, were happily not followad by any out- break of the epidemic. It is true that three local cases are included in the table of mortality from plague given in Appendix I attached to this report. These cases were reported from Nimbral, in Akola tluka, where two imported cases were brought from Bombay. The deceased were, it is believed, relatives of the plague-stricken persons who came from Bombay. But owing to the remote situation of the scene of these attacks, information was not received concerning them till some time after they occurred; and the particulars since ascertained do not show how far the circumstances of the cases justify their being classed as local. Apart from these three deaths, 45 cases were recorded, of which 32 proved fatal. More than half of these patients, viz., 25, were at- tacked within the limits of Ahmednagar City, of whom 10 recovered under treatment and 15 succumbed to the disease. Surgeon-Major Stevenson is preparing for the medical authorities a record of these cases, and will no doubt deal fully with the technical aspects of the disease in so far as they could be observed in this district from the imported cases which occurred. It will therefore be sufficient if this account is restricted to a description of the pre- cautionary measures adopted in the town and district from the time when the risk of plague spreading to these parts was first apprehended. Precautionary measures in Nagar Town. 2     Khn Sheb Edulji Rustomji, the Vice-President of the Ahmednagar Municipality, has recorded in two very full reports the various steps which were taken at Ahmednagar by the Municipality either spontaneously or in re- sponse to suggestions from the local authorities. I propose to summarize the substance of these communications, supplementing portions with notes on points such as the working of the quarantine arrangements, which were outside the scope of municipal management, and the like, and completing the record by a short description of the measures adopted simultaneously at places in the district other than the Head-quarter town. In the present state of medical knowledge concerning the causes and circumstances leading to an outbreak of bubonic plague, it would perhaps be going too far to suggest that the measures adopted in this district prevented the spread of the disease from Bombay and Poona to Ahmednagar by means of infected passengers by road and rail. The assertion may, however, be hazarded that the steps taken appreciably diminished the risks of such a misfortune; and it must in consequence be admitted that the Ahmednagar Municipality have thus deserved much credit for the attitude which they adopted both in originating measures of defence, and in seconding such efforts as were made by the authorities to avert the spread of infection. Special powers taken by the Ahmednagar Municipal- lity. 3.    In the month of October  1896, the attention of the Nagar Munici- pality was drawn to the unusual mortality in Mn \ill\vi, the scene of the outbreak in Bombay, and they decided that it was desirable to take immediate pre- cautions against the importation of the disease by rail. The preliminary but necessary step was therefore taken of applying to Government under Section 73 of Act VI of 1873 for special powers, and sanc- tion to the same was duly received by telegram on October 17th. Examination of arrivals at Nagar Railway Station. 4.    The Municipality thereupon appointed a Hospital Assistant to examine at Ahmednagar Railway Station all passengers alighting from the trains. A plague hospital was simultaneously provided in the Siddhi Bgh, outside B 1090-1
?2 Opening of a Special Plague Hospital. Erection of a second Plague Hospital. the city walls, and placed in immediate charge of a pensioned Hospital Assistant under the direction of the Civil Surgeon. The hos- pital building was a permanent double-storied struc- ture standing in a large compound, which at once afforded comparative isolation and also permitted a rapid increase at any time in the available accommodation by the erection of temporary buildings within the enclosure. The original building could hold some 12 or 15 patients. A few out-houses at the back of the premises were adapted to afford accommoda- tion to the families of patients when the detention of the sufferer's relatives under medical observation seemed necessary. This hospital was soon after- wards supplemented by a second, a temporary struc- ture of bamboo and matting, erected near the Rail- way Station. This shed, 40' by 10', was calculated to accommodate six patients. Rules framed for enforcing Segregation of Patients, &c. 5. The Municipality then adopted the special rules, copy of which is given in Appendix II, empowering their staff to take certain extraordinary measures of an obvious necessity. The adoption of these rules was hastened by the detection of the first imported plague case about the third week in December. Increase in Municipal Sani- tary and Conservancy Staff. 6. Wisely recognizing the importance of greater cleanliness in the city the Municipality increased its sanitary establishment by doubling the staff of inspectors and retaining the services of extra sweepers and scavengers. On the inspector fell the duty of visiting one of the 12 wards (there were 12 inspectors) of the city daily. Suspicious mortality among the rats was ordered to be re- ported immediately; and finally a reward of 8 annas was publicly promised to any person bringing a plague case to the notice of the Municipal Executive. It is doubtful whether this handsome reward would have compensated a possible informant for the odium which his action in bringing a case to notice must have given rise to in the breasts of the patient's relatives. Possibly not, as the reward was not applied for. Establishment of Registra- tion posts by District Magis- trate. Inspection of arrivals by Road and Rail after Registra- tion. Preparation for Quarantine Measures. Enforcement of Cleansing Measures in Nagar, Bhingr and Cantonments. 7. By the end of January the plague had obtained such formidable dimen- sions in Bombay and Poona that Government directed by telegram that no efforts should be spared to check the spread of infection into districts free from the disease. Action was at once taken to supplement the precautionary measures above described by arranging for the registration of all arrivals at Ahmednagar from infected areas. For this purpose two clerks were posted at the Railway Station, and posts were established on the roads from Bombay and Poona, at a distance of a few miles from Nagar, so that travellers by the roads might be also brought under observation. The names of persons registered at the station and road-side posts were duly communicated to the Nagar Municipality, the Canton- ment authorities and the Municipality of Bhingr, with a request that arrivals from infected places might be kept under observation for eight days. It was anticipated that the staff en- trusted with the observation of arrivals, viz., Municipal and Cantonment subordi- nates, might not be sufficiently careful in their enquiries to ensure that all plague cases should be detected. The erection of a quarantine camp at the station was therefore taken in hand at the same time as the registration system was intro- duced, in order that, on its completion, quarantine might be enforced either at once or whenever it ap- peared to be desirable. Simultaneously with these measures steps were taken to improve the sanitary condition of Nagar City, Bhingr and Cantonments. The improvement con- sisted in whitewashing and ventilating the houses, adding to the staff and equipment for the removal of night-soil, and cleansing the surface drains. Sudden increase in im- ported cases of Plague. 8. During the first week in March, 4 cases of plague, all imported, occurred in Ahmednagar and Bhingr. One of the Bhingr patients, a Shimpi from Poona, had developed the symptoms after eight days' residence within Muni-
?3 cipal limits. He died before his case was reported, and directly after his decease a second member of his household, also a recent arrival from Poona, was attacked. Of the other two cases, one sufferer arrived from Poona, and was concealed in Nagar City for several days before information was obtained of her arrival, and the other imported case from Nsik was detected at the Railway Station. Enforcement of general Quarantine for eight days. 9. A consideration of these cases seemed to show the necessity for more stringent precautions and to throw suspicion on the manner in which the inspection staff charged with the duty of observing new arrivals were acquitting them- selves of their daily tasks. At this time the quarantine camp at the station was sufficiently advanced for immediate use, and it was therefore thought advisable to impose a strict quarantine without further delay. Quarantine was thus notified with effect from March 10th. Quarantine was declared applicable to all arrivals from outside the district, whether by road or rail, except Europeans, officers on duty, and the servants of the latter. First class passen- gers were to be exempted on executing a bond to remain at Ahmednagar under daily medical examination for eight days. The Personal Assistant to theCollector, who was entrusted with the contrbl of the quarantine arrangements, was allowed a general discretion to exempt persons who could satisfy him that they had not come from an infected locality, or whose detention appeared to be unnecessary. The difficulty in enforcing quarantine between places connected by road and rail are mainly the following:- (1) How to ascertain correctly the place from which travellers arrive ? (2) How to provide against the evasion of quarantine by persons alighting at intermediate stations and continuing their journey by road ? The satisfactory solution of these difficulties appeared so problematical that no attempt would have been made to enforce quarantine if the situation at Poona had not rendered the facing of these difficulties absolutely necessary. The mor- tality in Poona had reached 82 per diem, the normal death-rate being 5. This, and the house-to-house inspection, induced the residents to look elsewhere for a temporary refuge. Ahmednagar, only 78 miles by road and a few hours' journey by rail, offered an asylum the more valuable inasmuch as its reputation for healthiness is widespread. Already the population of Nagar City had been augmented by many thousands of arrivals from Bombay and Poona, thus creating a risk of serious overcrowding which, if permitted to continue unchecked, could not have failed to produce dangerously insanitary conditions. For these reasons quarantine seemed to be absolutely necessary, however difficult it might prove in its subsequent working. The notification imposing eight days' detention at the station camp on all arrivals was supplemented by two orders of the District Ma- gistrate, requiring all arrivals from outside the district arriving by road and not passing through the camp to obtain a permit before taking up their residence in Nagar or Bhingr, and forbidding the inhabitants of these places to receive any such arrivals unless they had passed through the quarantine, or received such a permit. Even with these precautions, many evasions of the regulations must have occurred, though but few were brought to light. In a few cases the offenders were prosecuted and fined. Description of the Ahmed- nagar Quarantine Camp. 10. The Quarantine camp is thus described by the Vice-President of the Municipality in his re- port- The camp was laid out (on designs prepared by the Municipal Sec- retary) in a field near the station, the land being kindly lent free of rent by Mr. Bezanji Chandabhai. It consists of 40 sheds, each 20' by 10', each shed being divided into two parts by a partition wall, and provided with a verandah facing west. The 40 sheds are arranged in four rows with broad walks between each row. They are constructed of bamboo matting, plas- tered and whitewashed. The whole camp is enclosed by a fence of matting and barbed wire. Inside the enclosure, besides the 40 huts already described, are cook-houses for Hindus and Musalmns, a large shed for low castes, an office and residence for the Camp Superintendent, a hospital,
?4 bazr shed, and five bathing apartments with concrete floors. In the bazr shed flour, grain, groceries, vegetables, fuel, milk, &c., are on sale, and both cooking pots and small lamps can be obtained for hire. Suitable latrines are set apart for the different sexes, and the whole camp is completed by a special shed and sentry box at the entrance for the police guard on duty. For the better class of travellers furniture in the shape of country cots, tables, chairs and benches is provided. A staff of water carriers, cooks, sweepers, &c., are in regular attendance in accordance with the requirements of all castes. With these arrangements the passengers were apparently content. During the seven weeks for which quarantine was in force only one person left without permission, out of several thousands who passed through. A slight expenditure was incurred on pauper travellers who could not support themselves and would not work. For the most part those who were detained purchased food at the camp bazr; others were provisioned by the friends from the town, who were allowed entry to the camp for a short visit. 11. In all 4,981 persons were entered on the register kept at the camp. Of these 568 were found to have come from, infected areas and detained under observation. Plague in the Quarantine Camp. 12. There were only two cases of plague among the inmates. The following table shows details :- Case. Caste.  Age. Date of arrival.  Date of attack. 1 Mochi 25 12th March 1897, 12 o'clock at night.  16th March 1897, 4-30 P. M.  2 Teli 50 27th March 1897, 2 P. M.  31st March 1897, 6 P. M.  Both cases came direct from Poona, and were bound for Nagar City. The persons attacked were promptly removed to the Plague Hospital, where they succumbed to the disease. Results of Quarantine. 13. The quarantine continued in force from March 10th to April 28th, when the steady decline in the mortality both in Poona and Bombay rendered it possible to revert to the previous system of registration without undue risk. The net results of the measure may be briefly summarised as follows :- (1) Two plague cases were detected and prevented from entering the town. (2) No cases of plague occurred in Ahmednagar or Bhingar after the quarantine was imposed, except one or two imported cases which had arrived before March 16th. (3) After the first week or two of quarantine, the arrivals steadily decreased in number, so that by the end of April scarcely a sign of the previous daily immigration from infected areas could be discovered :- It is difficult to assert with confidence that similar results could have been attained without the enforcement of quarantine regulations. 14. Reverting to the special measures taken by the Nagar Municipality, the following must be mentioned in addition to those already described. (1) The maintenance of a careful daily mortality record. (2) The thorough disinfection of all premises in which plague cases occurred. Additional Precautions adopted in Nagar City. (3) The enforcement of prompt removal of all filth and rubbish from private premises. To these must be added the following precautions adopted in response to directions from the local authorities.
?5 (4) The burial of plague patients in specified areas only, and cremation in similar fashion. (5) The removal of herds of cattle from the city site to enable the premises occupied by the cattle to be kept in a sanitary condition. (6) The thorough cleansing of both road-side and underground drains, involving considerable expenditure and the temporary removal of the Otas which, by projecting into the street over the road-side drain, in many cases turn the latter into a closed cess-pit of a most insanitary description. Segregation of Patients and their Families. Disinfection of Premises where a case of Plague had occurred. 15. It is perhaps only necessary to add that the enforcement of segrega- tion in the case of plague patients and their families, and the disinfection of the premises on which a case had occurred, were carried out in a thoroughly ade- quate manner without evoking any serious opposition. Patients, promptly removed to the hospital in dhulies kept ready with bearers for instant use, were well cared for, and allowed to be attended by members of their family if they so desired. The latter were segregated at the Siddhi Bgh Hospital. Houses were disinfected by the removal of the roof, the digging up of the floor earth to a depth of a foot or so from the surface, and the use of quicklime and carbolic acid. 16. Finally the Municipality arranged to secure proper death certificates for all persons dying within municipal limits, and to prevent the removal of sick persons through the town gates unless specially authorised. In this they were assisted by the special registration staff previously posted at the railway station and on the roads but withdrawn to the City Gates to control road arrivals, from the date of enforcement of quarantine. Special House-to-house Inspection in Nagar City. 17. The last step taken by the Municipality was the organization of a house-to-house inspection by the school-masters of the town in the middle of the mouth of April. The school-masters, being men of good caste, were readily admitted everywhere. Their inspections were directed to ascertaining how far the houses had been cleaned and whitewashed, and whether any suspicious cases of illness were being concealed. In all 57 school-masters, assisted by 3 Govern- ment clerks, were employed. A special Form (Appendix III) was supplied to them for the recording of the results of their work. In this way 6,159 houses were visited and 29,581 persons inspected ; 96 cases of illness were reported and subsequently certified not to be bubonic plague, and finally many sanitary defects in the houses were brought to notice and formed the subject of orders from the Municipal Executive. The conception of this scheme of inspection originated with the Vice-President of the Municipality, and the measure was carried out, there is good reason to believe, in a thorough and searching manner, for which much credit is due to those concerned. Preparation for a possible outbreak during the monsoon. 18. Here may well be concluded the account of precautionary measures taken to protect Ahmednagar from the plague. It should be added that when at the end of May the disease seemed nearly extinct in Bombay and Poona the following steps had been taken to render the town and district fit to cope with a possible recrudescence of the plague during the wet weather. (1) Ahmednagar City and Suburbs had undergone a thorough cleans- ing, and were in a better sanitary condition than they had ever been before. (2) Two plague hospitals were ready for immediate use, one a masonry building in the Siddhi Bgh, to which additional accommodation was attach- ed in the shape of matting sheds, and the other a matting shed hospital near the station. The temporary structures were double roofed and covered with strong tarpaulins to render them thoroughly weather proof. Two other permanent buildings, offered as caste hospitals, were held in reserve. (3) A camp of observation, consisting of similar temporary struc- tures and completely fitted for immediate use, was ready at the station. This would accommodate between three and four hundred persons. B 1090-2
?6 (4) A special segregation camp in the shape of a large masonry dharmshla situated outside the Sarjpur Gate of the town, recently placed in thorough repair, was available for instant use, and would hold between two and three hundred persons. (5) A store of matting and tarpaulins was held ready for use should the erection of further temporary structures be found necessary. (6) All arrivals by train and road at Nagar and Bhingr from infected districts were being registered and inspected, all deaths were required to be duly certified, and mortality returns were carefully scrutinized weekly. (7) Disinfectants had been placed in all tluka head-quarters for use in any of the villages of the district. (8) A scheme for house-to-house inspection, such as was required in Poona, was held in readiness for adoption at short notice. In this way Ahmednagar, which had successfully dealt with 26 imported cases during the prevalence of plague elsewhere, was fully prepared for any possible developments that the change of season from dry to wet weather might be expected to produce. Happily there has so far been necessity for utilizing the preparations for the outbreak so long averted. Precautionary measures in the Nagar District. 19. Outside Nagar City and its immediate surroundings little could be done to arrest the importation of infection from Poona, Thna or other infected places. At the railway stations arrivals were registered; but little reliance could be placed on the information thus obtained being subsequently utilized with effect. The roads lay open to travellers, and no system of posts over the Poona and Thna borders seemed on consideration to hold out a prospect of results justifying the expenditure and trouble involved in establishing them. Local authorities were fully informed of their powers and duties, and provided with a stock of disinfectants. Small camps were erected at railway stations for the detention of arrivals attacked by suspicious fever. Above all, the local plague authorities and village officers were impressed with the necessity of segregating suspicious cases of fever outside the villages, and such segregation was, as a rule, enforced in all cases reported. It is probable that the safety of the outlying villages was secured by an informal quarantine which the villagers in many places adopted in self-defence, in accordance with established custom. Sick persons not inhabitants of the village are often, in times of epidemics, refused entry and driven out to the fields by the villagers. The patient so deprived of shelter and attendance is extremely likely to succumb to the illness; but the village escapes, and the principal acted upon if somewhat cruel is in the main sound. In Akola this form of segregation is reported to be very prevalent. Conclusion. 20. There remains little more to relate. Partly, it would seem, owing to the extreme dryness of the climate, which does not favour the development and spread of the disease, and partly it may perhaps be hazarded, owing to the prompt segregation of plague cases and the relatives of those attacked, the bubonic plague failed entirely to establish itself in epidemic form in Ahmednagar town or district. Without at- tempting to credit to the latter of these causes the exemption from disease which probably climate and local conditions have combined to secure, it may perhaps not unfairly be claimed that few measures which previous experience had shown to be either practical or effective were omitted in endeavouring to ward off the expected visitation. To those who were responsible for the working of these measures the result is not devoid of satisfaction. 21. A rough estimate of the expenditure incurred on plague measures is given in Appendix IV. A mortality record is given in Appendix V. R. E. ENTHOVEN, Personal Assistant to the Collector. Ahmednagar, 21st July 1897.
?No. 2452 OF 1897. Sholpur Collector's Office, 4th August 1897. FROM W. T. MORISON, ESQUIRE, I. C. S., Collector, Sholpur; To THE COMMISSIONER, C. D., Poona. Sir, With reference to your No. P.--1672, dated 11th June, I have the honour to submit the following report on the preventive measures adopted against the spread of plague in this district, and on the cases that occurred. Preventive Measures.-At first the precautions taken consisted in the medical examination at the Sholpur Railway Station of passengers coming from infected areas. The services of a Hospital Assistant were obtained for this purpose at the expense of the Sholpur Municipality. Another Hospital Assist- ant to be posted at Brsi Road Railway Station was asked for, but no one could be made available. The medical inspection at Sholpur was not effectual as out of the four cases that are known to have arrived at or passed Sholpur, only one case was detected at the time. Application of the Epide- mic Diseases Act. After the Epidemic Diseases Act was passed, more extensive measures were adopted. The following officers were appointed plague authorities under the Act:- (1) With powers under Rules 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 13-Assistant and Deputy Collectors within their charges. (2) With powers under Rules 8, 9, 10 and 11- (a) Mmlatdrs and Head Krkns within their charges. (b) Municipal Commissioners within municipal limits. (c) Secretaries of Municipality within municipal limits. (d) Medical Officers holding Her Majesty's Commission. (e) Medical Offiers in charge of Government or State-aided medical institutions. (f) Medical Officers employed by municipalities not lower in grade than Hospital Assistants and such officers on pension. (g) Police Officers not lower in grade than Chief Constable. Rule 5 was applied to the whole district. The following officers were appointed Presidents of Panchas to be formed under Rule 13:- In Sholpur town ... ... ... The Supervisor, Public "Works Department, in charge of Ekruk Tank. In other Municipal towns and in Mdha and Mlsiras ... ... ... The Sub-Registrars. Elsewhere  ... ... ... The Village Ptils in their villages. On all Government servants of whatever department the necessity of giving immediate information of any suspicious case that came to their notice was impressed, and in particular the village officers were warned to keep a strict watch on all new-comers. Camps of observation were established at Sholpur, Brsi Road and Mohol, and at the other Railway Stations krkuns were posted to send to the villages intimation of the arrival of passengers from infected areas. All stations between Bombay and Dhond inclusive were declared to be in infected districts against arrivals from which the precautions were to be enforced. A special police party was posted on the Brmati and Phaltan border of Mlsiras Tluka to prevent the entrance into the district of suspected persons B 1085-1
?2 Observation camps. from that side. The principle followed in the case of the observation camps was that all passengers from infected areas, the observation of whom after arrival could not effectually and with certainty be carried out otherwise, were detained under observation in the camp for a period of eight days. The names and addresses of the remaining passengers were taken and inquiries were made daily at their houses. The practical result of the rule was that all third class and some second class pass- engers were detained. No attempt was made to deal in the same way with the road traffic within the district. The Sholpur camp was opened on 11th February and the Brsi Road and Mohol camps on the 22nd idem. They were closed on 31st May. The total number of persons detained was 2,800. Among these plague developed in only one case at Brsi Road. In Sholpur two detached dharmshlas, one near the Railway Station and another near the Siddeshwar Tank, were utilized as places of detention. The dharmshlas were guarded by a party of civil police who also conveyed the per- sons detained from the Railway Station to the dharmshlas. The Municipality supplied two krkuns who attended each train and kept a register of passengers arriving from infected areas. The Hospital Assistant signed this register, and those who were to be detained were conveyed to the observation camp. The names and addresses of the others were reported to the Municipality who arranged that the ward inspectors should make daily inquiries about the new arrivals for a period of eight days. Those in the camp of observation were made to wash their clothes on arrival. Two servants were attached to each dharmshla to attend to the wants of those detained who were not allowed other- wise to communicate with those outside. If any one under detention had not the means of procuring food, subsistence money was allowed. The Civil Surgeon inspected the camp daily. At Mohol and Brsi Road the arrangements were in charge of the Assistant Collector. The accommodation provided consisted of a number of tents sur- rounded by a fence. They were well removed from the village and placed under the shade of trees. A Hospital Assistant had medical charge of the camp, and an establishment, consisting of a Camp Superintendent, water carriers and village watchmen, was also appointed. These two camps were intended more parti- cularly to protect the towns of Pandharpur and Brsi. The system of observation camps lost much of its force by the facility with which the rules could be evaded. It was impossible to have a camp at every station in the district, and even had that been possible the check would have been ineffective without similar camps at all stations before the Railway enters this district. Observation was evaded by the passengers getting down at stations before the observation camp was reached and either re-booking or completing their journey on foot. In spite of this there is every reason to believe that the observation camps were useful safe-guards in so far as they imposed a check on the rush of the people from plague-stricken areas, especially from Poona. By reducing the passenger traffic they lessened the chance of the importation of the disease. Plague Krkuns. The posting of plague krkuns at the Railway Stations was intended to supplement the camps of observation. These men took the names of the passengers and of the villages to which they were proceeding. They then sent post-cards to the Ptils of the villages who were instructed to keep a watch on the new arrivals for a period of eight days and to report the result to the Mmlatdr. The krkns sent to the Mmlatdr separate lists of arrivals with which the Ptil's reports were checked. The Ptils and villagers were made fully alive to the danger of the importation of the disease, and it is satisfactory to note that in every case where necessity arose they acted promptly and enforced segregation of their own motion. Ytras. Special steps had to be taken to prevent the religious fairs from becoming centres from which the disease might be disseminated. For the November fair at Pandharpur arrangements
?3 were made for the medical inspection of the pilgrims arriving at Brsi Road, Mohol and Mdha. The next big ytra came on in February, and as the disease was then raging in Bombay it was thought advisable to stop the ytra altogether. This was done, and a similar order was enforced against the Chaitri fair in April and the less important ytras in the intervening months and against several minor fairs in the district. In ordinary years the Municipality receives Rs. 10,000 in pilgrim tax during the two fairs that were stopped, but the receipts would probably have been less this year on account of the famine. Hospitals. The Sholpur Municipality put up a Plague Hospital with separate accom- modation for suspected cases and provided the neces- sary menial staff. The hospital was in charge of the Civil Surgeon. There were two admissions, of which one recovered and one died. The Municipality have now replaced it by a building that will stand the monsoon. At Brsi Road the cholera hospital put up by the District Local Board was used for the reception of the one plague case that was discovered in the camp of observation. The patient was treated by the Hospital Assistant in charge of the camp. The case was fatal. Death-rate. The death-rate in the towns of Sholpur, Paudharpur and Brsi was care- fully watched. Up to the end of January it was normal, but then it began to increase and is still above normal. The increase cannot be traced to the presence of plague. It is attributed partly to the prevalence of small-pox and latterly of cholera, but in the main it seems to be due to the hardships people are put to on account of the high price of food-grains. In Sholpur the death-rate among young child- ren, especially among those under one year, showed a higher percentage of in- crease than among the rest of the population. The death-rate figures are col- lected at the municipal nkas by which all funerals must pass. The reports from the nkedrs are handed over to the Ward Inspectors who make further inquiries at the houses where death occurred and of the neighbours. Not a single case has been reported in Brsi or Sholpur, and no case is known to have occurred. In Pandharpur one case was found after death. At Brsi a segregation Hospital was erected by the Municipality outside the town, and a special peon was engaged to assist in the work of obtaining in- formation of the occurrence of plague cases. At Pandharpur the Cholera Hospital was prepared for the reception of plague cases and a segregation camp was established on the Kard Road. A qualified medical officer assisted by a special staff of Ward Inspectors was appoint- ed for the detection and treatment of plague cases in the event of an outbreak. A special establishment had also to be entertained to assist the Police in pre- venting the assembly of pilgrims at the ytras which were stopped. The Brsi and Pandharpur Municipalities jointly paid for the Hospital Assistant appointed to the Brsi Road camp of observation, and both Munici- palities increased their stock of disinfectants to be ready against any emergency. Hotgi Plague Inspection. Under the orders contained in Government Resolution No. 751/249-P, General Department, dated 11th February 1897, a plague inspec- tion station was established at Hotgi for the medical examination of passengers passing out of the Bombay Presidency. A temporary hospital and observation camp with quarters for the staff were put upon a site selected by the Sanitary Commissioner. The menial staff consisting of a cook, ward boys, watchmen, sweepers were entertained locally, and a party of Civil Police was posted to gurd the camp and prevent escapes. The down trains were locked at Sholpur and were emptied at Hotgi when every passenger was examined. Suspected cases were detained under observation and were dieted at the expense of Government. Under the orders contained in Government Resolution No. 2234/1679-P, dated 29th April 1897, further arrangements were made to disinfect by boiling any articles of passengers' baggage which the medical officer in charge might suspect of being infected. Boiling apparatus was ob- tained and a staff of dhobis employed. Up to 21st June the operations at Hotgi were in charge of a Commissioned Medical Officer who had under him an
?4 Assistant Surgeon and four Hospital Assistants. Since that date the Assistant Surgeon has been in charge, and as the operations are still in progress, it is unnecessary at present to give statistical results of the work done. Two cases of plague were detected and both recovered under treatment. The passengers and others who came within the operation of the orders as a rule submitted complacently to the restrictions imposed. Cases. In dealing with cases that actually occurred the orders were- (1) to enforce segregation in the case of the sick ; (2) to segregate and keep under observation for a period of at least 8 days those who had in any way been in communication with the sick ; (3) to disinfect or destroy any articles that might have become infected ; (4) to disinfect and throw open to the sun and air the house occupied by the sick. (If it was only a hut it was to be burned.) Sub-divisional officers and Mmlatdrs were directed to go immediately to every case reported, and see that the orders were carried out. The only instance in which the plague continued for any length of time in spite of this treatment was in the Shindewdi cases in Mlsiras Tluka (Nos. 12 to 18) detailed below. The District Deputy Collector was quickly on the spot and saw that the orders were promptly and thoroughly carried out. The place of segregation was frequently changed, every article that could not be properly disinfected was destroyed, new clothes were given to those segregated, and they were fed with food brought to them from the village and not out of any stock they had themselves. In spite of these, six deaths occurred in the month that followed the first death. With one exception they were confined to one family. These six cases with four at Hotgi (Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8) were the only indigenous cases that occurred in the district. The following is a brief record of the cases that occurred in the district :- Case No. 1 17th December 1896.  A female passenger from Bombay was found on arrival of the train at Sholpur to be suffering from plague. She died on the way to the Segregation Hospital.  Case No. 2 18th December 1896. A fatal case imported from Bombay was not reported till after death had occurred. (Pandharpur.) Case No. 3 23rd January 1897. A man with a ticket from Bombay to Sholpur was found in a semi-conscious state in the lavatory of a carriage at Hotgi Railway Station. He was brought to the Plague Hospital at Sholpur and died on the 25th idem. Case No. 4 21st January 1897. A Mng woman who had been to Bombay to attend her son who died of plague returned to Hotgi village. She was taken ill of plague on the 21st and died the same day.  Cases Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8. 24th January 1897 to 1st February 1897. Between these dates three inmates of the hut in which case No. 4 had died and another woman of the same caste living in an adjoining hut were taken ill of plague and all died, the last death occurring on February 1st. These four were not exposed to any source of infection except from case No. 4. The cases were not reported until February 1st. The remaining members of the families were segregated in their fields and their huts, and the sweepings round about were burned. No other case occurred in the village. Case No. 9 4th February 1897. A labourer died of plague at his native village of Ozare in Karmla Tluka shortly after his return from Bombay. Cases Nos. 10 and 11. Do. Two labourers died of plague at their native village Kumbhej in Karmla Tluka shortly after their return from Bombay.
?5 Case No. 12 5th February 1897. About February 1st a Martha woman died of plague in Brmati Tluka, Poona.    Her  brother who  lived in Shindewdi,   Tluka Mlsiras, an adjacent village, went to her funeral.    He returned to his village and was well until 5th idem, when the plague declared itself  and he died on the 7th.    The surviving members of his house-hold were at once removed from the village to a field at a distance when the following cases occurred.  Case No. 13 14th   February 1897. Brother of case No. 12 died on 15th February 1897. Case No. 14 16th   February 1897. Mother          do.           do.         20th       do. Case No. 15 23rd  February 1897. Brother         do.           do.          25th       do. Case No. 16 4th March 1897 Sister-in-law do.            do.          5th March 1897. Case No. 17 8th March 1897 Brother         do.            do.          10th        do. Case No. 18 11th February 1897 Besides these a Rmosi woman who lived near was attacked on the 11th February.    She was removed by  her friends to the adjacent village of Dharampuri where she died on the 13th.  Case No. 19 7th February 1897 A man who had come to stay with the Station Master at Angar was attacked with plague and died there.  Case No. 20 Do. A Hospital Assistant who said he had been on plague duty in Bombay arrived by the early morning train. He escaped detection at the Railway Station but  went to the Civil Hospital the same day when he was found to be suffering from plague.    He was removed to the segregation hospital where in course of time he recovered.   Case No. 21 7th March 1897  A Brhmin came from Poona to Mdha. On 7th March he was attacked with plague and died on the 9th in a Dharmshla  outside  the   village  where  he  had  been segregated. Case No. 22 20th March 189 7. A passenger from Dhond to Brsi Road was detained in the camp of observation there.    He developed plague and died on the 22nd idem. Case No. 23 21st March 1897 A Mrwdi arrived at Kem Railway Station from Poona on March  19th.     He went  to Wadshivane, a  village in Karmla Tluka.   On 21st idem he got fever. On the 25th he went with his wife to   Wangi where he died on the 26th. Case No. 24 27th March 1897. A Hindu  woman became  ill  in Bombay and was brought by her husband to Warkutne in Karmla Tluka. She died on the 29th idem. Case No. 25. 5th April 1897 A party of labourers were returning from Bombay to Pondsiras in Mlsiras Tluka.    They came by train to Jejuri and thence by cart.    Two of them were detained  by the Plague Inspecting Officers at Kalyn. After alighting at Jejuri a woman of the party fell ill.    She died on the 7th as they were nearing their destination. Case No. 26 7th April 1897 Her  child caught the disease the same day.    The villagers did not allow the party to enter the village. The child afterwards recovered. Case No. 27 12th April 1897 On the 6th April a Bania came with his wife by rail from Poona to Kem and thence by road to Tembhurni in Karmla Tluka.    He was kept under observation by the village officers.    On the 12th he was found to be suffering from  fever and headache  and  was at once segregated.    He died on the 14th.    It is reported that his mother died of plague in Poona a month before. Cases detected by the Plague Inspection Officers at Hotgi. Case No. 28 27th  February 1897. An Armenian came from Bombay or Poona.    He stayed at Sholpur to beg for passage money, and then went on to Hotgi, where he was found to be suffering from plague.    He recovered. Case No. 29 29th March 1897. In this case also the patient recovered.  I attach a statement of the expenditure incurred showing separately the special expenditure incurred by the Municipalities. B 1085-2  BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS.
?NO. 1371 OF 1897. FROM THE FIRST ASSISTANT COLLECTOR, Stra; To THE COLLECTOR OF SA'TA'RA, Stra, 12th July 1897. SIR, With reference to your No. 3895, dated 30th June 1897, asking me to submit a report regarding measures adopted for the suppression of the bubonic plague in my division, I have the honour to state as follows:- 2. The plague fortunately took no real hold in any part of my charge, and the measures taken were mostly preventive. 3. I have reason to think that during the latter part of last year, espe- cially before any considerable attention was drawn to the existence of plague except in Bombay, many people who had gone from villages here to labour in Bombay, feeling ill and being in reality smitten with plague, returned home and died of plague in their villages, the deaths being ascribed to fever and the attention of the authorities being consequently not drawn to the matter. I made close enquiries in many villages which I visited in the course of my tour. I was much surprised at the extent of emigration from this district. In almost all the poorer villages and in many of the wealthier ones some persons are in the habit of going yearly to Bombay for labour. These generally go in the non- cultivating season and return in time to till their lands. Among these emigrants there was of course a panic when the existence of plague became widely known in Bombay and they returned in haste to their villages, some with the infection on them. I ascertained this by examining the death registers and finding in them entries of the deaths from "fever" of persons who had newly returned from Bombay, this fever being almost certainly plague. 4. Fortunately it seems that, in the absence of certain conditions the nature of which it has been impossible to ascertain, the dry air of the Deccan is not congenial to the plague germ. Otherwise I cannot account for the fact that with plague raging in Bombay, multitudes of people returned to their villages, many probably affected with plague, but these only communicated the disease to others in the rarest instances, though their nearest relatives, lived in the atmosphere, touched their clothes, probably nursed them till death and finally conducted their funeral ceremonies. 5. The exceptional villages in which the plague became endemic I will now deal with. These were Sngwi in Koregaon Tluka, Akhade, Waluth, Panas and Khdshi in Joli Tluka and, I believe, one or two cases in the town of Wi (of the latter I have not accurate information). Of these villages the only ones of which the plague took any hold were Sngwi, Akhade and Waluth. I visited all these villages at the time when they were affected but could find no reason why the plague should have taken a hold in them rather than other villages. Indeed, so capricious was the disease that in Akhade, it attacked the hamlet and carried off in a few days 25 per cent. of the population, while the village which is almost contiguous with the hamlet remained untouched. In Waluth too, the hamlet was attacked while the village, not half a mile off, had not a case. The villagers of Sngwi and the inhabitants of the infected hamlets of Akhade and Waluth very wisely dispersed of their own accord to their fields when their homes had become tainted and thus the disease died out. I entered the hamlet of Akhade to find one old man only as a sort of care-taker. I remonstrated with him and pointed out the danger, but he preferred to stay saying that if any one further was taken he was an old man and it was his turn. The attack in Akhade Waluth, Panas and Khadshi, which all lie close together, seems to have origi- nated in the death at Panas of one man who had been smitten in Bombay and whose funeral was attended by people from the other villages. 6. I cautioned the ptils of neighbouring villages not to allow persons from those abovementioned to enter without some days' surveillance outside, but B 1216
?2 the caution was hardly needed as the people of the affected villages did not wish to leave and only desired to stay in their fields. The necessary measures of burning clothes and airing and disinfecting the houses attacked were taken. 7. I have mentioned that there were one or two deaths from plague in Wi. In respect of these, prompt measures were taken in the first case by the Mmletdr under my telegraphic instructions and in the second by the Civil Surgeon who happened to be in Wi at the time. I was at one time much con- cerned regarding the safety of the town. At the time when plague was at its height in Poona, I learnt that large numbers of people were coming from there to Wi. At the same time the Civil Surgeon inspected the town and reported that it was in a most insanitary state, that the Municipality would not move in the matter of cleansing it and that the Chairman had actually stopped the work of disinfecting a house which he (the Civil Surgeon) had himself ordered to be disinfected. I went to Wi and met him there, and inspected parts of the town with him and some Municipal members. It was certainly in a most insanitary condition but the Vice-President promised that sanitary matters should be attended to and he fulfilled his promise. Extra road sweepers were put on, the houses of the town were whitewashed inside and out, and the Municipality raised the question of the filling in of the pit privies, many of which exist in Wi and form a danger to the health of the town. (This matter is now under corres- pondence.) An extra Hospital Assistant was kept on duty on the east side of Wi to watch all arrivals. This officer was a pensioned 1st Class Hospital Assistant, residing in Wi, Sayad Yassin by name. I must allude in high terms to his work. He was on duty the whole 24 hours, even slept on the road-side and examined all passengers. Though at one time suffering from fever he continued from the time of his appointment in in March to June to do this, really the work of two men at least, but the Muni- cipality were unable to obtain further medical assistance owing to the overstrain on the Department. I also during my stay at Wi called a meeting of the leading townsmen. Between 2,000 and 3,000 people were present. I pointed out the imminent danger of plague owing to the influx from Poona and urged those present, (1) to take each in his own house every sanitary precaution possible and urge his neighbours and friends to do the same and (2) in case of cases unfortunately occurring not to conceal them and thus endanger the whole community but to give immediate information to the authorities. The Vice- President of the Municipality, the Mmletdr and others spoke to the same effect. The fears for the safety of Wi were fortunately not realized and the town escaped the infection almost, it seemed to me, by a miracle as it was quite im- possible to prevent the ingress of persons tainted, if the disease had not declared itself in them. 8. The measure of watching arrivals at the stations of Wthar and Stra Road was adopted for some time as a precaution against plague, but it ceased after a time under your orders as it was impossible to depute medical officers for the purpose, and the police inspection was not effective while it was a great annoyance to travellers. 9. Special measures were taken for the protection of Stra, Mahbleshvar and Panchgani by observation camps. With these I was not directly concerned except in so far as that I arranged with the assistance of the Executive Engineer for the building of the observation camp at Dandeghar, near Panchgani, and prior to Mr. Alexander taking charge of them, inspected the Mahbleshvar posts under your telegraphic instructions. The Dandeghar observation camp was under the charge first of Surgeon- Captain Bedford and latterly of Mr. Vincent, who has, I presume, reported to you regarding its management. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, S. P. ARTHUR, 1st Assistant Collector.
?Early. No.B.P./224 OF 1897. From E. J. EBDEN, ESQUIRE, I. C. S., Commissioner, S. D.; To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, General Department. Belgaum, 10th September 1897. SIR, Belgaum Collector's Report, No. 4319, dated 17th July 1897. Dhrwar do. No. 5330 do. Bijapur do. No. 2943, dated 14th July 1897. Knara do. No. 2273, dated 24th June 1897. Ratugiri do. No. 3000, dated 9th July 1897. Kolba do. No.B.P./1075, dated 4th August 1897, and accompaniments.    I have the honour to submit, with reference to paragraph 6 of Government Resolution (General) No. 3045/2269-P., dated the 2nd June last, the mar- ginally noted reports* on the his- tory of the Bubonic Plague and the measures adopted for its prevention and suppression in this division, and to observe as follows:- 2. The dates to which the history is brought up in the several districts are apparently the dates of the reports submitted by the Collectors, i.e.- Belgaum, 17th July 1897. Dhrwr, do. Bijpur, 14th July 1897. Knara, 24th June 1897. Ratngiri, 9th July 1897. Kolba, 4th August 1897. 3. It will be seen that the districts of Belgaum, Dhrwr, Bijpur and Knara were free from the plague during the period reported upon, and are still enjoying immunity. There were only two cases (one proving fatal) at Khnpur in the Belgaum District, one (cured) at Hubli in the Dhrwr, and one (fatal) at Kumta in the Knara districts. All these were imported. The remark made by the Collector of Belgaum seems, in a great measure, true that the freedom from the plague epidemic enjoyed by the district was due as much to prompt measures taken in the few cases that occurred, as to the medical inspections at Kalyn, Poona, Rjewdi, &c., which passengers had to pass through before entering the Belgaum District. The same remark may be held to apply more or less in the case of the other three districts also. Mr. Woodward surmises that climatic conditions in this part of the country are unfavourable to the development of the plague germ. It would indeed be hasty to generalise in this way, but it is nevertheless true that, in the course of nearly one year during which the disease might have been expected to have been introduced, this large area has escaped with only four imported cases notwithstanding the large numbers of people who must have migrated to these parts during the period from Bombay, Poona and other affected centres. 4. It was only in the districts of Ratngiri and Kolba, in the latter es- pecially, of this division, that the epidemic assumed a more or less severe form. The reason is not far to seek. A large number of the inhabitants of these districts annually migrate to Bombay for enployment. Most, if not all, of these returned home owing to the plague panic in Bombay and hence, in spite of the precautionary measures adopted in the early stages, affected persons brought infection with them. Casual cases occurred and the habitual disregard of sanitary precautions on the part of relatives, freinds and neighbours of affected persons gave origin to indigenous cases. It is therefore feared that until the plague entirely disappears from Bombay, there is every probability of its recru- descence in both the coast districts after the daily sea communication is reopened. It is still prevailing in parts of Kolba, and a serious outbreak is just now reported from the Dpoli tluka of Ratngiri. 5. The following table gives particulars about the total number of attacks and deaths in the several districts from September 1896 to 30th July 1897:- * The reports of the Collectors of Belgaum, Dhrwr, Bijpur and Knara have not been printed. B 1396-1
2 Month. BELGAUM. DHARWA'R. BIJA'PUR. KA'NARA. RATNA'GIRI. KOLA'BA. TOTAL.  REMARKS.  Imported. Indigenous. Imported. Indigenous. Imported. Indigenous. Imported. Indigenous. Imported. Indigenous. Imported. Indigenous. Imported. Indigenous.   Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths.  September 1896 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... October  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1  1    2 1    November   ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...   8 8 1  8 8 1   December  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  24 15   11 11   35 26    January 1897  1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67 43 7 6 20 20   88 63 7 6  February  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85 95 12 10 35 31 47 26 120 126 59 36  March   1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45 38 53 41 28 27 158 117 75 66 211 158  April  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...    9 7 42 33 9 7 559 528 18 14 601 561  May  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 11 9 21 22 505 399 22 23 516 408  June  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  1 1 6 6 2 2 33 35 3 3 39 41  July  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...       23 15   23 15  Total 2 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 232 200 131 105 135 129 1,326 1,120 371 330 1,457 1,225
3       As per   Imported.  Indigeous.  Cases. Deaths.  Cases.  Deaths. Printed statement for week ending 30th July 1897  133 128  1,158  1,018 Commissioner's statement above  135 129  1,326  1,120  Difference  2 1  168  102       As per   Imported.  Indigenous.  Cases.  Deaths. Cases.  Deaths. Collector's Statement A  Printed statement for 150 134  1,422  1,176 week ending 30th July 1897  135 129  1,437  1,189  Difference  * 15 5  15  13    These figures are tabulated from the printed weekly statements issued from    the Secretariat. The figures for the Ratngiri District agree with those given in the table at paragraph 11 of the Collector's report. Those for Kolba given in the above statement do not tally with those appearing in the printed statement. The difference as per margin is due to erroneous figures having crept in, in the printed statement for the week ending 28th May, where the totals of the previous week under "Indigenous" have been brought forward as 1,049 and 918 instead of 1,217 and 1,020 respectively. The figures, inclusive of those for Janjira State furnished by the Collector of Kolba in the Statement A accompanying his report, differ * from the total together for Kolba and Janjira as given in the printed statement up to the 30th July 1897.     6. In the Ratngiri District the cases were isolated and occurred independently of one another. As pointed out by the Collector, the epidemic scarcely ever travelled from one village to another or even from one quarter to another of the same village. It was only in the village of Ladghar in the Dpoli tluka that the number of indigenous cases was considerable. Here the plague poison was apparently brought in the clothes and other things belonging to a person who had died of plague in Bombay. The things arrived at the village from Bombay on the 23rd of January 1897. Immediately afterwards dead rats began to be noticed about the house into which the infection had been brought. A person attacked with fever died on 22nd February. Another person in the same house caught fever on the 5th March and died the next day. Four more deaths occurred in that house and three in a neighbouring one before a formal report on the subject reached the authorities. Segregation was resorted to and was attended with good results. In all there were 47 attacks and 39 deaths.  7. The Collector of Kolba states that the first ascertained death from plague in the district occurred at Alibg on the 27th December 1896 and the next on the 7th February 1897. But it would appear from the first printed weekly statement that the first imported case took place at Mahd so early as October 1896, followed by 8 cases and deaths in the following months. Mr. Gray says that whenever the disease appeared in the district, whether it became epidemic or not, the plague was invariably due to connection with Bombay or other infectious centres. The places where the disease took root are Alibg, Panvel, Uran and Theronda, a village near Revdanda. It was difficult, as remarked by the Collector, to ascertain which were actually the first indigenous cases. At Alibg more than one death from plague had occurred before the cause of the mortality was openly recognized. No doubt the first case in any locality must be an imported one unless the plague poison possesses a self-generating power. The town of Pen, which was exposed to infection from Panvel and Alibg as well as from Bombay, unaccountably escaped with one indigenous case in May, though a few imported cases had occurred in the town at an earlier date. Mr. Gray quotes one curious instance of a death in Vdawli in the Mngaon tluka, where a person, in attempting to cure another by the rough native method of wet-cupping, which involves the implication of the mouth to the bubo, took the poison into his own system and died. All the tlukas and mahls of the district were visited by the epidemic to a greater or less extent. The total number of villages in the district in which the disease appeared was 69 including Mthern, and of those in the Janjira State 8. Revdanda had the largest number (416) of indigenous cases, with a correspondingly large number (393) deaths. In Alibg, Revdanda, Panvel, Mora, Chanji and Murd the plague caused very heavy mortality. These results bear out Mr. Gray's observation that coast villages
?4 with their cocoanut groves and swampy ground are more favourable to the propagation of the disease than the higher and more open inland villages. Imported. Indigenous. Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. 371 330 1,457 1,225 8. The total number of cases and deaths in the division during the period of report is given in the margin. Precautionary measures. 9. The precautionary measures adopted in the several districts were almost of the same nature. Belguam District.-In the city of Belgaum passengers arriving from Bombay, Poona and intermediate stations have been subjected to medical inspection since December 1896. Separate sheds for affected and suspected persons were kept in readiness within easy reach of the Civil Hospital. In February a plague hospital with medical staff was opened at Londa (Government Resolution No. 751/249-P.' dated the 11th February 1897), though not a single case has been detected there up to date. Inspection began at the Khnpur Station in March. Special sanitary measures were adopted in all the large towns of the district. The fair at Yallmma, which was to have been held in April, was stopped. Dhrwr District.-Instructions were issued to the Railway Police to register the names and addresses of passengers from infected parts alighting at Dhrwr, Hubli and Gadag Stations and to the District Police to keep a watch over them for 14 days after arrival. A medical staff was appointed at each of the stations of Dhrwr, Hubli and Gadag to examine all arrivals by each train. All the municipalities were asked to make budget provision for expenditure on plague operations as might become necessary. Nine of the ten municipalities erected temporary hospitals and segregation sheds and provided themselves with a good supply of disinfectants. In the Dhrwr, Hubli and Gadag Municipalities extra conservancy establishments were entertained. The annual fairs at Yamnur, Kalkeshwar, Naregal and Kalghatgi were stopped. Municipalities were required to submit weekly mortuary returns showing the death-rate as compared with a five years' average for the weeks, in order to facilitate detection of concealed plague mortality. Bijapur District.-Plague authorities were appointed at all the Railway stations and large towns in the district. Camps of observation were established at Bijpur (22nd February 1897) and Bgalkot (27th March 1897). To prevent people from alighting at intermediate stations in order to avoid medical inspection at Bijpur and Bgalkot, police were posted at Minchnal and Kadlimatti to take down the names and addresses of persons so evading inspection. Temporary hospitals were erected at Indi, Bijpur, Telgi, Katgeri and Bgalkot. Since January last, all trains have been inspected at the Indi Road, Bijpur and Bgalkot Railway Stations. The inspection at the Indi Road Station was discontinued from the 1st of July last. Kanara District.-All the municipalities on the coast, within whose limits landing places or bandars are situated, watched arrivals and examined passengers from the affected centres with the aid of the local medical officers, and they did all in their power for the detention, segregation and treatment of plague cases, should any arise, and paid special attention to the lime-washing of houses and the general cleanliness of the towns. Ratngiri District.-Orders were issued to the Revenue and Police Officers that all cases of plague should be reported at once in the same way as cholera cases, and precautions as to segregation and disinfection should be used. Arrangements were made at all the ports, where steamers call from Bombay, for the segregation of affected persons. Hospital Assistants inspected arrivals at Viziadurg, Mlvan and Bnkot. The Mmlatdr's Head Krkun performed this duty at Devgad. Orders were issued to stop all fairs and large gatherings. All possible care was taken to have every case promptly reported and the rules about segregation and disinfection enforced. The municipalities did what they were asked to do by way of precautionary measures. Kolba District.-As early as October 1896, when the plague in Bombay had assumed serious proportions, an order, which was subsequently found to be illegal, was issued by Mr. Maconochie prohibiting the landing of affected persons at any
?5 port in the district. Messrs. Shepherd and Company also tried to prevent passen- gers with the plague on them from travelling on their boats, but without much success. It was only when the plague had become indigenous in Panvel and Uran that the municipalities were stimulated to greater exertion in sanitation. Immediately after the rules under Act III of 1897 were issued, Plague Authorities were appointed for the various affected localities, nkas for the inspection of passengers fixed, isolation huts were ordered to be erected, and all arrivals from Bombay closely watched; 22 police at Uran and 25 at Panvel were employed under Government sanction to assist in the work. Insanitary house-property was condemned at Uran and Panvel in March, and arrangements for house-to- house visitation were made. A Hospital Assistant was employed at Panvel, Uran and Alibg. Disinfection of affected premises and segregation of patients met with a good deal of opposition from the people, and these remedies could not be insisted on owing to the want of adequate physical force to compel compliance. It was at the end of April when the plague was at its height that the co-operation of the Bombay Plague Committee was secured and vigorous suppressive measures were adopted. Every house at Alibg, Theronda, Revdanda and Chaul was disinfected and lime-washed. In Panvel and Uran, only infected houses were so treated. Inoculation by Dr. Haffkine's prophylactic process was also largely resorted to. Expenditure on Plague Operations. * Since reported by the Accountant-General to be the amount expended up to 31st July 1807. 10. Concerning the expenditure incurred on plague operations in the several districts, I have already reported on the subject in my letter No. B. P.-194, dated the 6th ultimo. The total amount expended from Provincial funds was Rs. 28,770-11-9; from Local funds, Rs. 1,738-1-11; and from Municipal funds, Rs. 9,617-11-2. To the Kolba District a sum of Rs. 40,000 was advanced from Provincial funds, of which Rs. 30,757-2-1* were spent on plague operations. The Collector of Kolba has been asked to report what portion of the amount ad- vanced should, in his opinion, be recovered from Local, Municipal or other bodies concerned. 11. The method of disinfection, discovered by Dr. Dyson, by means of per- chloride of mercury having been reported to have worked with great success at Bulsr and other places, the instructions to Mmlatdrs regarding the use of the disinfectant that were drafted by the Commissioner, N. D., and approved by Government, have been circulated to all the Collectors in the Division for com- munication to Mmlatdrs and Mahlkaris. I trust the remedy will meet with similar success in Kolba and Ratngiri, where the plague is still giving trouble. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, E. J. EBDEN, Commissioner, S. D. B 1396-2
?7 No.B.P./1075 OF 1897. From E: GRAY, ESQUIRE, I. C. S., Barrister-at-Law, Collector of Kolba; To THE COMMISSIONER, S. D. Albg, 4th August 1897. SIR, History of the Plague in the Kolba District. I have the honour to submit a report on the sub- ject noted in the margin in compliance with your No. B. P.-164 of 10th June 1897. 2. Among the few statements which experience shows may safely be made regarding the bubonic plague is that it is slow in establishing its hold on a locality. The district of Kolba, which lies on the south side of Bombay harbour, was untouched by the disease for many months after it had been ravaging Bom- bay,-notwithstanding the large daily traffic which exists between the two. Deaths of persons already affected by the disease, who availed themselves of the facilities for traffic, and left Bombay with the intention of returning to their own villages did indeed occur in many places throughout the district. The first ascertained death of this kind at Alibg took place on 27th December,-the next not until 7th February,-and it is not till the middle of March that Albg, the head-quarters of the district, was found to be in the grasp of the disease. But before this two other places had become affected-Uran and Panvel-both early in February. 3. The whole history of the plague has already been given in (i) the daily telegraphic reports to Government of the numbers of attacks and deaths at various places, and (ii) the weekly progress reports submitted under the directions of paragraph 6 of Government Circular No. 1095/572 P., General Department, dated the 1st March 1897. The present report can do but little more than sum- marise the information already thus recorded. 4. The places in the district where the disease took root are Uran, Panvel, Albg and Theronda, a village in the vicinity of Revdanda, to which the infection ultimately extended. It also appeared in Murud, the capital of the Janjira State, under the Political Agency attached to the Collectorate of Kolba. A separate report regarding the epidemic at this place was submitted to you, for the information of Government, under this office No. B.P./641, dated 14th June 1870 A few indigenous cases occurred at the coast village of Awas, north of Albg, and a considerable number at Akshi, the village immediately on the south side of the Albg creek, where eventually it was found necessary to place a hospital, which however treated only one or two patients before the epidemic ceased in the village. 5. It is probably safe to say that wherever it has appeared, and whether it has become epidemic or not, the plague has invariably been due to connection with Bombay or other centres of infection. The disease began at Mora, in the Uran Petha, the point nearest Bombay, early in February and thence, aided by fresh importations from Bombay, slowly spread over the island of Karanji. Uran is in daily steam communication with Bombay, and in December and January, when the plague was at its height in Bombay, crowds of business men and others with their families took refuge there. The first victims at Mora were the Koli women who carry baggage from the jetty into the town, and to whom the infection was no doubt conveyed from the bedding or wraps of passengers from Bombay. At Panvel, also in close communication with Bombay, several introduced cases led, at the end of February, to a general epidemic. There were isolated cases in Panvel villages among persons newly arrived or returned from Bombay, Panvel and Uran, but the disease obtained no foothold. It has not everywhere been easy nor possible to trace the connection of the first indigenous B 1396-3\?\
?8 cases with the infection, as it was in the instance of Mora, which was very clearly marked. Indeed, it is not possible in all places to ascertain which were actually the first indigenous cases. In Albg, for instance, there is reason to believe that more than one death really due to plague occurred before the cause of mortality was openly recognised and reported as such. The locality in which the indigenous outbreak commenced was the neighbourhood of the Augre's and Biwalkar's Wadas, and the owners of these are leading citizens whose servants were in communication with Bombay. In Janjira the first indigenous cases occurred in the precincts of the Mawalis palace, about a mile from the town, and the contact of the victim with the infection is unknown, but mortality had been observed previous to his seizure among rats, in the palace buildings. Whether rats can communicate infection or not is a question for medical experts, but it can safely be affirmed that in this district, in all the places where the disease has eventually established itself, the first cases were imported, not indigenous. In two indigenous cases however, which suddenly occurred at Neral in Karjat without any visible importation of the disease, the infection was not directly traced to Bombay: but Neral is on the line of rail from Bombay to Poona, and the means of communication therefore was present. Revdanda was reported in the official returns as the scene of an outbreak, but though plague has visited this place and Cheul, the outbreak occurred in reality in the hamlet of Theronda, which lies along the coast a little to the north of Revdanda. It is believed that the disease was introduced by the crew of a native craft which had gone to Bombay, and who returned and died. Into Revdanda the plague was introduced by an old woman of the Koli caste coming affected with the disease from Theronda into the house of a relative where she died. The true cause of her death was at first concealed, and it was ascertained subsequently by the police when dead rats had appeared in the house. The town of Pen, which was exposed to infection from Panvel and Albg as well as Bombay, un- accountably escaped with one indigenous case, that of a relative in the house where a plague patient from Bombay died. This was late in May, and prompt action was taken by the local Hospital Assistant for the disinfection of the house and removal of the inmates and neighbours. But a few imported cases had occurred at Pen at an earlier date. With one exception, there has not been a single indigenous case in the tlukas of Mahad, Mngaon and Roha, though ten imported cases occurred, and there were practically no attempts in the villages at either segregation or disinfection. The exception is somewhat a curious instance which occurred at the village of Vadvli in the Mngaon Tluka. A man suffering from plague was treated by the villagers with the rough native method of wet-cupping, in the belief that removal of blood from the bubo would effect a cure. The cupping process involves the application of the mouth to the instrument for the creation of vacuum. The native who operated took the disease and died. As a general inference, therefore, towns appear to be more favourable to the propagation of the disease than villages and the coast villages, with their cocoanut groves and swampy ground than the higher and more open inland villages. 6. So early as 15th October 1896, when the plague in Bombay had acquired proportions which suggested danger to the surrounding country, my predecessor, Mr. Maconachie, issued an order under Section 144, Criminal Procedure Code, prohibiting the landing of all persons at any port in the district. This order was found (Government Resolution No. 5176, General Department, dated 25th November 1896) on a reference to the Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, to be illegal. Messrs. Shepherd and Company seem to have tried (Government Resolution No. 5601, General Department, dated 26th December 1896), to prevent passengers with the plague on them from travelling by their boats, but the arrangements made with this object were of very little use. Medical examination at the Carnac Bunder was not enforced until later when the plague had become epide- mic in Panvel and Uran. All that could be done under these circumstances was to stimulate the municipalities to greater efforts in sanitation. This was done both by my predecessor Mr. Maconachie as regards Albg, and by my Assistant Mr. Brooke as regards the municipalities in his charge. Soon after the commencement of the outbreak at Uran an order under Section 45 (1) of Act IV of 1890 was issued by me as District Magistrate, the full text of which was reported
?9 to you under this office letter No. 878, dated 19th February 1897. But this order has subsequently been held by the High Court to be ultra vires, and a conviction made thereunder quashed. It appeared therefore that the existing law was inadequate for the purposes of dealing with the plague. Just at this time (20th February), rules were published under Act III of 1897. In ac- cordance with provisions of these rules, Plague Authorities were appointed for the various affected localities. Nkas for the inspection of passengers were fixed, isolation huts ordered to be erected, and all arrivals from Bombay to be closely watched. The sanction of Government was obtained to the enlistment of 110 extra police, of whom 22 were at once employed at Uran and 25 at Panvel. Mr. Jardine, Assistant Collector of Salt Revenue, was appointed a Magistrate of the Second Class. Insanitary house-property was condemned at Uran and at Panvel in March, and arrangements made for house-to-house visitation. Two Hospital Assistants were, at my urgent request, detailed by Government and employed, one at Panvel and the other at Uran. A hospital shed was erected and a retired Hospital Assistant engaged by the Municipality at Albg. But Govern- ment were unable at this time to afford any more medical assistance. Inspected premises were fumigated and disinfected, but the disinfection owing to the want of efficient agency was, I fear, perfunctory and not effective. Segregation of patients was not insisted on, and it would have been useless to insist on it, because (i) there was not the physical force to compel compliance, nor (ii) medical provision of fit hospitals for patients to be taken to. The attitude of the population was antagonistic to all measures taken by authorities for suppres- sion of the epidemic, passive resistance being most marked in the Mahomedan community. The isolation of patients in their own houses by the removal of other inmates was, however, carried out as the next best step to the removal of the patient, the people concurring more readily in this. It must be mentioned here that in the matter of segregation of patients the hamlet of Mora was for- tunate inasmuch as the presence of Mr. Carrel, the Supervisor of Government Distilleries, a gentleman who possesses great influence over the Kolis of that place, enabled a system of segregation to be established with great success. But this success was limited to the Kolis of Mora, and did not extend to the other parts of the Petha of Uran. The municipalities, as such, were useless in plague work, that of Uran at first being inclined to be obstructive also. Many of the members at Albg and Panvel left the towns, and such business as could be done in the name of the municipalities was thrown entirely on to the official members who could not leave their places. Labour became very scarce owing to the disper- sion of the population, and difficulties increased in carrying on operations not- withstanding the powers conferred by the Epidemic Diseases Act, owing to the poverty of municipalities, the increased number of centres requiring attention, and the paucity of hands in the district. 7. At the end of April, when the situation was at its worst, I was enabled, by the care of Government, after a personal consultation with His Excellency the Governor, to place myself in communication with the Bombay Plague Com- mittee, and obtain for the district a share of the resources at the disposal of that body. I had previously represented the urgent need of a Commissioned Medical Officer in the district, to supervise the various centres of operations, and received the promise that such an officer should be appointed. An allot- ment of Rs. 15,000 was placed at my disposal by Government for expenditure in plague operations, and another of Rs. 25,000 has since been granted (Govern- ment Resolution No. 2273/1731-P, dated 27th April 1897, and Government Resolution No. 3910/2741-P, dated 19th July 1897), the question of the source from which these amounts are ultimately to be repaid being left for future consideration. Thus equipped I was able to enter on the vigorous but expensive regime of the Bom- bay Plague Committee. The Chairman and some of the members of that body were good enough to visit, in company with me, Albg on the 27th and Panvel on 29th of April and Uran on 3rd May. Revdanda, Cheul and Theronda also were visited by Surgeon-Major H. P. Dimmock in my company. These places were all thoroughly inspected, and the requirements of each estimated. It was announced to the population that plague patients would no longer be allowed to remain in their own houses, but would be moved into segregation hospitals. At Albg, as has been mentioned, a hospital shed and a medical man had already
?10 been provided. Arrangements were now made to provide hospital build- ings and subordinate medical officers for Panvel, Uran and Revdanda, and the disinfection of all these places taken in hand vigorously by gangs of trained coolies under an European Inspector. The whole disinfecting staff employed in the district was supervised by Mr. T. G. B. Atkinson, who was deputed for this purpose by the Bombay Plague Committee. The knowledge that military aid was at the disposal of the Plague Committee to enforce the order for segregation of patients at once removed all open opposition to this measure, though the dislike of the people to part with their sick was evinced by repeated instances of concealment of cases. The organising of house-to-house inspection, to prevent the possibility of such concealments, was a matter of some difficulty, but the best efforts of the officers at each place were put forward to gain this object. It was resolved that at Albg every house in the town should be disinfected and lime-washed, and this was done. So also at Theronda, Rev- danda and Cheul. In Panvel and Uran it was deemed sufficient to disinfect those houses only in which cases had occurred, and in the case of Panvel this was done. At Uran circumstances have rendered it necessary to modify this order, and to increase somewhat the range of houses to be disinfected, and the work is still going on. The process of disinfection consists in thoroughly wash- ing the whole of the interior of a house, walls, roof and floor with a solution of perchloride of mercury, after which the house is lime-washed. The washing with perchloride of mercury solution, however, is too damp a process to be resorted to when the rains have set in, and at such time disinfection is done by lime-washing with a mixture of carbolic acid in the wash, the whole of the surfaces of walls, roof and floor. The disinfecting operations met with no resistance anywhere except at Revdanda and Cheul, where a disposition was shown amongst part of the Brahmin community to oppose the admission of the professional disin- fectors into their houses. This was, however, overcome in a great measure by the tact of Mr. Brady, the local supervisor of operations. Meanwhile the promise of a Commissioned Medical Officer was fulfilled, Surgeon-Captain D. J. Collins, A.M.S., being deputed to take medical charge of the operations against the plague under the orders of the Collector. This officer arrived at Albg on 12th May, and has ever since been busily employed in overlooking the whole field of work, and visiting successively all the affected localities. Government were also pleased to depute a junior Civilian, Mr. S. M. Edwardes, to act as a Special Assistant to the Collector during the press of work entailed by the visitation. Mr. Edwardes has been able to relieve me of a considerable portion of the formal and routine work of my office, and thus enabled me to spare more time than would otherwise have been possible, to the campaign against the plague. The sketch given above does not include the very numerous orders daily issued by this office as occasion demanded (both before and after the advent of the Bombay Plague Committee's aid), all of which were detailed in the weekly pro- gress reports submitted to Government. 8. The system of operations which the aid of the Bombay Plague Com- mittee rendered it the possible to inaugurate therefore comprised- (I) The establishment of Plague Hospitals, equipped with the neces- sary medical staffs and stores. (II) The compulsory removal of sick persons from their own houses. (III) The disinfection of the affected premises. In Albg, as has been stated, a hospital shed and a medical man had already been provided, and continued to be useful until the epidemic ceased in the town. But the season being far advanced, it was thought well in opening the other hospitals to provide buildings which would be capable of withstanding the rains. Accordingly it was decided that at Albg, when the rains broke, the hospital should be removed to the old Mmlatdr's kacheri, and buildings were chosen at Pauvel and Uran and Revdanda. At Panvel a large upper-storied dharmshla, belonging to a Hindu lady resident in Bombay, was selected and occupied. The owner at first refused her consent, but though I had power under Rule 9 to seize the buildings, I succeeded in conciliating her and inducing her to allow the contemplated use of the dharmshla as an act of
?11 charity, free of rent. The Mahomedans and Jews were also induced each to come forward and allot a building to be used as hospitals for members of their respective communities, but it was not eventually found necessary to use either of these. Similarly at Uran buildings for the use of their own communities were set apart by the Banias, Parbhus and Mahomedans. Statements are ap- pended showing the number of hospitals opened at each place and the patients treated. The charts attached will show that in almost all the centres the epi- demic had reached its highest point before the establishment of these hospitals, and that it declined rapidly after. 9. Inoculation by Dr. Haffkine's prophylactic process was largely resorted to in Uran. Dr. Haffkine himself, at the invitation of Mr. Carrel, visited Uran (Mora) twice, and inoculated a large number of Prsis, several Kolis, and some Government servants, including my Assistant, Mr. Brooke, Mr. Jardine, the Assistant Collector of Salt Revenue, and Mr. Carrel himself. Surgeon-Captain Childe also came over to Uran and inoculated nearly 100 persons, including the District Superintendent of Police, Mr. Green, and myself and some of our private servants. Surgeon-Captain Collis Barry visited Albg on 19th April and in- oculated about a dozen persons, and Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Hay inoculated a few peons and others belonging to this district at Mthern. All the Mmlatdrs of the district were desired to report whether they and the members of their establishments and the public of their neighbourhoods were willing to undergo inoculation, but the replies were invariably unfavourable. The Chitnis of my office, Ro Sheb P.V. Naik, underwent the operation. In Uran 410 persons underwent inoculation once and 309 twice. Since his arrival Dr. Collins has inoculated some 81 persons, mostly members of the Police Force, at Albg. Five persons who had been inoculated at Uran were attacked by the plague, but recovered within two days. 10.    The district owes a debt of gratitude to the Bombay Plague Committee and the officers whom it sent over to conduct disinfecting operations and aid in the treatment of the sick.    It would be hard to over-estimate the benefit of  the resources which came to aid and encourage a depressed populace.    But it is only just to notice the services of certain individuals unconnected with the Plague Committee, whose energies were exerted both before and after the advent of the aid from Bombay. 11.    At Uran, when the epidemic broke out, Mr. E. M. Carrel, the Super- visor of Government Distilleries, was prompt to grasp the situation.    Possessing great influence over the Kolis  who  inhabit this neighbourhood,  he persuaded them to adopt segregation, to resume their ordinary habit of burning their dead instead of burying, to which they resort when visited by an epidemic, to untile their houses and to conform with the general requirements of  the time.    He succeeded in allaying all panic,  and in dispelling all inclination to aggressive obstruction on the part of Kolis, a sturdy population capable, if uncontrolled, of very determined and even violent resistance to orders.    Mr. Carrel's influence over this portion of the population was signally instanced by his  success in persua ling a considerable number of them to undergo Dr. Haffkine's prophy- lactic inoculation. 12.    Mr. Hormusjee Manekjee,   a Prsi gentleman of private means, a member of the Kolba District Local Board and Abkri Contractor, at  his own expense provided  a  camp  for  the summer resort  of  his Prsi brethren in Bombay at Uran, in which over 1,000 were accommodated.    He persuaded a very large proportion of these to undergo inoculation.    He also sent over from Uran to Albg a native  medical practitioner who had had a certain success in his treatment of plague cases, an act of charity and public spirit which deserve commendation, in view of the prejudices of large portions of the  community against European treatment. 13.    Assistant  Surgeon  J.   P.   Pocha  rendered  good  service in visiting promptly the  scenes of fresh   attacks, administering treatment where it was possible, and exercising vigilance over the appearance of cases. 14.    At Albg, Assistant Surgeon M. F. Pereira has throughout done an amount of quiet and unpretentious work which is worthy of the highest credit. He spared himself no trouble or fatigue in visiting cases, watching the medical B 1396-4-
?12 work at the Plague Hospital or keeping himself informed of the  exact state  of the town. 15.    Mr. V.  H. Shikhare, the President of the Municipality and Huzur Deputy  Collector,   was  assiduous  in  his  attention to the requirements of the situation and daily patrolled the town.    His health  obliged him to   take a month's privilege leave just before the time when the Bombay staff began their work in Albg. 16.    The  Mmlatdrs of  Alibg  and  Panvel, Messrs.  Maruti  Sakharam Vinekar and Balkrisbna Babaji Sane, the Head Karkun of Panvel, Mr.   Yesh- wantrao Ranadive, and the Mahlkari of Uran, Mr. Gopal D.   Nigudkar, all rendered efficient service. 17.    I am indebted for much help to Mr. Brooke, my Assistant, who issued carefully compiled instructions in Panvel and Uran with regard to the methods of disinfection of affected premises, the arrangements for the disposal of the dead and other necessary observances, and exercised a vigilant  supervision over the progress of the disease within the limits of his charge. 18.    The visitation of the plague has brought forward very  prominently the want of telegraphic communication with Panvel and Uran; the one is  the head-quarters  of a Tluka, and the other of a Mahal in which are stationed the Government Distilleries, a source of a revenue amounting, I believe, to  about 30 lakhs.    At a time when communications were urgently needed, and inform- ation required between both these places and Albg as well as Bombay, the greatest inconvenience was experienced  from this cause.    A Telegraph Office exists at Pen, a distance of some 20 miles only from Panvel. 19.    But I venture to think that the deepest need which has been  brought to light by this epidemic is that of a larger and more easily accessible  supply of medical officers, both superior and subordinate.    Dispensaries had been sanc- tioned both at Roha and at Karjat   this year.    The latter especially is a crying want.    But neither could be established owing to the   want of medical officers. Doubtless the resources of Government in this department were  severely taxed, owing to the famine requirements above ghats as well as to the plague.    But whatever may be the cause, there is no doubt that the difficulty created  by the want of medical aid was forcibly illustrated by the advent of the plague.    And in connection with this subject, I would respectfully place before Government the claims of a district such as Kolba, to the permanent services of a commis- sioned medical officer as a Civil Surgeon.    Apart  from the   convenience   of the European officers stationed here,  who  with their families in the monsoon  are very much cut off from communication with Bombay, it  must be borne in mind that the district, which in old times had only the dispensary at Pen on the one side and that  at Mahd on the other, has of late years been much increased in area by the addition of the tlukas of Panvel and Karjat.    The Panvel Tluka carries with it the two dispensaries of Panvel and Uran.    The supervision and inspection of all these dispensaries, as well as of the two to  be placed in the future at Karjat and Roha, will constitute a duty which may well be assigned to a superior controlling medical administrative officer, and taken off the hands of the officer in charge  of   the Civil Hospital  Head-quarters,  which must neces- sarily be left without its doctor when he is absent on his tours of inspection.    I submit that these considerations which carry weight in  normal times are very much strengthened by the position which may now be fairly regarded as   estab- lished, that the present arrangement of an Assistant Surgeon  in charge of the Civil Dispensary is not sufficient to meet an emergency. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, E. GRAY, Collector.
?13 No. 3000 OF 1897. From THE COLLECTOR OF RATNGIRI; To THE COMMISSIONER, S. D. Ratngiri, 9th July 1897. SIR, As directed in your No. B. P.-164 of the 10th ultimo, I have the honour to forward a report on the progress of the plague in this district, and the measures taken for its prevention and suppression. 2.    Its history consists  of a number of isolated outbreaks, independent of each other, originating in cases  brought from Bombay, and in one instance from Bhiwndi, in the Thna District, and in one from Albg.    It scarcely ever travelled from one village to another or even from one quarter to another of the same village. 3.    As soon as it was noticed in the newspapers that there   was plague at Bombay, on   the  advice   of  Dr. Collie,  Civil Surgeon,  I issued orders to the Revenue and Police officers that all cases  were to be reported at once in the same way as cholera cases and the same precautions as to segregation and dis- infection were to be  used.    The vaccinators were  also ordered  to report any cases that came under their observation, but the Sanitation Department objected to their being  asked to help on the ground that they could not be expected to diagnose the disease. 4. The first suspected case reported was at Sangmeshvar, the largest town in the tluka of that name. It occurred on the 15th December and was reported on the 18th. The news of this spread quickly in the neighbourhood, and the people were so alarmed that the weekly bazr was almost unattended. 5.    On receipt of the report, arrangements were made at all the ports, where steamers call from Bombay, for segregating persons who appeared to be suffering from the plague when they landed.    Sheds were built and the duty of seeing that the sick did not go to the Dharmshlas and mix with the public was entrusted to the police. 6.    From this  time  several cases  were reported at the rate of one or two daily.    On 11th  of February  1897 the Police Ptels were again warned  to be careful in reporting all apparent or suspected cases,  to segregate the sufferers and their relatives, and to have the locthes and   bedding burned   and houses disinfected and emptied for 10 days. 7.    The first indigenous case occurred on January 20th. 8.    On the receipt of Government telegram, dated 10th February last, more effective measures were taken at the ports.     As many Hospital Assistants as could be spared from the Civil Hospital and other institutions at head-quarters and from municipalities were stationed at the different ports from 14th February 1897.    Two pensioned Hospital Assistants were engaged for Viziadrug and Ml- van, and Government were asked to send men to Bnkot and Devgad.    On  18th March 1897 one arrived at Bnkot and then all were supplied except Devgad, where the Mmlatdr's  Head Krkun did the work of inspection.    No quaran- tine was imposed,  but all passengers were examined,  and those found to be or suspected to be affected with plague were detained in  sheds  built for the pur- pose.    The Customs  Officers were asked to bring the crews and passengers of boats landing at the  smaller ports to the main ports to be examined, but this was not found  generally possible.    The Bombay Customs Collector was asked to give port clearance only for the main port, but he could not comply with this request. 9.    Orders  were issued to stop all fairs and large gatherings and remained in force until the beginning of the monsoon.
?14 10. Copies of the orders issued by the District Magistrate under the Epidemic Diseases Act were sent to you with my No. 1350 of 29th March. It is not necessary to repeat them now. They were chiefly to ensure all cases being immediately reported, and the rules as to disinfection and segregation being enforced. 11. The total cases that occurred in the district according to the months and divided into imported and indigenous are :- Month. IMPORTED. INDIGENOUS.  Cases. Deaths. Cases. Deaths. December 24 15   January 67 43 7 6 February 85 95 12 10 March 45 38 53 41 April 9 7 42 33 May 1 1 12 10 June 1 1 5 5 Total 232 200 131 105  It was not until the imported cases began to diminish in numbers that plague became indigenous in any village except Khlgm. 12. The villages where there were more than 4 indigenous cases are :-  Cases. Deaths. Month. REMARKS. Khlgm 12 10 January  Ladghar * 44 35 March * Two cases were reported in April, but they were not Karden 10 6 April  plague. Bnkot 16 13 April, May  Masra 8 7 Do.  Veshwi 13 11 May, June One case in April.  I give a detailed description of the origin of the plague at each of these places, as well as at the others where less than five indigenous cases occurred. The seriousness of the outbreaks at Khlgm, Ladghar and Bnkot was undoubtedly due to the first cases not being reported. If they had been, the disease could probably have been confined to the one house, in which the cases occurred as was done in Barondi and other places. Of these 6 places, Msra is in Mlvan Tluka in the south and near the coast, on a small creek. Khlgm is in the Ratngiri Tluka in the centre of the district, and two miles from the Shastri river, right inland. The other four are in the Dapoli Tluka, Bnkot and Veshwi join and are practically one village, at the northernmost boundary of the district on the mouth of the Savitri river. Ladghar and Karden are two miles apart on the coast and some 20 miles south of Bnkot. 13. At all these villages a Hospital Assistant was in attendance from the time the cases were first reported till the end of the epidemic. There is one still at Bnkot. Every endeavour was made to get information of fresh cases as soon as they occurred. After the original cases were reported, there does not appear to have been any concealment except at Bnkot and Veshwi. The former is occupied chiefly by Mussalmans, the latter by Kolis, and both these classes objected to the segregation of their sick, though the latter had no objection to leaving their houses themselves and going to live in the jungle. Hospitals were erected for the sick and segregation huts for their relations.
?15 14.    The details of the origin of the disease in each of the villages, as far as they can be ascertained, are as follows:- Khalgam.-First case was that of a woman by name Bhima Vittoe Sinde, who arrived from Bombay, at her father's house on the 30th Decem- ber 1896, was attacked with fever on the 1st January 1897, and died on the 4th January 1897. 2nd.-Her brother's wife by name Bhagirthi kom Bhawoo Shinde, who attended on her, contracted the disease on the 7th January 1897. She was taken to her father's house at Dakol, a neighbouring village, where she died on the 11th January 1897. 3rd.-A girl belonging to the same family was attacked with fever on the 3rd February, but there are reasons for thinking that this was not a case of plague. The 4th case was of a man by name Sona Rama Dudya who landed at Jaigad from Shepherd's steamer with fever, arrived here on 26th January 1897 and died on the 28th January 1897. His house was about half a mile from the first house and had no connection with it. After his death, the remaining members of the house left it and resided in a separate vacant house at some distance for nearly two weeks, bat after having repaired the walls and grounds re-occupied it. These were all the cases in the village itself, but a more serious outbreak occurred in a hamlet called "Madhli Gotad Wadi," which is on a hill about two miles from the village. It consists of nearly 20 houses belonging to one family. Here a man by name Sona Ganu Gotad arrived from Bombay on the 6th January 1897, was attacked with fever on the 8th January 1897, and died on the 11th January 1897. He is responsible for all the other 10 indi- genous cases, of which 8 proved fatal. Ladhgar-A man, Bhandri by caste, arrived here from Bombay on the 23rd of January. Probably he brought plague infection in the clothes and other things belonging to his wife, who died of plague in Bombay two or three days before his arrival here. A day or two after his arrival from Bombay, some 8 or 10 rats were found dead in his as well as in a neighbour's house. A few days later his aunt was attacked with fever and died on the 2nd February 1897; next his nephew contracted the disease on the 5th February 1897 and died on the 6th February 1897; next, a week after the death of the nephew, his son got plague and died on the 14th February 1897, and next he himself got attacked on the 23rd and died on the 25th February 1897. These four deaths occurred in one house. Similarly three deaths occurred in the next house. Up to this time nobody suspected the disease to be plague. But on the occurrence of the 8th case the matter was reported to the Chief Constable who then sent police to inquire. The police having had instructions for diagnosing plague, came to the conclusion that it was plague. Up to 9th March there were in all 34 cases with 31 deaths. All the remaining residents left their houses on the 9th and arranged to erect chappers in their fields and to put up in them, but some of the patients were allowed to remain in out-houses near the unaffected chappers and their attendants used to mingle with unaffected men, so cases of plague continued to occur for nearly a week. Karden, commencement and cause.-1st case. Hussen valad Abdul Rahim Makadum having been attacked in Bombay arrived here on the 4th of February and died on the 12th February 1897. Second case. His neighbour arrived from Bombay on the 7th March 1897. He was attacked on the 11th March 1897 and died on 12th March 1897. Third and fourth cases, both indigenous, one the sister and the other the brother of the deceased No. 1, were attacked on 22nd March 1897. The sister died on 23rd March 1897 and the brother on 25th March 1897. These had all been living in the house of No. 1 whose clothes had not been destroyed. 5th.-An old woman was reported to be suffering with plague, but the case was doubtful. 6th.-A female by name  Sherrifa, wife of  Abdul Ajid, was attacked on 27th March 1897. 1396-54-
?16 7th.-The brother of No. 2, by name Abdul Rahiman, was attacked on 3rd April 1897 and died on 4th April 1897. There was a long interval between the imported and indigenous cases in this house. 8th.-The brother of No. 6 was attacked on the 3rd April 1897. 9th.-Abdul Kadir was attacked on the 3rd April 1897. He apparently had no connection with any of the others. 10th.-Maryambibi, daughter of Bhawoo Russul, was attacked on 3rd April 1897. Masra.-The first plague case occurred at Belosi on 16th March 1897. This was a woman named Anandi, wife of Dhondu Palav, who arrived from Bombay on 16th March and was attacked the same day. She died on 19th March. Another imported case occurred on 5th April and proved fatal on the 7th April. Five more imported cases occurred and proved fatal during the interval between 13th and 25th April. Two indigenous cases occurred respectively on 15th and 19th April and proved fatal on 17th and 20th April 1897. In all nine cases proved fatal. The indigenous cases occurred in the houses where imported cases had proved fatal. The tenth case was that of Sakharam Babaji Palav. He came from Bombay about four months previously and was attacked on 8th April. The 10 cases took place in five houses, which were quite close to one another. Bnkot and Veshwi.-The first indigenous case occurred at Bnkot on 5th. April 1897 and at Veshwi on the 7th instant. Dhondu Rama (the first indigenous case of plague at Bnkot) was an idiot He used to haunt the dharmshla near the bandar and the shops close to it. He subsisted on the charity of passengers who put up there waiting for the steamers He used to accept articles of food and raiment from the passengers. There are many instances of persons concealing plague cases and running away with their effects, after disposing of the dead, from Bombay and other affected localities. It is a practice of the natives to give in charity the clothing, &c., belonging to the dead. Dhondu, in his intercourse with the passengers, may have received such clothing and thus contagion may have been communicated to him. After he was attacked, a shopkeeper in the same locality was attacked the next day. All the houses in which plague cases occurred are close together. The majority of cases occurred in a lane near the dharmshla. There were three houses in which more than one case occurred. In all there were 13 houses where there were cases. Changu bin Damu was the first person attacked at Veshwi. He had come from Bombay only four days before he was attacked. He had gone there to see one of his relations in Bombay who was attacked with plague. After the relation's death Changu came to Veshwi with all his effects. Chiwcli.-Two indigenous cases. These were brother and sister. They died on 22nd and 23rd January respectively. A relation of them living 500 yards off in the same village had come from Bombay with the plague and died on the 11th. The others had visited him. Velas.-There were five indigenous cases in three houses in the same alley between 30th March and 7th April. There was only one imported case discover- ed in the village, which occurred on 15th February, and cannot therefore have caused the indigenous cases. Niwendi.-One indigenous case. The son of a man who came with plague from Bombay. Both were taken ill on 2nd March and died on the 5th. Shirgaon.-Three indigenous cases. The first was wife of a man who came from Bombay, and managed to elude the examining officer. He had a bubo when he arrived at Shirgaon on 18th March and he died on 3rd April. His wife died on the 2nd. The other two were wife and son respectively of a man who came from Krwr and died on the 2nd April, some 15 days after arrival. The wife died on the 5th and the son on the 13th of the same month. The two houses are about 30 yards apart.
?17 Buroudi.-Three indigenous cases. All died. One of these three, who were all in the same house, had visited the plague-affected part of Ladghar. He was taken ill on 12th April and the other two on the 14th and 23rd. They died on the 20th, 22nd and 25th respectively. There were no buboes on any of them, and until the third death the disease was not suspected to be plague or reported. Sangameshvar.-A boatman was taken ill in January, but recovered. It is supposed that he contracted it by taking plague-stricken persons in his boat; but it is doubtful if this was a case of plague at all. Are.-There were two indigenous cases in the same house on 21st February. One recovered and the other died the same day. There was no imported case in this village, and it cannot be ascertained how the cases originated. Guhagar.-There was one indigenous case, a Teli, taken ill on 9th March and died on 13th. There were two imported cases on 15th December and 5th January; but they did not live near the house of the Teli and no connection can be traced. Bhoste.-Five indigenous cases. Three persons, all relations, came from Bom- bay with plague on 10th January and died on that day or the next. They lived in different houses, two in one vdi and one in another. The indigenous cases were all of one family, related to the persons who had come from Bombay, and living only five yards off one of the houses. They died between the 2nd and 12th of February, and are reported to have been attacked on the very days on which they died. 15.    A case was reported as indigenous at Kelshi, but it was subsequently found that the affected person had got the plague at Vlas. 16.    The last case reported occurred on June  4th,   and there  are grounds for believing that the disease has now disappeared from the district. 17.    Luckily there were no indigenous  cases in   any  of the  large  towns. The Municipal Committees in most cases did what they were asked to do by way of precautionary measures, such as cleaning their towns and   building temporary hospitals.    Vengurla and Chiplun were specially energetic, sending their medical officers down to  the bandar daily to examine passengers.    Assistant  Surgeon C. M. Bodrigues did very good work. 18.     All the Assistant Collectors, Mmlatdrs, the District Superintendent of Police and his subordinates worked very hard and did all that they were asked to do thoroughly; as also did all the Hospital Assistants and pensioners with one exception. 19.    My warmest acknowledgments are due to   Surgeon-Major   Collie, Civil Surgeon, for the advice and help which I received from him during the whole time of the epidemic. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, W. W. DREW, Collector.
?No. 706 OF 1897. FROM COLONEL J. M. HUNTER, Political Agent, Kthiwr; To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, General Department, Bombay. Kthiwr Political Agency, Rjkot, 17th August 1897. SIR, Subject. Report OB the recent out- break of plague in certain places in Kthiwr. With reference to  paragraph 8 of Government Resolution  No. 3045/2269-P. of 2nd June last, I have the honour to submit a detailed report of the late outbreak of plague at certain places in Kthiwr and the measures taken for its suppression. Plague brought into K- thiwr by fugitives from Bombay. 2.    The virulent outbreak of plague in the Mndvi ward of the City of Bombay during the months of October and November and its subsequent spread to other parts of the city caused a general exodus of the inhabitants, who fled to their native places or sought temporary domicile with their relatives or friends living elsewhere. Kthiwr being closely con- nected with Bombay numbers of these fugitives flocked into the province bringing with them either the germs of the disease or persons affected with it. Preliminary measures. Me- dical Inspection at Railway Stations and ports. 3. As this exodus was calculated to result in the spread of the disease over other parts of the Presidency wherever the Bombay fugitives went to reside, the following measures were taken to protect this province from the disease :- At Bhvnagar, Botd and Sihor Railway Stations medical inspection of all passengers arriving from Wadhwn was carried out, and at the port of Bhv- nagar a medical officer boarded all country boats and steamers arriving from Bombay. Similar inspection was also enforced at Verval, Mngrol, Porbandar and Jmnagar. It was found that by the 22nd December 1896 one case of plague had arrived at Mahuva from Bombay, one at Verval, one suspicious case at Mngrol and one at Porbandar ; in all 4 cases. Segregation of affected persons and their treatment according to Dr. Haffkine's instructions advised. 4.    All maritime States under this Agency were then instructed to make the medical inspection more thorough and effectual. Similar orders were also issued to the officials at Wadhwn as regards medical inspection at the Wadh- wn Railway Station of all passengers coming by the B. B. & C. I. Railway. In addition to medical inspection, segregation of per- sons found to be affected with the plague and their treatment according to Dr. Haffkine's instructions was ordered. Synopsis   of    instructions issued. 5. The following is a synopsis of the instructions issued to all Darbrs and Government officers for the prevention of the spread of the disease:- (a) Segregation in hospitals of patients found to be suffering from the plague, disinfection of houses and destruction of clothing of patients (Cir- cular No. 147 of 13th January 1897). (b) Careful inspection of all imports of bjri and jowri and old or mouldy grain being opened and dried until passed by medical officer as fit for human food (Circular No. 170 of 15th January 1897). B 1408-1
?2 (c) Limewashing of all public buildings and particularly grain stores at once and at intervals of one month, and private persons advised to do the same (Circular No. 170 of 15th January 1897). (d) Reporting of cases of plague to the Agency by wire (Circular No. 253 of 20th January 1897). (e) Measures to be adopted against overcrowding in dwelling-houses and register of daily arrivals to be kept. Camps to be formed in the neighbourhood of towns for accommodation of new arrivals in overcrowded houses (No. 415 of 29th January 1897). (f) Should a case of plague occur, the following measures were to be taken (Circular No. 632 of 12th February 1897) :- 1. The whole infected building and one or more of adjoining houses to be at once vacated and inmates accommodated in a camp outside the town where they should be daily inspected by a medical officer and kept under strict police surveillance, arrangements being made for supply of food. 2. Floors of infected building to be dug up, walls scratched and disinfectants copiously applied, tiles to be removed from the roof and necessary openings made in the walls for ventilation. 3. Thorough inspection of all the dwelling-houses of the town or village and removal of inmates of overcrowded or unwholesome houses, openings in walls and roofs of ill-ventilated houses to be made. 4. Strict medical inspection at Wadhwn and ports. Quarantine at Bhvnagar and other ports. 6. In January the Bhvnagar Darbr imposed quarantine against vessels coming from Bombay, but under Government advice this was modified so as not to interfere with the steamers, their passengers being landed and segregated. Similar measures were also adopted at Porbandar and Jmnagar. Passengers arriving by sea were landed and segregated and detained for a number of days in shelter camps, where facilities for obtaining food were provided and the persons were daily examined by medical officers. Imported cases in the four months preceding February. 7. These medical examinations and enquiries as to previous cases led to the following imported cases of plague being discovered :- October 1896   1 case in Jmnagar. November    1  Wadhwn Civil Station. December    1  Wadhwn Civil Station.   1  Mahuva.   1  Verval.   1  Mngrol.   1  Porbandar.   1  Kutiyna.  Total  6   January 1897   1 case at Wadhwn Civil Station.   1  Bhvnagar.   1  Mahuva.   1  Verval.   3  Mngrol.   2  Porbandar.   1  Salya.   1  Khambhliya.   3  Jmnagar.   3  Kutiyna.  Total  17
3 The total number of cases imported at each place during the above four months was as shown below:- Kutiyna    4 Jmnagar    4 Mngrol   4 Wadhwn Civil Station  3 Porbandar   3 Khambhliya   1 Salya  1 Verval   2 Mahuva  2 Bhvnagar    1  Total  25 Imported cases in February.  8. February, however, saw a large increase in the number of such imported cases, owing to the plague having broken out in Karchi, whence people fled in all directions in large numbers. The cases imported in Kthiwr during February are returned as under:- Kutiyna  1 Jodiya  29 Porbandar  6 Jmnagar  3 Salya  2 Una  2 Jafrabad  1 Bhvnagar  2  Total 46 Indigenous cases. At Jodiya. 9. It was in the 2nd week of this month that indigenous cases were discovered both at Jodiya and Wadhwn Civil Station. The following are the details of the outbreak at Jodiya as given by Colonel Kennedy, the Administrator of Jmnagar, in his report dated 14th February 1897:- "A day or two before the 26th of last month a Luwna and his wife came from Karchi. On the 2nd instant, the man was found to be suffering from bubonic and he died on 3rd instant. He had probably been suffering for 3 or 4 days before his case came to light and there is no reason to take this as anything but an imported case. On the 8th instant, the wife was found to be suffering and she died on 9th. Her case must I think be taken as indigenous as at least 12 days to 14 days must have elapsed since her arrival from Karchi, though possibly she may have had the germs in her system before her arrival. In the meantime the daughter of this couple came to condole over her father's death. She came from Jambuda about 8 miles from Jodiya and yesterday morning she was found to be suffering from high fever. She was well on the 12th instant for she went to the river to bathe. This morning clear bubonic symptoms showed themselves and she was removed from her place of temporary isolation to the plague camp where she is under treatment. Hers is unquestionably an indigenous case. The house was closed and watched so that no one could go in pending further instructions from me. My instructions were that the house itself and those on each side should be unroofed, floors dug up and the whole fumigated until I could personally inspect the place. I went over this morning to Jodiya and inspected the house and its surroundings, and have ordered the complete demolition of the house and burning of materials and the cleansing and ventilation of the neighbouring houses as above." The prompt and stringent measures adopted had the effect of immediately stamping out the plague from Jodiya and no fresh case occurred since. Indigenous cases at Wadhwn Civil Station. 10. As regards the appearance of plague at the Wadhwn Civil Station, the following short account will furnish necessary details as to its origin and other particulars:- On the 11th February a man, his wife and a female child of 4 years were found suffering from fever in a public lodging house. The man had bubonic swellings but though these symptoms were absent from his wife and child, the Agency Surgeon whom I deputed to the place reported that they were plague cases. The child died soon after. From enquiries it transpired that another
?4 daughter of this man had died of fever shortly before these cases came to notice, and it was suspected her disease was also bubonic.    Besides the above, an old woman  who was living in an adjoining room was also attacked and died soon after.    These persons were permanent residents of Wadhwn Civil Station and had not gone to Bombay, though it appears that they had constant contact with people coming from Bombay.   The sanitary condition of the house was reported to be unsatisfactory.    These cases came to the notice of the medical officer of the Station, Assistant Surgeon Ro Bahdur Thakordas Kikabhai on the 11th, who  at once took the necessary steps for segregation and disinfection.    The Agency Surgeon was also sent immediately to Wadhwn.    Huts were  erected beyond the station limits for the temporary residence of affected persons and separate sheds provided for healthy  inmates of affected houses, who were pre- vented from having communication with the rest of the population arrangements being made for the supply of food, &c.    The floors of the infected rooms were dug up, the walls scraped and disinfectants copiously  applied.    The tiles of the whole building were removed and openings made in the walls to allow free ventilation.    A thorough inspection of all houses in the station was made by the Agency Surgeon and Prnt officer, and strict injunctions were issued for general cleanliness.    These measures proved so successful that after two more cases, one on the 13th February and the other  on  the   10th  March, the  disease  totally disappeared. Darbrs warned to be alert against the appearance of plague in their respective States. 11.    The measures adopted at Wadhwn Civil  Station were at  once communicated to Darbrs in order that similar precautions might be taken, should any indigenous cases occur in their respective territories, and later on I took the opportunity of a meeting of Krbhris, held at Rjkot in February, to impress upon them the great importance of taking prompt and effectual measures for segregating affected persons, &c. Cases   in   the    Wadhwn town. 12. The disease next appeared in the town of Wadhwn which is only 3 miles from the station, and the inhabitants of which have daily communication with the latter. A Ngar woman came from the Wadhwn Civil Station on the 13th February with fever on her. The fever continued for 4 days. In the morning of the 17th she had pain in the armpit, developed a bubo and died the same night. Another local case occurred on the 3rd March and the patient died on the 7th March. On the next day a Brhmin boy residing in the same street was taken ill, developed a bubo on the 9th, and died soon after. The Darbr officials were somewhat lax in taking the necessary measures, but eventually at my earnest request they were duly carried out which resulted in the complete disappearance of the disease. Subsequent progress of the plague. 13. The following statement and chart show the subsequent progress of the plague in the States under this Agency :- Month.         IMPORTED CASES.  INDIGENOUS CASES.  Place.   Number.  Place from which. imported. Place. Number.     Population. March 1897        Bhvnagar 1  Bhvnagar 27 }Already referred to above{ 57,653  Jodiya 1  Kutiyna 23  9,580  Talaja 1  Wadhwn C. S.  1        7,164  Jmnagar . 1  Wadhwn City 2  17440                4                             53
?5 Month. IMPORTED CASES. INDIGENOUS CASES.  Place. Number.  Place from  which imported. Place.  Number.  Population. April 1897 Verval 1  Kutiyna 47 9,580  Porbandar 2  Chiklodra 1   Salya 1  Bhvnagar 13 57,653  Bedi  5   61   Jmnagar  2       Chela 1      Jetpur  1      13      May 1897 Jmnagar 9  Kutiyna 21 9,580  Bedi  1  Katwna 16 171  Rjkot 1  Bhvnagar 4 57,653  Wadhwn C. S. 1  Porbandar  1 18,805    12   42  June 1897    Kutiyna 3* 9,580      3  * Last case occurred on 2nd June 1897. It will be seen from the above that Bhvnagar and Kutiyna are the only two places where the plague established itself and made many victims, the total cases at Bhvnagar being 44, at Kutiyna 94 and at Katwna, a village close to Kutiana, 16. Details of the cases at Bhvnagar. 14. The origin of the outbreak of plague at Bhvnagar was as follows :- There were as stated above 4 imported cases from Bombay ; three before the first indigenous case was reported and one after. The first imported case arrived on the 4th January but was not discovered until the 6th and the patient died on the 7th. The second imported case was found on the 1st February during the medical inspection of passengers at the Bandar, was segregated and ultimately recovered. The third case was also discovered on the 1st February and recovered in a week. The fourth case came vi Surat and Gogo, was discovered on the 3rd March and discharged as cured on the 30th March. The first indigenous case at Bhvnagar occurred on the 23rd February. A Brhmin woman residing in the Rnika ward of the town was attacked with fever on that day, developed a bubo on the 27th and died in her house on the 2nd March. It is said that she had no communication with any case but I am inclined to think that she must have contracted the disease through contact with persons who had come from Bombay, or through their clothes or some such channel. The next case occurred in an adjoining house on the 27th, a large bubo was noticed in the left groin of a patient on the 29th who died on the 6th. This woman is said to have come in contact for 2 or 3 days with a neighbour who had died of plague. The disease then established itself in that locality. In the first week of March there were six cases. In consequence of this outbreak I urged the Darbr authorities to carry out more strictly the principles of segregation and disinfection, which had already proved effectual in preventing the spread of the disease in other places. Visit to Bhvnagar and personal exhortations had a most beneficial effect. 15. On the 7th March I proceeded to Bhvnagar and personally inspected the arrangements. I found that the Darbr authorities were endeavouring to do their best but the apathy and in some cases active opposition on the part of the people hindered progress. My presence and ex B 1408- 2
?6 hortations had a most salutary effect. The leaders of the different communities and castes agreed to co-operate with the Darbr officials. They provided special buildings for the segregation and treatment of affected persons of their respec- tive classes and also for the isolation of healthy inmates and relatives. For those who had not been able to make special arrangements, a special hospital and sheds were provided by the Darbr. In the second week of March only one case occurred. But in the second half of the month there was a recrudeseence of plague, 17 cases having occurred in the same part of the town. The measures taken, though not successful in at once eradicating the disease from the affected locality, prevented its spread to other parts of the town. Seven cases occurred in the first fortnight of April, 7 in the 2nd fortnight, and 4 in the first week of May, in which month the disease totally disappeared. The total indigenous cases at Bhvnagar were 44, of whom 34 died and the rest recovered. Outbreak at Kutiyna. and other Musalmns. 16.    The disease, however, made greater havoc and stayed longer in Kutiyna where  the Darbr had to deal  with a more conser- vative and illiterate population of Hindus, Memons, The number of cases at this place aggregated In March ... ...    23 " April  ... ...    47 " May  ... ...    21 " June  ... ...    3           94 in a population of 9,580. The Darbr officials were in the beginning apathetic or afraid to enforce stringent measures, but soon found that in such matters half measures were useless and delay was fatal. Here also it was established without a shadow of doubt that plague was primarily imported from Bombay but that the first cases were not allowed to leak out which resulted in the disease firmly establishing itself. Like Bhvnagar the Kutiyna people have also an intimate connection with Bombay and in the general exodus from that city in the months of November, December and January, the natives of Kutiyna flocked into Kutiyna in large numbers. No less than 1,500 persons are said to have come before arrange- ments were made for medical inspection at the Railway stations or the imposition of quarantine or observation camps at the ports. It appeared from enquiries made that among the fugitives a Memon with fever and bubo came to Kutiyna vi Porbandar on the 11th December but he recovered. Another person similarly affected arrived on the 23rd December. Three more cases were traced to January. The Chief Medical Officer of the Jungad State thus describes how the plague originated and established itself at Kutiyna :- "On the 11th February Santok Madhavji, Hindu female, aged 20 years, was attacked by plague-fever, bubo, and delirium and she died four days after. The history of her family is very instructive. The family of Lalji Jagjiwan whose daughter-in-law Santok was, lived at Bombay, where one son and one granddaughter died. The rest landed at Porbandar on 6th January and arrived at Kutiyna on 8th. His daughter Acharat was seized by plague on 9th and died on 12th January. His son Chakon was attacked by plague on 16th and died on 18th. His wife Poori was attacked on 23rd and died on 26th. The last person had not been to Bombay, all the rest came from Bombay. The history of this family is still more mournful to relate. They scrupu- lously withheld all the cases until the death of Santok and no medical aid was resorted to for any of them. Lalji at last perceived his folly and vacated his house which was kept closed for a few weeks. On re-entering the house on 15th March Lalji's son Kamalshi was attacked on 17th and he is yet lingering. Lalji himself was attacked on the 18th and died the same day. " When I saw Lalji's house on the 23rd instant it was locked, the entire family decimated, I found the tiles removed, the inside of the house was reported to me as having been fumigated and whitewashed after Santok's death on 15th February. The history of this family shows how tenaciously the poison of plague clings to a place and how dangerous it is to live in a plague stricken house. It further renders the utility of white-washing and fumigation doubtful. Till about this time the people were more or less successful in keeping back plague cases, but the havoc thus silently wrought by the disease could then no longer be kept hidden. If the disease had been early recognized and reported and if strict sanitary and suppressive measures were then allowed a chance, the disease would probably not have had a stronghold of the place as it now has. But the people were awestricken by measures adopted at Bombay and kept the facts con- cealed as long as they could."
?7 A medical man holding the degree of L. M. and S. with two Hospital Assistants were sent by the Jungad Darbr for attendance on the sick. An Assistant Superintendent of Police with a strong body of men was ordered to carry out the necessary measures for house-to-house visitation, segregation, and disinfection, and the concealment of the disease was made penal. The town was divided into wards and members of each caste and a female nurse accompanied the officials in the house-to-house visitation. The Divn, accompanied by the Chief Medical Officer of the State, visited the place towards the end of March and made complete arrangements for the suppression of the disease. Visit to Katiana in com- pany with Drs. Lowson and Burke. 17.    I also proceeded there on the 25th April in company with Dr. Lowson, the special Plague Commissioner, and Dr. Burke, the Agency Surgeon, and met the Divn who was awaiting us. Dr. Lowson was satisfied with the segregation Hospitals and Camps and gave some valuable advice to render them more efficient. In consequence of the objections of the Mahome- dans to allow the corpses of their dead or the bodies of their sick females to be seen, I issued a notification that all cases of sickness or death not declared to and examined by the Medical Officer would be treated as plague cases and the segre- gation and disinfection measures enforced. A prohibition was also placed against all persons leaving the town until they had passed 8 days in an observation camp and had their effects disinfected. Several of the infected wards of the town were ordered to be evacuated. Appearance of plague in a neighbouring village Katw- na. 18.    The stringent measures enforced at Kutiyna had the effect of reducing the number of cases to 21 in May as against 45 in the previous month, but it was discovered that the disease had appeared in a village called Katwna, some 3 miles from Kutiyna. A Hindu Bht, a land-owner in Katwna, aged 35 years, had been to Kutiyna for some business and on his return was suddenly attacked with plague and died in the latter part of March. Other cases then began to occur but were not brought to the notice of the Darbr authorities. The cases came to knowledge in an indirect way. The Police Ptil of the village was punished for his negligence in not finding out and reporting the cases. The entire village was evacuated, the residents going to reside in the fields and others removed to the segregation camp at Kutiyna. This coupled with thorough disinfection had the effect of freeing the village from the scourge in a fortnight. Total     disappearance     of plague since 6th June. 19.    There were only 3 cases at Kutiyna in the beginning of June, the last being on the 6th. No indigenous case having oc- curred since that date, the disease may be said to be totally stamped out. Observation      Camp      at Wadhwn Civil Station. 20.    In consequence of a case of plague having passed undetected all the medical examinations on the Railway lines between Bilimora and Jetpur, orders were issued in April in pursuance of advice from Dr. Lowson to have the temperatures taken of all passengers arriving by the B. B. & C. I. Railway at Wadhwn, which is the place of entry into Kthiwr by land, and arrange- ments were also made to disinfect the clothing of all passengers at that place. In order that this might be affectually carried out, a detention of 24 hours in an observation camp was directed to be enforced. This measure was especially necessary in view of the gradual progress of the disease northward from Bom- bay. Observation  camps at the ports. 21.    Danger from another quarter also threatened us at this  time     The virulent outbreak of the disease at Mndvi, in Cutch, which is only a few hours voyage from, and in daily communication with the western ports of K- thiwar called for increased watchfulness against the import of the disease through the Kthiwr ports opposite the Cutch coast. Strict injunctions were therefore issued to enforce medical inspection of all passengers arriving at the ports and their detention at observation camps for a period of 8 days. Returns of daily arrivals were called for in order that the influx might be carefully watched. The ports at which such observation camps were established were
?8 notified, and landing at other ports where such arrangements could not be made was prohibited. The ports on the southern coast of Kthiwr being closed during the monsoon, observation camps at these places have been dispensed with. But those at Wawnia and Jmnagar on the Gulf of Cutch have still been retained as plague has not yet totally disappeared from Cutch and com- munication with that province is not entirely stopped during the monsoon. 22.    The observation camp at Wadhwn Civil Station however has been razed from the middle of July, owing to the subsidence of plague  at Bombay and other places in that direction. 23.    Looking to the peculiar  circumstances of Kthiwr, divided as it is among numerous principalities and administrations which must render concerted and uniform  action very  difficult and  exposed as it is to the large influx of persons from Bombay, Karachi and Mndvi both by sea and land the province may be said to be exceptionally fortunate in being comparatively immune from a widespread epidemic and in being   able to stamp out the disease from places where it has taken root for the time being.    The Darbrs and their officials loyally carried out my instructions and  advice to the best of their ability, and they now acknowledge the wisdom of the measures adopted, though at first they thought them rather too stringent. 24.    The very effective observation measures introduced by Colonel Ken- nedy, Administrator at Jmnagar, and Mr. Quin at Porbandar have, I feel sure, contributed in a very great degree to the comparative immunity from the disease which this province has enjoyed; for the ports of those States were the places to which the population of Bombay, Karchi and Mndvi (Cutch) mostly fled to escape from the epidemic at those cities. 25.    The lessons which appear to an  unprofessional mind to have been taught by the recent outbreak are the following :- 1.    The disease is undoubtedly conveyed through human agency and it clings tenaciously to one locality or dwelling, although there may be others equally if not more insanitary. 2.    It appears to require more than one case for the disease to estab- lish itself in a new locality, i.e., to become indigenous, which favours the conclusion that the poison  needs to  be in a   concentrated form  or  that certain forms of the disease which are accompanied  by no  excretions do not propagate the disease.    Thus a number of cases may be imported into a locality without infecting the residents. 3     That the conditions of life in sea-port towns are more favourable to the outbreak and spread of the disease. 4.    That though dwellings may be insanitary they may escape pro- vided they are not overcrowded. 5.    That the disease may cling to a particular dwelling or articles of clothing for several weeks if not properly disinfected as in the case of the Kutiyna family. 6.    That it is possible to protect a town from the importation of the disease by efficient detention and observation camps. 7.    That it is of the first importance to obtain the earliest information of any cases so that the segregation and disinfecting measures may be in- troduced before the foci of infection have become numerous.    This is es- tablished by our experience at Wadhwn Civil Station and Jodiya. 8.    That to make the above possible an efficient organization for the registration of  deaths  and their causes  is necessary in all large towns. This has been impressed upon the Darbrs and District officers have been instructed to satisfy themselves on this point during their tours. 26.    There was no remarkable mortality amongst  rats  in  those  places where the plague appeared, but no positive conclusions can be drawn therefrom because rats are not numerous and if a few died they would not have attracted attention.
?9 27.    No measures were adopted this in province for prevention or cure by means of Haffkine's prophylatic or Yersin's curative serum. 28.    The history of the plague so far in Kthiwr may be summed up as an almost entirely successful effort to keep out the disease, and on equally satis- factory endeavour to isolate and stamp it out in those few places where it be- came established. 29.    A complete statement of plague cases from the beginning to  the- week ending  11th June last is herewith attached, as called for in your No. 2238/P. of the 31st May last. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. M. HUNTER, Colonel, Political Agent, Kthiwr. THROUGH THE POLITICAL DEPARTMENT. B 1408-3
?No. 2877 OF 1897. From LIEUT.-COLONEL F. H. JACKSON, Political Superintendent, Planpur ; To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, General Department, Bombay. Planpur, 31st July 1897. SIR, Submits a report of the out- break of plague at Planpur and the means adopted for its suppression. As required by Resolution in the General Department, No. 3045/2269-P., dated the 2nd June 1897, I have the honour to submit a report of the outbreak of plague at Planpur and the means adopted for its suppression. The population, the ruler, and the influential commu- nity of Planpur. 2.    Planpur is a town of 22,500 inhabitants situated on the Rjputna- Mlwa Railway, about 40 miles from Mount Abu and 17 from the British Camp at Deesa, with which it is joined by a branch rail. The ruler of the Native State, of which it is the capital, is a Mahomedan styled " The Dewn." His name is Sir Mahomed Sher Khanji, K.C.I.E. Although the Mahomedans are numerically the strongest, the most influential community in the place is that of the Jain Baniyas. Introduction of the plague from Bombay during the ab- sence of all the principal authorities from head-quar- ters. 3.    The plague was introduced from Bombay at an unlucky time when all the principal authorities were absent from head-quar- ters. On the 5th January 1897 the Political Superin- tendent proceeded on his cold weather tour in the districts and on the 20th the Dewn, his two sons and a large party left Planpur for a long-projected tour in Northern India. The Chief Minister and the State Medical Officer accom- panied this party. The current duties of the State were left in charge of a former Minister, a Jain Baniya by caste, while a special Hospital Assistant was engaged to look after the town. There was one other Medical Officer available, viz., Assistant Surgeon J. P. Wdia, who has charge of the Superintendency and the Railway within certain limits. In consequence of the exodus from Bom- bay, which commenced in January, this officer, on the 14th of that month, was directed to commence the inspection of Railway passengers. Two Jain Baniyas coming from Bombay and Visnagar introduced the plague on the 8th February. 4.    About the 11th February  a report reached me in camp that some suspicious deaths had occurred in the town, but it was not till the 20th that the official in charge wrote to say that, since the 16th, six cases of plague had occurred, four of which had proved fatal, and that before the 16th there had been some cases which were not medi- cally treated. It subsequently transpired that two Jain Baniyas coming from Bombay and Visnagar early in the month had brought the infection with them, and that the first death from this cause actually occurred on the 8th of February. The first few cases were hushed up so that the authorities had not the opportu- nity of dealing with them even if they had wished to do anything. The measures adopted to prevent the plague from spreading. 5.    I returned to Planpur on the 23rd February and lent my assistance to the local officials. A Committee was formed to deal with all matters connected with plague. The principal townspeople were interviewed and an attempt was made to excite their interest in preventive measures. It was at first desired to do everything by  persuasion and not by force.     The people proved to be quite apathetic about the matter.    White-washing, disinfect- ing and fumigating were feebly carried out.   All our establishments were with- B 1436
?2 drawn from the town and the part affected was isolated as much as possible. The collection of mourning women at the house of the dead was stopped. The erection of sheds outside the town was commenced and the people were exhorted to go and live in the gardens outside, so that the town might be cleaned and ventilated. An attempt was made, but without success, to obtain extra medical assistance (native) from the outside. An application was made to Bombay for " Yersin " and " Haffkine's" serum, but the supply had been exhausted. The Hospital Assistant, who had been specially engaged, proved quite useless, and so the whole work fell upon Dr. "Wdia, including the inspection at the Railway. The plague at first con- fined to certain limit. Its first victims and its gradual increase. 6.    For some time the measures taken confined the plague to one part of the town and to the Jain Baniya community. The victims were at first almost all women. Rats were found in infected houses. Gradually servants and others who had to come in contact with the Baniyas began to be affected, and it became evident that if stronger measures were not taken the plague would spread over the town. The necessity of applying for the services of a Euro- pean Medical Officer. 7.    When the subject of compulsory segregation was discussed the sub- ordinate officials of the State expressed their inability to carry it out in the face of the opposition that would be made. There were two parties among the Jain Baniyas and one opposed the other. The Dewn, in Hindustn, was deceived as to the urgency of the matter. I was of opinion that though force might be used it was useless to resort to it as long as there was a total lack of organization for hospitals and segregation, &c. I therefore asked His Highness to return to Planpur and lend his authority to some effectual measures to suppress the plague. He consented to do so, arriving at Planpur on the 23rd March. He at once agreed that the only thing to do was to apply for the services of a European Medical Officer to take charge of the whole operations. Application to Government was made by wire, and on the 2nd April Surgeon- Captain H. F. Cleveland, from Deesa, arrived to take charge of the special work. Arrival of Dr. Lowson and the measures decided on for segregating, treating the pa- tients and their relations. 8.    In the meantime an offer from Government to depute Dr. Lowson, the Plague Commissioner, had been accepted, and it hap- pened that he arrived on the same day as Dr. Cleveland. A meeting was held, at which the Dewn and all the principal persons in the place were present. Dr. Lowson spoke and explained the principles on which plague had been dealt with elsewhere, and indicated what ought to be done in Planpur. Some of the townspeople also expressed their views of the matter. It was finally resolved that compulsory segregation should be tried with an ex- ception in favour of pardh women. Before he finally left, Dr. Lowson selected places for hospitals and indicated the method of segregating and the treatment of patients. The organization of four hospitals under Dr. Cleveland. 9.    Under Dr. Cleveland's orders four hospitals were organized, viz., one for the Jain Baniyas in their own spacious Dehla in the town. For the Mahomedans, in a dharmsla outside the town, and for other castes, in the sheds that had already been affected. The Borahs came forward and offered to arrange their own hospital in a small bungalow which they used as a club. Each of these hospitals had a special place for segregating patients as well as their relations; also a supply of medicines, disinfectants, and apparatus for boiling clothes. Dr. Patwardhan, the State Medical Officer, was put in charge of the ' Dehla' and all within the town, and Dr. Wdia, of the shed hospital and of all outside the town. He had also charge of the Railway inspection. At last two extra Hospital Assistants were procured from the outside and were placed under these officers. Reorganization of the sys- tem, of disinfecting. 10.    At the  same time   the  system  of disinfecting   was  reorganized,  a special staff of men being enlisted for the purpose. This department eventually became, under Dr. Cleve- land's personal superintendence, very efficient. After the patient and his relations had been removed, the roof of the house was taken off and the place thoroughly cleaned and disinfected, the fire-engine charged with a solution of carbolic acid being sometimes used for this purpose.
?3 Many of the townspeople leave Planpur. 11.    As some of the influential Jain Baniyas and others still continued to hamper the Darbr by their opposition, they were told that the measures resolved on would be carried out even if troops from Deesa were procured for the work. They then desisted from openly thwarting the action of the Darbr. Many of them left the town for the villages. In fact the town soon began to wear a deserted appearance. It was a good thing to get rid of the people for the time so that the work of cleaning and ventilation could proceed. Dr. Cleveland in his first report described the streets as " narrow and tortuous, the houses dirty and overcrowded, with practically no lighting and ventilation." Dr. Lowson expressed his appreciation of the difficulty of dealing with people who habitu- ally live amidst such insanitary surroundings. These remarks especially ap- plied to the dwellings of the Jain Baniyas whose horror of taking life induces them to abstain from ablutions and from interfering with the ordinary process of nature. Segregation of plague pa- tients completed and the re- sult of the treatment at the several hospitals. 12.    By the 7th or 8th of April all the arrangements for segregation were in good working order. Dr. Cleveland had his office in the town and spent most of the day there. With the exception of *pardh women all patients were re- moved by force if necessary, but happily this had sel- dom to be resorted to. Some dhulies had been con- structed for the convenience of the sick, but nothing would induce them to use such suspicious contrivances. The belief that European doctors kill cholera and plague patients to suppress the disease was freely entertained, and a seat in a dhuli was regarded as certain death. " The doctor touched the temples or the tongue of the plague patient and he was a dead man !! " This belief induced the Jains in the ' Dehla ' Hospital to refuse all medicines, and the consequence was that nearly all their patients died. The best success was obtained in the Shed Hospital outside the town, to which the patients of the lower classes were taken. Here the medicines being taken, and the air and the sun having free play, a good percentage of recoveries was made. Precautions taken at Plan- pur and by the Deesa and Mount Abu authorities to prevent the importation of plague into their societies and the result. 13.    In the meantime attention was being paid to the  examination  of passengers leaving Planpur by rail. Both the Agent to the Governor General at Mount Abu and the General Officer at Deesa were equally solicitous that the plague should not be communicated to their societies by persons fleeing from Planpur, and it was suggested that quarantine should be imposed on all passengers booking from that place. This was a difficult thing to carry out, and it was a precaution which could be evaded by travellers proceeding up or down the line to take their tickets. The matter went before the Government of India, who decided that quarantine could not be enforced against Planpur, but that every latitude should be given in the medical inspection to detain suspected persons. This principle was adopted, and, at the same time, proclamation was made by beat of drum setting forth the inconveniences to which travellers would be exposed at the quarantines up the line, and dissuading the people from travelling by rail. The result was so far successful, that no case occurred in neighbouring territory of plague imported from Planpur. It is true that two passengers affected were detained at Abu Road who said they booked from Planpur, but one proved to be a subject of the Dnta State, and the other, a Brhman, could not be traced. It is certain that no Brhman family had any member of it affected in Planpur. Good result obtained by strict quarantine at Deesa and Abu Road Station. The plague did not spread to vil- lages. 14.    At the same time it is only fair to say that a very strict quarantine was imposed at the station for the Deesa Camp and also at Abu Road Station, and that it was mainly owing to these precautions that the success alluded to was obtained. It is a curious fact that although many people left the town and resided for a time in the vil- lages of the State, no authenticated case of plague occurred in any one of the villages. * Many women of the Baniyas who do not observe "purdh" were removed.
?4 Progress of plague be- tween the middle of April and 1st of May. 15.    By the middle of April the plague in the town had been steadied. On the 17th, in his weekly report, Dr. Cleveland stated: "There have been 16 fresh cases during the week, i.e., 10 less than last week, making a total of 127 cases. The number of deaths during the week was 15 against 16 in the former week. The percentage of deaths in plague cases is now 62.9 as compared with 58-the percentage up to last week. All the cases are indigenous. This was the turning point, because the next week, Satur- day, April the 24th, the report was more favourable, viz.: " There have been 8 fresh cases of plague during the week with 5 deaths." " From these figures it appears that the plague is now decreasing. House-to-house visitation is carried out all over the town, and I do not think that there can be any conceal- ment of cases." " To make more certain, the burning and burial grounds are all watched." "Railway inspection is carried on as before." "Five people have been detained as suspicious cases but no case of plague has been found." Plague cases from 1st May to 15th May 1897. 16.    On  May  the 1st the fresh  cases were two and there had been  two deaths. For the week ending May the 8th, two fresh cases and two deaths. Previous to these there had been no fresh case since the 24th April. This re- appearance of the plague after it had remained quiescent could not be explained In the week ending May the 15th there were two fresh cases and one death. This was the first and last case among the Borah community. The report says: "With the exception of one purdh woman all the members of this family were segregated and the house was thoroughly cleaned and disinfected. In fact the whole street in which the Borahs live was cleaned and disinfected with carbolic acid solution by means of the fire-engine." The plague being over, the people return to the town. Orders concerning re-occu- pation of infected houses. 17.    By  Saturday the  22nd May  the plague was reported to be ' over. ' The people began to return to their houses. An order was issued that no person should reoccupy an empty house unless he produced a certificate stating that it had been thoroughly disinfected. No case of plague occurred in a house which had been disinfected. Long after the plague ceased in the town, a passenger, a Pathn, travelling from Bom- bay to the north, was taken out of the train with symptoms of plague on him. He was detained in the shed hospital, where he was very troublesome and where he died on the 5th June. This was the very last of the plague in Planpur. In the town it practically ceased by the 11th May. Among the population of the town itself there had been altogether 141 indigenous cases and 90 deaths plus 2 imported cases which ended fatally. Appends  a return  of the daily casualties, &c. 18.    I append a  return  showing  the  daily casualties, also   the  number of patients segregated, of non-affected persons segregated, and the number of houses disinfected. The cost of the operations came to about Rs. 12,000. Concluding Remarks. 19.    To  Surgeon-Captain  Cleveland's  good-natured  energy and personal exertions  the  success of  the operations  was mainly due.    The  State  officials   and  subordinates    worked well under his direction when once there was a system, and they knew what to do. His Highness the Dewn behaved with courage and good sense throughout and set a capital example to his people. The people were much frightened by this new and insidious form of death. While acknowledging the advantage of segregation they shrank from its details which to them were horrible, especially the removal of women from their homes. Happily there was no contre- temps although some soreness must have been caused. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, F. H. JACKSON, Lieutenant-Colonel, Political Superintendent, Planpur.
?Report on the Plague in Cutch from the 1st October 1896 to the 15th August 1897. Description. Cutch, or the sea-coast land lying between the Peninsula of Kthiwr on the south and the Province of  Sind  on the north, ex- tends from 2047' to 24 North Latitude, and 6826' to 7010' East Longitude. Exclusively of the Ran it contains an estimated area of 6,500 square miles, a population (in 1891) of 558,415 souls, and yields a yearly revenue of about Rs. 30,00,000. Cutch, 160 miles from east to west and from 35 to 75 from north to south, is almost entirely cut off from the Continent of India. It is for the most part sandy and treeless, and on the south and west prin- cipally is fringed with mangrove swamps. On the north and east is the Ran, a salt desert supposed to cover 9,000 square miles. Population. Of the entire population there are 351,620 Hindus and 133,492 Mahomedans. Climate. The climate of Cutch, as  compared with other parts of the Bombay Presi- dency, is mild and agreeable.    The months  of  April and May are very hot inland, while along the coast the climate is delightful, both from the absence of the burning wind and dust storms that prevail elsewhere during those months. In June the hot winds generally cease, the atmosphere becomes cloudy, and occasionally the rains, which com- mence very irregularly, are preceded by excessive sultriness. The   plague  of  1812 and 1815. Towards the close of the year 1812, Cutch was visited by an outbreak of pestilence of such virulence, that it is said to have destroyed half the people of the country. In the year 1815, the year of the heaviest known rainfall, it again broke out in great virulence at Kunthkote in East Cutch or Wgad. (The symptoms at that time were the same as those which have manifested themselves during the present outbreak in this province, and very few recovered.) Most died between the 3rd and 9th day, as is the case in most cases now. The plague apparently was in the air, for there was nothing to show that it was brought from outside or was spread by the touch. It appeared to attack most fiercely the sluggish and vegetable-eaters. Rajputs escaped, while Brhmins and Vnias died in numbers. From Kunthkote the disease spread to other parts of Wgad, causing much loss of life in the early months of 1816. In May, it crossed to Morvi, and came back in August within 10 miles of Bhj, and at the same time it raged in Rdhanpur and Sind. Since 1817 there has been no return of the pestilence. Noticeable   features   of the present plague. In the present plague, the Mahomedans of the village of Salaya, a, suburb of Mndvi, suffered equally with the Hindus, but I think that this was due in Salaya to the very dark dwellings in which the people lived and to their utter carelessness as to whether they got the disease or not. In Mndvi itself, as the hospital returns will show, the Mahomedans, such as Borahs, Khojas, and meat-eaters generally, did not suffer so much as the Hindus, nor was the death-rate so high amongst those attacked as the Hindus. Of course their numbers are not so large, but taking the percentage the Hindus suffered the most. Another noticeable fact, as far as my experience goes, is that Brhmins, high officials, and rich merchants have had more or less immunity from the disease, probably owing to their living in better houses and having better food. The virulent fever of 1878. In 1878, after a bad  epidemic of cholera succeeding the heaviest rainfall since 1815, the province was visited in August of that year by a virulent type of fever which attacked every village and hamlet in the province, and in Bhj, the capital, persons died at the rate of 40 a day. B 1437- 1
?2 I mention this epidemic of fever because it has been suggested that it might have been plague, but I think this idea is fallacious; for though it was un- doubtedly an unusual and very virulent type of fever, the death rate was small in proportion to the usual death-rate from plague. Out of about 100,000 per- sons attacked, 12,344 died, whereas in plague the mortality would have been at least 60 per cent. There is no reason to suppose, therefore, that it was plague. An account of this epidemic of fever will be found in this office letter No. 74, dated 6th June 1879, with enclosures. Did   the   plague   take  its rise  in Cutch first ? I have also heard it said that the present plague was introduced into Bom- bay from Cutch, possibly because it broke out in the Mndvi quarter of Bombay; but this is inhabited by many others besides Cutchees, and is a shipping quar- ter of the town, and I have no reason to suppose that this was the case. The plague in Bombay must have begun about the end of June or beginning of July. The steamers did not begin to run till the middle of September, and it was not till the end of September or beginning of October that anything was heard of plague in Cutch. The first case is reported to have been landed from Bombay on the 3rd October 1896, when the exodus of Cutchees in Bombay to their own country really began. A reference to the map and return marked A will show that out of 48 villages in which plague cases, either imported or indigenous, have occurred, 19 are within easy distance of Mndvi and the coast. Mndvi, the port which has suffered most, is in direct and constant communication by steamers with Bombay and Karchi. From Mndvi most of the other places mentioned in return A have become infected. Again, the only case which occurred at Lakhput, on the borders of Sind, was of a man who had lately come from Karchi, and in the same way Koteshwar and Naransa- rowar were infected. Lastly, if the plague in Bombay commenced about the end of June or beginning of July, and was introduced from Cutch, it is reasonable to suppose that it would have been recognised in Cutch long before it was, and that there would have been indigenous cases earlier. I am aware that there being no proper registration of deaths, and such a disease not being looked for, it might go on for a long time without being discovered ; but I think that had it started in Cutch before Bombay, it would have got such a thorough hold on some place sooner than it did, that the authorities could not have failed to recognise it; especially as being unexpected, no precautions would have been taken against it. The first place to suffer from indigenous cases to any extent was Rwpur in the month of February, and it has been proved that this place was infected from Karchi, the man, a Durzi, having come from Karchi and infected 11 of his relatives living in the same or adjoining houses, of whom all died. The theory, therefore, that the plague was introduced into Bombay from Cutch will not hold good. It was not till October that I heard of cases being landed at Mndvi, and I then wrote to the Divn asking for a weekly return of cases. The first return of cases sent to me was for the period 17th September to 19th October, and showed that there had been 9 imported cases and 3 deaths during that period, but no indigenous. A subsequent return gave the date of the first  imported case landed as the 3rd October 1896, and between that date and 28th February there had been 47 imported cases and 25 deaths, but according to the Darbr return there was no indigenous case till the 4th January 1897, when one case occurred at Mndvi and another case and one death up to 28th February. Preventive measures. As soon as I found that  cases infected with plague  were being landed at Mndvi from   Bombay,   I  spoke  to  the  Divn and His Highness the Ro in the matter, and the report of the Darbr shows that the following preventive measures were ordered :- (1)    Inspection  of   passengers   arriving  at Mndvi,   Khri  Rohar, Mundra, Jakhau and other ports. (2)    Segregation  and treatment  in separate  sheds provided  for the purpose of all those found infected. (3)    At Mdhpur, two miles from Bhj, and the first customs chauki on the Mndvi road about one mile from Bhj, arrangements were made for a further examination of persons coming into Bhj from Khri Rohar and Mndvi. Any persons found suffering from fever were  kept  under observation outside the town.
?3 (4)    Instructions  were also issued for examination and segregation at all other towns and villages. The Darbr also reported that, in the event of the plague becoming epidemic in any place, a general turn out of the people would be enforced, persons affected would be separated, and the village cleaned and disinfected. Strict orders were issued for enforcing general sanitary measures. As a matter of fact, however, when the plague broke out in Mndvi in an epidemic form about the beginning of April, there were no disinfectants for Mndvi at all, and very little for Bhj. In fact, 1 think, I might safely say that there were not 500 lbs. of disinfectants of any sort in the whole of Cutch. The Darbr also reported that the medical and municipal staffs had been strengthened. When the exodus from Karchi began, as well as from Bombay, I felt sure that plague must attack Cutch in an epidemic form sooner or later, for when 5,000 people a week were landing from these places, it was impossible to arrange for an efficient camp of observation on shore. A large police force would have been necessary, and a very large quantity of supplies. Water, too, was not available for such a large number in one place. The Darbr, therefore, issued strict orders to the Ptels and Dhrus of villages to keep in quarantine for 15 days outside the village any arrivals from Mndvi or other infected places. It could never be expected, however, that these orders would be properly carried out in every case. Precautions  at   Bhj, the capital. Special precautions   were  taken to prevent the  plague  spreading to Bhj. All persons coming from Mndvi were detained in quarantine at a place called Dahisara, about 15 miles from Bhj. This place was chosen on account of there being a large dharamshla there. Later on, about the end of April when the plague in Mndvi had got a firm hold, the Darbr asked for the services of Surgeon- Captain Ricketts, of the 17th Native Infantry stationed at Bhj, in addition to his own duties. Dr. Ricketts, advised the Darbr regarding preventive measures and carried out measures for its suppression should it appear, by the erection of segre- gation sheds, hospitals for Mahomedans and Hindus, the ordering of a supply of disinfectants, &c., &c. A strict registration of deaths was kept and the cause of each death ascertained. As soon as an imported case occurred in a house, the persons residing in it, as well as in the adjoining houses, were turned out and the house at once disinfected, and I believe in two cases the houses or rather huts were burnt down. By these means the plague has up to date been kept out of Bhj and there have been only 6 imported cases. In addition to looking after Bhj, the services of Dr. Ricketts have been utilised for taking preventive and suppressive measures at other places such as Anjr, Kera and Mundra. He has also been looking after the sanitation of Bhj and the places above mentioned and occasionally inspecting them to see that his suggestions have been carried out. Latterly the Darbr decided to send the Chief Medical Officer and Dr. Karanjia, the Medical Officer ordinarily in charge at Mndvi, on a tour of inspection of the villages to ascertain whether the plague is more widely diffused than is supposed and whether the orders issued by the Darbr are being carried out. Dr. Damania, owing to an outbreak of cholera in Bhj and a recrudescence of plague at Mundra, has not been able to go, and he has been sent to Mundra; but Dr. Karanjia has gone out and has sent in some reports, which have not yet been sent to me. Of Mndvi and the measures taken to suppress the plague there and in the surrounding villages I shall treat separately. Turning out the popula- tion of a village. There is no doubt that, when it can be done, there is nothing like turning the inhabitants out of a village. This was done in the case of the village of Kathda, which had 27 in- digenous cases and 27 deaths: and the plague at once ceased. This was also partially done in the case of Rwpur, the houses in which the deaths occurred being opened up, as well as a large number of the surrounding houses, with the best results. In Cutch, there would be little difficulty in doing this in every case when a village becomes badly infected, and other measures have failed to eradicate the disease; for with the exception of
?4 Mndvi, Bhj and Anjr, there are not half a dozen towns with 5,000 inhabitants, and most have a population of 2,000 and under. There is always ample waste ground close by, and the villages are not numerous and some distance apart. Of course it would be necessary to exercise strict supervision to prevent the persons turned out wandering to other villages. The healthy condition of the people who left Mndvi and encamped out in the surrounding vdis (gardens) and waste ground and along the sea-shore was very noticeable. Out of some 800 to 1,000 persons encamped along the sea-shore, not a single case of plague, that I heard of, occurred during the 2 months I was there, although these people chiefly belonged to the village of Salaya, a suburb of Mndvi, which was thoroughly impregnated with plague. It was the same also where the camps were out on waste open dry ground. In the vdis (gardens), however, where the camps were under thick trees which did not admit much sun, and close to wells where the ground was more or less damp, several cases were found, showing clearly that the scientific opinion that heat, sun and dryness are deadly enemies to the baccillus, is correct. Disinfection. I have been informed that in many cases merely taking- off the tiles to admit sun-light, burning grass on the floors, and keep- ing the house open to the air, has proved sufficient  in the way of disinfection. When it can be clone, therefore, turning out the entire population and thoroughly cleaning and opening up the houses would appear to be the easiest and quickest method of getting rid of the plague. PLACES IN WHICH PLAGUE CASES HAVE OCCURRED.     Imported cases only. 1. Lakbpur ... ... 6 miles north of the sea-port of Mundra, 2. Bhchao ... ... 47 miles north-east of Bhj, 23 miles from Anjr. 3. Wondh ... ... 4 miles east of Bbchao. 4. Nagalpur ... ...   mile north of Mndvi. 5. Nni Khkher ... ... North-east of Mndvi, 6 miles from coast. 6. Dhunoi ... ... 18 miles south of Bhj midway between Bhj and Mndvi 7. Chasro     ... ... North-east of Mundra, 10 miles from coast. 8. Gundla   ... ... North-east of Mundra, 5 miles from coast. 9. Ramani ... .. North-west of Mundra, 12 miles from coast. 10. Desalpur ... ... North-west of Mundra, 8 miles from coast. 11. Bhj ...  ... North-of Mndvi, 36 miles from coast. 12. Mnkuwa ... ... South-west of Bhj, 7 miles. 13. Mdhpur ... ... South-east of Bhj, 2 miles. 14. Samatra ... ... South-west of Bhj, 11 miles. 15. Anjr ... ...   South-east of Bhj, 24 miles. 16. Khri Roher ... ... South-east of Anjr, 12 miles. 17. Mthda ... ... North-east of Mundra, 12 miles from coast 18. Khedoi ... ... South-west of Anjr, 7 miles. 19. Nakhtrna ... ... Well inland, 25 miles west of Bhj 20. Angia ... ... Near Nakhtrua, 4 miles. 21. Dhvda ... ... Do.               5   do. 22. Suthri ... ... West of Mndvij 3 miles from coast. 23. Nransar ... ... Near Lakhput on border of Sind. 24. Koteshwar ... ... On Khori Creek, borders of Sind. As will be seen by a reference to the return marked A all the above have had very few cases. Exclusive of Mndvi there have been 128 imported cases in Cutch with 114 deaths. Mndvi has had 92 cases with 39 deaths, making a total of 220 im- ported cases and 153 deaths. Of the 128 imported cases exclusive of Mndvi, 20 were from Bombay, 19 from Karchi and Sind, and the remainder occurred in villages in Cutch and were from Mndvi. Indigenous cases. The following places have had indigenous cases as well as imported :- 1. Mndvi ... 36 miles south of Bhj, the most important sea-port of the State and from which a considerable portion of the revenue of the State in the shape of customs is derived Salaya, a suburb of Mndvi on the bank of the Rukhmvati River, about two or three hundred yards across, and may be included in Mndvi. 2. Durgpur... 4 miles from Mndvi, 3 miles from coast.
?5 3. Godhra                          8 miles from Mndvi, 6 miles from coast. 4. Bidada                          8 miles from Mndvi, 7 miles from coast. 5. Ghadsisa                            18 miles from Mndvi, 19 miles from coast. 6. Gundili                             4 miles north of Mndvi. 7. Maska                         1 mile north of Mndvi. 8. Kathda                         5 miles north of Mndvi, 1 mile from coast. 9. Ludwa                       18 miles north of Mndvi. 10. Bada                       13 miles west of Mndvi, 3 miles from coast. 11. Kodaya                        5 miles north of Mndvi. 12. Kapaya                        3 miles north of Mundra. 13. Mundra port           East of Mndvi, 32 miles from Bhj. 14. Kera                      14 miles south of Bhj. 15. Rawpur                         41 miles north-east of Bhj. 16. Nalia                      60 miles west of Bhj. 17. Baet                      13 miles south-west of Mndvi, 5 miles from coast. 18. Bhojay                      18 miles north- west of Mndvi, 10 miles from coast. 19. Tunwana           7 miles north-east of Mndvi, 7 miles from coast. 20. Meran                       7 miles north-west of Mndvi. 21. Nana Bhdia          8 miles east of Mndvi, 4 miles from coast. 22. Desalpur         15 miles north-east of Mndvi, 8 miles from coast. 23. Kothara            34 miles north-west of Mndvi. 24. Lakhput         On the borders of Sind, 80 miles north-west of Bhj. Of the above, with the exception of Mndvi, where the plague has raged and which will be treated separately, the following have only suffered to any extent :- Godhra.-Eight miles from Mndvi, population 1,900. The first imported case from Mndvi occurred on the 9th January 1897 and the next on 25th April 1897. The first case was probably a man who had landed from Bombay and es- caped observation.    There were no indigenous cases, however, till the 4th July 1897, when on that date there were 2 cases and 2 deaths, and on the 6th 1 case, 1 death. There were then no more cases till the 31st July, since when there have been 13 cases and 5 deaths. Gundili.-193 cases, 166 deaths. This village, population 4,600, four miles north of Mndvi, was first attacked on the 10th March 1897 (an indigenous case), the man, an inhabitant of the village, having been to Mndvi and there become infected. From the first attack the plague has been steadily going on up to now without a break. This village has suffered in proportion just as much as Mndvi, and it appears most difficult to eradicate the disease at this village. Great difficulty has been experienced in regard to house search, the inhabitants, who are Rajputs, being most averse to having their houses entered and their women seen. A hospital was started at this village on the 4th August, two nurses have been sent to look after the sick, and everything is being done that can be done; and now that the rains are over, the Darbr are issuing orders for a general camping out of the people. Maska.-One mile north of Mndvi, population 1,600. This village was first attacked by a case from Karchi on the 8th March 1897, and between that date and the 16th April 1897 there were 17 indigenous cases and 15 deaths. Till the 25th April there was a break when cases were imported from Mndvi, the plague having got a thorough hold of the latter place about the beginning of April. Since then the disease has gone on till up to date ; there have been 79 indigenous cases and 69 deaths. Kathda, five miles west of Mndvi, 1 from sea-coast, population 1,100, was first infected about the beginning of May by a case from Mndvi, and between the 18th May and 13th June 1897 there were 27 indigenous cases and 27 deaths, The people of this village, where the plague seemed to be getting a hold, were turned bodily out and encamped outside. The houses in which cases had occur- red and those adjoining, were thoroughly cleaned and lime-washed, and the whole village generally put into a cleaner state and the people kept out for nearly a B 1437-2
?6 month. This had the desired effect, and since the 13th June 1897 up to date (15th August) there has not been a single case. Bada-13 miles west of Mndvi, 3 from sea-coast, population 1,400. Infected from Mndvi on the 11th May 1897, on which date there were 4 im- ported cases and 3 deaths, and 4 indigenous cases and 1 death. Judging from there being indigenous cases on the same date for the first time, it is probable that there had been other imported cases. Up to the 26th June there were 26 indigenous cases and 23 deaths, when for a month there were no cases, but a recrudescence took place on the 25th July 1897 and there have been since then 20 cases and 15 deaths. Kodaya.-Five miles north of Mndvi, population 3,000. There was an imported case from Karchi on the 17th March 1897, and on the 8th April 1897 2 indigenous cases and 1 death. On the 25th April 1897 there was an imported case from Mndvi, but the village remained free till the 15th July 1897, since which date there have been 14 cases and 5 deaths. Kapayo.-Five miles north-west of Mundra, population 1,200; although this village has had 12 imported cases and 12 deaths between 3rd January 1897 and 16th January 1897, there have been only 4 indigenous cases and 4 deaths. It has been free since the 16th January last. Mundra.-A sea-port, 30 miles south-east of Bhj and 24 miles east of Mndvi, population 10,000. The first case was imported from Karchi on the 14th February 1897, on which date there was 1 case and 1 death. Nothing, however, happened and there was no other case till the 21st March 1897, when another imported case from Karchi was reported. No indigenous cases, however, as far as is known, occurred till the 17th April 1897, when there were 5 indigenous cases and up to the 22nd April, 12 cases and 3 deaths, the type being reported as mild. None of these indigenous cases occurred in the city. In one case a Mundra man was infected by associating with fugitives from Mndvi encamped outside the city. The indigenous cases then apparently ceased, but from 25th April to 3rd May 1897 there were 11 imported cases. On the 3rd May 1 indigenous case occurred and on the same date 2 imported cases from Mndvi; and up to the 8th June, 13 imported cases and 11 deaths, but no further indigen- ous cases between 3rd May and 3rd June, when on the latter date, and the 5th, there were 4 cases. Since then the place has been free; but I have just heard (August 23rd) that it has become infected for the third time. Kera.-14 miles south of Bhj, population 2,000, chiefly Khojas. This village has three times been cleared of plague and three times re-infected. The first time was on the 1st April, but it is uncertain where the case was imported from, probably Mndvi, which is not far off and with which the Kera Khojas have a good deal of intercourse. Between the 1st and 17th April there were 24 indigenous cases and 17 deaths when there was a break for 11 days, until a case was imported from Karchi on the 28th April. Indigenous case occurred on the 1st May, and between that date and the 30th May there were 14 cases and 11 deaths. The type according to report was more virulent on the second occasion. The town then again became free, but has lately (August 23rd) been infected for the third time by persons coming from Mndvi or surrounding villages. It is noticeable that the attacks in April and May occurred amongst the Kunbis, while the last outbreak was amongst the Khojas. Rawpur.-This place was infected by 3 Darzis coming from Karchi on the 11th February and 14th February 1897. These two, it is stated, were attacked 15 days after their arrival, and gave the plague to 11 of their relations living in the same houses, and all died, as well as 2 of the Darzis from Karchi: the third and only remaining grown-up member of the family surviving to take care of the children of the family. These were the only cases, and the place has since been free. It is worth noticing that the first case which occurred at Durgpur-vide Return A-was a relation of the people who died in Rawpur and came to visit them, taking the plague back with him to Desalpur. In the case of Rawpur, the Darbr officials made the people turn out from a large number of houses surrounding the infected portion, and this seems to have checked the plague.
?7 Meran, five miles from Mndvi, population 1,800, became infected from Mndvi, like most of the surrounding villages, by persons belonging to the village going there for provisions or to see friends. The first case occurred some time in May, the exact date apparently being unknown, and up to the 10th June there were 14 indigenous cases and 14 deaths. There was then a break till the 16th July, from which date there have been 19 indigenous cases and 11 deaths. Nna Bhdia.-Eight miles east of Mndvi, four miles from coast. On the 26th June 1897, 4 indigenous cases and 4 deaths were reported. Probably these cases were due to the persons having visited Mndvi and become infected. There were then no cases till the 24th July, when it broke out again, the place probably being re-infected from one of the surrounding villages, as at that date Mndvi was practically free from plague. Since the 24th July up to date there have been 13 indigenous cases and 4 deaths, which points to a mild type of the disease. It will be seen by a reference to the map that out of 48 places which have had cases of plague either imported or indigenous, 35 places are comparatively close to the sea coast. Nakhtrna, Angia, Lakhput, Nransar are the only really inland places which have had any cases, and these imported and few. Type of plague There have been distinctly three types of plague, the bubonic and pneu-  monic forms and a third without either, in which those attacked died sometimes within six hours of first feeling ill. This latter type was at the beginning of the plague at Mndvi very prevalent and accounted for the high mortality and also again towards the close of the epidemic. The other forms were also present. Latterly, as at Gundili, the disease has taken the bubonic or milder form, if anything can be called mild which kills off over 60 per cent. The villages of Kodaya and Nna Bhdia appear to have had the disease in the mildest form. Mndvi, 500 miles north-west of Bombay and 36 miles south-east of Bhj, is the principal port of the State and the largest, most important and filthiest town in Cutch or perhaps anywhere. The population is 35,000, and the area in which they are accommodated is much too small for the number, more espe- cially when some 7,000 cattle in addition to the inhabitants are located within it. There was another indigenous case on the 18th March, and up to the 31st March a total of 11 cases and 6 deaths. From April 4th to 9th, 13 indigenous cases, but on the 10th I was informed privately that matters were worse at Mndvi than reported, and I was told that there had been 12 deaths in a parti- cular quarter of the town when I saw the Divn the next day and then went to Mndvi on the 12th to judge for myself. There were at least 25 cases on that date. I then at once telegraphed to Government and warned the Plague Com- mittee at Bombay and Karchi that numbers were leaving for those places by steamers, and on my return to Bhj I wrote out and forwarded to the Darbr a memorandum of my visit, copy attached (marked C.) On the 24th April Dr. Lowson arrived at Mndvi, where I met him, and, after seeing His Highness the Ro the following day, Dr. Lowson telegraphed to Government, with the result that on the 29th April, Surgeon-Lieut.-Colonel Wilkins and a staff of assistants and trained nurses arrived at Mndvi. Previous to his arrival, however, Dr. Lowson had organised and got ready a large hospital for Hindus and another for Mahomedans, and the former contained nearly 100 patients when Dr. Wilkins arrived. Sepoys had also been put on the gates of the town and even at the several burning and burying grounds to take a note of the bodies and the addresses of the houses from which they came. In addition to the sepoys, men had also been placed at the gates to take a note of the bodies passing out, so as to ensure a check. A segregation camp and a hospital at Salaya, the suburb of Mndvi, had also been started, disinfectants ordered, &c., so that on Dr. Wilkins' arrival, matters were well forward. As a report on the subsequent operations has been written by Dr. Wilkins and sent to the Plague Committee it seems superfluous for me to do so. There
?8 are, however, certain points in Dr. Wilkins' report, a copy of which I have received, which require notice: Page 11 of the report-Requirements, paragraph 2. The proposal to make a space about 20 feet wide between the fort wall and the houses is being carried out as far as possible, but much could not be done during the rains, as there was no place in which to move the people who are to be turned out and their houses and huts pulled down. Sites have been chosen for the people of different castes, who will have to turn out; and now that the rains are over I am told that houses and huts for their accommodation, of the same kind as they previously possessed, will be built for them. 3. Drainage will not be such an easy matter as Dr. Wilkins thinks. Of course it could be done, but to ensure thorough good drainage half the town will have to be pulled down and re-built. As Dr. Wilkins reports, the streets are very narrow, and open drains, which in a town like Mndvi would probably be best, would still further contract the roads. The Darbr at present are rais- ing the streets in the centre with a slope to each side, so as to allow the surplus water to run off. 4. The city walls should certainly be lessened in height, and this may possibly be done, but the Darbr seems very averse to pulling them down alto- gether. I hope, however, that His Highness the Ro will visit Mndvi this month and perhaps he may come to a different conclusion in the matter. 5. Something may be done in this way. Certain improvements in the way of removing sheds has already been done. 6. I am told that the cattle of the gowlies have been removed, but num- bers of private owners keep cattle in their houses which should doubtless be removed, but there will be great opposition to this, especially from the Mahjans. 7-8. These will no doubt be attended to. 9. The Darbr tried to get the services of Mr. Sykes, who was formerly Engineer in charge of the harbour works here, but he was unwilling to come. The matter will again be pressed on the Darbr, and His Highness the Ro has already said that, if a European Engineer is necessary, one will be retained. The question of employing a European Medical Officer until the town is put into a more sanitary condition will be brought to the notice of the Darbr. 10-11. These have been brought to the notice of the Darbr. 12-13. The Meghwls and brick-makers are to be accommodated else- where; I believe a site for Meghwls has already been chosen. I do not know how the soaking of bamboos and teakwood is to be avoided. They are used in the ship-building trade, and the ground occupied is the only one where ships can be built. Though the smell is certainly objectionable, it is not, I believe, noxious to health, and the place is clear of the town and to leeward of it. I may add that most of the suggestions made have been put before the Darbr from time to time by various Political Agents. I is hoped now since this visitation something will be done. His Highness the Ro seems anxious to do what he can, but I fancy the opposition has always been from the Mahjans of Mndvi, who dislike any interference with their old established customs and filthy ways. Para. 14. Godra should be Godhra. Meren " " Merau. Kodag " " Kodae. Kathda is given as having had 60 cases of plague; it should be 27. Previous to the departure of Dr. Wilkins, the villages could not have proper attention paid to them, as there was more than enough work at Mndvi. As the hospitals at Mndvi became more free, patients were brought from the surround- ing villages; but as the distances were in some cases too much, it was decided by Dr. Mason to start hospitals at one or two of the villages, and the first was started at Gundili on the 4th August. Later on, when Mndvi became prac-
?9 tically free, hospitals were started at Godhra, Merau, Gundiali and Kodae. On the departure of Dr. Wilkins, the following staff was left with Dr. Mason:- three nurses, three hospital assistants, one compounder and six ward orderlies. With this weak staff he has to look after some ten infected villages, as well as Mndvi. The work, therefore, which has devolved on him has been exceedingly heavy, some of the villages being 10 to 15 miles from Mndvi. The inhabitants of these infected villages are now to be turned out gradually one after the other, and the houses cleaned and disinfected, and I trust that this will have the desired effect of clearing the villages of the disease. G. E. HYDE-CATES, Major, Acting Political Agent. Bhj, 13th September 1897. His Highness the Ro has written and thanked Surgeon-Lieut.-Colonel Wilkins, Surgeon-Captain Mason, and staff for their exertions, and the valuable work done by them. G. E. HYDE-CATES. B 1437-3
?FROM LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. W. WRAY, Political Agent, Kolhpur and Southern Martha Country; To J. DEC. ATKINS, ESQ., I.C.S., Secretary to Government, General Department, Poona. Kolhpur 2nd September 1897. SIR, With reference to your demi-official letter of 31st ultimo to the Special Plague Committee, of which His Excellency the Governor was pleased to appoint me a member, I have the honour to submit, in accordance with your request, the following account of the measures which have been adopted here, and in this district, at my suggestion, and which I have found effective as well as easy of manipulation during the last six months for the purpose of preventing the im- portation of plague into towns or villages, and also for preventing the spread of plague from any town or village which may have become infected. 2.  To avoid lengthy details I will describe the general arrangements, which are, of course, subject to local conditions, and which are capable of modification or enhancement as the case may be. I also append a rough sketch plan of an imaginary infected town of, say, 10,000 inhabitants. 3.  To prevent the importation of plague the following seem to be the principal considerations:- (1) Selection of suitable sites for observation camps. (2) Plan of observation camps and their erection and establishments. (3) Methods of detaining the public and preventing leakage. (4) Disinfection of arrivals. (5) Food and amusements for the temporary occupants of the camps. (6) Passes for rail and road. (7) Notice in the newspapers declaring quarantine. while the indispensable considerations for the prevention of the spread of plague from any infected town or village can be summed up as follows:- (1)  Warning to the neighbouring villages to make their own quarantine arrangements and report the arrival of all strangers. (2) Police cordon A round the infected town or village and distribution of Police on the roads. (3) Preparation of pass forms a, b, c. (4) Rough register of inhabitants taken in sections. (5) Camp of detention or "waiting camp " for people wishing to leave the town. (6) Police cordon B round the " waiting camp." (7) Prohibition of visits to other bazrs, and arrangements for local  sup- plies. (8) Plague Hospital. (9) Standing camp for segregation or accommodation of persons while their houses are being disinfected. (10) Notice in Gazette legalizing the above measures in lieu of proclama- tion. B 1463-4
?2 4. For prevention of importation of Plague. (1) "Selection of site for observation camp." Perfectly open ml ground, with no trees in the vicinity, and with water only near enough to prevent hardship would seem to constitute the best site for an observation camp. All the camps in the Kolhpur and Southern Martha Country districts have been chosen on this principle, and though thousands of people have come direct from infected places, and have been detained in these camps, not a single case of plague has occurred in either of them. (2) "Plan of observation camp and its erection and establishment." For the camps themselves I purposely arranged for the roofs of the huts to be thin, and the doorways wide, so that the sun might have plenty of power inside, while at the same time there should be plenty of air. Of course for the monsoon we have had to thatch the roofs and trench the sheds. The sheds have been sufficient in number to accommodate each day's arrivals separately, the occupants being moved up from No. 1 to No. 8 row. Men and women are of course separated, except when families prefer to be together, and there is no difficulty about caste arrangements, for natives know how to adjust their own affairs in that respect, and therefore this has never given any trouble. For establishment see Appendix X (Dr. Sinclair's recommendations). (3) "Method of detaining the public and preventing leakage." All passengers booked to stations where quarantine is imposed are handed over by the Railway Police to the State Police at the Station barrier, and they are taken to the observation camp. They may return to where they came from if they choose, without leaving the platform, but they cannot go on any further. All roads and bridges are guarded by Police, and all travellers without passes, unless they can prove that they are bon fide marketers, and that their village is within 5 miles, are taken to the nearest observation camp. (4) "Disinfection of arrivals." To this I attribute in some measure the fact of there not having been a single case of plague in any of our observation camps. Every passenger or traveller as he (or she) arrives at the camp is made to take off all clothes, and is well washed with hot water, soap and phenyle, while his (or her) clothes are boiled in lime water. If the clothes are unfit even for this, as is sometimes the case, they are burnt, and the owner is provided with new clothes gratis. I quite think that this compulsory cleansing, combined with the heat and dry- ness of the camp, and the perfect drainage, has had a good deal to do with the immunity from plague that has characterized these observation camps, and for the complete way in which these arrangements have been carried out, we are indebted to Dr. Sinclair, the Darbr Surgeon of Kolhpur. (5) "Food and amusements for the temporary occupants of the camps." Food has up to now been supplied gratis in the observation camps, and it has been so much appreciated with the assistance and encouragement given to amusements of various kinds among the occupants by the Darbr, that their detention has been rather popular than otherwise. In fact we have had difficulty sometimes in avoiding being imposed upon by people repeating their visits, in order to be kept for nothing." (6) "Passes for road and rail." Passes are of two kinds. "a" pass to enable officers on duty to avoid detention; "b" pass to enable the occupants of the camps to proceed after they have done their eight days under observation. The "a" passes are issued on application subject to certain conditions, namely, that the applicant travels first class, and that his servant or servants travel all the way in a compartment specially reserved for them, and not in the ordinary 3rd class with strangers. If they fail to show this at the detention station, the servants are taken to the observation camp.
?3 The road passes are given in the same way, and must be shown when asked for. If there is plague along the road, passes are not given at all, and if any one succeeds in running the blockade and arrives at the outskirts of the town, he can get no further, and he is taken to the nearest observation camp. (7)"Notice in the newspapers"declaring quarantine. To guard ourselves against complaints of springing the restrictions upon the public notices were originally sent to the Bombay daily newspapers stating that all persons booked to the various stations in the Southern Martha Country would be detained in the observation camps, and this had a remarkable effect in the way of keeping the public at home, or at any rate in keeping them from coming in this direction. 5. For the prevention of spread of plague from an infected town or village. (1)"Warning to neighbouring villages to make their own quarantine arrangements, &c." It is useful in devising operations for the prevention of spread of plague by the unrestrained movements of the people to recollect that villagers, in the Konkan especially, are accustomed to make their own quarantine arrangements as against cholera, and therefore there is little difficulty, as I have found, in obtaining their co-operation in respect to plague, if their villages are in the neighbourhood of an infected town. Thus one of the first things to be done is to send round an intimation to all villages in the infected neighbourhood, warning them that they will be incurring serious risk if they allow any guest or stranger to enter their village, and that for the sake of themselves and their families they should arrange to accommodate all guests or strangers outside their villages for the time being, and at the same time make an immediate report of any arrival to their tluka head- quarter authorities. This will often be willingly agreed to by villagers and carefully carried out, and it meets the preventive measures almost half way. For instance, even in a big town like Kolhpur, this system has gained such favour that if any stranger happens to have run the blockade, he is at once informed against by the town people, or taken to the doctor by them, and thence he is despatched by the next train to the observation camp with his whole family. The same is the case in the villages. Had not the villagers in one instance excluded some strangers who had come from Kard, their village would have been infected, for one of the visitors was attacked with plague while being kept outside the village, and he died. Another instance was reported to me yesterday of two men from the Kard direction swimming the river to escape the Police. They were detected by some villagers who caught them and detained them and they are there now in a field, pending orders. (2)"Police Cordon A." This is the cordon to be placed round the infected town itself with the least possible delay after plague is reported to have broken out there. It may consist of a chain of double sentries (one of them a Police sepoy and the other as Sanadi) which encircles the town with an interval of about 150 or 200 yard (or shouting distance) between each double sentry, so that not only is it impos- sible for any one to leave the town without being seen, but there can be com- munication between the sentries for mutual assistance, if required. By night this cordon can be drawn in closer, if necessary, in which case it would occupy only the roads and bye-ways, for people seldom trust to the fields with their families and baggage in the dark. For a town of 10,000 people like Kard or Tsgaon, 50 sepoys and 50 Sanadis for the two cordons on each relief would be ample. They of course require temporary huts of matting, such as they know how to make for themselves, and which cost only a few annas each.
?4 The duty of this Police Cordon is- (i) to allow no one to go out of the town without a pass. (ii) to see that holders of pass "a" have no luggage or families and are bon fide cultivators. (iii) to hand over those who show pass "b" to the other Police Cordon, ? for escort to the "Waiting Camp." In addition to this cordon there should be Police Stations at one or two miles along the principal thoroughfares according to the features of the country, the place for the Police Stations to be approximately a little beyond where travellers would be obliged to strike the road. Each of these police posts to consist of three men. (3) "Passes." Passes should be of three kinds, pass a for bon fide cultivators who must be allowed to go to their fields, signed by the Mmlatdr or his deputy. If the cultivators have luggage and families with them, their pass "a" is cancelled, and they must go back and get pass "b". Pass "b" is for persons who desire to go to the waiting camp for ultimate departure, to be signed by the Mmlatdr or his deputy. Pass "c" for persons who have done their 10 days in the waiting camp, to be signed by the Medical Officer in charge of the waiting camp. Holders of pass c are free to go where they like, so long as they do not go back to the town. (4) "Rough register of inhabitants." To facilitate matters, rough registers may be made of the inhabitants in sections, and a kind of roll-call taken by each section morning and evening. In this way the authorities know who are absent, and unless the family can account for any absentee he will be searched for and brought back. (5) Camp of detention or "Waiting Camp." The waiting camp should be a mile from the town in the direction of the station, if there is one, or along the principal road. It should be built in echelon for purposes of ventilation, and should have proper accommodation in proportion to the size of the town, say for 200 people, if the town is of 10,000 inhabitants. There should be a grain-dealer and a vegetable seller on the premises to sell food, and a Hospital Assistant in charge. The camp should be built in two blocks. Block A for persons in whose families plague has not occurred, and Block B for persons in whose families plague has occurred. If any case of plague occurs in Block A, all who may be in the same hut should be transferred to Block B, and kept there 10 days from the date of the last attack. The actual plague patient, of course, being removed to the plague hospital on the other side of the town, see sub-paragraph (8). It does not seem to be desirable to supply food gratis in a waiting camp, because detention there should be regarded as a compulsory obstacle to desertion and flight rather than as an attractive change of residence. For those who remain in the town it is useful, as I have found in Cutch and elsewhere, to get up some form of general amusement once or twice a week during the epidemic, not only to divert the people, but also to empty the town of them for a few hours at a time. An energetic Mmlatdr can do a good deal, if he advertises properly and encourages the people, in the way of getting up ploughing matches, cart races, bullock or pony races, foot races for men and boys and school children, wrestling matches, &c., &c., and if he can offer some small prizes for each event, the attraction brings hundreds of people out of the town for an afternoon, and in the meantime the air in the streets and houses has a chance of circulating.
?5 (6) "Police Cordon B." This is the cordon for the "Waiting Camp" and the work of the Police on this duty is to take over from Cordon A all who hold the "?" passes for the waiting camp and to see that they are lodged there, also to see that no one leaves the waiting camp without pass "C" signed by the Medical Officer of the camp. Temporary shelter is necessary also for these sepoys on Cordon B, as above described. (7) "Bazars" No one should be allowed by pass or otherwise to go from an infected town to any neighbouring village Bazar, nor should any outsiders be allowed to come to the infected town for its Bazar. If supplies run short it is easy enough to have them brought and deposited at Police Cordon A, the Mmlatdr or his deputy being sent for to see the supplies taken over by the local Bunniah and to prevent dispute, and, what is more, contact between the local people and the outsiders. This arrangement works quite satisfactorily, and even the transfer of grain from one set of carts to another on the boundary is carried on without difficulty on the high road, where we have an observation camp between Kolhpur and Kard. (8) "Plague Hospital." A special hospital for plague cases is generally placed to leeward of the town and about half a mile from it, with the usual staff and arrangements which I need not enter into here. (9) "Standing camp for segregation and accommodation of persons while their houses are being disinfected." In addition to the special hospital for plague cases it is necessary to have a standing camp of matting huts on open ground not far from the town or village, so that if the epidemic is very severe some portion of the inhabitants, say a streetful at a time, can be taken out there while their houses are being disinfected and aired. This camp also answers the purpose of a segregation camp for families who have had the plague amongst them. If any one is attacked with plague in this encampment he is taken to the hospital, and the matting hut in which he was is promptly burnt, and another erected for the remainder of the family on another piece of ground. The Police Cordon A can always be thrown back a little in order to enclose this encampment. (10) "Notice in Gazette legalizing the above measures in lieu of procla- mation." Speaking from experience, I consider that to attempt to lay down the above rules in a town by proclamation is a mistake. A proclamation of the kind only creates a panic, and gives the agitators the opportunity they want of making false representations to the ignorant classes as to the intentions of Government. People soon find out the rules for themselves if they are allowed to do so quietly, and they quietly submit to them, and it is only necessary to impress upon the officials in authority that warning and not punishment is all that is required for a first attempt at infringement of the rules. There can be no successful infringement, or very little, if the measures are properly and tactfully carried out by the authorities, and though perhaps these measures would not be feasible in all their entirety in a large city, yet a good deal can be done on the same principle, however large the infected area may be. 6. As an instance of the practicability and success of these measures in a small town of 5,000 inhabitants, I may mention the case of Manerjuri. Plague broke out there on 12th February last. Measures were at once taken and the same night a Police Cordon (A) was placed round the village. Had the Chief of Ichalkaranji, to whom the village belongs, dealt fairly with us there might have been no more plague, because in other places it has been stamped out at once, but he allowed 40 odd fresh cases to occur without making any report, and thus the disease gained a footing and it has been difficult to eradicate it. ? 1463-5
?6 In spite of this, however, in the seven months since it began, there have not been more than 79 deaths altogether in a population of 5,000, and only one per- son has escaped through the Police Cordon, and she was detected and brought back to the segregation camp (where she developed plague and died). Moreover, in the seven months not in one single instance has the disease been communicated by Manerjuri to any of the numerous neighbouring villages, nor to the town of Tsgaon of 10,000 inhabitants, only 6 miles distant. 7.    In the Kolhpur City and villages and the Southern Martha Country towns  and  villages,   whenever the first sign of   plague has   appeared,   the above measures have been applied without a moment's delay according to circum- stances and local conditions and the plague has been checked. 8.    I cannot conclude this report without observing that had it not been for the generosity of His Highness the Rja of Kolhpur who has sanctioned all proposed expenditure, the personal  exertions and  promptness of the Diwn, Mr.   Meherjibhai Kuvarji, C.I.E., and the skill and energy   of Dr. Sinclair, the Darbr Surgeon of Kolhpur, and the co-operation of some of the Southern Martha Country Chiefs (notably Sngli), I could not have brought into operation the above plans and principles with the success which has so far, under Provi- dence, attended their accomplishment. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. W. WRAY, Lieut.-Colonel, Political Agent, Kolhpur and Southern Martha Country. Scheme proposed for the protection of Kolhpur from Bubonic Fever. For this purpose a camp should be formed near the Shirol Road Station, Kolhpur State Railway, on a site to be hereafter selected. Temporary huts of bamboo matting, with thatched roofs to accommodate about 30 persons each, should be erected, each shed being divided into 3 compart- ments: the larger one for Brhmins, Jains, Lingyats and Marthas; a second compartment for Musalmns, Prsis and Native Christians; and the third for women and children. A small separate hut should be set apart for low caste persons. Five such blocks of buildings will be sufficient for the requirements of passengers arriving each day, and the dharmashla can be utilised for office, cooking, kothi and residence for Hospital Assistant and establishment. A separate block of buildings, capable of accommodating 20 sick with the partition between for women, should be erected to the north of the other build- ings as a temporary hospital for the treatment of all suspected cases. A block of buildings with latrine accommodation similar to the foregoing should be provided for the use of the Police. One latrine with 10 seats, with partition between each seat for males, &c. separate latrine with 5 similar seats for females, should be constructed in a con- venient place similar to those provided at Chinchli. For effectually carrying out this quarantine, the following establishment will be necessary:- 1 Hospital Assistant (already appointed). 1 Aval Krkun with competent assistant. 4  Peons. 5  Hamls to keep the blocks clean and look after the lights.
?7 2 Bhangis. 1 Health Inspector. 1  Kothiwla with Assistant. 2  Cooks, one Brhmin and one Martha, with two assistants. Cooked food for all castes will be provided daily at a charge of annas 3 for each meal. Those preferring dry rations will be supplied with the same at annas 2 per meal; but destitute people should be fed free. Milk, firewood, vegetables and all necessaries should be supplied daily by the Mmlatdr. A Police guard of about 20 men, with the usual complement of officers should be detailed for the purpose of the protection of the camp and maintenance of order. A bullock with mkan, 4 ghgris and a driver, will also be required for supplying the people with water. The necessary furniture, medicines and contingencies required for the camp will be supplied from the A. E. Hospital, and rules for guidance of Medical Officer will be separately drawn up by the Department. Arrangement for lighting the several blocks both inside and outside by means of lamp posts and lanterns should be provided as required. Pots required for storage of water and cooking purposes should be ob tained by the Awal Krkun from the Khsgi Department, and he will be held respon- sible for all losses. Arrangement should be made with the G. I. P. and Southern Martha Railways to intimate daily by telegram to the Medical Officer in charge the num- ber of 2nd and 3rd class tickets issued each day to stations on the Kolhpur State Railway. They should also be asked to permit the tickets to hold good during the period of the quarantine and to prevent re-booking of such passengers at all intermediate stations. No passenger arriving at Shirol Road should be allowed to return until he has completed the period of quarantine. (Signed)    GEO. SINCLAIR, Darbr Surgeon, Kolhpur. (True Copy) J. W. WRAY, Lieut.-Colonel, Political Agent, Kolhpur and Southern Martha   Country.
?No. 905 OF 1897. REPORT ON THE MEDICAL INSPECTION OF PERSONS LEAVING AND ARRIVING AT BOMBAY BY SEA DURING THE PLAGUE EPIDEMIC, 1896-97. OUTWARD INSPECTIONS. 1.    Before describing in detail the wholesale system of inspection of outward vessels, crews and passengers, which was introduced early in February 1897, the procedure as regards issue of bills of health which had hitherto been in force at Bombay may be explained, as apparently much ignorance prevails, especially amongst foreign nations, on that point. 2.    The bills of health issued at Bombay have been, until the 6th of Febru- ary 1897, of two kinds-Form " B " and Form " C."    Form " B " Bill of Health certifies not merely to the health of Bombay city and its environs, but testifies to the sanitary condition of the vessels to which it refers, and to the absence of dangerous epidemic diseases amongst its passengers and crew. To it is attached a necrological certificate that shows the number of deaths during previous week in Bombay from Plague, yellow fever and cholera, and contains the official opinion of the Standing Medical Board as to the epide- mic or sporadic character of these diseases at the time of its issue. This official bill is therefore not merely a document which gives evidence of the health of the port that issues it, as ordinary bills of health do, but furnishes a medical guarantee that the vessel which carries it is free from dangerous epidemic disease and is in a sanitary condition at the time of sailing. It necessitates of course a medical examination of the vessel, crew and passengers prior to departure by an officer appointed for the purpose; and this examination-India's effort to prevent the export from its shores of such diseases as cholera and Plague-has been in force since June 1884. Up to 6th February 1897 this Bill, Form " B ", was only issued to vessels bound to some of the following ports:-Aden, Red Sea Ports, European vi Canal, Persian Gulf and Mauritius, vessels for which with their crews and passengers have been regularly inspected here during the last 13 years. It is well to make this fact clear, because other countries never seem to have admitted that efforts have been honestly made by India to keep her own special diseases within her own borders. Thus oue of the Delegates sent by the Mauritius Government to study the Plague at Bombay, and who was present at a medical inspection of a batch of sea-borne passengers here, express- ed surprise at the closeness of the inspection and professed amazement when told that vessels, crew and passengers for Mauritius have been carefully inspected here prior to departure for the last 13 years; and he further stated that no one in Mauritius had ever been aware of that fact; and this notwithstanding that the very wording of the Indian Bill precludes its issue without a medical in- spection of ship, crew and passengers immediately before sailing. Form " C " Bill of Health is on the other hand a pro form bill, which merely states the condition of health in Bombay at the time of issue, and is therefore granted without inspection of ships and those sailing on them. It is taken by vessels bound to ports other than those already mentioned. 3.    Such was the procedure in force in Bombay up to 6th February   1897, when, as the Plague epidemic increased and it became evident that a panic stricken population was rushing from the city by all available routes, Government decided to enforce medical inspection by their own officers  of  all  vessels and persons leaving Bombay by sea for anywhere, and from that date accordingly the pro form Bill  of  Health " C " ceased to be issued.    The expression  "by their own officers " is here used because the two local shipping companies which carried away the great bulk of the population that fled by sea had already, and at an earlier date, provided a medical inspection of their own. 4.    It is clear then that as regards vessels bound  for Europe vi Canal, Persian Gulf, Aden, Red Sea and Mauritius, the Bombay procedure has been for many  years  acting as  a check on the export of cholera and other dangerous epidemic diseases, and that, when Plague broke out in the city in September 1896, and before the Venice Convention was even thought  of, the  Bombay  medical inspection system was working steadily, if silently, in connection with departures for the  ports just mentioned.    Under that system, but amplified to meet the B 1397-1
?2 requirements of the Red Sea Pilgrim Ships Act, was conducted the examination on shore prior to embarkation of the 4,831 pilgrims for the Haj of 1897 who succeeded in procuring passages from Bombay, before this port was closed on 31st January 1897 against pilgrim departures, and with such success that amongst the passengers of the eight vessels which conveyed them between the dates of 8th October 1896 and the 28th January 1897 only 2 cases of Plague occurred during the voyage to Camaran, viz., those on board the S.S. "Pekin" which left Bombay on 28th December 1896 with 1,045 pilgrims. The Venice Convention describes the procedure to be adopted in the case of a vessel on which before departure a case of Plague occurs. The vessel becomes "Infected" and is to be notified as such. This rule has been in force in Bombay since 1884 with the difference that not merely Plague cases, but cases of cholera, or other dangerous infectious or contagious disease such as small-pox, yellow fever, measles and scarlatina, if found and removed from a departing ship render the vessel an "Infected" one, necessitate its disinfection, and cause the bill of health to become foul by an entry of the incident. Europe, in short, has during the present year prescribed a course of treatment for India which that country has more or less been under for years. 5. The average number of bills of health-Form B-issued yearly since June 1884 has been 668, and the yearly number of persons inspected for issue of the bills 82,137. The problem, then, that Government had to solve was the institution of a system of inspections sufficiently developed to cover, as events have proved, during the six months-February to July-20,252 outward bound vessels and 394,164 persons travelling on them. The necessary powers were acquired under the Epidemic Diseases Act, and the following rules became law on the 6th February 1897:- 1.    No vessel shall leave the port of Bombay  until   she has been inspected by the Health Officer of the Port,  and the master or person in charge of such vessel has obtained a bill of health or  certificate from such officer that the master or person in charge, officers, crew and passengers (if any)  of such  vessel  are  free  from any   dangerous epidemic disease: "Provided that, in the case of a  vessel  that has called  at Bombay from a port outside the Continent  of India  en route for some other port, and which has on arrival a clean bill of health and  has had no communication with   Bombay   except  through any person   or persons who shall   have embarked   there,   the inspection  of such vessel   by   the   Health   Officer of the Port may be limited to the medical examination of such person or persons so embarked, and the bill of health or certificate required by this rule shall only certify that such person or persons is or are free from dangerous epidemic disease, and such certificate may be in the form of an endorsement on the bill of health furnished to the vessels at the last port of call prior to arrival at Bombay. For the purposes of this proviso the Collector of Customs and the Port Health Officer are empowered to decide what shall constitute communication with Bombay." 2.    Should the Health Officer of the Port be of opinion that any person on board of any vessel so inspected is suffering from a dangerous epidemic disease, he shall refuse to give a bill of health or certificate as aforesaid unless and until such person is removed from the vessel. 3.    After a master or person in charge of the vessel has obtained any bill of health or certificate under the provision of these rules no person or cargo shall be admitted or taken on board of such vessel before she  leaves the port of Bombay unless such vessel  is again inspected by the Health Officer of the Port and another bill of health or certificate obtained from such officer by the master or person in charge of such vessel. 4.    No port clearance shall be delivered to any vessel unless and until the master or person in charge thereof shall produce the bill of health or certificate so to be obtained as aforesaid, and it shall be the duty of Customs Officers to refuse delivery of the port clearance without the production of such bill of health or certificate.
?3 5. The Government of Bombay may appoint any person or persons by name or by virtue of office Health Officer or Health Officers of the Port for the purpose of these rules as regards any class or classes of vessels and may cancel any such appointment. 6. Disobedience to any of the above rules, Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, will subject the offender, and all persons aiding and abetting him, to a prosecution under Section 271 of the Indian Penal Code. The proviso to rule 1 (in italics) was added on 12th May 1897 to meet the cases of such vessels as arrived from uninfected foreign ports at Bombay en route to Europe, and whilst at Bombay held no communication with the shore except through passengers embarked there, nor took in food, water or coal. The only vessels which came under these conditions were those of the French Messageries Company, and the China passengers of one of them, as well as the crew, raised some objections to being inspected here, arguing that the very inspection by officers from a Plague centre such as Bombay might be the means of infecting them. This argument being sound in a sanitary sense the proviso referred to was added by Government ; and rules were drawn up by the Collector of Customs and the Port Health Officer which defined for the purposes of the proviso what shall be held to constitute " communication with Bombay." As a matter of fact, however, no vessel has as yet come under the proviso, as all French steamers which have arrived at Bombay since its introduction have gone into wet dock and thereby freely communicated with the shore. 6. The number of vessels and passengers leaving Bombay was so large that Government considered the work to be beyond the powers of one Department, and an arrangement was made by which eventually all steamers, and such native craft as were bound to any port north of Mndvi (Cutch) and south of Bhatkal (the most southerly point in the Presidency), were to be inspected by the Port Health Staff, and all other native craft by medical officers entertained by, and under the orders of, the Collector of Customs and his staff. The Port Health Officer was requested by the Collector of Customs to supervise the inspections of the Customs Medical Staff, and consequently the whole harbour work carried out is included in this report. The following was the staff provided :-   One Port Health Officer. " A "-PORT. Health. Staff. One Additional Port Health Officer.  Three Commissioned Medical Officers.  Three Assistant Surgeons.  One Hospital Assistant.  One Lady Doctor, and the services of a second as occasion required (as events proved for from 2 to 3 days in each week during the fair weather season). "?"-CUSTOMS. Two qualified Private Practitioners. Medical Staff.  One Lady Doctor.  Messrs Shepherd & Co. also provided a Medical Officer (qualified Private Practitioner) in connection with that Company's large passenger traffic at Modi Bandar. In addition to the extra medical staff detailed under A and B, a second clerk was provided for the Port Health Office, the crew of the Port Health launch was doubled, and extra Preventive Officers and sepoys provided by the Customs. 7. Of the following tables, No. I shows the number of outward vessels and their passengers and crews inspected month by month from 6th February to 31st July 1897 ; and No. II gives the weekly return of Plague deaths, as shown in the necrological certificates attached to the bills of health, and in addition the total weekly mortality from all causes during the period covered by Table I, as well as from the date when Plague was declared to be epidemic in Bombay. It also, for purposes of comparison, contains a column showing the average weekly total mortality for the previous five years :-
?4 TABLE No. I.   MONTHS. NUMBER OF VESSELS INSPECTED. NUMBER ?F PERSONS INSPECTED. REGISTERED NUMBER OF PERSONS REJECTED.   Passengers.  Crews. Total. Passengers.  Crews. Total.  Number of Steam-ships and Square-rigged Vessels inspected. Number of native Sailing Craft inspected. Total.  Steam-ships and Square-rigged Vessels. Country Craft. Steam-ships and Square-rigged Vessels. Country Craft. Number of Passengers. Number of Crew. Number of Crew and Passengers. Rejected. Sent to Hospital for observation. Rejected. Sent to Hospital for observation. Number of Passengers. Number of Crews. Number of Crews and Passengers. February 203 2,313 2,515 44,451 5,387 8,299 14,806 40,838 23,105 72,943 153  22  153 22 175 March .. 299 3,819 4,118 38,698 19,382 13,008 20,855 58,080 33,863 91,943 181  32  181 32 213 April .. 288 4,816 5,104 27,805 10,062 11,990 30,151 37,867 42,141 80,008 189 39 70 7 189 70 259 May .. 249 5,206 5,455 25,833 10,768 11,946 32,851 36,601 44,797 81,398 155 155 29 29 155 29 184 June .. 160 1,797 1,957 16,227 3,196 8,798 12,437 19,423 21,235 40,658 89 70 9 9 89 9 98 July .. 156 947 1,103 10,677 1,042 8,835 6,660 11,719 15,495 27,214 49 46 12 12 49 12 61 Total 1,354 18,898 20,252 163,691 49,837 62,876 117,760 213,528 180,636 394,164 816 310 174 57 816 174 990  TABLE No. II.    For the week ending Official number of Plague deaths reported. Total Mortality for each weak. Mean number of Deaths of last five years for each week. For the week ending Official number of Plague deaths reported. Total Mortality for each week Mean number of Deaths of last five years  for each week. 13th October 1896 45 634 467 9th March  1897... 590 1,326 520 20th  do. 53 606 448 16th do. ...... 497 1,258 506 27th  do. 72 698 442 23rd do. ..... 438 1,139 509 3rd November  1896 49 668 414 30th do. ...... 496 1,141 520 10th do. 51 623 421 6th April  1897 399 1,007 527 17th  do. 53 704 434 13th do. ..... 373 970 544 24th  do. 67 760 420 20th do. ..... 310 836 585 1st December 1896 64 772 432 27th do. ...... 195 671 598 8th  do. 173 1,051 431 4th May  1897 .. 144 638 577 15th  do. 259 1, 310 445 11th do. ..... 98 558 568 22nd  do. 226 1,416 443 18th do. ..... 67 547 374 29th  do. 390 1,853 449 25th do. ..... 56 541 550 5th January  1897 348 1,711 474 1st June 1897 .. 34 500 517 12th  do. 335 1,638 458 8th do. ..... 34 585 515 19th  do. 470 1,758 479 15th do. ..... 26 531 485 26th  do. 446 1,721 493 22nd do. ..... 19 501 440 2nd February  1897 516 1,645 495 29th do. ..... 11 549 441 9th  do. 745 1,911 516 6th July  1897 .. 7 550 467 16th  do. 845 1,728 544 13th do. ..... 4 577 463 23rd  do. 778 1,650 518 20th do. ..... 9 678 494 2nd  March  1897 692 1,484 522 27th do. ..... 14 770 520  N.B.-Plague officially declared epidemic in Bombay on 13th October 1896. The merest glance at Table No. I will convey to the mind a conception of the enormous passenger traffic dealt with under the Government organization, but it cannot give more than an approximate idea of the difficulties and complica- tions arising from the conditions of a traffic that necessitated inspection at many different centres in a very large harbour, at various places along an extensive foreshore, and within wet docks where the necessities of tidal conditions had to be reckoned with. The admirable and successful Police and Customs organiza- tion necessary to control the traffic and ensure that no person evaded inspection, the complex arrangements necessary for the separate examination of the two sexes with retiring rooms for more private inspection, and the carrying out of a compulsory and very severe individual inspection without offending caste pre- judices and with as little inconvenience to the travelling public and shipping companies as possible, none of these important details can be shown in a return or properly appreciated except by the Government which directed them and the officials who carried them out.
?5 8. The object aimed at being the prevention of the spread of plague to other Indian ports, to ports outside India, and, above all, to Europe, with its incal culable effects on Indian commerce, no measures were spared to obtain that end- and the most characteristic feature of the inspection became its extreme strict-, ness and searching nature. Plague, moreover, is a disease which, requires a very rigid and close inspection for its recognition. Its main and chiefest signs during the Bombay outbreak were fever and buboes, and all natives with either of these signs became objects of suspicion, their temperatures were taken and they were subjected to the most searching examination in private. During the months of February, March and April the number of persons placed on one side for temperature observation ranged from 20 to 25 per cent. and as many as a dozen rapid registering thermometers were in use at the same time. It need hardly be said that to eliminate the suspicious cases a careful individual examination of each native was necessary, and this included not merely a look at a man's tongue and face and a pulse observation, but a careful exploration of his body for glandular enlargement. Nor was the examination confined to the persons sailing on a vessel. The vessel itself was overhauled and a high sanitary con- dition insisted on. This included the opening and thorough cleansing of lascars' boxes, which were often found to contain filthy clothes and rubbish quite capable of supporting the Plague microbe in comfort and affluence. In fact it would be impossible, humanly speaking, to device a more stringent or exhaustive exami- nation for the prevention of the export of Plague. All ship commanders were in addition advised as to periodical inspections of their crews during the voyage, and of the advantage of frequent exposure to sun and wind of lascars' clothes and kit, whilst printed instructions were sent to shipping agents for issue to commanders of vessels without medical officers, describing the symptoms and the treatment to be adopted should Plague break out on their ships. 9.    The strictness and thoroughness of the examination are described and insisted on here, not because in the slightest degree do the officials who carried it out claim any credit for doing what was merely their duty, but because too much publicity cannot be claimed for the efforts made in Bombay to confine the Plague within its own borders.   It was  noticed  that  neither  lay  nor  even medical persons seemed to be able to realise how very searching the inspection was, until they had themselves experienced it.    If then in India the real nature of the measures adopted by Government for the prevention of  Plague export cannot be conceived unless seen, it is not too much to expect that the nations of continental Europe which have signed the Venice Convention may also, without ocular or, at least, strong evidence,  be  unable to realize how great   were the efforts made here to save them from the infliction which Bombay was enduring. Nor should it be forgotten that when the Indian Delegate at the Venice Con- vention described the thoroughness of the Bombay inspection, not from hearsay, but from the evidence of his own eyes, his statement was, according to Reuter, received with "satisfaction mingled with incredulity."    At that very time, it may be added, a Medical Officer of the Italian Government, who had been sent to Bombay to report on the measures adopted there for the prevention of the spread of Plague to Italian ports, was expressing his surprise at the completeness of the inspection system here, and was  learning from the evidence of his own eyes that the statement made by Dr. Cleghorn was true in every respect.    This Officer, Dr. Druetti, accompanied the Port Health Staff to all vessels bound for Italian ports, generally assisted at the  inspections, and became   thoroughly acquainted with the Bombay measures of prevention; and it was due to his favour- able views, presumably, that the severe quarantine in force at Brindisi at the time was afterwards removed. 10.    The regulations of the Venice Convention, published, however, some months after the Bombay arrangements had been in full swing, lay down that at a Plague-infected port all persons sailing  on  a ship are to be  inspected on shore prior to embarkation.    In Bombay the inspection of passengers was carried out on shore or on board ship according to the circumstances of each case.    The local conditions had to be taken into  consideration,  and these conditions made it convenient in some, and absolutely necessary in  other, instances to hold the inspection on board ship. B 1397-2
?6 As a matter of fact, however, the great majority of the passengers during the six months shown in Table I were examined on shore, prior to embarkation, in sheds specially arranged for the purpose; and these were of the classes most likely to be carriers of the Plague, i.e., passengers by Shepherd's local and coast- ing steamers and the British India boats bound to Kthiwr, Cutch and Karchi. Those inspected on board ship were as a rule passengers by the ocean- going steamers. In all instances the crews of vessels were examined on board ship. Their inspection elsewhere would have been impossible, or, if possible in few instances, could have been attended by no sanitary benefit whatever; for, if any one of a crew during inspection on shore was found to be a Plague case, he must have been considered to have already infected the vessel he came from. The importance of crew inspections will be seen from a glance at Table I which shows that considerably more than half of all persons inspected came under the crew class, and consisted of the very people who under the conditions prevailing were the most likely, in the case of vessels going to Europe and foreign ports, to be carriers of infection. Thus a P. & O. Liner arrives from Europe, and at once proceeds to discharge its native crew. The crew by law can claim dis- charge, and the lascars rarely fail to do so. Another crew is then entertained in Bombay, and its members join the vessels some days before it sails from this port. During the plague epidemic the new crews in these cases came from some of the most infected areas in the town, and were, therefore, much more likely to be carriers of the Plague than the passengers who were chiefly Europeans and most of them from up-country stations free from the disease. 11. It is of course impossible to accurately gauge what is the real and exact value to be attached to any system of medical inspection as a preventative to the spread of Plague. It cannot discover the disease in its incubating stage, but it can detect signs and symptoms suspicious of the disease; and if all persons with suspicious signs and symptoms are removed from a vessel, the odds are much in favour of that vessel remaining uninfected. There is also an indirect effect which follows a strict inspection system, and that is the check on the spread of the disease which arises from. Plague and suspicious cases not caring to risk the chance of detection once the severe nature of the medical examina- tion has been recognised. This was very marked during the first months of the inspections when it was noticed that after the system had been acting for a short time the number of Plague and highly suspicious cases presenting themselves for examination considerably lessened; and the Port Health Office was deluged with letters and certificates relating to persons who wanted to leave Bombay but feared being prevented from doing so by the rigour of the inspection. When it is remembered that only two ocean-going steamers are known to have Plague on board after leaving Bombay from the first appearance of the disease in September 1896 to the present time, it is allowable to claim that the measures adopted by the Bombay Government shall be considered the leading factors in that result, and that a proper system of medical inspection if applied in time is capable of preventing Plague from seriously spreading beyond its centre of first appearance to neighbouring parts. It is of course impossible to trace the move- ments of each passenger who left Bombay by sea for ports across the harbour, and down the coast; and cases of Plague may have got away, by sailing craft and small coasting steamers, even after the strict system of inspection was introduced for passengers by such vessels. But enquiry has failed to show any; and amongst the large number of passengers who left for Karchi, where they came under official observation, and statistics accordingly are reliable, only one case of Plague occurred, and this might equally be called a Karchi case, as the man only complained of illness five days after landing at Karchi and 7 days after departure from Bombay. The two ocean-going steamers mentioned above as Plague-infected were the S.S. " Pekin " which left Bombay with 1,045 pilgrims for Jeddah on the 28th December 1896, and the hired Government Transport S.S. " Dilwara" which left Bombay for Southampton on 10th March with 172 crew and 1,063 passen- gers.
7 The pilgrims of the " Pekin " had been in Bombay and living for weeks in a Plague-infected locality, and all things considered, it is wonderful that more cases did not occur. The " Dilwara " case did not come under the Government inspection system, as the examination of troops and passengers by troop-ships is carried out by the Military authorities, the Port Health Staff only inspecting the vessels and crews; and the case occurred amongst the passengers. Both these vessels were densely populated, and the passengers of one of them represented the most insanitary class that travels by sea-pilgrims for Mecca. Yet the disease did not catch on, from which it would seem that the cir- cumstances of a sea voyage are inimical to the Plague microbe, and that people affected by manifest Plague, or in whom the disease is incubating, may be on board ship without danger to the rest of the passengers, unless indeed the number of those infected is very considerable. 12. The supreme importance of preventing Plague export abroad, especially to Europe, doubtless resulted in hardship to some, and many lascars and native passengers were removed from vessels because a considerable fever from which they suffered at the time of inspection could not then be known to be not due to Plague. Moreover diagnosis was not made easier by the fact that a large number, probably 50 per cent., of the lower orders of natives have chronic glandular enlargement, and that during the height of the epidemic there seemed to be an accompanying wave of ill-health which manifested itself by a rise of temperature and an appearance of illness in the proper natives even when free from Plague. 13. The number of cases shown as rejected in Table I is 990, i.e., 990 in- dividuals were prevented from sailing during the six months under report. This number is not however even approximately correct, and only represents those whose cases can be found on the records. During the early period of the inspections, when all concerned were work- ing at full pressure, large numbers were prevented from embarking, the returns of which have either been lost or were never made; and it was only afterwards that a proper return of the rejected was kept. It would be interesting to know exactly how many of those rejected after- wards developed Plague; but the information cannot be given. In the early months of the inspection there existed in Bombay no camps of observation to which suspicious cases could not be sent, and, as it would have been manifestly unjust to send merely suspicious cases to a Plague hospital, those rejected on suspicion were simply turned back into the town, their addresses, if they had any, having been, as far as possible, registered. A rough idea of the number of Plague cases amongst those rejected may perhaps be found from a consideration of the fact that out of 29 suspicious cases sent to the first observation camp available (Port Trust) 19 developed Plague, and the 11 cases sent to the Gokuldas Tejpal Hospital were all refused admission and transferred to the Arthur Road Hospital as bon fide Plague cases. There is, therefore, a strong presumption that a large percentage of those turned back into the town before the creation of the observation camps were Plague cases, some of whom, doubtless, died in their homes, whilst any who were subsequently re- moved to Plague hospitals were simply entered in the hospital records as cases from the city. When the observation camps erected by the Plague Com- mittee were instituted in April all rejected cases were transferred to them, and kept under observation until free from all suspicion of Plague. By that time, however, the Plague mortality was rapidly dropping, and comparatively few of those sent for observation developed the disease. Accordingly, and for the reasons stated, it can only be officially stated that the number of authenticated Plague cases discovered at the outward inspection was 47; and that not even an approximate return can be furnished of the presumably very large number of those who rejected as suspicious at the inspections afterwards proved to be genuine Plague cases.
?8 14. From the experience of the inspections it would appear that a large percentage of the lascar class suffer from the ravages of syphilis; and it was noticed that when anyone of this class, or indeed any of the lower orders of natives, had glandular enlargements in the groin, syphilis became the explana- tion. In fact so anxious were men to avoid suspicion of Plague that a disease, which is generally either indignantly denied or only admitted with shame and reluctance, became the fashionable excuse for a lump in the groin even amongst those who were certainly not syphilitic. 15.    It is due to the natives who experienced the inspections to say that generally speaking they submitted cheerfully to examination, and when rejected allowed themselves to be taken to  observation camp and remained there quietly and without demur;   or, before these   camps  were  instituted, gave  up  their addresses and drifted peacefully back into the city.    As the rejection of one   of a family generally meant the abandonment of departure by the rest, they deserve credit for stoical behaviour under misfortune.    Occasionally  bribes, from a few annas to considerable sums, were offered,   and when no notice was  taken,  the profferer gave up all hope and calmly awaited the pleasure of the Sarkar.  Rarely was any insolence or discontent manifested, and then only by youthful natives with a high school education and a partial knowledge of English. 16.    It is worthy of note that out of all the Europeans examined only one had to be removed from his vessel  on suspicion.    This case, a cabin  boy on an Austrian  Lloyd steamer,  had so high a temperature,   105 F., and seemed so ill that he was sent for observation to St. George's Hospital, where after some days his disease,  typhoid fever, became apparent.    He  recovered and proceeded to Europe in a subsequent ship. 17.    The assistance afforded by the leading shipping companies deserves acknowledgment.    Their agents and commanders,  although doubtless consider- ably harassed and inconvenienced by the rigour of the system, were almost in- variably  courteous and helpful.    The requirements  of the inspecting   officers were  always attended to,   and their  efforts to   secure high   sanitary   conditions in the vessels leaving were fairly seconded by agents,  commanders and officers; so that  it is no exaggeration to state that almost all steamers which have left Bombay   during the year were as clean as human hands could make   them.    To Messrs Shepherd, P. & O., British India, Austrian  Lloyd's and Rubattino  Com- panies especially acknowledgment is due and is now freely made. 18.    Should at any future time another epidemic of plague necessitate a second system of wholesale inspections of outward sea passengers, the records of the present time will doubtless be searched for information as to the arrangements and staff necessary.    It is well therefore to make it clear that the Inspecting Staffs A and ? detailed in paragraph 6 of this report were really insufficient. The work was only satisfactorily got through by working at the highest pressure, and under conditions which left no margin for illness or accident.    At times of especially heavy departures, as on English Mail days, it was found necessary to enlist the services of at least two and sometimes for medicial officers from other appointments.    The unfailing punctuality with which these extra officers were provided, often at the shortest notice, by the Secretary to the Surgeon-General, Surgeon-Captain Grayfoot, reflects the greatest credit on that officer, who also on several occasions assisted at the inspections himself.   To Surgeon-Captain Hojel and the other officers who at much personal inconvenience assisted on these spe- cial occasions, and carried on their share of the work with much skill and tact, the thanks of the Port Health Staff are due. For future contingencies then the Staffs A and ? should be increased by the addition of one Commissioned Medicial Officer and one Assistant Surgeon and arrangements made, as under existing circumstances, for supplementing that staff on special occasions. 19. During February and March, as already stated, there were no abserva- tion camps available for the detention of suspicious cases. Should severe Plague again declare itself, such camps should be at once run up and placed as close as possible to the busy centres of passenger traffic. These centres are Modi Bandar, Victoria and Prince's Docks' harbour walls, and the open harbour. At Modi Bandar, which is much the busiest passenger centre on the foreshore, there
?9 is ample space for the erection of a camp sufficiently large to accommodate for a few days outward bound passengers rejected from the boats there, and who would thus have only a few yards to walk in order to obtain temporary shelter. The absence of observation camps during the first months of the inspections was the cause of considerable hardship to many of those rejected at the examination, who had given up their city homes and, when not permitted to sail, had no means of proper shelter. When Modi Khna Observation Camp was opened the reject- ed at Modi Bandar were sent there, but the distance was considerable. Hence the necessity for a small camp at the Bandar itself, especially for such cases as an obesrvation of perhaps one day or even less may clearly prove to free from suspicion of Plague. For the busy centres at the Wet Docks and their harbour walls the obser- vation camps might be placed outside the Northern Gate of Prince's Dock, where there is ample space between the Merewether Dry Dock and the Pilgrim shed at Malet Bandar. For rejections from vessels in open harbour, Modi Khna would be the pro- per place for an observation camp; and if steps were made leading to the water, access to the camp would be quite easy. At each of these camps there should be a separate shed, of dimensions pro- portioned to the size of the camp, where Plague cases can be detained pending removal to Plague hospital. The equipment of these observation camps should include supplies of the excellent ambulances introduced by the Plague Com- mittee, and sufficient stores of disinfectants. 20.    A sufficient number of rapid registering thermometers should be in stock for use at the inspections.    Experience has proved that any instrument that requires a longer time than half a minute for temperature observation is of little use when dealing with the enormous human traffic shown in Table I. Unfortunately these  half minute thermometers are very fragile and require very careful handling.    It may be useful to place on record that the number used and broken on both outward and inward inspections during the six months of the former and the four months of the latter has been 12 dozens, the ap- proximate cost of which was Rs. 900. 21.    A statement is attached in the form of an Appendix (I) to this report, which will furnish an approximate estimate of the cost to Government of the Outward Sea Inspections. II.-INWARD INSPECTIONS. 22.    Large numbers of the city population who had fled from Bombay in December and January began to return as the Plague declined.    They had already scattered the disease far and wide over the Presidency, and they rushed back to the city which they had abandoned in panic with as much eagerness as they had originally left it.    Public opinion fearing the effects on the health of Bombay from this inrush of people, many of whom came from Plague centres and famine districts, demanded some check on the importation of Plague cases; and, under the directions of the Plague Committee, the inspection of arrivals by sea from places within a defined area was organized and placed in working order. Karchi in the north was heavily infected, and the whole coast more or less as far south as Goa was either infected or in communication with infected places. Accordingly a line drawn through a point 10 miles north of Karchi and Bhatkal on the West Coast of India and some 100 miles south of Goa were fixed as the limits of a prescribed area from ports and places within which vessels on arrival at Bombay should be medically inspected. All other vessels were allowed free pratique, subject to the ordinary rules of the port, on furnishing the boarding Pilot with a certificate to the effect that there had been no communi- cation during the voyage with places or vessels within the prescribed limits. The necessary powers were obtained on 12th April 1897 by the issue of the following rules under the Epidemic Diseases Act of 1897:- 1.    The Bombay Plague Committee is hereby authorised to appoint persons as Plague authorities. B 1397-3
?10 2.    Such Plague authorities are hereby empowered to medically inspect persons coming to Bombay Island by sea,  by vessels, including native craft, which have touched  at any port in India between Bhatkal and a line ten miles north of Karchi, and to detain or send for detention to such hospitals or other places as may be appointed by the Bombay Plague Committee for the purpose any persons  whom they find or suspect to be suffering from Plague. 3.    The master of every vessel, including buggalows and every kind of native craft, arriving at the port of Bombay, from or having had communica- tion with any place on the West Coast of India between Bhatkal and a line ten miles north of Karchi, on board of which there is or has been during the voyage from which she is arriving or has last arrived, either among the passengers or crew, any case or suspicious case of Bubonic Plague, or if one or more deaths from  any cause  whatever shall have occurred  on board on the said voyage,  shall report the same  at the earliest possible moment by signal to the Health Officer of the Port or through the Pilot or Water Police. 4.    If the vessel is  coming into port, the master shall  report such cases to the Pilot or other boarding officers at the earliest possible oppor- tunity, or if she be not boarded,  or is already  at anchor within port limits, shall hoist a signal, which shall be,  during the day the  flag R of the Com- mercial Code at the main, and during the night, at the same place, 3 lights, namely, red, white and red, and shall also verbally by an officer, or in writing, inform the officer in charge of the Harbour Police.    It shall be the duty of the Pilot or other officers to whom  such report  under Rule 1 is made to communicate the same without delay to the Health Officer of the Port. 5.    Pending the  arrival of the Health Officer of the Port the master shall anchor in the stream, and shall not permit the departure or landing of any of his crew or passengers until permitted to do so by the Health Officer of the Port. 6.    The masters of vessels to which Rule 3 is applicable, and the masters of all vessels arriving from the ports or places inside the limits prescribed in Rule 3, shall only permit the disembarkation of their crews and passengers between the hours of 6 A.M. and 6 P.M., and at such bandars or places as may be directed by the Health Officer of the Port. In accordance with the authority given by the above rules regulations were drawn up and issued to Port authorities and shipping companies describing the procedure to be adopted by commenders of vessels on arrival at Bombay. 23.    Vessels under  these  rules  disembarked  their  passengers  at  Modi Bandar, at the docks' harbour walls, and at anchorages in the open   harbour. The vast majority of arrivals disembarked at the two first mentioned centres, and some additions  to the   arrangements  already existing  there for the  outward inspections, were all that were necessary, and were cheerfully provided by Messrs. Shepherd and Company.    Amongst these was an installation of electric lighting at Modi Bandar for the inspection of passengers by that company's Dharamtar boat on occasions when owing to tidal conditions arrival was delayed until after dark. Steamers which anchored in the stream were inspected at their usual anchorages. For the enormous number of native sailing craft inspection arrangements were made at the Dutiable and Free anchorages, and at a special anchorage selected near Tucker's Beacon. Vessels collected near these centres and awaited the visits of the examining officers, who, after inspection, gave certificates entitling them to pratique. 24.    The following staff was provided by the Plague Committee and placed under the directions of the Port Health Officer:- 3 Commissioned Medical Officers. 2 Private Practitioners. 5 Assistant Surgeons (Government).
?11 13  Medical Students. 1  Lady Doctor. 1  Lady Nurse. 1  Lady Medical Student. Owing to the heavy strain on the Medical Department in connection with Plague and Famine a sufficient supply of trained medical subordinates could not be obtained, and it became necessary to engage the most experienced medical students available, and their services were utilised at the bandars to take temperature observations, and at the anchorages, aided and supervised by Assistant Surgeons, to carry out the inspections. 25.    The  complicated  arrangements  necessary   in   connection with the Outward inspections have   already  been  alluded  to.     The difficulties to be surmounted in the case of the Inward System were in some ways even more marked.    The heavy arrivals of April and May,  106,272 and 123,812 respec- tively, were carried in 8,494 vessels, each of which had to be inspected ; there was no certainty as to time of arrival ; and the disembarkations were spread over a large area.    It will readily be understood that the conditions created difficulty and complications. The ordinary representative of public opinion who could not understand why the Plague Committee had hesitated before finally deciding to enforce a medical inspection of arrivals by sea from infected ports was probably ignorant of the difficulties to be surmounted. As he enjoyed his usual meals he was doubtless unaware that a special arrangement, by which inspections were made in the harbour and several miles from shore between 12 midnight and early morning, was necessary in order that he might get his fruit and vegetables, and that to enable him to obtain his little luxuries overworked medical men had to toil at night. The complex arrangements necessary to ensure that the across-harbour supplies such as fruit, vegetables, hay and firewood were not delayed, could only have been recognised by the general public had a break down in the organiza- tion drawn attention to the fact that to be deprived of certain necessaries of life is unpleasant and inconvenient. 26.    The success of the scheme, the comparative silence which marked the working of a system under which in April and May over 229,000 persons were strictly and individually examined and 3,494 sent to observation camp and fed there, could only have been ensured by the rapidity and completeness which the demands and suggestions of the Port Health authorities were complied with by the Plague Committee.    Under the tireless activity of General Gatacre, Mr. C. James and Dr. Dimmock, in an almost incredibly short space of time, ambulances of the most improved  type were supplied,  Plague  observation camps were opened, apparently insuperable difficulties were surmounted, and an inspection system was working smoothly which dealt with the masses of people shown in the following Table No. III :- TABLE No. III.                                                  NUMBER OF VESSELS INSPECTED. NUMBER OF PERSONS INSPECTED.  NUMBER OF PERSONS SEGREGATED.     Passengers. Crew. Total. Passengers. Crew. Total. Months. Number of  Steam-ships and Square-rigged Vessels inspected.  Number of Native Sailing Craft inspected.   Total. Steam-ships and Square-rigged Vessels. Country Craft. Steam-ships and Square-rigged Vessels. Country Craft. Number of Passengers. Number of Crew. Number of Crew and Passengers. Sent to Hospital for observation.  Sent to Hospital for observation. Number of   Passengers.  Number of  Crew.  Number of Crew and Passengers.   April ... 228 3,266 3,494 70,104 11,150 6,522 18,496 81,254 25,018 106,272 447  447  447 May    .. 194 4,806 5,000 73,661 12,258 6,907 30,986 85,919 37,893 123,812 3,047  3,047  3,047 June   .. 104 1,474 1,578 16,403 2,881 3,955 9,966 19,284 13,921 33,205 1,341  1,341  1,341 July    .. 89 943 1,032 9,152 973 3,228 6,517 10,125 9,745 19,870 489  489  489 Total.. 615 10,489 11,104 169,320 27,262 20,612 65,965 196,582 86,577 283,159 5,324  5,324  5,324
?12 27.    The above table shows that the great inrush of people took place  in April and May, when  167,173 passengers poured into Bombay by sea from places within the prescribed limits.    They represented all sorts and conditions of people, the sleek and well fed native from Cutch, the Goanese  who  arrived in as good health as when he originally deserted the city, and the hungry  and destitute native from the southern ports of the Presidency.     Comparatively few of the latter class were actually emaciated from  famine.     The larger numbers were simply without means of subsistence,  and many of them were also ill and weak and perilously close to famine point unless relieved.    Consider- able numbers were found on inspection to be suffering from fever, and were sent to observation camps for food and treatment rather than for suspicion of Plague. This large influx of sickly and destitute arrivals did not at first seem to increase the weekly mortality returns of the city. The unusual cleanliness of Bombay at the time, a much reduced population, and the fine weather which enabled the immigrants to sleep in the open air, together with the charity doled out by friends or relations, doubtless prevented the unfavourable effects on the general health which might have been expected. With the advent of the rains, however, most of the favourable conditions ceased. The population had largely increased; sleeping in the open air became either impossible or attended with danger to health; over-crowding in damp and ill-ventilated rooms resulted, and the mortality steadily increased, until early in August it had become prac- tically double its normal rate calculated on the population of the last census, viz., 821,000. 28.    In  dealing   with  the   masses   of people who came under inspection during the four months April to July, and who represented arrivals from heavily infected places such as Karchi, Janjira, Alibg, &c., as well as from ports where Plague had not reached epidemic proportions, although each  case  was  decided on its own merits, it  was found necessary to decide  on  some defined plan  in order to eliminate the healthy from the suspected.    A sliding scale  of tempera- tures  was  accordingly  introduced,   and  passengers   were divided into classes according to their own state of health and to the state of Plague at the places which they were judged to have arrived from.    A map showing the progress of the disease, and altered according to the reports from the mofussil, was furnished by the Plague Committee, and in accordance with the  alterations in this map the figures on the sliding scale of temparatures would vary.    Thus arrivals from a place only slightly infected would, if free from other signs of Plague and with temperatures under 100 F., be passed as healthy one week, and the next  week, owing to unfavourable reports from the same place, would be placed in  obser- vation camp if found with temperatures anything over  normal.    This  system was   found to work well, and as a brisk   house-to-house   visitation was being carried out by the Plague Committee at the same time it is probable that few, if any, cases of Plague which arrived by sea during the four months under report escaped detection, even if they succeeded in passing through the inspecting staffs in the harbour and at the bandars.    Some difficulty was   experienced in dis- covering the places from which the passengers had really come.    By arrange- ment the tickets were not collected until the inspection was  over, and in many cases the tickets contained the information required.    In other instances, how- over, the passengers had   travelled on foot for many  days   and covered long distances  in order to secure the cheaper transit by the Dharamtar ferry boat, the fare for which by law is fixed at four annas;  and their original places of departure could with difficulty be traced, and in some instances not at all. 29.    When the  process of  elimination was completed the suspects were transferred to the Plague  Committee's observation camps,  and detained there for periods varying from 3 to 5 and 8 days, according as they had come originally from uninfected, moderately and heavily  infected places.    Actual Plague cases were sent in ambulances to a Plague hospital. These observation camps, at Modi Khna, Narelvdi and Reay Road, open until the rains set in, and during the rains at Wri Bandar and Mlet Bandar, have been already described in the Plague Committee's report. Suffice it to say that they answered their purpose admirably and reflect the greatest credit
?13 on Mr. James, who designed all of them except the Mlet Bandar ones. They provided shelter and food for 5,324 suspects from the Inward Sea Inspections alone during the four months April to July, and were managed so well that peace and contentment reigned within them. In addition to the above two other camps were available, the Cutch Memon and the Borah Observation Camps. The heads of these communities requested that suspects of their respective castes should be sent to their own camps, and the Plague Committee agreed to this. The concession, it may be added, was the cause of much extra work to the inspecting staff; and as any suspects who were transferred to these private camps became more or less lost to sight, it is questionable whether it should be granted on any future occasion under inden- tical conditions. 30. Early in May began the rush from Cutch Mndvi, where the Plague had assumed a virulence of type incomparably greater than anything Bombay itself had experienced. At first all arrivals with temperatures over normal were placed in camp for eight days' observation.    Later on, however, the influx increased; the danger to the city from the possible entry of persons   in   whom  an  incubating  disease could not be detected became more apparent; and accordingly all passengers by sea from Mndvi and neighbouring Cutch ports were on arrival placed under what was practically a quarantine observation of eight days;  and this continued until the approaching South-West Monsoon put an end to sea communication with ports in the Gulf of Cutch.    The wisdom of this step  was proved by an incident of the first inrush from  Cutch  Mndvi.    A perfectly healthy  looking arrival was placed on one side for temperature  observation, not because in the slightest degree did he seem ill or feverish, but owing to the fact that he had come from a heavily infected   place.    His temperature having been   proved to be normal he was allowed into the city, and 36 hours afterwards complained of illness and was found to be suffering from Plague.    It is possible of course that he may have become infected by his Bombay house which he had originally left when Plague broke out in this city, but it  is more probable that he became  so in Cutch Mndvi, and at the time of return to Bombay had the seeds of  the disease in him.    In all some twelve hundred suspects from Cutch Mndvi were accommodated in the various observation camps; and it says much for their managing staff that these passengers, most of whom were well-to-do natives, were perfectly satisfied with the treatment and accommodation provided.    It was in connection with this Cutch Mndvi  traffic, and at  an   earlier date with that from Karchi,  that actual Plague cases were discovered at  the time of arrival.    Amongst passengers from the former place occurred an incident which illustrates the suddenness with which Plague at times declares itself.    A woman, whose husband was in an advanced stage of the disease,  asked, on the morning of arrival, if she might accompany him to hospital.    At the time she was ap- parently in perfect health.    Two hours later she was  in  high fever, almost unconscious and an undoubted Plague case. 31 After the first fortnight of June the inward rush of passengers ceased and the inspections from that time do not need detailed description. The staff mentioned in paragraph 24 was reduced by the transfer of two Commissioned Medical Officers to duty elsewhere, and the services of the medical students and of one lady inspector were dispensed with. Towards the end of the month a recrudescense of Plague occurred at Uran, and the observation camps again became lively with suspects from that place. Late in July a pilgrim vessel from Jeddah, where Plague existed at the time, arrived with 536 Hajis. These pilgrims were feeble, filthy and famished looking, but free from any suspicion of Plague. Under the regulations of the Venice Convention of 1897 it became necessary to disinfect them and their clothes and luggage. This was done at the Pilgrim shed by the Port Health Department under arrangements made by the Plague Committee. The disinfection was most successfully carried out chiefly by means of the Government Geneste Herscher Steam Disinfecting Apparatus. A few lines record the facts: six days were necessary for the job; and a life-time would hardly suffice to efface the memories of the awful filth of the clothing which had to be carefully sorted and examined. It may be added B1397-4
?14 that a considerable portion, if not all, of the initial cost of the disinfecting stove was probably repaid by the saving which resulted from a capable disin- fection by steam under pressure of sodden and filthy heavy articles, such as rugs, rezais and bedding, which would otherwise have had to be destroyed and replaced at the expense of Government. The pilgrims, who were kept isolated during these proceedings and fed by the Plague Committee, were afterwards sent to their various destinations without having had any direct communication with the city. 32.    An examination of Table III will show that although 106,272 arrivals by sea were examined in April, only 447 persons were sent to observation camps. The smallness of this number is explained by the fact that there were no powers under which suspicious arrivals could be sent for segregation  until the rules given in paragraph  22 were published on 12th April.    It may also be noticed that there is no entry in the table of any cases of crews having been sent to camps on suspicion.    The explanation   is of course that the crews of inward vessels had not been within the focus of infection at the ports from which they arrived; and that when any number of crew was found on arrival, as rarely happened, to be suffering from fever, he was generally kept under observation on his vessel until it became clear that he was not suffering from Plague. 33.    It remains to add that the examinations were of the same searching- nature as has already been described in connection with, the outward inspection, and that the number of duly authenticated Plague cases detected on arrival  was, up to the 31st July, 57.    Of these the   largest number occurred amongst   pas- sengers from Cutch Mndvi and Karchi respectively, the remainder having been chiefly from various southern ports in the Presidency. 34.    The remarks made in paragraph 18 as to the insufficiency of the staff for outward inspection are applicable also to the inward system.    The experi- ences   of April and May prove  clearly that, when several steamers heavily laden with passengers arrive at the same hour, or within a short time of each other, vessels and passengers must either be detained  for considerable periods, or the medical staff, unless sufficiently strong for all contingencies, has to work at a pressure which  cannot last for long.    The two rival companies concerned in the coasting traffic exhibited an igenuity in timing the arrivals of their ships at practically the same hour that was truly marvellous, and  was sometimes described in  stronger terms   by overworked and  exhausted   medical   officers. The   staff,   therefore, detailed in paragraph  24 ought, for any similar future occasions, to be increased by two Commissioned Medical Officers;   and it should be laid down as an axiom, and for obvious reasons,  that both for outward and inward inspections the examining officers should be of irreproachable character and antecedents. As already mentioned, native craft were examined at three anchorages. Experience has now shown that a fourth should be added to those mentioned in paragraph 23, and should be fixed at moorings north of the Free Anchorage and between it and Mzgaon Bandar. 35.    An Appendix II is attached to this report, from which can be judged the approximate cost of the Sea Inward Inspection organization  for the  four months April to July 1897. 36.    It can be readily understood that an  organization sufficient for the thorough examination of over 677,000 persons  dealt with by the outward and inward staffs required something more   than a   sufficient  number   of medical officers.    The assistance of the Preventive Service and of the Police was neces- sary.    Without their aid-cheerfully and loyally rendered-the work could not have been carried on, and any attempts to do so could only have spelt failure.   It is impossible to describe in this report  the many details of additional  wrok thrown on these Services, and the loyal spirit in which their officers bore the strain imposed by extra and unpleasant duties; but it can and should be freely admitted  that  if any success  has been achieved,  any real  good done   by the organization planned, then the officers of the Preventive Service and of the Police have largely contributed to the result.    To  Mr. Walsh, Superintendent, and to Messrs.  Bailie   and   Thomas of  the   Prentive  Service, are due  the heartiest
?15 acknowledgment of the Port Health Officers for the assistance rendered by them, as indeed, by all Customs Officials. To Superintendent Ingram, to Inspector Lee-Smith and Constable Wheatley of the Prince's and Victoria Docks Police, and to Inspector Holdway, Water Division, thanks are due for the excellence of the arrangements under which large masses of people were controlled, and the inspections and transfers to observation camps of the " suspected" successfully carried out. 37. In conclusion, some words concerning the medical officers, male and female, who carried out the working of the Outward and Inward Inspection Systems. They have been engaged on a form of Plague duty which is, perhaps, the most unpleasant that can be conceived. Cut off from almost all that interests in their profession they have spent months and months on long and weary rounds of monotonous inspections. The exigencies of an enormous passenger traffic, and of commerce generally, necessitated hours of work which left little time for meals and none for ordinary recreation. Work began at 6 A.M. and rarely ended before 7-30 P.M. The public idea as to the simple nature of the inspections has been alluded to in paragraph 9 and their real character explained in paragraph 8 of this report. Duties which at no time were pleasant or easy became too often loathsome and difficult. The exploring of some of the filthiest parts of the human body for enlarged or tender glands cannot under any circum- stances be other than disagreeable; and when this operation has to be repeated through days and weeks and months, it can only be described as nauseating. Those only who have been through it can thoroughly appreciate how great was the sense of duty required to prevent, under such conditions, a searching exami- nation from degenerating to a more superficial and perfunctory observation. Nor can any one who has been without the experience form a true conception of how very dirty the lower class native can be. Those officers of the subordinate staff as were either natives of, or born in, India were in addition exposed to the admitted danger which such people incur from chances of infection. During the months of February and March, especi- ally when, large numbers of the Plague-stricken were endeavouring to leave Bombay, the chances of infection amongst the officers of the Subordinate staff must have been considerable, and credit is due to them for not merely honest work, but fearless conduct. It can be claimed for each and every member of the staff that everything personal was subordinated to the exigencies of duty, and that as a result shiping companies and passengers were little inconvenienced, and trade flowed on unin- terruptedly. Under the circumstances it is only right that the services of those who have worked so hard and well should be brought to the notice of Government; and I accordingly now record the names of those who served on the two staffs, with the exception of the medical students on the Inward Staff whose names have been already sent to, and their services acknowledged by, Government :- Outward Staff. In addition to the Port Health Officer and Surgeon Major J. Crimmin, V.C., Additional Port Health Officer, Surgeon-Lieutenant S. Evans, Indian Medical Service (Bombay)  Surgeon-Lieutenant  W. W. Clemesha, Indian Medical                                           Service (Bengal).  " " W.   G.   Richards,  Indian  Medical Service (Madras). (A) - Appointed by Assistant Surgeon V. E. Fernandez (Bombay). Government    "         "    W. A. M. Wakeman (Bombay).  " "   F. H. O'Leary (Bengal).  Hospital Assistant Abdul Latiff (Bombay).  Miss E. daCunha, L.M. & S.  "     G. M. Breadley, M.D. (B) - Nominated   by  Collector of Customs.   Dr. J. P. Davur, Private Practitioner. "    F. A. Faria do.  Mrs. J. A. Walke, L.M. & S. Appointed   by Shepherd & Co.  Dr. ?.   ? Munchi
?16 Inward Staff (Plague Committee). Surgeon-Captain W. J. Taylor, Army Medical Staff. ,,       Lieutenant E. F. E. Baines, Indian Medical Service (Bombay) ,,           ,,          G. F. Sealy, Indian Medical Service (Bombay). Dr. James Munday, Private Practitioner. ,,   P. D. Hormusji,               do. Assistant Surgeon E. A. St. Romaine (Bengal.) ,,             ,,      F. G H. Deeks       (   do.    ) ,,             ,,       J. S. Herring         (    do.    ) ,,             ,,      G. B. Croming (Madras). ,,             ,,      G. R. Coxe (Bengal). Mrs. Van Ingen, M.D.    (But only on harbour duty for one month). ,,    Clemesha, and one lady and thirteen male medical students. I desire especially to draw attention to the service of Surgeon-Major Crimmin, V.C., and of Surgeon-Lieutenant Evans, Miss E. daCunha and Assist- ant Surgeon Fernandez on the Outward, and of Surgeon-Lieutenant Baines and Mrs. Clemesha on the Inward, Staff. I am not sure that I have any right to make remarks on the service of Dr. Crimmin, who, as additional Port Health Officer, was in no way subordinate to me, but as the Senior Officer in charge of the two inspection systems, I take the liberty of doing so. That officer brought to his appointment as Additional Port Health Officer the training of an expert and the experience derived from having acted as Health Officer of the Port of Bombay on many occasions. To his untiring zeal and devotion to duty was due in great part the success of the outward and inward organizations; and I am only giving him his due when I state that without his aid and counsel success would have been difficult, if not impossible. Surgeon-Lieutenants Evans and Baines have by their unselfish devotion to duty merited the highest praise, and I am pleased to have the opportunity of bringing their names specially to the notice of Government. The necessity for lady doctors in Plague inspections is beyond question and the selection of Miss E. daCunha, L.M. & S., as the Chief Lady Inspector on the Outward Staff, was an extremely fortunate one. The thoroughness with which she carried out her duties, and the skill and tact she exhibited under difficult circumstances, call for praise, whilst her cheerfulness under fatigue and hardships such as exposure to sun, and during the South-West Monsoon to storm and rain, compel admiration. Mrs. Clemesha, on the Inward Staff, deserves special mention for the truly admirable way in which she carried on duties which, always heavy, became even more arduous owing to the transfer of Mrs. Van Ingen, M.D., to Cutch Mndvi. Assistant Surgeon Fernandez on the Outward Staff has worked so zealously and well, and his services have been so very useful, that I desire to bring his services prominently to the notice of Government. The heavy office work in connection with two large organizations more than doubled the work of Mr. Ramrao G. Kamalakar, First Clerk in the Port Health Office, who, in order to keep abreast of his duties, cheerfully gave up holidays and half holidays, and worked overtime. He deserves great credit for successfully carrying on the office at a critical time and under great difficulties. The crew of the steam launch deserve mention. The launch was daily under full steam from sunrise until 7 P.M., and at times until a later hour; and the crew had accordingly a hard time of it. They performed their duties most satisfactorily. I have mentioned for special recognition the names of certain officers, but I wish it to be clearly understood that all officers and subordinates on the two staffs have merited the commendation of both Dr. Crimmin and myself, under whose directions they have worked.  For one and all of them I claim the simple admission they did their duty well.  F. F. MACCARTIE, M.B., Bombay Port Health Office, Town   Surgeon-Major, Customs House, dated 6th September 1897. Health Officer of the Port.
17 APPENDIX I.  Statement showing the Expenditure incurred in connection with the Medical Inspection of persons leaving Bombay by Sea. From February up to and for 31st July 1897.    Extra cost to Government of Outward Inspections for six months. Cost to Government under ordinary circumstances in connection with the appointment of Port Health Office for six months. Salaries of Rs.  Rs. Commissioned Medical Officers 17,413 Half of Budget Estimate for 1897-98 of which Port  Assistant Surgeons and Hospital- Assist- ant 3,045 Trustees pay half 12,861 Lady Doctors 3,479   Clerk (extra) 230   Extra crew for the Port Health Steam Launch, coal and stores 1,390   Thermometers 336   EXPENDITURE INCURRED BY THE CUSTOMS DEPARTMENT.    Salaries of    Lady Doctor and Private Practitioners 5,091   Extra Preventive Officers 1,817   Extra Menial Staff 182   Tonies, stores, clinical thermometers and disinfectants 339   Total ...  33,322  Total ... 12,861 APPENDIX II.   Statement showing the Expenditure incurred in connection with the Medical inspection of persons arriving at Bombay by Sea. From 1st April up to und for 31st July 1897.    Cost to Plague Committee of Inward Inspections. Cost to Government of Inward Inspection, Salaries of Rs. Salaries of -Paid by Government. Rs. Commissioned Medical Officer and Private Practitioners ... 6,788 Five Assistant Surgeons .. 3,083     Thirteen Medical Students (male) 2,601   Lady Inspectors 2,146   Tonies, Launches and Port Trust Barge. 4,860   Rent for shed at Prince's Dock and ground-rent at Modi Bandar 747   Furniture, &c. 102   Garry hire for suspects 270   Thermometers 315   Telephone charges ... ... 250   Allowances to Port Health Officers, Clerks and peons 108   Total ... 18,185 Total ... 3,083 B 1397--5
STATISTICS OF PLAGUE MORTALITY AND MORTALITY FROM ALL CAUSES IN BOMBAY CITY TAKEN FROM THE REPORT OF THE MUNICIPAL COMMISSIONER, BOMBAY. B 1530-1
?2 Statistics of Plague Mortality and Mortality from all causes in Bombay  SECTIONS. Popula-tion. Date of the first reported attack of Bubonic Fever.                                                                  WEEK ENDING.    4th August 1896 11th August 1896 18th August 1896 25th August 1896 1st September 1896. 8th September 1896. 15th September 1896. 22nd September 1896.    No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths.    All causes Plague. All causes Plague. All causes Plague. All causes Plague. All causes Plague. All causes Plague. All causes Plague. All causes Plague. Upper Colba 4,335 1896 Nov. 28th 5   5   3   2  4  4      Middle & Lower Colba 13,622 Sept. 28th 3   7  8   7   7  3  3  5  Fort, Southern 3,951 Nov. 9th    1    1      1    Fort, Northern 32,847 Sept. 24th 19   22   15   22  22   20  20  17  Esplanade  10,064 Oct. 24th 2  4   4   5  1   6  2  1  Mndvi  37,295 Aug. 21st 25   27  26  . 33  37 1 54 1 38  63 4 Chukla 32,197 Sept. 23rd 35  27  28  31  20  21  28  31  Umarkhdi  52,466  24th . 30   42  44  42  45  35  40  38  Dongri  30,317  23rd 20   17   33  29   29   18  26  24  Market  44,751  27th 15   24   20   26  31   20  30  15  DhobiTalo 39,945  26th 30  24   36   36   36   29   28  26  Fanasvdi 24,069  16th 9   17   14  13  9   10   16  15  Bhuleshvar  38,363  25th 18  17  17   20  25   30  40  30  KhraTalao 27,035 Oct. 4th  19   25  35   23  23  25  31  24  Kumbhrvada  32,209 Sept. 26th 22   24  28  31   27  26  22  40  Khetvdi  28,814  23rd 12   11  20   19   20   15   15  16  Girgaon 26,999  27th 19  26  16  28   24  16  18  22  Chaupti   11,512 Nov. 28th 6  4  3  3   4  5  3  1  Wlkeshwar 12,990  3rd    5   3   10   5   4    6    2  Mahlakshmi 17,014 Oct. 7th  8   4   3   3   1   8  2  3  Mzgaon 33,640 Sept. 30th. 20  24   16   17   21   15   23   26  Trvdi  21,298  22nd. 7  14   21  24  18   16   13   10  2nd Ngpda 18,768 Oct. 1st. 23  19   17   17   24   12    19   19  kmtipura 29,203 Sept. 26th. 35  29  43  48   40  28  26  36  Trdeo  18,980  16th. 24  14  21  19  22  14   22   10  Byculla  47,403  22nd. 55  39  43  42  43  34  37  34  1st Ngpda 11,133 Oct. 2nd. 3  4  4  5  5  7  6  12  Parel.  28,740 Sept. 27th. 22  22  10  11  25  27  19  27  Sivri . 6,063 Dec. 2nd 2  2  8  4  3  3  1  4  Sion  19,601 Sept. 29th 2   7  8  9  12   10  6  9  Mhim. 18,505 Dec. 1st 14   14  21  14  12  7  10  18  Warli. 25,493 Sept. 28th 13   18  18  15  21  15  13  19  Water Division 23,142 Nov. 22nd 1   2   1   4   2   3   2     Non-Resident and                   Unknown   7  20  19  22  11  28  14  16  Total 821,761  525  561  606  635  629 1 563 1 580  613 4
?                  29th  6th  13th               20th   27th  3rd  10th  17th  24th  September   October  October  October  October  November  November  November  November  1896.  1896.  1896.  1806.  1805  1896.  1896  1896  1896  No. of  No.of  No. of       No. of  No of  No. of  No. of  No. of  No. of  deaths.  deaths.  deaths.  deaths.  deaths.  deaths           deaths  deaths  deaths  All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague.                     1  1  2  1  3  1  1  1    12 5 11 4 17 2 19 3 19 3 25 9 17 4 24 8                     24 1 19 1 14 2 28 1 11  11  22 8 32 2   2  3  2  2  3         43 140 33 51 9 73 25 58 24 65 24 60 15 60 13 41 12  1 41 2 27 1 17  26  20 1 33 2 44 1 39 1  1 41 2 49 2 48 1 46 4 67 3 62 2 75 6 81 4  5 29 8 32 5 26 3 26 10 28 3 20 4 34 5 40 7  1 28 2 24  20 3 21 4 25 1 16 2 25 3 41 3  1 85 1 34 3 31 1 28  26 1 22 2 32 1 31 1   14 1 14 1 6 1 14 3 8  14  9  13 1   29 1 23  30 2 33 2 25 3 32 3 23 1 23 3   21  35 4 28  23  19  28 1 25 3 24 2  1 32 3 23 1 23 1 29 5 24 1 27 3 31 3 28 2  3 17 1 12 2 14 1 22  16  14  16 1 19    32 1 31  13  25 2 29 2 25 1 22  16    5  2  3  5  2  6  3  3    6  3  5  1  9  9 2 5  8    10  3 1 1  4  3  5  10  11    28  20 1 14  34 4 17  15  26 5 27 3  1 12  12  9 1 17 3 17 1 5 1 6  15    28  21 1 17  28 8 36 1 30  22  32 4   34 3 35 2 26 1 37 1 31 1 34 1 41 3 47 8  1 5  12  18  16  15  4  15  24 2   49 3 34  40 1 34  37 2 41  34  33 1   3  5  4  8  10 1 7  12 1 8    18 1 16  18  17  12  11 1 8  13    3  4  4  2  1  1  1  5    8 1 11  7  12 1 12  8  11 1 14    4  12  13  10  17  12  17  9    20  9  13  11  13  7 1 10  16    24        1  1  1  1 1 21  21  21  25 3 18 2 10 1 13 1 8  7                     58 754 119 612 48 582 53 65 78 64 48 507 51 666  726 67 B 1630-2                                         B 1530-2                                                   3
?    1st  Decem-  ber 1896. 8th  December 1896. 15th  December 1896. 22nd  December 1896. 29th  December 1896. 5th  January 1897.  12th  January 1897. 19th  January 1897. No. of  deaths.   No. of  deaths.   No. of  deaths.   No. of  deaths.   No. of  deaths.   No. of  deaths.   No. of  deaths.   No. of  deaths.  All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. 1  2  4 1   2  1    5  17 5 20 7 24 6 21 6 30 12 29 14 16 3 14   1 1 ...  2 1 1 ... 2    1    14 1 31 9 32 5 35 8 67 8 54 13 74 22 60 29 4 ... 3  3 1 7  1 ... 7 3 ...  6 1 41 5 43 10 49 7 67 3 60 9 45 6 50 3 37 3 46 2 69 8 88 13 71 3 65 2 65 4 78 3 46 5 73 1 97 7 122 25 127 6 132 14 157 8 114 13 99 19 39 8 44. 9 6S 14 36 4 43 7 33 3 40 2 51 6 32 5 53 16 63 13 62 13 75 10 79 13 65 7 41 11 34 4 53 9 65 20 73 22 105 29 102 20 94 35 112 41 15 2 16 4 14 2 33 4 32 9 49 7 47 10 33  35 4 48 8 64 8 74 10 101 9 81 8 77 6 71 1 38 2 43 5 55 10 73 6 105 6 67 3 79 7 52 5 36 4 47 7 71 11 74 5 84 15 77 12 71 8 55 12 20  36 6 31 7 36 11 49 8 52 16 52 14 70 23 17 3 33 5 30 4 32 6 62 11 69 18 72 21 79 22 5  4  18 2 4 2 15 3 18 ... 24 4 12 2 8  9  6 1 6  10  11 1 13 2 21 4 9 1 7 2 3 1 11 1 4 ... 17 8 16 4 16 4 36 1 41 3 79 10 68 9 98 28 105 26 61 19 84 2 16 2 19 3 17  22 2 19 3 14 2 20 2 22 1 26 1 35  40 5 54 2 79 10 47 5 68 4 64     1 47 8 84 32 96 42 125 43 171 61 122 37 113 29 136 40 11  18 3 23 2 31 4 47 11 30 7 33 11 52 15 26  54 6 81 19 101 10 112 27 104 22 73 17 138 34 14 1 13 1 15 3 33 11 30 7 32 9 22 8 25 8 18 2 24 3 18 2 26 2 54 10 56 9 55 13 68 15 5 . . . 8 1 8  8 3 18 8 11 1 32 14 26 17 4  10  16  13 1 13 2 22  17 2 20 3 19  21 2 21 3 11 1 31 3 22 2 33 3 39 9 14 1 22  24 4 26 6 51 21 51 18 63 21 85 40   1  2  3  2 1 3  1  1  11       24 7 32 17 26 17 55 46 61 53 39 29 95 76 752 64 1032 173 1284 239 1387 226 1824 390 1693 348 1613 335 1735 470 4
26th January 1897. 2nd February 1897. 9th February 1897. 16th February 1897 23rd February 1897 2nd March 1897. 9th March 1897. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. No. of deaths. All causes Plague  All causes Plague  All causes Plague  All causes Plague  All causes Plague  All causes Plague  All causes Plague  2 1 4  5 1 4 1 9 8 10 8 7 5 17 6 31 17 21 12 14 8 15 8 11 4 3 2 1 1 1  1    1 1 1 1 1 1 61 16 48 19 47 18 46 18 36 13 15 5 13 4 7 1 4 1 5 2   3 2 2 2 3 1 34 1 30 4 33 1 22 4 38 4 39 6 48 10 37 1 27 1 47 3 10 1 40 4 40 1 30 2 78 8 57 7 88 13 73 15 81 11 73 6 75 16 53 9 52 11 39 12 42 15 41 13 44 13 52 19 37 7 27 7 36 4 42 9 30 11 18 6 21 5 78 27 95 35 79 29 90 34 58 17 41 16 38 11 41 11 30 8 29 7 33 11 33 16 23 6 13 5 69 6 43 7 40 4 40 5 31 2 46 10 29 2 55 7 41 5 50 7 49 8 41 5 37 4 24 4 63 16 61 14 71 20 63 25 56 2 55 20 35 19 77 19 71 18 71 33 65 35 53 28 24 4 35 9 82 21 76 19 102 29 63 20 59 19 42 17 20 8 23 6 9 3 15 6 17 5 14 6 7 4 10 3 21 2 15 10 25 15 30 15 28 19 20 11 19 14 19 4 33 13 40 19 42 19 44 28 27 13 32 20 80 25 99 40 87 47 81 50 82 40 77 37 64 27 26 6 35 15 59 29 50 35 41 26 32 21 27 10 40 5 56 7 65 9 53 16 39 11 37 8 35 3 126 48 83 29 89 45 64 34 77 26 66 30 59 30 68 26 67 32 83 49 60 33 74 43 56 28 48 19 129 22 153 50 159 62 157 100 130 73 173 112 129 59 22 8 21 4 30 15 24 14 11 7 14 6 16 9 76 15 100 27 111 46 90 60 101 56 95 59 93 52 26 10 24 11 17 4 26 11 30 13 17 5 13 6 23 2 62 17 74 38 70 31 51 30 47 29 61 28 55 13 57 14 86 40 87 52 111 62 126 74 108 58 82 26 58 16 81 34 72 45 66 47 42 27 56 30       2      1  85 70 64 55 101 92 120 116 110 106 110 99 103  99 1,693 446 1,624 516 1,891 745 1,710 845 1,634 778 1,467 692 1,311 590  5
?  16th March 1897. 23rd March 1897. 30th March 1897. 6th March 1897. 13th March 1897. 20th March 1897. 27 March 1897. N?. Of deaths. N?. Of deaths. N?. Of deaths. N?. Of deaths. N?. Of deaths. N?. Of deaths. N?. Of deaths. All causes Plague All causes Plague All causes Plague All causes Plague All causes Plague All causes Plague All causes Plague 12 6  6 4 7 6 6 3 5 2   3 1 7 1 7 3 12 9 12 6 12 5 11 2 10 3   2        1    20 8 20 7 16 7 12 1 9 2 12 3 5 1 5 2 3 3 1  2 1 2  1  2 1 65 7 62 12 63 13 59 7 86 30 60 20 45 10 30 2 31 2 27  36 2 45 7 31 1 33 1 83 2 64 5 79 12 63 14 66 16 67 4 55 d 55 11 52 8 58 10 42 11 35 11 30 9 21 2 19 7 18 6 17 4 20 1 20 7 18 4 11 1 45 16 35 3 33 10 28 7 22 4 33 7 14 3 8 2 17 2 5 2 7 2 6 1 3  5 2 32 5 31 3 21 2 28 2 31 4 28 1 21 1 30 1 30 5 31 2 23 2 28 2 26 4 24 2 37 13 32 9 31 9 27 5 27 15 22 13 19 3 21 5 15 8 22 6 24 6 17 3 11 3 11 3 30 8 23 5 36 4 16 3 12 2 9  7 3 9 6 4 2 2 1 1  1 1   2  12 8 5 4 12 10 12 6 5 5 3  4 3 21 13 22 15 21 12 15 8 17 10 6 3 5 1 37 14 34 13 44 29 27 7 34 9 29 6 26 4 25 11 12 1 13 3 16 3 20 5 18 1 10  44 7 29 5 34 9 30 5 34 9 26 6 35 7 60 23 41 16 41 20 36 13 57 17 35 14 34 12 44 18 39 13 25 12 18 5 15 9 21 5 14 2 89 41 79 35 75 23 67 23 49 8 51 9 40 3 15 5 14 7 12 6 11 5 15 5 10 5 6 1 69 37 87 46 92 59 57 28 41 16 32 10 27 11 13 3 14 6 9 7 11 4 8 1 2  2  64 42 74 45 81 54 63 45 43 24 31 17 23 11 89 56 81 45 91 58 84 54 38 21 21 11 22 11 40 19 43 23 34 23 33 16 30 18 15 12 8 3 1  2 1     1 1 1  2 2 111 96 87 76 95 83 111 104 118 138 153 140 96 82 1,242 497 1,115 438 1,120 496 997 399 919 378 817 310 642 195 6
?7 7 City taken from the report of the Municipal Commissioner, Bombay. 4th May 1897. 11th May 1897. 18th May 1897. 25th May 1897. 1st June 1897. 8th June 1897. 15th June 1897. 22nd June 1897. 29th June 1897.  All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague. All causes. Plague.    3 2   3  3  1  4    2  1  Upper Colaba. 11 8 3 2 13 5 9 1 6 1 10 1 9    11 3 5  Middle and Lower.       1       1      Fort, Southern. 15  13 1 20 1 15  12  11  13    20  19  Fort, Northern. 1 1 2 1 2     3  3    3  4  Esplanade. 33 7 22 1 27 4 22 2 21 1 27   28  1 17 2 28  Mndvi. 33 1 28 2 30 1 33 2 37  27 . . 27   34 1 13  Chukla. 74 4 53 5 43 1 55  36  51 2 38   35 1 43  Umarkhdi. 36 5 28 1 32 6 17 2 20  34 4 23  3 27 1 35 1 Dongri. 11 3 11 1 14 2 16 1 13  20  14   18  26 1 Market. 21 3 20 2 16  15 1 12  15 1 24  2 28  23  Dhobi Talo, 7  5  2  11  2  12  2  9 1 26  Fanaswdi, 18 1 29 1 13 1 16 1 23 1 18 3 10  2 6  19  Bhuleshwar, 19  18 1 27 1 21 3 28 2 33  26   24  26 1 Khra Talo. 22 4 22 4 16  17  11  15 1 29  3 14  20  Kumbhrwda. 9  9 3 12  16 1 19 1 12 1 17   14 1 13  Khetwadi. 6  10 2 6  6 1 8  11  12  1 15  10  Girgaum. 3  2  2  1  1   5  1   3  14  Chaupti. 1 1 3  2  1  4      5   1  3  Wlkeshswar. 2  3  2  5  4  5  2   4  5  Mahlaxmi. 20 5 16 3 11  17 3 21  14 1 22  2 12  17  Mzagon, 4  12  7  10 3 4  13  9  1 8 1 9 1 Trwdi. 23 5 31 1 38 2 33 2 24 1 27 1 27   13  27  2nd Ngpda. 34 5 34 8 35 4 38 7 23 1 38 1 31  3 22 1 39  Kmthipura. 12 2 13 2 20 1 17 1 21  21   19   9  12 1 Trdeo. 47 6 46 6 29 1 35 3 35 1 40 1 21   35 2 34 3 Byculla. 7 2 8  5 1 5  5 2 5  6   8  5  1st Nagpada. 25 4 14 2 20 2 15 1 30 1 19   23   26 1 24  Parel.   3 1 6  6  4 1 2   1     4  Sewri. 14 3 17 3 12 1 11  6   9  8  6  7  Sion. 20 4 8 1 10 1 11 1 8  12  5  8  5  Mhim. 9 3 7 3 10  3   8 1 11   15  9  6  Worli.     2  1  1 1   8  3  2  Water Division. 84 67 48 39 45 32 34 20 30 19  38 17 25 8  21 4 25 3  Non-Resident. 621 144  541 98 529 67 516 56 483 34 559 34 505 26  475 19  517 11  Total.
STATISTICS OF INDIGENOUS PLAGUE CASES IN THE MOFUSSIL. The figures in this statement have been taken from special reports.    They differ in many cases from those given in the weekly statements pub- lished by Government, which showed  figures as they were reported week by week and not necessarily as they occurred. B 1394-1
?2 District. Week  4-12-96. 11-12-96. 18-12-96. 25-12-96. 1-1-97. 8-1-97. 15-1-97. 22-1-97. 29-1-97. 5-2-97. 12-2-97. 19-2-97. 26-2-97. 5-3-97. THA'NA DISTRICT.               Bndra (Slsette) 1 8 6 16 33 21 41 42 49 46 89 78 118 86 Kurla ( do. )       10 10 16 36 18 27 35 64 Thna ( do. )          2 5 1 2 3 Bhyndar ( do. )         3 10 8 8 15 14 Mald ( do. )          2     Chembur ( do. )           6  5 4 Poisar ( do. )           1    Madh ( do. )               Mhul ( do. )               Kolhe Kalyn (do. )               Utan ( do. )               Mulawni ( do. )               Ri Murdhe ( do. )               Dongari ( do. )               Vesve ( do. )             6 2 Trombay ( do. )             2  Andheri ( do. )             1  Dnda ( do. )              4 Marole ( do. )               Manori ( do. )               Goregaon ( do. )               Nnla ( do. )               Ju ( do. )               Akase ( do. )               Vile Padale ( do. )               Khdi ( do. )               Bassein (Bassein)         5   10 7 6 Mulgaon ( do. )          3 2  4 4 A'gshi ( do. )          1 2 6 7 9 Kaulr ( do. )           1    Sopra ( do. )               Umbrala ( do. )               Juchandra ( do. )               Sndor ( do. )               Nagaon ( do. )               Tuling ( do. )               Nilamore ( do. )               Kerawli ( do. )             2  Wdawli ( do. )              8 Nirmal ( do )              1 Watr ( do. )               Koprd ( do. )               Virr ( do. )               Murdes ( do. )               Gs ( do. )               Bhiwndi (Bhiwndi)     8 9 11 26 22 36 42 72 41 49 Selar ( do. )             5 2 Anjur ( do. )               Chinchni (Dhnu)         6 2 17 11 20 18 Kelve (Mhim)             2  Trpur ( do. )              1 Ghivli ( do. )               Kudan ( do. )               Pamtembli ( do. )               Kalyn (Kalyn)              1 NOTE.-The figures for the weekly periods after 19th February 1897 are those reported to Government from time the villages during those weeks. The differences are due to the difficulty in rapidly
?3 ending 12-3-97. 19-3-97. 26-3-97. 2-4-97. 9-4-97. 16-4-97. 23-4-97. 30-4-97. 7-5-97. 14-5-97. 21-5-97. 28-5-97. 4-6-97. 11-6-97. 18-6-97. 25-6-97. 67 73 31 24 12 7 7  1        46 22 30 38 11 16 21 6 3 3 6 1 1     17 25 10 18 18 9 5 3 3 1 3 1 1    6 9 4 7 2 3  2           6 8 7 3 1 4 1 3       2 1  3   1 3 2 1    4 1 1                   12 22 18 12 4 4           1 2   1     4 3       1 2    3   5 4 1        1                  5  1  1           5 1 4    1 2           1            87 44 39 14 7 2 1 1 3       1  1 4 1 3 2 2 1 3      1 1 5 3 14 2 5  1        3 3  2 4   1         3 1  2 6 2 5 5 1 5 1   2          1 4 12 1 6 12 9 2 9 1        2                1  2 4              9 1 4  3                              2             1         15 20 28 53 40 56 63 60 52 15 20 7 2   1  1 6 12 22 33 7 2 6         23 4 6 14 20 17 17 16 13 3 2 1  2         3          4 9 15 9 31 18 13 25 4 3        1   3 1 1 3 2           1                1 1               12 21 21 20 7 9 4    1 1      2 2               1 2  4                  2       3 1  2 9 5  3 6 1                            1                 2               1 1  1                 2                 1 1     70 29 37 22 19 4 1                                  3        7 3 52 71 50 47 14 4 4   2      2 20 5 6 5   2         2 3 1 10 35 10 19 29 9 2           4 9 7 9              1                5 2 3   2      2 3 2 2 2 4 2 2 2 18 2  1  2 to time for the weeks, and in some instances slightly differ from the statistics of the cases which actually occurred in collecting statistics for a whole District for the purposes of the weekly reports.
?4 District. Week  4-12-96. 11-12-96. 18-12-96. 25-12-96. 1-1-97. 8-1-97. 15-1-97. 22-1-97. 29-1-97. 5-2-97. 12-2-97. 19-2-97. 26-2-97. 5-3-97. SURAT DISTRICT.               Surat City (Chorsi)             3 15 Rnder ( do. )             11 7 Katrgum( do. )               Jehangirabad (do. )               Adjan ( do. )               Jallpor (Jallpor)               Suribujrug( do. )              3 Panar ( do. )              1 Medhar ( do. )               Munsad ( do. )               Slej ( do. )               Amalsd ( do. )               Bulsr (Bulsr)           2 14 33 62 BhadeliDesaipurti (do.           1     Prdi Sandhpur (do.)           1 1   Kosamba ( do. )             1  Mogrwdi ( do. )               Lilpur ( do. )               Untadi ( do. )               Anjlv ( do. )               Prdi Haria ( do. )               Bhadeli ( do. )               Sarodhi ( do. )               Dived ( do. )               Bhagdvda ( do. )               Prnera ( do. )               Nandharla ( do. )               Gorgaum ( do. )               Saron ( do. )               Wasiar ( do. )               Bhagda ( do. )               Ronwal ( do. )               Gadaria ( do. )               Nnakwda ( do. )               Mugod ( do. )               Tigra ( do. )               Bhadeli Jagalla (do.)               Navera ( do. )               Chanvai ( do. )               Haria ( do. )               Dhamdchi ( do. )               Abrama ( do. )               Atak Prdi ( do. )               Sonwada ( do. )               Hlr ( do. )               Prnera Prdi (do.)               Bhagod ( do. )               Mehey ( do. )               Tithal ( do. )               Kajan Ranchod(do.)               Pathri ( do. )               Khaparia ( do. )               Prdi (Prdi)               Palsode (Brdoli)               Brdoli ( do. )              2 Chikhli (Chikhli)               NOTE.- The figures for the weekly periods after 19th February 1897 are those reported to Government from time villages during those weeks. The differences are due to the difficulty in rapidly
?5 ending 12-3-97. 19-3-97. 26-3-97. 2-4-97. 9-4-97. 16-4-97. 23-4-97. 30-4-97. 7-5-97. 14-5-97. 21-5-97. 28-8-97. 4-6-97. 11-6-97. 18-6-97. 25-6-97. 5 2 1 2 4 6 3 9 7 1       14 10 11 16 35 8 14 2 4 2   1 1  1     1                    2 2 1        8 4 3                  1            4 2 4 1  1                         2   3   3               1                2   3                        1    89 127 144 107 173 84 31 26 7 9 4 1 1 1     1 3 1 2    1        1   1 2 4 1 1         1 1 2 1  9 10 12 7 3 5 3 3 6   3 2 3 1      1    1 1    1       10         1 2                               1     4 2          5 1               1                2                2   7 2   13 5 5 6 4 7 3     1 2 3 5 6 1 3 1 1        1                 2                1 3      1         8  3 1             1 4  2 1               1             2  2               2 1 3 3  4 1 1          5 58 42 43 100 27 3     1                       15 4 12 11 7 3 1  8 2 2 4     3 1 1              2  3                1 1       1       5 1 2              11 2 3 2 1 9 2 2 3 2       2 1               1 1                1                1                3    1             11 2 1 2             1  1  2 1 1 1 1         1                1                   1        1                2                                1               to time for the weeks, and in some instances slightly differ from the statistics of the case which occurred in the collecting statistics for a whole District for the purposes of the weekly reports. ? 1394-2
?6 District. Week  4-12-96. 11-12-96. 18-12-96. 25-12-96. 1-1-97. 8-1-97. 15-1-97. 22-1-97. 29-1-97. 5-2-97. 12-2-97. 19-2-97. 26-2-97. 5-3-97. AHMEDBAD DISTRICT.               *City            9   POONA DISTRICT.               Lonikalbar (Haveli)              5 Talegaon Dbhde               (Mval)              1 Lonvla (Mval)               Ptan ( do. )               Ssvad (Purandhar)               Hivra ( do. )                Ghodnadi (Sirur)               Kadus (Khed)               Poona City     2  12 13 41 43 42 35 63 127 Do. Suburban              1 Do. Cantonment           1 2 2  AHMEDNAGAR               DISTRICT.               Nimbral (Akola)             3  NA'SIK DISTRICT.               Igatpuri            2   SHOLA'PUR DIS-               TRICT.               Hotgi         3 1     Shindewdi (Mlsiras).            2 2 1 SA'TA'RA DIS-               TRICT.               Sangvi (Koregaon)        3 4 2     Pimpowde Budruk               (Koregaon)       1        Kumthe ( do. )          1     Wi (Wi)           1    Malthan, Phaltan               State           2    Akhade (Jvli)            10 5  Waluth ( do. )             9 13 Kharsi ( do. )               Bahule (Ptan)               NOTE-The figures for the weekly periods after 19th February 1897 are those reported to Government from time to time for the weeks, and in those weeks. The differences are due to the difficulty in rapidly * Prior to the week ending 4th December 1896, two cases were  Two more cases were reported  Prior to the week ending 4th December 1896, Saugir for the week ending Do. do. Do. do. Do. do. Do. do. Do. do.
?7 ending 12-3-97. 19-3-97. 26-3-97. 2-4-97. 9-4-97. 16-4-97. 23-4-97. 30-4-97. 7-5-97. 14-5-97. 21-5-97. 28-5-97. 4-6-97. 11-6-97. 18-6-97. 25-6-97. 6 1  1 1 1  1 3                        1                      3 2 1  2 1    4        1 1         3 1                  1             3                  1             205 185 313 265 235 158 94 59 26 13 13 9 8 2 3  1 3 3 3 3 2 1 2 1   2 1    21 6 18 17 28 24 16 17 11 6 4 1  2                                        2                           1                                                                                1                                1                   5               1  1            some instances slightly differ from the statistics of the cases which actually occurred in the village during collecting statistics for a whole District for the purposes of the weekly reports. reported for the week ending 9th October 1896. before December 1896. the following cases were reported :- 4th October 1896 2 16th October 1896 2 6th November 1896 4 13th November 1896 5 20th November 1896 9 27th November 1896 7
?8 District. Week  4-12-96. 11-12-96. 18-12-96. 25-12-96. 1-1-97. 8-1-97. 15-1-97. 22-1-97. 29-1-97. 5-2-97. 12-2-97. 19-2-97. 26-2-97. 5-3-97. KOLA'BA DIS-               TRICT. (INCLUD-               ING THE JANJIRA               STATE).               Owoor* (Mahd)             1  Mtherau (Karjat)               Neral ( do. )      2         Bori, Uran (Panvel)          1 18 12 9 7 Chauje do. ( do. )           1    Funde do. ( do. )           1    Mhatawli do. ( do. )               Kegaon do. ( do. )               Panvel ( do. )            3 4 18 Panogi ( do. )               Jaskhar ( do. )               Wadarli (Mngaon)             1  Pen (Pen)               Aws (Alibg)            1 1  Revdanda ( do. )               Alibg ( do. )               Saral ( do. )               A'kshi ( do. )               Cheul ( do. )               Thal ( do. )               Janjira State.               Murd           3    Dangri               Karshet               Yekadara               Janjira               Vihur               RATNA'GIRI DIS-               TRICT.               Khlgaon (Ratngiri)        1 5 4  1   Newendi ( do. )              1 Shirgaon ( do. )               Chiveli (Chiplun)        2       Aren ( do. )              2 Guhgar ( do. )               Sangmeshwar, Tluka               Sangmeshwar         1      Bhosilen (Khed)           3    Ldghar (Dpoli)               Karden ( do. )               Kelshi ( do. )               Vels ( do. )               Bnkot ( do. )               Veshwi ( do. )               Barondi ( do. )               Masuren (Mlvan)               NOTE.-The figures for the weekly periods after 19th February 1897 are these reported to Government from time to time during those weeks. The differences are due to the difficulty in rapidly * Prior to the week ending 4th December 1896, one case was reported
?9 ending 12-3-97. 19-3-97. 26-3-97. 2-4-97. 9-4-97. 16-4-97. 23-4-97. 30-4-97. 7-5-97. 14-5-97. 21-5-97. 28-5-97. 4-6-97. 11-6-97. 18-6-97. 25-6-97.                 1 1                               7 4 7 3 1 3 4             2 2   2 21 13 12 6 7 3 1 10                  1     2     2    1    7 4            5 9 13 21 24 10 12 11 26 11 5 3  1 1     2                      1                                     1     2 4 3 6 3   5         1  12 88 97 73 41 59 4 17 7 5 6 5      12 42 30 51 23 63 28 14  5         1                  3 15 3 12 8 2             1   1 6 3      1                               3 3 3 2 11 4 88 54 41 37 5 5 1 2    1                8                         1 1        5            2    1                                            1                    1                                             1    2                                                 2          16 28    1  1            4 4                1 3                7 3 5 2             1     4 3  2 3         8       3         3                         for the weeks, and in same instances slightly differ from the statistics of the cases which actually occurred in the villages collecting statistics for a whole District for the purposes of the weekly reports. in Owoor during the week ending 6th November 1896. B 1394-3
?10 District. Week  4-12-96. 11-12-96. 18-2-96. 25-12-96. 1-1-97. 8-1-97. 15-1-97. 22-1-97. 29-1-97. 5-2-97. 12-2-97. 19-2-97. 26-2-97. 5-3-97. SIND.               KARCHI DISTRICT.               Karchi City  2 10 26 35 124 181 218 200 320 284 273 264 246 Tatta       1        Jungshahi             3  Shewan               Pir Mangho (Karchi)               Kotri               Goth Nowabad               Mallu               Villages (not named)               HYDERABAD DISTRICT.               Hyderabad City               Tando Alahyar        2 2 1     SHIKA'RPUR DISTRICT.               Sukkur (Sukkur)           1  1 7 Ahad ( do. )               Saidabad ( do. )               Makan Arazi ( do. )               Shhpur ( do. )               Rohri (Rohri)              1 Palni ( do. )               Mando Dairio ( do. )               Umarkas ( do. )               Drakhan ( do. )               Thatti ( do. )               Miani Baghat ( do. )               Boraha ( do. )               Shikrpur               Khairpur Dahirki               Tando Pir Mahomed               (Hasankhan)               Jal Mashaikh               Pir Sathro               Sarhad (Ghotki)               Khawandino Malik               (Ghotki)               UPPER SIND FRONTIER.               Jacobabad               NATIVE STATES.               Baroda.               Baroda City               Billimora(Navsri Dn.)           1 1   Dhamdacha ( do. )               Gandevi ( do. )              1 Amalpur ( do. )               Desa ( do. )               Pati ( do. )               Delwada ( do. )               Vadsangal ( do. )               NOTE.-The figures for the weekly periods after 19th February 1897 are those reported to Government from time in the village during those weeks. The differences are due to the difficulty in rapidly
?11 ending 12-3-97. 19-3-97. 26-3-97. 2-4-97. 9-4-97. 16-4-97. 23-4-97. 30-4-97. 7-5-97. 14-5-97. 21-5-97. 28-5-97. 4-6-97. 11-6-97. 18-6-97. 25-6-97. 289 250 271 264 189 177 167 114 85 49 40 38 26 7 2 4    1  2 7 5 2       1 3  1 2 1                               1 3               3 1 1 5 2 3 5                 1       1                4                               4 23 53 11 84 148 89 54 35 25 7 3 1 1    2  10 1 1 1  1                        10 19 75 90 106 114 66 17 15 6 8 1 1          15 11 9 4              1 2                1                1            1  8 23 21 19 8 11 9 4 11 2        1                 3 1                1                1            4 7 9 13 6 1           8 10  4 3  1          1            2    3    1            11 23 8   2  1          5 7 2 1  1            1                 5              3 4 2                    2 1                                                       4 2  1         3  14 2  7 7 10 15 15 8 11 6 6 7  7 1 10 1 6 5 6 2 4 1 1      9 30 28 17 38 38 28 16 39 6 12 4 4 2   2                3                1                    1               1              to time for the weeks, and in some instances slightly differ from the statistics of the cases which actually occurred collecting statistics for a whole District for the purposes of the weekly reports.
?12 District. Week  4-12-96. 11-12-96. 18-12-96. 25-12-96. 1-1-97. 8-1-97. 15-1-97. 22-1-97. 29-1-97. 5-2-97. 12-2-97. 19-2-97. 26-2-97. 5-3-97. NATIVE STATES- continued.               Baroda- continued.               Vadvoli (Navsri Dn.)               Ajrai (  do. )               Chaltan (  do. )               Talhod (  do. )               Armda               Mehsna (Kadi Dn.)              15 Beyt (Amreli Division.)               Planpur            4 7 9 Kolhpur.               Manerjuri            1 13 7 18 Miraj              1  KTHIWR.               Wadhwn Civil               Station             4  Jodiya             1 1 Wadhwn Town              1 Bhvnagar               2 Talja               Kutiana               Katvana               Chikhodra                CUTCH.*               Mndvi City            2   Kapaya Mundra            (4 cases in th  Desalpur Naleh            (1 case on 5t  Ngalpur               Durgpur               Ghad Sisa                Gundiali               Muska               Kathda               Ludwa               Bada               Mundra               Bazatlh            (1 case in Ja  Salayia               Kodae               Bhojae               Tanwana               Merau               Kera               Rwpur             9  Nalia                Kothara               Lakhpat               Bhj                NOTE.-The figures for the weekly periods after 19th February 1897 are those reported to Government from time in the village during those weeks. The differences are due to the difficulty in rapidly * The figures for Cutch-Mndvi are only approximate ones,
?13 ending  12-3-97. 19-3-97.  26-3-97.  2-4-97.  9-4-97.  16-4-97.  23-4-97.  30-4-97.  7-5-97.  14-5-97.  21-5-97.  28-5-97.  4-6-97.  11-6-97.  18-6-97.  25-6-97.     1                 2 1   2 1               1               2       1          1        1    1 2 2 1                       1  9 11 21 23 27 16 8 2 2 2       2 7 5   2 14 3 5 2 3 1   4 1                 1                                1                5 1 10 6 4 2 1 3 4 2        1               5 10 1 7 11 16 2 11 9 8 1 2 3 2           14 1             1             4 8 9 222 305 1,888 829 590 369 327 157 75 48 month of January 1897)                           h January 1897                          5          3          1      2      69 10 16  1 3 6 1  2       34 7 9           2   19 6 2     1 1                      2 1 5 4 8        8  3    4   nuary)                     1 2              1        1          1                2      3                12 2      8 14 1 1  8 3  3    2 2                          1           2                 1                   5      to time for the weeks, and in some instances slightly differ from the statistics of the cases which actually occurred collecting statistics for a whole District for the purposes of the weekly reports, accurate information not being available. \ill\ 1394-4
PLAGUE CASES   DURING  THE   MONTHS OF OCTR. & NOVEMBER  1896. Drawn & Litho: Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE  CASES   DURING  THE   MONTH OF  DECEMBER   1896. Drawn & Litho: Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE  CASES   DURING  THE   MONTH OF   JANUARY  1897. SEPARATE MAPS ARE GIVEN FOR SIND AND FOR THE DISTRICTS OF THANA, KOLABA AND SURAT. Drawn & Litho: Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE  CASES   DURING  THE   MONTH OF   FEBRUARY    1897. SEPARATE MAPS ARE GIVEN FOR SIND AND FOR THE DISTRICTS OF THANA, KOLABA AND SURAT. Drawn & Litho Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE CASES   FROM   THE  MONTH OF   MARCH TO THE END OF JUNE 1897 SEPARATE MAPS ARE GIVEN FOR SIND AND FOR THE DISTRICTS OF THANA, KOLABA AND SURAT. Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE   CASES    DURING   THE   MONTH    OF    DECEMBER  1896 Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco. Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE   CASES    DURING   THE   MONTH    OF    JANUARY   1897. Drawn & Litho. Govt Photozinco. Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE   CASES    DURING   THE    MONTH    OF  FEBRUARY   1897. Drawn & Litho. Govt Photozinco. Office Poona 1897.
PLAGUE   CASES  FROM   THE MONTH  OF MARCH TO THE END OF JUNE 1897. Drawn & Litho: Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE   CASES    DURING   THE    MONTH    OF    JANUARY   1897 Drawn & Litho: Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE   CASES   DURING   THE   MONTH OF FEBRUARY 1897 Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE  CASES  DURING THE   MONTH  OF   MARCH  TO   END   OF   JUNE  1897. Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE   CASES    DURING   THE   MONTH   OF    JANUARY   1897 Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE   CASES    DURING  THE   MONTH  OF  FEBRUARY 1897 Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE CASES DURING THE MONTH OF MARCH TO END OF JUNE 1897. Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE    CASES    DURING    THE   MONTH   OF  DECEMBER 1896. Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE    CASES    DURING    THE   MONTH   OF   JANUARY   1897. Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE    CASES    DURING    THE   MONTH   OF   FEBRUARY   1897. Drawn & Litho. Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
PLAGUE CASES FROM THE MONTH  OF  MARCH TO THE END OF JUNE  1897. Drawn & Litho: Govt. Photozinco: Office, Poona 1897.
