THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES FOR DISTRICT MUNICIPALITIES AND OTHER TOWNS AND VILLAGES. (Revised up to 1st June 1902.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1902. [PRICE, 4 annas.] [6 pence.]
THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES FOR DISTRICT MUNICIPALITIES AND OTHER TOWNS AND VILLAGES. (Revised up to 1st June 1902.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1902.
?CONTENTS.                                            CHAPTER I.  PAGE (1) Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 5 (2) Government of India, Home Department Notification, No. 302,  dated 4th February 1897, conferring powers on Local Govern- ments 7 (8) Regulations for mufassal towns and villages 8 CHAPTER II.  Instructions with regard to the carrying out of plague measures  and with regard to other matters connected with plague-  General remarks 32 Agency for working plague regulations 33 Discovery of plague 35 Removal of plague patients-to hospital 36 Segregation of contacts 38 Evacuation  39 Inoculation 40 Disinfection 42 House searches  45 Inspection and burial of corpses 45 Plague hospitals and camps 47 Surveillance or passport rules 48 Railway Inspection 52 Fairs, festivals and pilgrimages 56 Destruction of rats 57 Plague reports and returns  59 Plague correspondence 62 Plague regulations 63 Plague appointments and plague allowances 64 Plague expenditure and accounts  66 Duties of the railway staff 70 APPENDICES.  Appendix A.-Plague passport 72               B.-General pass, for journeys by road or boat 73              C.-General pass, for journeys by rail  74              D.-General pass, for persons leaving an infected or                       notified place, &c. 74             E.-Special pass for persons leaving an inhabited infected                      area 75
iv   PAGE APPENDIX F.-Plague inoculation certificate  76                  G.-Register of permanent passes issued to persons attend-                    ing markets  77                  H.-Relaxation of passport rules  77                  I.-Intimation form  79                 J.-Time allowed at inspection stations for plague                    examination  80                 K.-Detention certificate  80                 L.-Return of persons detained at inspection stations  80                 M.-Statement to accompany proposals for placing                   restrictions on fairs and festivals  81                 N.-Notifications for placing restriction on fairs and                    festivals  82                O.-Plague Report  83                P.-Destruction of plague records  84                Q.-Distribution of spare copies of printed orders of Gov-                  ernment  85                R.-Part I-Allowances of officers deputed to plague                  duty  86                R.-Part II-Salaries of officers temporarily entertained                  for plague duty  88                 S.-Pay and allowances of sanitary inspectors employed                  on plague duty  90                 T.-List of plague charges  93
?THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES FOR DISTRICT MUNICIPALITIES AND OTHER TOWNS AND VILLAGES. CHAPTER I. (1)-EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897). An Act to provide for the better prevention of the  spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Short  title,  extent   and commencement. 1.  (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897; (2) It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive of Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti); and (3) It shall come into force at once. Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2.  (1)  When at any time the Governor-General in Council is satisfied that India or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the Governor-General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary Regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of persons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including com- pensation if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene- rality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in Council may take measures and prescribe Regulations for- (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such
6 [Epidemic Diseases Act. detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary; and  (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected with any such disease. (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred by this Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories administered by it. Penalty. 3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. XLV of 1860. Protection    to    persons acting under Act. 4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done or in good faith intended to be done under this Act.
?7 (2)-GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME DEPARTMENT NOTIFICA- TION CONFERRING POWERS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (No. 302, DATED 4TH FEBRUARY 1897). WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, is pleased to direct that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised by Local Governments with regard to their respective terri- tories as follows :- (a) All the said powers by the Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal and Chief Commissioner of Burma. *                        *                        *                        *
?8 (3)-MUFASSAL   PLAGUE   REGULATIONS   (FOR   DISTRICT MUNICIPALITIES AND OTHER TOWNS AND VILLAGES). (Notification No. 201 published on pages 75-96, part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 26th February 1901.) WHEREAS certain parts of the presidency of Madras are visited by, and other parts are threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force in the presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease: In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub- section (1) of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897), and delegated to him under sub-section (3) of the same section by the notification of the Government of India in the Home Department, No. 302, of the 4th February 1897, the Governor of Fort St. George in Council is pleased to prescribe under the said Epidemic Diseases Act, and in super- session of all regulations previously issued on the subject, the following revised regulations to be observed in all towns and villages in the presidency except the city of Madras:- Part I.-General Precautionary Measures to be adopted in all Mufassal Towns and Villages. Surveillance or passport rules. Every arrival from an infected or notified area bound to obtain a passport and placo himself under surveillance for ten days. 1. (1) Every person arriving, or suspected of having arrived, from any place declared by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council or by the Collector of a district to be infected with plague, or from any place notified by the Gov- ernor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of this regulation shall, unless he is exempted under Nos. 32 and 51 of these regulations or unless he already holds a passport or a permanent pass under No. 31 of these regulations, or unless he has been detained for the full period of incubation at a road or railway inspection station or in a plague camp, before leaving the railway station at which he has alighted, or before disembarking from the steamer, ship or boat in which he has travelled, or in the case of arrival by road either immediately on reaching a road frontier inspection station or within twelve hours from the time of arrival at any other place, obtain from the officer mentioned in clause (3) of this regulation a passport in the form appended [Appendix A] to these regulations binding him to present himself for inspection daily for the next ten days before the local authority of the town or village where he may be; and he shall be bound so to present himself.
?9 Part I-Begulation 1.] 9 Provided that passengers from plague-infected or notified areas holding railway tickets to Mttuplaiyam or to stations on the Nilgiri Railway shall obtain passports at the Coimba- tore railway station, and the Madras Railway Company shall not carry any such passenger beyond Coimbatore station unless he produces a passport signed by the medical officer of that station. Provided also that, where it appears desirable, the muni- cipal chairman or any revenue officer not below the grade of deputy tahsildar may, by endorsement on the passport, exempt any person from personal attendance and permit him to be inspected at his residence. Provided also that in the case of persons from a plague- infected or notified place who regularly attend the important weekly markets in non-infected areas and return to their village within a period not exceeding 24 hours, a permanent pass in the form appended [Appendix D] to these regulations may be issued instead of a passport. Such passes will be issued by such officers as the Collector may appoint in this behalf. Any person refusing to comply with, or attempting to evade, this rule may be detained for ten days at the nearest inspection station or other place appointed by the Collector for the purpose in addition to being subjected to the penalty prescribed in No. 54 of these regulations. Definition of local authority." (2) By a "local authority " is meant any of the follow- ing officers : - (a) The local medical officer ; (b) The station-house officer ; (c) The headman of the village ; (d) Any person appointed by the Collector of the district for the purposes of this regulation. In places where there is more than one local authority, the duties prescribed in these rules shall be performed by, or with the permission of the Collector under the orders of, the officer who stands first in the order given in this clause. Passport- issuing officers. (3) The following officers are authorized to issue passports :- (a) To travellers alighting at rail- way inspection stations. The medical officer in charge or  other officer acting under  his  orders. (b) To travellers alighting at rail- way stations included within municipal limits. Such medical, sanitary or other  officer as may be appointed  by the chairman with the  Collector's approval. B
?10 [Part I-Regulation 1. (c) To travellers alighting at other  railway stations. The stationmaster or other officer appointed by the Collector for  the purpose. (d) To travellers arriving by  steamer, ship or boat. The medical, sanitary or other  officer appointed to examine  such travellers. (e) To travellers arriving by road. The medical, sanitary or other  officer appointed to examine such  travellers, or if no such officer  has been appointed, the local  authority of the place of arrival. Duties of passport- holders. (4) Every person required to take out a passport shall declare truly his name, address, and such other particulars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport. He shall daily present himself with his passport at the appointed time before the local authority (i.e., the passport-examining officer) of the place where he may be for the time being and obtain that officer's signature on his passport in token of inspection. If he gets ill or if any sickness occurs in the house in which he has been residing since his arrival from an infected or notified place, he shall give immediate information of the same to the local authority. He shall report similarly any change in his residence occurring within ten days from the date of his arrival and shall, before departure, get the entries under headings 11 and 12 of his passport altered by the local authority. On the expiry of the said period of ten days, he shall deliver up his passport to the local authority of the place where he may then be. Intimation of issue of passports. (5) (i) The issue of a passport shall immediately be com- municated by the officer issuing it to the local authority of the place of destination by sending him the triplicate copy of the passport. If the local authority of the place of destination is not known, the triplicate copy of the passport shall be sent to the tahsildar concerned for transmission to the local officer by whom the traveller has to be observed. The tripli- cate copy of the passport may be transmitted by post, or by a special messenger, or in any other manner which the Col- lectors concerned may determine. Intimation of the issue of passport need be telegraphed only in urgent cases. (ii) The following procedure shall be followed in respect to passport-holders who change their residence within the Madras presidency within ten days of their arrival :- (a) The local authority of the original place of arrival shall send the triplicate copy of the passport to the local authority of the new place of destination after noting therein the number of days for which the passport holder has been observed.
?Part I-Regulation 1.] 11 (b) If the new place of destination is in another district, the change of residence shall also be intimated directly to the district medical and sanitary officer of that district, and through the tahsildar or municipal chairman concerned to the district medical and sanitary officer of the original place of arrival. Duties of local authority or passport examiner. (6) The local authority of the place of destination shall see that, on the arrival of the traveller, he is observed daily for ten days. Any case of illness or death in the house in which such traveller is or has been residing shall be forthwith reported with full details to the nearest officers of the medi- cal and revenue departments. Particular attention should be paid to cases of fever accompanied with acute affection of the lungs, as these symptoms may indicate the existence of pneumonic plague. The appearance of glandular swellings attended by constitutional disturbance so slight as not to prevent the patient moving about, the occurrence of abortion amongst women, of convulsions amongst children and of sudden death in the aged should not be ascribed to ordinary causes without medical advice. After ten days, the duplicate passport shall be recovered from the traveller and sent to the tahsildar. Persons without passports how to be dealt with. (7) The headman of every village shall keep himself promptly informed of the arrival of every person from an infected or notified area without a passport and shall deal with him or cause him to be dealt with as in the preceding clauses of this regulation to which such person shall be bound to submit himself. Passport examiner'3 register. (8) A register, which may be kept in manuscript, shall be maintained by each local authority in the following form:- (1) Date of receipt of triplicate copy of passport or other intimation. (2) Name of traveller. (3) From what infected or notified area arriving. (4) Date of arrival of traveller. (5) Number, date and place of issue of passport. (6) How long kept under observation. (7) State of health of the traveller and other persons livin in the house in which he is or has been residing. (8) Date of departure if occurring within ten days. (9) Destination. (10) Date of despatch of triplicate passport to the local author- ity of the place of destination, and of intimation to the tahsildar or municipal chairman and district medical and sanitary officer. (11) Date of despatch of the duplicate passport to the tahsildar and how despatched. If sent by messenger, his name and time of his departure should be stated.
?12        [Part I-Regulation 1. Intimation in respect to persons passing through a railway inspection station. (9) In the case of persons passing through a railway frontier inspection station, the medical officer in charge shall arrange to record the following information in respect to every traveller from an infected or notified area who is not detained by him under the provisions of No. 3 of these regulations and to send it without delay-if possible by the railway guard of the same or next train-to the district medical and sanitary officer of the district to which such traveller is proceeding :- (1) Date of arrival. (2) Name of traveller (in full, including house-name and caste- title). (3) Father's name. (4) Caste. (5) Age and sex. (6) Whence coming. (7) Railway station of destination. (8) Number of railway ticket. (9) Destination and resi- dence during the next ten days. District.  Taluq.  Village (or amsam and desam).    Street.  Number or name of the owner of  the house. Intimation in respect to other travellers. (10) In the case of other persons coming from an infected or notified area, the duty of recording the above information (excepting items 7 and 8) and communicating it to the district medical and sanitary officer shall devolve on the officer issuing the passport. Duties of district medical and sanitary officer and tahsildar. (11) The district medical and sanitary officer shall forward the reports referred to in clauses (9) and (10) of this regulation to the tahsildar concerned, whose duty it shall be to see that the persons therein mentioned are duly observed, and that any case of sickness or death in the houses occupied by them is promptly reported, and to bring to the Collector's notice all instances of omission to issue passports or attempts to evade this regulation. Incapacitated persons and minors. (12) In the case of incapacitated persons and persons who are under 12 years of age, the obligation to take out passports for them, to present them for daily inspection, to report truly their names and addresses, to intimate any change in their residence, and to comply otherwise with the requirements of this regulation shall vest in their legal guardians or persons in whose charge they travel or who receive them at the railway station of destination.
?Part I-Regulation 2.] 13 Notice in railway carriages regarding passports. (13) All railway administrations shall put up in a conspicuous place in every railway carriage a copy of the following notice in English and in the principal vernacular language of the country through which the railway line passes:- Notice.a The Madras plague regulations require all passengers arriving from plague-infected parts to take out passports at the station where they alight, or (1) in the case of passengers proceeding to Madras by the North- East line of the Madras Railway, at Bitragunta; (2) in the case of those arriving at Madras by the other lines of the Madras Railway, at Perambr; and (3) in the case of passengers proceeding to Mttuplaiyam or to stations on the Nilgiri Railway, at Coimbatore. Persons infringing the regulations render themselves liable to prosecution. Tasiildar's duties may be performed by municipal chairman and that of district medical and sanitary officer by Collector. (14) In municipalities, the tahsildar's duties under this regulation shall be performed by the municipal chairman. The term "tahsildar" in this and other regulations includes deputy tahsildar. The duties of the district medical and sanitary officer under clause (11) of this regulation may be performed by the Collector in districts where this course is found convenient. In such cases, the intimations referred to in clauses (9) and (10) should be sent to the Collector. Information regarding plague cses and arrivals from infected areas. 2. (1) In every district municipality and every town or village, every house-holder and every medical practitioner practising therein who becomes cognizant of the occurrence in his house or in any public or private dwelling or place within the limits of the municipality, town or village, of any case of plague or of fever with glandular swellings, and in the case of persons who live within an area that has been notified as infected or who have been in any way exposed to plague infection, of acute affections of the lung, of convulsions in children, abortion in women and sudden death in the aged, shall be bound to give information of the same, with the least practicable delay, in the municipality to the chairman of the council and the medical officer in charge of the municipal dispensary or hospital, and in a town or village not being a municipality, to the village head or to the nearest officers of the revenue and medical departments, who shall report the fact at once to their immediate official superiors. (2) Every house-holder and every keeper or person in charge of an hotel, chuttram or other place of public resort, a As amended by notifications No. 543, Fort St. George Gazette, dated und July 1901, part I-A, page 364; No. 569, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 27th May 1902, part I-A, page 198.
?14 [Part I-Regulation 3. shall also in the same manner forthwith report the arrival at the house, hotel, chuttram or other place, of any person from any area which has been declared by the Governor in Council or the Collector to be infected or which has been notified by the Governor in Council for the purposes of the preceding regulation 1. Inspection of railway passengers. 3. (1) At or near any railway station appointed by notifi- cation in the Fort St. George Gazette as an inspection station, any medical officer appointed in this behalf may detain any train and require every person travelling therein to alight and submit himself to medical examination as the medical officer may direct, and may for this purpose, with the assistance, if necessary, of the police, using such reasonable force as may be required, detain such passenger either on the railway pre- mises or in some other suitable place which the Collector shall provide for the purpose. (2) Such person shall be bound to submit himself to such examination and shall furnish the information referred to in clause (9) of No. 1 of these regulations and any other particulars which the medical officer or any person acting under his orders may demand. Any person refusing to comply with this rule may be detained for such period as may be necessary, in addition to his being subjected to the penalty prescribed in No. 54 of these regulations. (5) After examination, all persons shall be allowed to proceed to their destination except- (a) those suffering from, or suspected of, plague or those who have so recently suffered from plague as to be in a possibly infectious state; (b) pilgrims or persons belonging to any other class who appear for any reasons to be specially dangerous whether travelling singly or in numbers, or persons who cannot be depended upon to present themselves daily for medical examination for ten days on arrival at their destination, or to give information should plague occur among them. (4) Persons coming under class (a) shall be detained until they are cured or as long as the infection or suspicion of plague remains. Information of such cases shall be sent urgently to the Collector and the district medical and sanitary officer of the district. All contacts shall also be detained for a period of ten days from the occurrence of the last case of plague among them. (5) Persons coming under class (b) may be detained at the discretion of the medical officer till the full period of
?Part I-Regulation 4.] 15 incubation (i.e., ten days) has elapsed since they left the infected area, or if that date is not known, for ton days. (6) a Any person arriving at, or passing through, an inspection station may, at the discretion of the inspecting medical officer, be compelled to obtain a passport in accord- ance with clause (1) of No. 1 of these regulations and undergo surveillance for ten days. (7) The inspecting medical officer may also require any passenger to deliver up his ticket, in order that some mark indicative of his having arrived from a plague-infected locality or an area notified under the preceding regulation 1, and therefore of his being liable to obtain a passport at the station of destination may be impressed thereon ; and such passenger shall be bound to deliver it up accordingly. Attempts to evade inspection by breaking journey at an intermediate station. 4. If a passenger from a plague-infected or notified area appears to be attempting to evade inspection at an inspection station by alighting at a station short of that- for which his ticket has been taken, the station master or railway official in charge or an officer specially authorized by the Collector in this behalf, shall insist on his continuing his journey as far as the inspection station, either by the same or the next following train, and may, with the assistance of the police, take all such steps as may be necessary to compel him to do so. Attempts to evade inspec- tion, by book- ing to a station sliorb of the inspec- tion station or by arriving otherwise than by train at or beyond an inspection station" 5. Any such passenger alighting at a railway station short of, or arriving otherwise than by train at or beyond, an inspection station, who from his being unable to show any business at the place of alighting or arrival appears to have so alighted or arrived for the purpose of evading examination at such inspection station, may be detained by the station- master or railway official in charge or an officer specially authorized by the Collector in this behalf at the railway station at which he has alighted or arrived and be handed over to the medical officer in charge of the inspection station, or forwarded or returned, as the case may be, to the inspection station by the same or next train proceeding thereto. The railway fare of the person so detained and forwarded to the inspection, station shall be paid by the passenger and, if not paid, shall be recovered from him by the railway authorities as excess fare. Disinfection of railway carriages from infected areas, 6. When any carriage from an infected area is detached from a train at any railway station in the Madras presidency, it shall be disinfected and ventilated by the railway author- ities in the following manner as soon as possible and before it is again, brought into use, and if such carriage is detached at a As amended by notification No. 619, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 30th July 1901, part I-A, page 420.
?16 [Part I-Regulation 7, an inspection station appointed under the preceding regula- tion 3, such disinfection and ventilation shall be effected to the satisfaction of the inspecting medical officer:- (i) Third and intermediate class carriages- The interior wood-work of the carriages, especially the floors and seats, shall be thoroughly washed with a solution of perchloride of mercury (1 in 1,000) and o: hydrochloric- acid (2 in 1,000); the doors and windows shall be opened, and the vehicle exposed to the air; the sweepings shall be carefully collected and be burnt. (ii) First and second class carriages- The floors and wood-work shall be treated as above, the cushions being also brushed and thoroughly cleansed and exposed to the sun for not loss than four hours. Disinfection of railway carriages in which plaguo patients liavo travelled. 7. (1) Any railway carriage from which a passenger who is suffering from the plague has been removed shall be detached at the nearest convenient station, and shall be disinfected by the railway authorities as follows, and if that station is an inspection station, such disinfection shall be effected to the satisfaction of the inspecting medical officer:- (i) The carriages, after being detached from the train, should be thoroughly washed with soft soap. After an interval of two to three hours, this should be washed off with plain water, and then the following disinfecting solution should be thoroughly sprayed all over the interior as well as the exterior of the carriages by means of a s.yringe:- Corrosive sublimate 1/2 oz. Hydrochloric acid 1  Water 3 gallons. This solution should be allowed to dry on the car- riages. Special care must be taken to direct the solution into all the cracks and crevices and jilmills. (ii) After disinfection, the carriage should be kept out in the open Cor 48 hours. They can then be brought into use again. (iii) In the case of first and second class carriages, which afford greater facilities than third-class compartments for the harbouring of plague germs, it will be necessary, if the carriages are contaminated, to burn the cushions and to disinfect the wood-work in the manner indicated above, and repaint the interior. (2) If a compartment has been used by a suspicious case of plague, it shall be treated as directed in the preceding regulation 6. If of the third or intermediate class, its use may be permitted as soon as it is thoroughly dry; but if it
?Part I-Regulation 8.] 17 be of the first or second class, it shall, after such disinfection, be kept locked and unused until the nature of the case be definitely ascertained, when the question as to whether or not the cushions be destroyed and further disinfection be effected, shall be decided in accordance with the preceding clause (1) (iii) of this regulation. Power to enter any building or place for the purpose of inspecting plague cases and taking necessary measures. 8. The Collector or any officer authorized by him for this purpose may at any time enter any building or place in which plague is reputed or suspected to exist, and inspect and, if necessary, detain or remove and isolate any person suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague, or to have so lately suffered from plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, or believed to have recently arrived from an infected or notified area. Bringing of susceptible articles from infected areas prohibited. 9. The bringing, taking, sending, or consigning, by sea or land, of soiled linen and used bedding (except when carried as the personal baggage of travellers), rags, and waste paper from a plague-infected place in India into or through any other part of India to which the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897) applies, having been prohibited by the Government of India, the Collector shall take due steps to make the prohibition known and to enforce it. Articles brought in contravention of this prohibition shall be de- stroyed, and no person shall be entitled to claim compensation on account of such destruction. Destruction of rutR. 10. The Collector shall arrange for the frequent inspec- tion of consignments of grain arriving from plague-infected areas and of landing places, railway goods-sheds, and grain bazaars, and for the killing and subsequent destruction by burning of all rats found therein. When any place is infected, steps shall be taken to destroy rats in it and is the surrounding area within a radius of ten miles. Part II.-Measures to be adopted in places imminently threatened with Plague. Declaring a district to be under obser- vation and authorizing the Collector to adopt cer- tain measures. 11. Should it appear that plague imminently threatens to attack any district, Government may declare such district or part of it to be under observation and may authorize the Collector to establish frontier inspection stations, to arrange observation circles, to organise sanitary and ambu- lance staffs, to provide plague hospitals and camps, and to strengthen and train the district establishments.
?18 [Part II-Regulation 12. Road and railway inspection stations. 12. Frontier inspection stations shall be established as near as may be to the frontier on roads and at railway stations. The inspection stations on roads shall be located only at places where they can be efficiently worked, i.e., at places where the nature of the country forces traffic to converge between narrow lines and not where the country is flat and open and where consequently they can be easily evaded. In special cases, and when the country is unfavourable for such inspection, patrols may be substituted for stations. Accommoda- tion and equipment of inspection stations. Mode of inspection. 13. At each frontier inspection station shall be erected a sufficient number of sheds for hospital and observation pur- poses; and disinfectants and stores shall be maintained. 14. All passengers shall be examined and dealt with at these inspection stations in accordance with the provisions of No. 3 of these regulations, and those by road shall also be provided with passports under No. 1 of these regulations. Observation circles. 15. (1) For the taluqs necessary in his opinion to be watched, the Collector may appoint the requisite number of plague inspectors, who should be given a range with a radius not usually exceeding 5 miles. For non-municipal towns, assistant plague inspectors may be appointed. (2) Every municipality to which the regulations contained in this part apply shall be divided into circles, which should, as far as possible, follow ward divisions so that they may be readily comprehended. In municipalities where there are wards containing less than 1,200 houses and a population of less than 5,000 persons each, two or more wards may be comprised in one circle. Three circles shall ordinarily form a division. (3) The Collector may also appoint plague supervisors to check the work of inspectors and assistant inspectors. When available such plague inspectors and assistant plague inspectors shall be certificated sanitary inspectors, or such as have received a special training for dealing with plague to the satisfaction of the Sanitary Commissioner. Duties of the observation staff. 16. (1) This observation staff shall work in municipalities under the municipal chairman and in other places under the district medical and sanitary officer or other officer appointed by Government or the Collector for the purpose. Its duty will be to constantly and systematically patrol the circles in order to gain the earliest possible information of a case of plague, so that immediate action may be taken, and to remove with the aid of the ordinary conservancy establishment all defects in sanitation which would favour the propagation of
?Part II-Regulation 17.] 19 plague, such as accumulations of cowdung, manure or stagnant sewage, absence of perflation of groups of buildings, &c. It should also check the possession of passports or passes in the case of persons arriving from an infected locality. Should any person so arrive without a passport or pass, or having broken its conditions, any member of the observation staff may detain him and cause him to be dealt with in accordance with these regulations. (2) Inspectors and assistant inspectors shall keep a record of all persons suffering from continuous fever for more than twelve hours, and shall arrange with the village headman to have such persons inspected twice daily. If a member of the observation staff shall discover a case of plague, he shall act as is laid down in No. 21 et seq. of these regulations. Provision of accommoda- tion for plague purposes. 17. On the requisition of the Collector, and to the extent to which he may determine, a municipal council or a district board, if it has not already made the provision, shall provide and maintain in such localities, which, in the case of a munici- pality, may be within or without the municipal limits, as in the opinion of the district medical and sanitary officer, or a medical officer deputed by him, may be proper for the purpose, suitable and sufficient accommodation to the satisfaction of such medical officer, for the following purposes:- (a) an hospital camp for the isolation and treatment of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague; (b) a suspect camp for the detention of contacts; (c) a health camp for the occupation of persons who may be required to vacate any building or ground under these regulations and who may be unable to procure necessary accommodation for themselves. In the places so provided, the municipal council or the district board, as the case may be, shall furnish such hospital establishments, equipment and supplies as the district Col- lector may determine, and shall also make arrangements for feeding persons detained under any of these regulations on payment by them of the cost; but in the case of indigent persons, the municipal council or the district board, as the case may be, shall supply them with food free of charge: provided that any person so detained shall have full liberty to cater for himself subject to such rules and conditions as the medical officer in charge may prescribe.
?120 [Part II-Regulation 18. Acquisition of lands or buildings required for plague purpose. 18. Any building or place which is required for and is, in the opinion of the district medical and sanitary officer or the medical officer deputed by him in this behalf, suitable for the purpose of the accommodation to be provided under the last preceding regulation, may be entered upon and occupied without having recourse to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (I of 1894) by the municipal council or the president of the district board, as the case may be, or a person deputed by him in this behalf (if unoccupied without any notice what- soever, and if occupied after twenty-four hours' notice in writing conspicuously posted on such house or building) and may be used for the purposes of the accommodation under the last preceding regulation; and the owner or the lessee of such building or place shall not be entitled to anything beyond a reasonable rent as fixed by the Collector for the period during which the ground or building may remain in the occupation of the municipal council or the Collector and president of the district board, as the case may be: provided that the municipal council or the Collector and president of the district board, as the case may be, shall be bound at the cost of the municipality or the district board, as the case may be, thoroughly to cleanse and disinfect the ground and, if a building, to cleanse, disinfect and, if desired by the owner, whitewash it internally and externally after vacating it. Conveyances for the carriage of the sick and of infected articles. 19. The municipal council or the Collector and president of the district board, as the case may be, shall provide suitable conveyances for the free carriage to a place provided under No. 17 of these regulations, or other place, of persons suffering, or suspected to be suffering, from the plague, and for the transport of any clothing, bedding or other articles which have been exposed to infection. Training the establish- ment. 20. He shall see that the whole district establishment knows its duties, both while the district is under observation and also on the outbreak of plague. He shall especially bring Nos. 1, 2, 9 and 21 of these regulations to the notice of village officers and the inhabitants. Part III.-Measures to be adopted on the Occurrence of Plague. Report by local officers of occurrence of plague and isolation of patient and contacts. 21. On the occurrence of a suspected or actual case of plague in a village or town whether in a district declared to be under observation or not, it shall be the duty of the village headman or other local officer to send intelligence by a As amended by notification No. 1019, published at page 586 of part I-A. of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 3rd December 1901.
?Part. III-Regulation 22.] 21 express to the tahsildar or the municipal chairman and if plague inspectors have been appointed to the nearest plague inspector; and meanwhile to isolate the patient and all who have been or suspected to have been in attendance upon him or in contact with him, in a place provided under No. 17 of these regulations, or in their own houses provided they are not plague-infected or some other suitable places if they can there be segregated with no greater risk of spreading the infection, or in a hut or shed to be immediately constructed remote from inhabited houses. Report by plague inspector and talisildar or municipal chairman. 22. The plague inspector and the tahsildar or the muni- cipal chairman shall inform all superior officers up to the Collector by the quickest possible means, and shall go at once to the infected locality. The tahsildar or the municipal chairman shall arrange to be accompanied or followed by the nearest medical officer with a supply of medicines and dis- infectants and by a staff of constables and peons. Action to be taken by plague inspector and tahsildar or municipal chairman. 23. (1) On arrival at the infected place, the plague inspector (or medical officer if there is no plague inspector) shall supervise the isolation of the patient and the disinfection of his residence, clothing and excreta, and the clothing, and at his discretion, the person of his contacts, and shall continue such supervision until relieved under the orders of a plague officer and sent back to other duty. (2) The tahsildar or the municipal chairman shall act as follows:- (a) If the plague patient be a traveller who has newly arrived at the village, or a resident who has newly returned to it, from an infected locality, and has been with his contacts put into complete isolation from the beginning of his sick- ness, the tahsildar or the municipal chairman may content himself with continuing such isolation, with providing the patient with medical attendance if required by him or by those in charge of him, and with thorough disinfection as above. (b) But if he thinks it necessary, or is so ordered by superior authority, and provided the attack shall have been declared by a medical officer to be probably plague, after first completely isolating the patient and his contacts and posting a guard over them, he shall construct if accom- modation has not already been provided under No. 17 of these regulations- a hospital into which he shall remove the patient and which he shall provide with a guard;
?22 [Part III-Regulation 24, n suspect camp, where he shall remove, disinfect and detain all persons who have been, or sus- pected to have been in attendance on, or in contact with, the patient, and which he shall also provide with a guard; and a staff camp, to house the ambulance staff on its arrival. Action to be taken by plague officer. 24. (1) On receiving information of a case of plague, the duties of a plague officer (defined below, regulation 43) shall be as follows:- (2) He shall send telegraphic information to the Collector and the district medical and sanitary officer. (3) He shall then go to the scene of outbreak, and shall enforce the measures mentioned above. (4) He shall see that the hospital, the suspect camp and the health camp are properly organized and cordoned. (5) He shall see that the patrols and guards round the infected area completely isolate it, or such part of it as he deems fit, so as to prevent the return of the inhabitants without his written permission. (6) He may also, when authorized by the Collector, direct the evacuation of the village or town or any part of it, and the removal of the inhabitants to a health camp, provided sufficient shelter is available, and their detention there for a period not exceeding ten days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague among them. (7) On the evacuation of houses, he shall cause them to be surrounded by a cordon with the object of preventing the return of the inhabitants without his written permission, and to be thoroughly disinfected. (8) He may also cause the village to be disinfected. Report by Collector and the action to be taken by him. 25. (1) The Collector, on receiving information, shall tele- graph to Government, the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioner, and despatch the ambulance staff with its equipment to the village under the district medical and sanitary officer, or his assistant. (2) He may notify by tom-tom (the notification to be as soon as possible published in the District Gazette) that any town or village, or part of a town or village, or group of villages, is infected, whereupon the regulations contained in Part II shall come into force in the district if they have not been put in force by Government already.
?Part III-Regulation 26.] 23 (3) He may order the evacuation and disinfection of infected houses and houses in their neighbourhood, or of infected villages and towns, and prohibit their re-occupation without permission. (4) He may require the evicted people to reside in any place which he may appoint, under such restrictions as he may deem necessary, provided proper shelter is available. (5) He may requisition the services of any public servant or, for work connected with a railway, of any railway employ. (6) He shall, if possible, go to the village and direct operations. Preventive circles. 26. If an observation staff has already been appointed in the neighbourhood of an infected area, the Collector shall modify the observation circles so as to contract them to 5 miles diameter, within a radius of 20 miles or less distance around the infected area. If an observation staff has not been already appointed, he shall at once organize one so as to meet this requirement. Circles so formed round infected areas shall be termed preventive circles to distinguish them from the observation circles mentioned in the preceding regulation 15. These circles shall be placed in the charge of plague inspectors, whose duty shall be to frequently visit every inhabited part of their circles, check the working of the passport system, and maintain a watch over the health of the inhabitants with the object of quickly discovering cases of plague and preventing the spread of the disease. Inoculation. 27. The Collector shall arrange with the Sanitary Com- missioner to place an ample supply of Haffkine's vaccine within the reach of the inhabitants of plague-infected and plague-threatened localities and shall afford them every facility for being inoculated.  Certificates of causes of death. 28. (1) When he has a sufficient medical staff at his disposal to secure immediate inspection, so that there may be no chance of funerals being delayed, the Collector may, with the previous sanction of Government, order in respect of any particular area that the certificate of a medical officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death. (2) After the issue of such an order, if a burial or cremation takes place without such a certificate having been
?24 [Part III-Regulation 29. obtained, the death may be presumed to have been due to plague, and the rules regarding the segregation of the contacts and the disinfection of the house may be applied. House search. 29. With the previous sanction of Government, the Collector may organize search parties to visit houses for the purpose of detecting cases of plague, when there is reason to believe that the residents are attempting to conceal them. Sanitary restrictions with regard to funeral processions and burials. 30. (1) The Collector of the district, when and to the extent he may deem necessary, may make rules- (a) for prescribing the route which shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the grave-yard, burning ground or other place for final disposal of the corpse, and the places, if any, at which such procession may halt on its way for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes; (b) for enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain depth. (c) for requiring that the bathing of persons attend- ing the funeral shall be conducted at a place prescribed by him. (2) He may also prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than ground specially assigned by him for such purpose. (3) When a person dies of the plague elsewhere than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it for the funeral. Such persons shall disinfect themselves according to the orders which may be issued by the Collector in this behalf. Persons leaving for an uninfected place should obtain pass- ports. 31. (1) The Collector may require that all persons desiring to leave an infected or notified town or village to reside in a town or village not infected shall, before doing so, apply to and obtain from such officer as may be appointed for the purpose passports in the form appended [Appendix A] to these regulations provided that no passports be issued to persons suffering, or suspected to be suffering, from plague, or to have so lately suffered from plague as to be in an infec- tious state or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, and the said officer may always require, before a passport is given, the disinfection in a prescribed manner of all clothes and other articles to be taken away.
?Part III-Regulation 31.] 25 Persons leaving an infected place to at- tend to their profession or to reside temporarily in the immediate neighbour- hood should obtain passes. (2) Other persons desiring to leave the infected town or village may be required to obtain, before departure, passes, which may be of two kinds, either (1) general [Appendices B, C, and D,] or (2) special [Appendix E]. (3) General passes may be given to agriculturists and others having occasion to make daily or frequent journeys by road, rail or boat from an infected area, and may be given for an indefinite period; but they will not cover residence outside of the infected area, and will not cover journeys by rail unless that is expressly stated on them. In the case of agriculturists, where the officer granting the pass is satisfied that it is necessary for the whole family to go and work in the fields, a single pass may be given for the family, but there must be a separate pass for each person making a railway journey under a general pass. General passes should be given freely, and in the case of agriculturists working in the fields need not be revoked even should a case of plague occur in the family of the pass-holder. In the case of persons who regularly visit weekly markets in adjoining non-infected areas and return to the infected or notified place within a period not exceeding 24 hours, a permanent pass in the form appended [Appendix D] to these regulations should be issued. Intimation of the grant of such passes should be duly communicated to the officers concerned in the non- infected area. (4) Special passes shall be passes permitting persons to leave inhabited areas of an infected or notified town or village and reside on sites approved by an officer appointed for this purpose beyond them, and may be granted for households, provided that the name and description of each person covered by the pass is entered therein. The officer issuing the pass may always require, before the pass is given, the disinfection in the prescribed manner of all clothes and other articles to be taken away. Persons holding these passes shall not be allowed to return to the inhabited area otherwise than under such sanitary restrictions as the said officer may, from time to time, require or until the pass shall have been cancelled by him and disinfection of clothing and articles to be taken back with them be effected should he consider such disinfection necessary. (5) At convenient spots within, or in the proximity of, the inhabited area of an infected or notified town or village, the Collector shall establish one or more offices for the issue of passports and passes and shall notify by tom-tom the locality of such office or offices at such intervals as shall ensure the inhabitants being aware of their purpose and position. D
?26 [Part III-Regulation 32, Exemption from rules requiring passports and passes. 32. (1) The Collector may at his discretion exempt from the necessity of taking out passports persons who are merely returning from an infected area to their own village after bringing to market in such area articles of food or fuel; provided that such return be within eight hours after arrival and not after sunset, and that such exemption shall not apply to any such person who may have entered a dwelling house within the infected area. (2) The Collector may also exempt from the necessity of taking out passports or passes any person with regard to whom there are no reasonable grounds for suspicion of infection. Observation camp to protect a town or large village threatened with plague. 33. When there is a town or large village in the vicinity of an infected area, the Collector may establish a camp of observation at such town or village and may order detention and disinfection in such camp of all suspected persons coming from such area without passports or passes. He shall appoint special places where markets may be held and prescribe limits beyond which it shall not be lawful for persons bringing articles for sale from or to an infected area to pass. Use of public conveyances by plague patients prohibited. 34. No owner, driver or person in charge of a public conveyance shall carry any person suffering from the plague; nor shall any person suffering from the disease enter or be taken in a public conveyance. Infected houses not to be let untill disinfected. 35. No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know, that a person has suffered or is suffering from the plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected to the satisfaction of the medical officer appointed by the Collector in this behalf. Destruction of infected huts or sheds. 36. If the Collector of the district or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf is of opinion that the destruction of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of the plague, the Collector or such officer as aforesaid may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and the materials of which it is constructed. Disuse of buildings unfit for human habitation. 37. If it appears to the Collector or an officer appointed by him in this behalf that, in view of the prevalence of the plague within his jurisdiction, any building within such juris- diction, intended or used as a dwelling, is in so insanitary a condition as to be unfit for human habitation, he may
?Part III-Regulation 38.] 27 summarily cause the same to be vacated, and prohibit, by a written order, the further use of such building as a dwelling. After such prohibition no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives written permission in this behalf. Abatement of overcrowd ing. 38. When any building or place is, in the opinion of the Collector or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf, so overcrowded as to make the inmates or occupiers specially liable to an attack of plague, the Collector or officer authorized as aforesaid may, by a notice posted on some conspicuous part of the building or place, require the owner or occupier, if actually residing in the building or place, or the tenants or the actual occupants thereof, to abate, as prescribed in the notice, the overcrowd- ing within twenty-four hours by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or other occupants of the said building or place, and, in default of compliance with the requisition in the said notice, may summarily eject all the inmates or occu- pants, or reduce the number of the same in such manner and to such extent as may appear necessary. Abatement of nuisances. 39. The Collector or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may, when he considers necessary, enter upon any premises, whether situ- ated in a municipality or not, at any time during daylight and. summarily execute any work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in, sections 186, 220, 221 and 228 of the District Municipalities Act, 1884, or sections 99 and 101 of the Local Boards Act, 1884. Closing places used for supply, preparation, &c., of articles of food and drink. 40. The Collector of the district or any officer specially authorized by him in this behalf is empowered to close sheds used for accommodation of animals whose milk or milk products are sold by the owner or his agent, and places used for the supply, preparation or storage of articles of food and drink in infected localities or in the immediate neighbour- hood of infected houses, and to direct the removal and if necessary, the destruction of all articles of food and drink found in such places. Restrictions on the wash- ing of clothes. 41. The Collector of the district may prescribe that no person undertaking for hire the cleansing of clothing or other laundry process within an infected area to which he may extend this regulation shall store or wash or otherwise pre- pare clothing except at such places and at such times and under such conditions as he may direct.
?28 [Part III-Regulation 42. Dissolution of plague hospitals and camps. 42. No hospital or suspect camp or observation camp shall be closed without the special orders of the Collector, and until the receipt of such orders the municipality or the district board shall maintain such places in efficient repair. Provided there have been no actual or suspected cases of plague therein, the Collector may, in his discretion, allow a health camp to be closed after ten days, and a village or town or section of a town in which no death or fresh case of plague has taken place for ten days after the recovery or death of the last case to be re-inhabited as soon as it has been thoroughly disinfected. Part IV.-Miscellaneous. Administra- tive staff. 43. For administrative purposes in connection with the plague, the Collector shall have under his orders the following plague authorities :- (a) A superior staff consisting of plague officers appointed by Government. (b) A subordinate staff consisting of assistant plague officers appointed by the Collector. (a) Plague officers include divisional-officers, assistant Collectors, the district medical and sanitary officer, and additional medical officers and also personal assistant to the Collector; Special divisional-officers (either to relieve divisional- officers engaged in plague operations or to be in plague charge of a division). Extra Assistants to be in charge generally of a taluq but, if necessary, of a smaller area. (b) Assistant plague officers shall be tahsildars and deputy tahsildars (ordinary or special) and chairmen of municipal councils ex-officio; or persons of known and approved character and responsible position, specially appointed. Jurisdiction and powers of plague officers. 44. The Collector may, from time to time, assign to plague officers and assistant plague officers, jurisdiction over such local areas, and confer on the latter officers such powers as he may deem fit. The plague officers shall have the powers of assistant plague officers and such additional powers as may be conferred by Government.
?Part IV-Regulation 45.] 29 Moenial staff entitled to, and bound to give, one month's notice. 45. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, scavenger or other menial servant employed to do duty in connection with plague shall be entitled to one month's notice before dis- charge, or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and discharged at the end of it. (2) No such maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, sca- venger or other menial servant in the absence of a written contract authorizing him so to do, and without reasonable cause, shall resign his employment, or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice, or neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. Mode of disinfection. 46. Whenever disinfection is prescribed by any of these regulations, it shall be carried out in accordance with the general principles laid down by Government and such subsi- diary instructions as may be issued by the Sanitary Com- missioner or, in respect to management of hospitals, by the Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras. Compensa- tion. 47. When in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these regulations, any damage or loss is caused, no person shall be entitled as a matter of right to claim any compensation, but the Collector of the district or any person authorized by him may, in his discretion, award compensation at the cost of local, municipal or provincial funds as the case may be, and shall do so when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circumstances, to whom it would be a great hard- ship to bear it, or he may, in such cases, arrange for providing other necessary articles in the place of those destroyed or damaged and debit the charge to the proper funds. Contents of certificates, passes, &c. Their im- proper use prohibited. 48. Any certificate or passport or pass granted under these regulations shall contain an accurate description of the person named in it to prevent, so far as possible, its being used by another person; nor shall such a certificate or pass- port or pass given to any person to enable him to go from one place to another or for any purpose shall be used by any other person or for any other purpose. Segregated or detained  persons bound to obey directions givea to them. 49. Every person segregated or detained under any of these regulations shall obey the directions issued to him by the officer in charge of the place of segregation or detention and shall not leave such place except with the written permis- sion of the said officer, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition.
?30            [Part IV-Regulation 50. Canal boats, subject to same regulations as buildings. 50. (1) A canal boat shall be subject to all the regula- tions applicable to buildings; and passengers by a canal boat shall be subject to interrogation, inspection and detention in the same manner as passengers by railway. (2) In order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague either by or to a canal boat, the Collector of the district or any officer generally or specially empowered by him in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspicuous position of the boat. Privileges granted to inoculated persons. 51. (1) Persons who hold certificates that they have been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, shall be entitled to the following privileges, provided such certificates bear a date not earlier than six months but not later than ten days previously:- (a)  Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffer- ing from, plague, they shall not be liable to detention at any railway or road observation camp when travelling, except for such period as may be required to disinfect their baggage and clothes, if those are considered suspicious. (b)  They shall not be liable to take out passports and present themselves daily for observation for ten days after arrival from a plague-infected place,  or from any place noti- fied by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of No.  1 of these  regulations;  but they may be observed at their own residence and shall, with this view, be bound when   required  by any plague   officer  to give their names and addresses for the next ten days. (c)  Inoculated persons who   have been living in an infected house or have otherwise been exposed  to  plague infection shall not be liable to be segregated, but may be required to evacuate the infected house and to have their clothes  and personal effects  disinfected.    When, however, all the occupants of a house have been inoculated, neither the patients nor the other inmates of the house shall be required to be segregated, provided arrangements are made to  the satisfaction of a plague authority for the disinfection of the house and its contents, and for the prevention of the spread of plague to the neighbouring dwellings. (2) The inoculation certificate  shall be in the  form appended [Appendix F].    But when in   a  certificate issued
Part IV-Regulation 52.]             31 under authority, the thumb impression has not been taken, other satisfactory evidence of identification may be accepted. Inoculated persons bound to produce their inocu- lation certifi- cates and make an im- pression of thumb-marks. 52. Every inoculated person (who is exempted from segre- gation, detention and observation under the preceding regu- lation 51) shall be bound, when called upon to do so by the officer mentioned in clause (3) of No. 1 of these regulations, to produce the certificate showing that he has been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, and also to make an impression of his thumb-mark for the purpose of identification. Supersession of district board or municipality by  Collector in emergen- cies. 53. The Collector of a district may, in case of emergency or to save delay, provide for the execution of any work or the doing of any act which a district board or municipality is empowered or required to execute or to do in accordance with these regulations, and the immediate execution or the doing of which is in the said Collector's opinion necessary for the service or the safety of the public, and may charge the expense of executing the work or doing the act to the local board or municipality concerned. Penalty for breach of Regulations. 54. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such regulation, has been required or empowered to take under any such regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both.
?32 CHAPTER II. * INSTRUCTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE CARRYING OUT OF PLAGUE MEASURES AND WITH REGARD TO OTHER MATTERS CONNECTED WITH PLAGUE. General Remarks. A  combination   of the  following   measures is  likely to produce the maximum of good:- (a) The prompt discovery and isolation of every case of plague. (b) The thorough disinfection of the personal effects, clothes, and houses of patients. (c)  The segregation and inoculation of contacts. (d)  The removal and destruction by burning of plague- infected rats,  and the disinfection of the houses in  which they are found. Every endeavour should be made by the officers respons- ible to apply the first stated measure by sufficiently early organization of observation staffs in rural areas and muni- cipalities when imminently threatened, and by frequent insistence as to care and promptitude in effecting plague regulations by all authorities concerned, so as to secure that the first imported cases are rapidly and effectually dealt with; for it is only at the commencement of the outbreak that the remaining three measures can be carried out with success and within reasonable expenditure, and can therefore be expected to stamp out the disease before much harm is done. But when once the plague has been allowed to obtain a footing in a large place or to spread to a number of villages it will be found very difficult to apply the above measures. The policy then to be adopted at a particular place will depend on its physical features, the season of the year, the general sentiment and state of education of the people in regard to plague measures, the strength of the staff available, and the influence of the local authorities. * The regulations contained in chapter I should be worked subject to the explana- tions and conditions stated in this chapter. The portions omitted in this reprint, which are indicated by dots ( . . . ) relate to matters not concerning mufassal towns and villages.
Plague Agency.]                        33 2.  In the larger places, i.e., towns with a population of more than  10,000, the measures that will be found appli- cable are disinfection, inoculation, the evacuation of specially infected quarters, and (so long as infection has not spread through the town) the isolation of the sick.    In villages, the chief measure to be relied on is evacuation, but inoculation and chemical disinfection should also be resorted to so long as there is sufficient staff to supervise those measures.    Evacua- tion in both towns and villages should be conjoined with an opening up of houses sufficient for the admission of sunlight and air whenever this  is required.    In carrying out these measures it should be borne in mind that it will always be better to apply one method efficiently and thoroughly than to apply a   number   of   methods   with an inadequate   and insufficiently trained staff.    Another point of importance is that in places, where plague is constantly recurring and the amount of plague is liable to great seasonal variations, plague measures should be carried  out with special vigour at the season when the epidemic is at its minimum. 3.  Experience has shown that it is hopeless to carry out effectively any system of plague administration which is not supported by the people, and in a wide-spread epidemic, the resources of Government in the matter of funds and establish- ment being limited, much must necessarily be left to the people themselves.    Steps should therefore be taken to inform them beforehand of  the measures they will be required to submit to, and to convince them of the utility of the par- ticular methods selected, so that they may be induced to carry them out not by force but by the exercise of their own free- will and as a consequence of their appreciating and under- standing   the  benefits to be    anticipated  therefrom.    The measures are new to the people, particularly in fresh areas of infection, and if injudiciously or overzealously pressed, must defeat themselves by exciting opposition instead of gradually winning the co-operation of the people.    On the other hand if the services of the leading inhabitants are secured to assist the Government officials in carrying out measures which are clearly beneficial, it may often be possible, by reason of their example and attitude, to carry out with good results measures which would be ineffectual or injurious if enforced by definite orders upon a population ignorant of their advantages and suspicious of the objects with which they are adopted. Agency for Working Plague Regulations. 4.   Special attention should be directed to the restric- tion, so far as possible, of the employment of subordinate
?34                       [Plague Agency. Government officials of the medical and police departments and in especial to the advisability of enlisting to the utmost pos- sible extent volunteer agency to assist in carrying out plague measures. Whenever practicable, public and private hospitals and camps may be placed in charge of native practitioners. Police officers should hold no inquiry into suspicious cases of plague. Small representative committees of the inhabitants may be appointed in various parts of a city to co-operate with the authorities and to bring to their notice matters requiring attention or inquiry. 5.  As  far as  circumstances permit, Hindus   should   be employed in those parts of a city where Hindus predominate, and Muhammadans where Muhammadans are in a majority. Officers of all grades should use the greatest courtesy and consideration to the people, and should interfere as little as possible with their habits, feelings and religious prejudices. 6.  Where subordinate  native  agency is used, it is abso- lutely   necessary   that   Europeans   should  be   appointed   as supervisors over small and convenient units. 7.  The following procedure should be adopted in obtain- ing the services of military officers for plague duty:- I.  A Local  Government   or Administration  requiring an officer or officers for plague duty will apply to the Govern- ment of India, in the Home department, detailing the number of  officers required,  and   where and  when  they should  be ordered to join. Such applications shall always  be accom- panied by an intimation whether the officer should bring horses with him. II.  The Government  of  India will then address  the Adjutant-General in India, who will issue instructions under the orders of the Commander-in-Chief to one or more Com- mands to supply the officers wanted, the Government of India being at the same time informed of the instructions issued. III.  On learning from the Adjutant-General's depart- ment from what   Command the  officers   asked for  will be supplied,   the Government of India will  inform  the Local Government   or Administration  concerned,  and  all   further correspondence in reference to the individual officers detailed by  Commands, or their replacement,   should they for  any reason revert to military duty, will be conducted between the Local Government   or Administration and the Lieutenant- General Commanding.
Discovery of Plague.]                 35 IV.  When the officers selected have joined their appoint- ments, the Lieutenant-General Commanding will communicate their names to the Adjutant-General's department, and their services will then be placed at the disposal of the Govern- ment of India. IV-A. It is not considered desirable that a military officer should remain absent from his regiment on plague duty for more than a year at a time. The Lieutenant- General Commanding has therefore instructions to arrange with the Local Government for the relief by a substitute of any such officer who has been employed on plague work for over a year. V.  When an officer's services are no longer required, he should be directed by the Local Government or Adminis- tration to rejoin his regiment, the Lieutenant-General Com- manding and the Government of India being at  the  same time informed, and the latter will then replace the officer at the Commander-in-Chief's disposal. 8.  No officers of the Indian Medical Service or the Royal Army Medical Corps lent for plague duty should be permitted to revert to military duty without the previous sanction of the Government of India. 9.  The use   of   troops  for  plague  purposes  should   be avoided as far as possible  and their employment should be confined to  disinfection  when  local labour is not  available. Before   engaging   on   plague   duty,   the   sepoys    should  be inoculated and each of them  should be supplied with two suits of white drill, one pair of boots, and two white turbans; they   should   not  wear    military   uniform   or   carry   arms while  so employed.     The sanction of Government should be obtained before requisitioning them, and where the employ- ment of troops has once been sanctioned, the men may be changed without reference  to  Government.    Arrangements should be made for the relieving detachment to be inoculated before arrival. 10.    . . . Discovery of Plague. 11. The most important and the most difficult matter in all operations against plague is to obtain early information regarding the cases that occur. The prompt discovery of an imported case of plague may enable the local authorities to
36                 [Isolation of Patients, prevent a local outbreak, and even where a few indigenous cases have occurred, early information regarding each new case may make it possible to prevent the outbreak from spreading beyond a confined area. Every endeavour should therefore be made to obtain information of each case of plague that occurs, as soon as possible after the patient has been attacked, or where this is not possible, soon after death. 12.  For  this purpose,   the  surveillance   system  as  de- scribed in regulation 1, should be mainly relied upon, and the co-operation of the people in working it should be secured by pointing out to them the advantage of protecting themselves by not mixing with persons coming from infected areas and by giving the  authorities prompt notice of their arrival and of any cases of plague or suspicious  fever among them.    In towns,  one   or   more volunteers of each  caste  should be invited to assist the circle officers in prosecuting enquiries and discovering plague cases.    The risk of concealment of cases is lessened where people see that their leaders have ranged themselves on the side of the authorities. 13.  Besides carrying out the other measures prescribed in   part   I  of   the  regulations,   attention   should   be  paid to the improvement  of  the existing  system of registering deaths.    In municipal towns special daily returns of mortality may be called for and checked with the aid  of trustworthy subordinates   posted  at  burning  and  burial  grounds.    In villages whenever the deaths reported are found to be more frequent than usual, or when any case of fever with glandular swellings is reported, the tahsildar with the nearest medical officer should at once proceed to the village and make inquiries with a view to ascertain whether plague exists in the village; and the medical officer and the tahsildar should report to the district medical and sanitary officer the facts and the reasons for the decision arrived at by them as to the cause of the mortality. 14.  The employment of paid spies or informers as well as the grant of rewards for information regarding plague cases is prohibited. Removal of Plague Patients to Hospital. 15.  Plague patients who are left without any one to look after them or who have no home should in all cases be removed to hospital, and  there  can be  no question that in dealing
?Isolation of Patients.]                 37 with imported cases or with an outbreak in a small place upon which it is possible to concentrate a sufficiently strong establishment, the first measure to adopt is the compulsory removal of the sick to hospital. In dealing with early indigenous cases the same policy may be advisable. But if this policy prove unsuccessful in a large place, a point may soon be reached where the authorities will not succeed in getting the bulk of the cases. When this point is reached, the fact must be faced that the evils of leaving the sick in their houses are being incurred and that the attempt to remove them to hospital may be super-adding to these the evils that result from carrying about sick persons from house to house. At this stage the less the sick are interfered with the better. All that can then be done is to endeavour to palliate the evils that result from leaving people in their houses by arranging for continual visitation of the sick at home, the frequent dis- infection of the infected room, and the encouragement of inoculation among persons left in the houses with the sick. 16.  Except in the cases mentioned above, the removal of patients to hospital should not be made compulsory.    Every effort   should, however, be made to induce patients  to go voluntarily to hospital and to lessen the aversion to hospital by the following means-(1) by encouraging the establish- ment of private and caste hospitals; (2) by locating hospitals near to infected quarters;  (3) by limiting the size of hospitals so that patients may receive more individual attention, and accommodation may be more readily made available for their immediate families and friends; (4) by arranging for the pro- vision  of  an adequate number of medical attendants and nurses  and   of  ample  and comfortable accommodation for patients; (5) by permitting at least two friends to be in attendance on each patient so that the patient may never be left alone; (6) by allowing the patients to have their own food and medicines and  to  receive  visits from  their  relations, friends and religious instructors; (7) by taking care  that all arrangements for observance of caste customs and for the comfort and convenience of patients  and  their attendants are completed before inviting admission to hospitals. 17.  Moribund patients should never be removed to hospital except at the express wish of the friends or relations of the patients.    The risk of leaving in his house a patient whose case is so serious that the medical officer thinks he has not a fair chance of recovery is not great since, as the existence of the case will have become known, there will be no difficulty
?38                             [Segregation. in carrying out measures of disinfection during the progress of sickness (if necessary), or after death. 18.  The pneumonic variety of plague being the most con- tagious, persons suffering from this type of the disease should not be removed to the general wards of plague hospitals, but should be isolated in separate wards of the greatest possible air space.    It is further advisable that such cases should not be treated in private houses, unless in the opinion of the medical officer,  the room occupied  by the patient is  suited for his complete isolation,  and proper control  over the number of attendants and enforcement of disinfection could be had. Segregation of Contacts. 19.  Persons who  have been  in immediate contact with plague patients are known as contacts.    By segregating them, persons who are likely to develop plague are isolated and cease to be a danger to other people; the plague-infected houses are emptied  for the process  of disinfection,   and the contacts themselves are protected from further risk of infection from those houses.    To render segregation effective, the following measures are necessary:- (1)  All contacts should be diligently searched for and be   detained  for  the   maximum period   of incubation,   and prevented from mixing with healthy people; (2)  Those in contact with each successive case of plague that occurs in the segregation camp must be similarly dealt with; (3)  All clothing must be effectually disinfected on entry into the camp and if plague cases have occurred in the camp since the date of entry, at the time of departure also; and (4) The staff employed must be very strong  relatively to the number of cases that occur and must be trustworthy. 20.  These measures are not always practicable  and  the Indian   Plague   Commission   are   of   opinion   that the facts investigated by them do not justify the conclusion that in an outbreak the contacts from a house in which a case of plague has occurred must be regarded from the point of view of the protection of the rest of the community as so dangerous that they  ought  to be  compulsorily removed  to a segregation camp.    The Government of India have accordingly ordered that the compulsory segregation of contacts should be aban- doned as ineffective and harassing except when dealing with imported cases or when the infection is confined to so small an. area that contacts can be accurately known and establish- ments can be provided sufficient to secure the detention of
Evacuation.]                          39 every contact. Where these conditions do not exist, it is better to subject the contacts to mere surveillance at their houses, as any attempt to segregate them will not only lead to the general concealment of cases but also tend to scatter the people and thus spread the infection to distant places. While under surveillance, the contacts may be allowed to pursue their daily avocations. 21.  An officer who, not being on leave, is unable to perform his official duties owing to a short period of segregation on account of plague may be treated as on duty on full pay.    In the  case,   however,   of  officers   who   are   segregated  while returning   from  leave  and  thus   overstay   their  leave,   the period of detention may be treated as duty on half-pay, if it is considered that some concession is required, but officers who are suffering from plague should be treated in accord- ance with the ordinary rules. 22.  Officers in charge of plague camps should give deten- tion certificates in the prescribed form [Appendix K] to all persons who were detained by them, on their discharge from the camps. Evacuation. 23.  By evacuation is meant the emptying of all or some of the houses in an infected town or village, with the idea that they should not  be occupied as dwelling houses until it is believed that they can again be occupied without risk of infec- tion,   the  people thus  removed being lodged in temporary camps in the open country.    To make it thoroughly effective, the following conditions are required:   (1) the people should all be got out promptly;   (2) their effects should all be dis- infected; (3) each now case should be immediately isolated; (4) suitable   accommodation    should   be   available;   (5)   the people should be effectually prevented from visiting, or sleep- ing in, the infected houses until either the houses shall have been disinfected or until sufficient  time shall have elapsed for the infection  to  disappear; (6)  and lastly they should not be permitted to scatter and spread the infection in the neighbourhood. 24.  Evacuation  provides   the   most   effective   safeguard against the spread of plague which has yet been discovered.   Its advantages are self-evident and it should be resorted to wher- ever practicable. In villages and small towns (population not exceeding 10,000) complete evacuation (i.e., evacuation of all the houses) will be found to be generally possible. In large towns, the extent to which it can be carried out will depend on the willingness of the people, the season of the year, the
?40                          [Inoculation. situation of the town, the facilities for providing camp accommodation, and the strength of the available staff. It will be found to be of the greatest value at the very com- mencement of the outbreak, for the removal of the small number of people affected will not present any great difficul- ties, and prompt evacuation of the infected quarter may save the rest of the town. 25.  Evacuation is, however, likely to do more harm than good in the following cases:- (a)  During the rainy season, when it is impossible to keep the people, after they have once been removed from their houses, from going back to them.    In such circum- stances, the evacuated people are exposed to great incon- venience   and  misery  without  deriving any   countervailing advantages from evacuation. (b)  When the infection is widely distributed among the inhabitants of a large place, it is then advisable to agitate the people  as little as possible,  especially  when there are among them a considerable number of artisans and traders who may lose their occupation by being removed from the town and are therefore likely to run away and infect other places. Inoculation. 26.  The exhaustive inquiries made by the Indian Plague Commission have established  the fact that inoculation with haffkinine lessens the liability to plague and greatly increases the chance of recovery from an attack of the disease, and disproved the statement that serious ill-consequences have resulted from such inoculation.    The maximum period for which protection is afforded by inoculation has  not yet been determined.    For practical purposes, it has been fixed, for the present, at six months, but it should be noted that inocu- lation does not confer any great degree of protection within the first few days.    Recently inoculated persons therefore incur risk of infection by remaining in infected places, 27.  Inoculation should be encouraged  wherever possible and in particular among disinfecting staffs and the attendants of plague hospitals.    In places which, either owing to their nearness to plague-infected places or to  their having pre- viously suffered from an attack of plague, appear to be specially threatened with a visitation of the disease, no effort should be spared to explain to the people the advantage of being inoculated before the disease is among them and to secure the co-operation of the more enlightened members of the
Inoculation.]                                        41 communities. At the same time, no compulsion of any sort, direct or indirect, should be used. An awkward attempt at persuasion is liable to create opposition, resistance, and occasionally, unfounded apprehension, and great circumspec- tion is necessary in introducing inoculation in places where there is no demand for it. The District Magistrate should be consulted before starting inoculation at any place and the people should be distinctly warned that inoculation is not by any means a certain prophylactic, but that it considerably reduces the chances of the inoculated getting plague, that an inoculated person when attacked has increased chances of recovery, and that the process, if properly conducted, is harmless. 28.  Only trained and reliable persons should be entrusted with  the actual   operation  of inoculation, and   supervision should be exercised over them to ensure that they use only sterilized implements.    To  remove any possible ground for distrust as to the conveyance of disease from one person  to another, the inoculation syringe should be sterilized  in the presence of the person about to be inoculated.    The steriliza- tion  should be  effected by immersion   in  carbolic acid,   or preferably carbolized oil kept hot by the flame of a spirit lamp underneath.    After a bottle has once been opened and only a portion of its contents used, the remainder should invariably be thrown away. 29.  Inoculated persons should be furnished with certifi- cates in the prescribed form [Appendix F].    The certificate should bear the left thumb mark of the person inoculated and should be issued immediately after one full dose has been given, but the recipient should be recommended to return for a second inoculation after ten days.    The full dose should always be given at one time, unless for medical reasons it is considered advisable to divide it.    If it is necessary to do this, a certificate should not be given until the equivalent of two   full  doses   has   been   given.    If,   however,   no   undue reaction ensues after the first fractional dose has been taken, it is advisable to give the full dose at once on the second occasion, after which a certificate may be given. 30.  The privileges attached to inoculation are mentioned in   regulation    51.    They   are  not  admissible  in   cases   of persons   who  have   recovered   from  plague.    As  a  further encouragement the Government   has   authorized   the   grant of three days' extra casual leave on full pay to all public servants   for   the purpose   of  being inoculated,    Students F
42                              [Disinfection. attending Government and aided schools, who undergo inocu- lation, will be marked in the registers for not more than three consecutive days as "under inoculation," and such an entry will be regarded as equivalent to attendance. No subsistence allowance can be granted to inoculated persons for the period during which they are incapacitated for work owing to the operation. 31.  The Sanitary Commissioner is in charge of all measures connected with inoculation and he will issue the necessary rules as to the conduct of the operation, supply of hafflcinine and inoculation syringes, &c.    He should submit to Govern- ment a weekly return showing the progress of inoculation in the presidency. Disinfection. 32.   Chemical disinfection ought to be resorted to wherever possible.    Of all measures of disinfection, it is the only one which,  when  effectively   carried  out,   immediately  destroys the infective material present in a room and renders the room at  once practically  safe for re-occupation.    It is, however, essential that it should be  carried out by a trained agency, and experience shows that where such an agency cannot be employed, it is better to rely  on  gradual desiccation rather than   on   a   process   of   disinfection   which   is  likely   to  be incomplete and ineffective.    Imperfect  disinfection involves waste of energy and material, brings discredit on   the system by  exhibiting unsuccessful  results,  and engenders a false sense of security with regard to localities which have been incompletely disinfected  and still contain the living germs of plague. 33.  According to present knowledge, perchloride of mer- cury is the most effective chemical disinfectant.    It should be used in a strength of 1 in  1,000, to which 2 per 1,000 of hydrochloric acid and a little aniline blue should be added. If the owners have no objection, interiors of plague-infected houses should, as a rule, be treated with Wilkinson's coloured solution which contains the perchloride in the strength stated above.    To ensure that the chemical is free from impurities, it should be obtained from the Madras Medical Store depot by submitting indents through the district medical and sanitary officer and the Surgeon-General.    The perchloride should be issued in the form of a concentrated solution in acid and clear instructions should be forwarded with each consignment as to the amount of water to be added.    With a view to securing that the dilutions prescribed should be the solutions in which the disinfectant shall actually be employed, the capacity of
?Disinfection.] 43 the vessels used for measuring out the concentrated solution shall be accurately adjusted to that of the wooden buckets in which that solution is diluted for use. Further the buckets employed should be of such capacity as to hold just the quantity of water sufficient to dilute the measure of concen- trated solution to the desired effect. The perchloride may also be issued in the solid form in packets, the contents of which are accurately adjusted to the size of the vessels in which they are to be dissolved for use. 34.  Steam-sterilisers, unless their working is committed to skilled and trustworthy operators, are found in practice to be quite ineffective, and are therefore not suitable for general application.    Their use is limited to ports for the disinfection of the effects  of  native   crews and native ship passengers bound for ports out of India.    Full instructions as to the mode of working them should be supplied with each machine. 35.  In cases, where it is not possible to carry out chemical disinfection,   the   disinfecting   agency  of desiccation  should be relied upon.    For  this  purpose, the  house  ought to be thoroughly cleaned out; the  removal  from   the   house   of cowdung and other moist accumulations should be particularly insisted upon, and the inmates of the house should be induced to remain away for a period of at least two  months until the process of  desiccation is complete.    Disinfection by desicca- tion cannot, however, be relied upon during the rains. 36.  The breaking of holes in the roof or walls and the partial untiling will not accelerate the process of desiccation to such a degree as to counterbalance the damage done to the house.    This  measure should not therefore be adopted in the case of masonry houses  with   concrete roofs.    As a rule, such houses can be disinfected without great difficulty and  are   to   a   certain extent open  to light and air.    But in rural  areas,  where the majority of the buildings are of a comparatively poor character it will rarely be   possible   to provide for efficient chemical disinfection.    The   removal of portions of the roof of such huts can be done with no structural injury to the huts and at small cost and is permitted. 37.  Owing to the risk of infection from the blowing about of the floor dust and owing to the fact that it is practically impossible to secure that the whole material shall be carried away, the digging up of floors  with a view to kiln burning them ought not to be resorted to. 38. The actual  burning down of houses should not be resorted to except in the case of temporary structures which
?44 [Disinfection.  are of little or no value or in the case of houses which are unfit for human habitation. 39. With a view to encourage people to produce their goods for disinfection and to prevent them from secreting them, nothing which could by any possibility have any value for its owner should be broken up or destroyed by fire. Liberal compensation should be promptly paid for any articles that may be necessary to destroy, when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circumstances to whom it would be a great hardship to bear it. 40. Disinfection of personal effects should not be attempted in the case of travellers by road or railway but should be carried out in the case of- (a)  native  crews, third class or deck passengers and native servants leaving infected or healthy ports for ports out of India. This should be done on shore; (b)  plague    patients    and     contacts     removed   from infected houses, ships or railway carriages; (c)  plague   patients    discharged   from   hospitals   and persons returning to their houses from health or suspect camps. 41.  That the disinfection of the  person   is  effective  is indubitable  as   is proved by   the practice   of washing   the hands with disinfectants in bacteriological laboratories and in surgical operations.    The measure, however, is extremely unpopular, and  has   been ordered to be abandoned   in  the case of travellers as very little is to be gained by disinfect- ing them.    It  will be found useful in the case of persons taken out from plague-infected houses into health camps and in the case of plague convalescents leaving hospital. 42.  Laboratory    experiments   and   practical   experience alike tend to show that little danger is to be apprehended by the spread of plague by ordinary articles of merchandise, and it is neither advisable nor necessary to take any steps towards their disinfection.    The only restriction found neces- sary is the prohibition against the importation from infected localities of rags, waste paper and soiled linen which cannot be classed with ordinary merchandise inasmuch as they are very   likely   to  carry    infection.    Any   articles  brought in contravention of this prohibition should be destroyed.    Old newspapers in bales and paper (whether newspapers or not)
?House-searches.] 45 used for packing purposes are not included within the prohi- bition, but washed linen articles which, such as washed dhotis, are considered possibly dangerous, might, when they come to notice, not' unreasonably be held to come under the prohibition expressed in the term "soiled," although they have not been worn since they were last washed. Persons who send parcels by railway or post from plague-infected areas are required to declare in writing that the parcels do not contain any soiled linen and bedding, rags or waste paper. 43. Detailed instructions as to the mode of disinfection to be adopted in each case will be issued by the Sanitary Commissioner and, in respect to the management of hospitals, by the Surgeon-General. House-searches. 44. The system of house-visitation and house-search will be permitted only- (a) when plague exists in small and well defined areas, such for instance as an isolated quarter or ward of a town, or a single village in a neighbourhood which is otherwise completely free from infection; and (b) it is clear that it will be effectual in saving the people from disaster. When this mode of  discovering plague is  adopted, care should be taken that a sufficient number of European officers are employed to render the powers of search effective and at the  same time prevent the subordinate establishments from abusing their authority.    Failing officers of the civil establish- ments, young officers of the Staff Corps should be deputed for this duty.    Respectable inhabitants who volunteer for the service should be employed to assist in searching for concealed cases of plague; as far as possible houses should be allowed to be entered only by persons of caste or of the same religion as the occupants; and subject to the same limitation, women should be utilized in examining women and in searching any room or place exclusively occupied by them. Inspection and Burial of Corpses. 45. Regulation 30 deals with the mode of disposal of plague corpses. It in no way interferes with the religions customs of the people, but merely authorises the local
?46 [Corpse Inspection. authorities to insist on certain necessary precautions as to the routes to be taken by funeral processions and as to the place and manner of burial. Any rules which the Collectors may find necessary to frame under clause 1 (b) of this regulation should provide that when the burial of a person who has died of plague takes place in proximity to habit- ations or sources of water-supply, the corpse shall be buried six feet deep. By clause (3) it is not intended that public undertakers should alone touch the corpses. The dead may be dressed for the grave by their own relations or in whatever manner may be customary among the class to which the deceased belonged. 46. Under the first clause of regulation 28 the Collector may require in respect of any particular area that the certifi- cate of a medical officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death. But it must be understood that medical examination of a corpse is entirely optional on the part of the relations, and that no one will be compelled to allow the inspection of the corpse of a deceased relative. In the event, however, of a certificate not being produced or inspection invited, it may be presumed that any death, the cause of which cannot be determined not to be plague, has been caused by plague and the rules regarding the segregation of the contacts and the disinfec- tion of the house may be enforced. The examination of the corpses of women by men should never be required. The orders of the Government should be obtained before this regulation is acted upon in any area, and in applying for sanction, the Collector should report fully on the following points:- (1)   What classes of officers will be authorized to issue certificates under the regulation. (2)  Whether any fee will be  required for the grant of this certificate. (3)  Whether there is  such  a number of Government medical officers, male and female,  at the  station as will be sufficient to carry out inspection promptly so as not to cause any delay in burials. (4)  Whether there has been any increase in the rate of mortality. (5)  Whether there is any reason to believe that deaths are  concealed  or  that  causes   of death  are  not   correctly reported.
?47 Plague Hospitals and Camps. 47.  The Government will, whenever necessary, construct either itself or through local bodies temporary segregation and health camps and plague hospitals and will also by grants of money help private persons or bodies to  construct them on sites shown to them or selected by them and  approved by the authorities.    It is also prepared to place both public and private plague hospitals and camps in charge of native practi- tioners so far as the public  can find suitable  men who will undertake the responsibilities and can be trusted to carry out the prescribed rules.    The hospitals and camps will, however, be under the general supervision of Government officials, but these officials  will have nothing to do with the   treatment of the sick except  at their request, and their   duties will be confined to preserving order, preventing theft and keeping guard,   and attending  to  sanitation.    Detailed instructions with regard to the construction, equipment and management of plague camps will be issued by the Sanitary Commissioner and of plague hospitals, by the Surgeon-General. 48.  The Government has sanctioned the following rates of  contribution towards the   cost   of the  construction   and maintenance of private plague hospitals and segregation camps in places which are or may be threatened with plague:- (a) For construction, half the cost will be paid by Government provided the charges are considered reasonable. In any case of doubt or dispute the Government will have the right to estimate by means of the Public Works depart- ment the value of the work done. The buildings shall be erected on sites approved by the sanitary authorities. (b) For maintenance, grants not exceeding half the actual expenses will be sanctioned by Government on the following conditions:- (1)  The arrangements  for the sanitation and supply of   food   must   meet  with  the  approval  of the local medical officers  and the   Collector (2)  The amounts will be paid,  month by month, in arrears to the manager or managers approved by the Collector    .  .  . These grants will be met from provincial funds. The sale-proceeds of private hospitals to which Govern- ment has made a contribution should be equally divided between Government and the plague committee concerned.
?48 [Surveillance. 49.  In agricultural villages, district boards  may find it cheaper to give poor people  grants  not  exceeding   Rs. 3 a household and let them make their own arrangements than to build sheds for them.    Such advances should be kept at as low a figure as possible, and should be granted as a rule only to those who are otherwise unable to furnish themselves with shelter. 50.  It may become necessary at any moment for Collectors or other plague authorities to occupy buildings belonging to other departments than the Revenue department, for plague purposes.    In such cases the   earliest  possible intimation of such occupation should be given to the authorities in charge of  such buildings.    Before occupying  them,   any moveable articles in  the  building   at  all   likely  to   retain    infection should be  first carefully removed and placed   under proper custody. Surveillance or Passport Rules. 51.  Regulation   1.-Copies of this regulation should be hung up at railway stations.    The regulation  does not apply to passengers from a non-infected area, who pass through an infected station without breaking journey at that station. 51-A. Under this regulation, the Government or the Collector of a district may declare any place to be infected with plague. As a rule only the places actually infected with plague should be declared as such. The execution of precautions against the spread of plague is rendered more difficult when they are directed against an unnecessarily wide area. 52.  Passport-issuing officers should not suppose that they have merely to issue passports to those who come and apply for them.    The main object of declaring persons from in- fected parts to be bound to take out passports is to punish cases of wilful evasion of the rules, and it was never the in- tention to relieve the passport-issuing officers of their duty of tracing out  such passengers and not allowing them to  go away without passports.    Passengers who fail to take out passports   should   be  prosecuted  at  the   discretion  of  the Collector,  but  whether  prosecuted  or  not,   they must be required to present themselves for inspection for ten days as soon as their arrival has been detected. 53.  Passport-issuing officers should note that every person who holds   a   ticket  marked in   the manner    indicated in rule 82   should be given a passport.    To ensure that none escapes taking a passport, the passport-issuing officer should question passengers where they  come from, in cases where
Surveillance.] 49 they do not hold specially marked tickets. In cases where a passport has been wrongly issued owing to erroneous plague- marking of the railway ticket, or otherwise, . . . the municipal chairman or any revenue officer not below the grade of deputy tahsildar . . . is authorized to cancel the passport on satisfactory proof that it was wrongly issued. 54. It is the duty of railway authorities assisted by the platform police to see that passengers alighting at a railway station do not leave the premises except by the proper exit, and to afford every facility for the working of the plague regulations.     Ticket  collectors should be  required to stop    all passengers holding tickets issued at infected or notified stations until their names and addresses are taken down, and passports issued to them either by the plague official appointed for the purpose, or at smaller stations, by the station staff. 55. Arrangements should  be made to have all arrivals at large towns like Salem, Trichinopoly, Madura, not only examined by a medical subordinate at the railway platform, but also similarly inspected daily for ten days afterwards.    The Collectors concerned must see that this is done, and should not leave the matter wholly into the hands of municipal chairmen. At stations where medical subordinates are not available for the duty of watching arrivals, granting them passports and inspecting them for ten days, the work should be entrusted to stationmasters or competent persons already in the employ of Government, and if they are found neglecting their duty, they should be prosecuted.    Collectors are requested to check their action carefully from time to time. 56.  When a large body of troops or police or coolies engaged in plague operations are returning to a healthy district, previous intimation of their departure should be given to the local authorities of the place of destination.    Before starting, they should be carefully examined and disinfected, and on arrival at their destination, they should be given passports according to the rules.    With regard to troops  and  their families   and  followers leaving  infected  areas,  the  orders issued by the military authorities require (a) that they should be inspected and disinfected before departure, (b) that they should also be disinfected on arrival at their military stations, and (c) that where possible regimental arrangements should be made to house them separately for from ten to twelve days. 57.  In  the case  of  persons  from  a plague-infected or notified place who regularly attend markets and stay in the village only for a few hours a permanent pass in the form G
?50 [Surveillance. appended [Appendix D] to regulation 31 should be issued. The local authority of the village at or near which the market is held, the passport-issuing officer at the railway station at which the pass-holders usually alight and the officer in charge of the inspection station through which the pass-holders usually pass should be informed from time to time of the names and other particulars of the persons to whom the passes are granted. These officers will enter the names in a register in the form appended [Appendix G], and affix their initials and the date of presentation on the reverse of the passes on being presented by the holders. 58. As long as the disease is confined to narrow limits, an infected place must be regarded as requiring as much protection as any other place against fresh importations of infection, and all persons who may come from a second centre of contamination, or from a railway station which in conse- quence. of its proximity to such a second centre has been notified by the Local Government, should be furnished with passports and be kept under surveillance. But a person who comes to an infected place from a railway station which has been notified in consequence of its proximity to that place does not require a passport. On the other hand, a person who proceeds to such a railway station from the place which is infected must take out a passport though if he returns to the infected place within ten days the passport may be given up on his return and further inspection is unnecessary. 59. With a view to facilitate the working of the passport rules, railway employs holding periodical railway passes and Government officials holding standing passes should be required to provide themselves before departure with certifi- cates signed by the stationmasters concerned showing the places from which they start. 60. The extent to which the passport rules may be relaxed and the classes of persons in respect to whom the relaxation may be made by Collectors . . . are indicated in the note of the Plague Commissioner appended to his Proceedings, No. 16, dated 5th January 1899, and printed as Appendix H. 60-A. The passport rules should be worked in such a manner as to cause the minimum of inconvenience to gosha women, and persons belonging to that class should, whenever it is possible to do so, be exempted from attendance on the local authority at the hospital or elsewhere and be inspected at their own houses. The examination of gosha women
?Surveillance.] 51 should always be conducted by females, who, when not trained or duly qualified, should work under the instructions of the local medical officer. 61. Regulation 1 (3) (c).-The Collector should settle with the railway authorities of each district at which stations the railway staff shall be required to perform the duties connected with the issue of passports, and at which stations the Collector should make other arrangements. Station- masters requiring forms or service postage stamps should apply to the Collectors concerned, and should use the following designation in franking covers containing corre- spondence connected with their passport work-"Station- master and Honorary Plague Passport issuing officer." 62. Regulation 1 (5) (ii) (b).-The intimation should- contain the following particulars:- Passport number, date and station of issue. Passenger's name and his father's name. How long observed and where. New place of residence-District, taluq, village, street, and number or name of the house. The forms should be printed at the District Presses. 63. Regulation 1 (9) does not require the maintenance of a register. The information referred to therein should be recorded in duplicate with the aid of carbon paper, a separate slip of paper being used for each passenger, except in the case of the members of a family proceeding to the same destination, when their names may be entered in one slip. One set of copies should be forwarded at once to the respective destinations and the other kept for reference at the inspection station. No such intimation is necessary in the case of persons exempted from the passport rules under rule 60 of this chapter, as the officers to whom they are immediately subordinate are responsible for their observation; but it should be forwarded in the case of inoculated persons from infected areas who hold valid certificates as they are liable to be observed at their own houses. The intimation forms will be supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press, to Collectors on indent. 64. If the guards of the trains and other railway subordi- nates do not carry out the instructions given to them with regard to the transmission of the names and addresses of passengers, there should be no hesitation to prosecute them under the Epidemic Diseases Act. 65. Regulation 1 (9), (10).-The object of sending inti- mation of arrivals from infected parts to the district medical
?52 [Railway Inspection. and sanitary officer is not merely to inform that officer of the movements of such persons, but to make him responsible that the passport-issuing officers, the local authorities, and the tahsildars respectively carry out their duties under the passport rules. He should maintain a register of all intima- tions received by him and should see that all persons mentioned therein are duly accounted for. 66. Regulation 1 (10).-The form in which the informa- tion referred to should be recorded is prescribed in G.O., No. 1074-P., dated 15th September 1898 and is printed as Appendix I. Copies of the form are supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press. 67. Regulation 1 (11).-The tahsildar should file together the reports received from the district medical and sanitary officer (or Collector). No separate register need be maintained by him. As soon as a passport is recovered from the traveller under clause (6), it should be forwarded without delay to the district medical and sanitary officer after the number of the item in the report has been noted on it and after the fact that the passport has been recovered has been noted against the corresponding entry in the report. 68. Regulation 2.-This regulation should be strictly carried out throughout the presidency as a check on the working of regulation 1 and prosecution should be resorted to in places where the duty of reporting arrivals from plague-infected parts is neglected in spite of repeated warn- ings. If in any municipal town the existing sanitary staff is unequal to the task of properly carrying out the system of observation, it should be strengthened. Railway Inspection. 69. Regulation 3.-All inspecting officers, male and female, at railway inspection stations, and clerks employed at important stations, such as Jalarpet . . . should always carry with them a note-book of a special conspicuous colour with the words "Government of Madras Plague officials' note-book" printed on the back. A copy of the appointment order should be attached to the note-book. Copies of the book may be obtained from the Superintendent, Government Press, through the Surgeon-General. 70. Railway Administrations are requested to instruct their staff to give every assistance to the medical officers conduct- ing the inspection in order to minimise the detention of the trains, and to detain the trains until the medical inspection is over. Railway ticket collectors may be allowed to accom-
?Railway Inspection.] 53 pany the plague inspecting officers, if this course is found to economize time. The table appended [Appendix J] shows the time within which medical officers are required to conduct plague inspection. 71. All passengers should be required to quit their carriages and be examined on the platform or in some suitable place, cases of suspicion being removed for more careful investi- gation to a place reserved for the purpose. Care must be taken that the carriages are locked before the arrival of the train at the inspection station, and that no passenger is permitted to leave his carriage until in orderly course the arrangement shall be complete for such examination. 72. The inspecting officers should not only thoroughly examine passengers and passenger vehicles, but also inspect guards, drivers and firemen and their vans and engines, so that no person may escape inspection. No distinction should be made between railway people and others, and before any train, whether carrying passengers or goods, leaves the in- spection station, a thorough search should be made to discover if any persons have concealed themselves with the object of evading inspection. Every endeavour should be made to complete the inspection of trains within the time mentioned in Appendix J. If, on special occasions, the time is exceeded, a report explaining fully the delay should be immediately sent to the Collector for his information and for such action as he may think necessary. 73. In the absence of any symptoms showing a passenger to be suffering from fever, it is unnecessary to examine his person for the purpose of finding out whether buboes are present. This practice, if it is at present enforced anywhere, should be discontinued. 74. Female passengers should, under no circumstances, be required to be examined by men. For their inspection, one or more nurses are attached to each inspection station. 75. Care should be taken that inspection stations are not converted into detention camps. Any attempt at wholesale detention will only result in the development of effective modes of evasion. Unless a passenger shows symptoms of plague or cannot be trusted to observe the passport rules, he should not be interfered with. This rule applies also to road frontier inspection stations. 76. If a detained person has plague when removed from the train, all who have travelled with him in the same compartment are "contacts" and must also be detained unless they have been inoculated. But if he is detained
?54 [Railway Inspection, merely because he is likely to evade the rules, then there is no need to detain those who have travelled with him. 77. To enable detained persons to resume their railway journey after their discharge from the plague camp, the plague officer should give them certificates in the form appended [Appendix K]. The passengers should take the certificates to the Station- master and get them endorsed by him. 78. A return of persons detained for observation at the camps attached to railway inspection stations should be submitted by Collectors to Government in the form appended [Appendix L] once in four weeks. Each week's figures should, however, be shown separately in the statement. 79. The inspecting medical officer, Jalarpet, should send telegraphic intimation to the medical officer of the Ceylon Gov- ernment at Tuticorin when passengers pass from Bangalore to Tuticorin. The cost of these telegrams will be recovered from the Ceylon Government by the Accountant-General. 80. Any expenditure incurred in providing inspection sheds on railway platforms in cases where there are no proper facilities in the railway station for the examination of pass- engers in accordance with the plague regulations or in the supply of punches or scissors for marking railway tickets should be borne by the civil department and not by the railway administrations. 81. Persons sending horses from plague-infected areas by rail through Tungabhadra, and Jalarpet railway plague inspection stations should be informed that the syces accompanying the animals are liable to be detained at the inspection stations for a period of ten days under the plague regulations, and should be requested to arrange for a second syce from a non-infected area being present at the inspection station, through which an animal belonging to them has to pass, to relieve the man coming from the infected area. If such an arrangement is not made, both the animal and the syce will be liable to be detained and the owner will be required to pay 8 annas a day for stabling besides the keep of the horse during the period of detention, unless the syce brings with him sufficient provender. 82. The mark used at inspection stations is a hole four- tenths of an inch square punched in the long side of railway tickets. It should be made only on the tickets of those pass- engers who come, or are suspected to come, from plague infected areas or from places notified by Government for the purposes of the passport rules. The special mark should be
?Railway Inspection.] 55 made at the first inspection station at which the passenger arrives. It is not necessary to punch his ticket again at any subsequent inspection station through which he may pass, but he must be medically examined nevertheless. Tickets of persons who come from an uninfected area, or who, though coming from an infected area, have been detained for ten days at one of the observation camps established in the Madras presidency, need not be so marked. 83. Care should be taken that the plague punches are not used except by responsible persons and that they are kept in safe custody when not in use. The officers in charge of railway inspection stations will be held responsible for the safe custody of the plague punches, and under their orders the punches may be used by their assistants, but not under any circumstances by the police. The wrong punching of tickets should be specially guarded against, as the annoyance caused thereby and the consequent liability to take out a passport is very great. 84. Passengers who attempt to evade the plague mark by re-booking should be watched. If they break their journey for a considerable period, the passport rules should be applied to them. If they alight for a few hours with the intention of proceeding by a subsequent train, the right-hand lower corner of their new tickets should be clipped with scissors. If this course be adopted, it will be unnecessary to communicate their names and addresses to the new places of destination by telegraph or otherwise. The railway administrations have been authorised to supply stationmasters with scissors and bill the Collectors concerned for their cost, which should be met from local or municipal funds. 84-A. The discretionary power vested in the inspecting medical officer under clause (6) shall be exercised only under the most exceptional circumstances, when it may appear to be necessary for the effective carrying out of the plague regulations and to prevent the evasion of the passport rules  by persons from infected areas. 85. Collectors are requested to keep the cost of inspection stations as low as possible, and to satisfy themselves by frequent personal inspection that they are worked in strict accordance with rules. 86. Regulations 4 and 5.-The special attention of the railway authorities should be drawn to the necessity for the careful working of these regulations. If they are properly worked, there can hardly be any cases where passengers will break journey and escape observation altogether:
?56 [Festivals. Fairs, Festivals and Pilgrimages. 86-A. When a festival or fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from plague-infected parts is about to take place in an uninfected area, the Collector may apply to Government for orders to prohibit their attendance and to enforce the prohibition by stopping tem- porarily the issue of railway tickets to such persons or by other means. A similar course should be adopted when a festival or fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from healthy parts is about to take place in a plague-infected area. 87. Proposals submitted under the preceding rule should be forwarded through the Sanitary Commissioner so as to reach Government a month and-a-half previous to the holding of the fairs and festivals. Proposals submitted at later dates do not allow proper measures being taken to enforce them. In view to avoid delay in their submission, Collectors should prepare in their office every month a list of all the fairs and festivals to take place in the ensuing three months, and should send by the 15th of each month their recommendations relating to religious and other gatherings to be held in the next month but one. 88. The Collector's reports should be invariably accom- panied by draft notifications under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and by a statement in the form appended [Appendix M]. Skeleton notifications are printed as Ap- pendix N. 89. As stationmasters and booking clerks are not likely to find out in the case of small fairs and festivals whether the purchasers of railway tickets are going as pilgrims or not, the prohibition of the issue of tickets in such cases does not work satisfactorily and need not be recommended. As, how- ever, pilgrims to large fairs and festivals can perhaps be recognized, and it is of considerable importance to reduce the number of visitors to these festivals, the issue of tickets in their case may continue to be prohibited. It is left to the discretion of Collectors to decide which of the fairs and festi- vals are small and which large. In the case of unimportant local festivals, a careful working of the passport rules should suffice. Notice of the prohibition of the issue of railway tickets should be given to the railway authorities at least a week previous to the date of commencement of the prohibition. 90. Where pilgrimage to a fair or festival has been pro- hibited by Government, the Collector should, as far as the means at his disposal permit, watch all the roads round the
?Rat killing.] 57 village or town and prevent pilgrims from entering the place. Persons who are suspected to have come from infected parts should be watched for ten days, and, if not suffering from fever or any suspicious complaint at the end of that period, should be allowed to proceed on their journey. It must be distinctly understood that the prohibition is not in any way intended to interfere with the performance of the usual religious ceremonies at the temple, and that its only object is to prevent the assemblage of persons who might import or spread the plague. 91. A special establishment to carry out the measures prescribed in the foregoing rule is not ordinarily required. As far as practicable they should be carried out with the aid of the existing district establishment. If in any special case extra establishment is needed, a separate recommendation should be made when suggesting the imposition of restric- tions on the holding of the festival or fair. It is not necessary for the purpose of these measures to build costly structures at each place where a festival or fair is held. It will suffice if the Collector has in stock materials for one or two sheds, which may be utilized if required, but if not, may either be sold or carted to another place where they may be required after the close of the festival. 92. As regards pilgrimage to the Hedjaz, the Government of India annually issue orders either prohibiting it altogether or allowing it under certain conditions from uninfected parts only. In the latter case, the intending pilgrims are collected at convenient observation camps, they are not allowed to purchase passage tickets to the Hedjaz except at those observation camps, and after they have been detained for the prescribed period and certified to be free from infection, they are sent in special trains or carriages to the selected ports for embarkation. Pilgrims returning from the Hedjaz in healthy vessels are, after disinfection of their clothing and baggage, sent at once to their destination without being allowed to mix with the population of the port of landing. Those returning in a plague-infected vessel are subjected to ten days' observation in a camp before being sent to their homes. The authorities of the port of landing are required to send nominal rolls of the pilgrims to the Collectors concerned, and to give previous intimation of their departure, in order that they may be watched for a few days after arrival at their destination. Destruction of Rats. 93. Regulation 10.-There is a general belief, supported by medical opinion, that rats are peculiarly suseeptible to the H
?58 [Rat killing. infection of the bubonic plague and are active agents in its dissemination. Granaries are the favourite haunts of rats, and grain bags arriving from any place suspected to be affected by the plague should be very carefully examined, and any rats found with them at once destroyed and their bodies consumed by fire. Infection once brought into a granary spreads rapidly among the healthy rats, and thence in time to human beings living in the neighbourhood. The attention of all Collectors, presidents of district boards, chairmen of municipal councils, . . . is therefore drawn to the necessity of taking special precautions to prevent the danger of infection from this source. Arrangements should be made for the constant inspection of granaries and grain bazaars and care taken to keep them clean and disinfected and to have the rats destroyed. In inspecting these granaries particular inquiries should be made whether any dead or sick rats have been observed. Rats sick with the plague seem careless in the presence of men and run about in a dazed way with a peculiar limping gait in the hind legs owing to painful glands in the groin. The port and sea customs authorities should be instructed to see that no rats are landed with goods imported by sea into this presidency, and that rats found in ships are destroyed forthwith. 94. The Traffic Manager, South Indian Railway, has issued the following circular to his subordinates:-"Station- masters and their staff should carefully inspect consignments of grain from plague-infected areas to see that any rats that may arrive concealed in the grain are destroyed; should also destroy bandicoots, rats and nice where grain is deposited on railway premises in case they may have eaten of the grain and so become infected. This vermin should be tracked and exterminated by all possible methods, the dead bodies being consumed by fire at once. Stationmasters and others of the staff concerned with these instructions should make a special report to this office, if they destroy 20 or more of these rodents in any one week, and if a rat trap is wanted they should send an indent for one." Other Railway Adminis- trations have been requested to issue similar instructions to their staff. Collectors should satisfy themselves that these instructions are actually carried out. 95. It has been ruled that ordinarily the destruction of rats should be confined to- (a) infected places and the surrounding area within a radius of ten miles round it;
?Reports and Returns.] 59 (b) landing places and railway goods-sheds, where rats from infected places are likely to be imported with goods brought by sea or railway. In the case of (a), rewards may be necessary but the maximum rate should not exceed three pies. In other cases, the port or railway authorities are expected to do all that is required without the reward system. 96. The charges incurred in the destruction of rats should be debited to local or municipal funds according to the area within which such charges are incurred. Plague Reports and Returns. 97. When a case of plague, genuine or suspected, is first discovered in any place, the Collector or any gazetted officer, who may be at the head-quarter station of the district, should immediately telegraph the fact to the Secretary to Govern- ment, Local and Municipal department, to the Sanitary Commissioner and to the Surgeon-General, stating how the case was discovered, whether it was indigenous or imported, and in the latter case, whence it was imported, and such further particulars with dates as may be thought necessary. Cases of plague among 'contacts' who have not within a fortnight been in an infected place should be treated as indigenous and not imported. Further details should be furnished by post as early as practicable, if possible within 48 hours. This report should be in the form prescribed in Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 845, dated 5th December 1898, and printed as Appendix 0, and need be sent only to Government and the Sanitary Commissioner. A separate report should be furnished for each imported case unless the persons attacked belong to the same party, but where plague is indigenous, it is sufficient if the officer in charge of operations sends direct to Government a brief weekly report stating the number of attacks and deaths, the measures taken and the success they meet with, the attitude of the people, the method of infection (e.g., by air, imperfectly dried dust, infected soil and habitations, articles of apparel, merchandise and domestic use, by medium of rats, mice, squirrels, cats and infected water and food) and any other matters of interest. This report should contain the latest information available on Thursday, and should be despatched direct to reach Government not later than Saturday morning. 98. All attacks and deaths should be telegraphed daily by Collectors to Government, the Sanitary Commissioner and
?60 [Reports and Returns. the Surgeon-General in the form communicated with Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 357, dated 8th February 1899. Nil telegrams are not required. All Collectors should also send daily telegraphic reports of plague to the medical officer of the Ceylon Government stationed at Tuticorin whenever plague cases occur in their districts. The cost of these telegrams and of similar telegrams sent by Government will be debited to the Ceylon Government by the Accountant- General. 99. The following reports and returns are sent by the Government of Madras to the Government of India:- (a) An ordinary telegram every Monday showing separately the number of seizures and deaths from plague during the week ending with the previous Saturday (i) in the presidency town, (ii) in towns of 50,000 or more inhabitants, (iii) in the rest of the district, and (iv) in all ports of the presidency. (b) . . . (c) Special telegraphic reports whenever plague extends to any new district or important place. (d) A monthly return showing daily plague seizures and deaths in each district during the previous month, to be despatched with a brief narrative of any events of importance in connection with plague, so as to reach the Government of India not later than the 7th of each month. (e) A special report by letter when a district or town of over 50,000 inhabitants previously included in the weekly returns is considered or declared to be entirely free from plague. Copies of this report are circulated to all Local Governments and Administrations and all Political officers. To enable the Local Government to prepare the monthly narrative required by the Government of India, the Collectors of districts affected with indigenous plague are requested to forward every month a report, written by themselves, (1) stating whether plague is increasing or decreasing in their districts, and (2) containing brief notes as to the measures taken to suppress the disease and the degree of success attained, the temper of the people, the readiness with which they permit segregation of the sick and contacts, or with which they evacuate houses of their own accord, whether they accept treatment or desire inoculation, what steps they are taking to help themselves and any other matters of interest.
?Reports and Returns.] 61 This report should reach Government not later than the 27th of the month to which it relates. Whenever a place previ- ously included in the list of infected areas is considered to be entirely free from plague, the Collectors concerned should submit a special report to Government so that it may be excluded from the list. 100. Each Collector should keep in his office a plague record, to which officers on plague duty in his district should be requested to contribute brief notes on any matter they may consider of importance in perfecting measures against the disease, or desirable of being placed on record with a view to adding force to theories already assented to, or controverting them from (1) an administrative, (2) medical, and (3) sanitary point of view. Weekly extracts from this record of the portion bearing on sanitation should be sent to the Sanitary Commissioner. 100-A. In the event of recrudescence of plague in towns or villages which have been free from the disease for any length of time, particular efforts should be made by the local authorities to ascertain whether any definite facts bearing on the probable cause or source of re-infection are available, and a special report should be submitted by the Collector to Government through the Sanitary Commissioner. Informa- tion sufficiently reliable and relevant to be of value will be communicated to the Government of India. 101. In Mysore, the amildars and deputy amildars in charge of taluqs and sub-taluqs bordering on the British districts are required to give immediate information of the occurrence of plague within their jurisdiction direct to the tahsildars of the neighbouring British taluqs, and deputy commissioners have been requested to keep the Collectors of adjoining British districts promptly informed of the occurrence- of plague in the neighbouring districts in Mysore. Collectors of British districts bordering on Mysore should arrange to give similar information direct to the officials of the darbar. Similar arrangements are in force with regard to districts bordering on the Nizam's Dominions. A system of inter- communication among the Sanitary Commissioners of the various provinces has been sanctioned by the Government of India with regard to news about the progress of plague. Under this system, the appearance of plague should be telegraphed at once by the Sanitary Commissioner in whose area cases occur to the other Sanitary Commissioners on receipt of a report of a first case in taluqs and important towns.
?62 [Correspondence. Plague Correspondence. 102. All correspondence about plague should be addressed to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal depart- ment, and should be marked with the word 'Plague' in red ink on the outside covers and on the left-hand corner of the papers. Telegrams should be addressed to "Madras, Plague." All communications, except reports or returns on printed forms, should be forwarded with a docket sheet, copies of which are supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press. 103. All references regarding account matters should be addressed to, or forwarded through, the Accountant-General. 104. Plague correspondence should be entered in a separate current register, and the papers shown against a new item 'Plague' in the quarterly business returns. A separate series of numbers should be given to the disposals, and the question of destroying or retaining them settled in accordance with the mode indicated in Board's Proceedings, No. 101, dated 18th April 1898. As regards passports, however, they are of no use after the expiration of the ten days' period of observa- tion and may then be destroyed except in cases where they are required or likely to be required in connection with any prosecution or for any special purpose. In Appendix P is given a list of plague records with a note against each item as to when it may be destroyed. 105. Copies of printed Government orders relating to plague matters need not ordinarily be supplied to medical subordinates, sanitary inspectors or chairmen of unions, or to each member of a municipal council. Where necessary, district circulars should be issued to subordinate officers embodying the purport of the Government orders. Spare copies of Government orders are at present distributed in accordance with the statement printed as Appendix Q. 106. Copies of all important orders passed by the Govern- ment in regard to the prevention and suppression of plague will be supplied from the Government office to the Deputy Adjutant-General, Madras Command, and the General officers Commanding Districts, who should also be furnished by Collec- tors . . . with similar orders issued by themselves. 107. The Superintendent, Government Press, should supply all Collectors with the required number of copies of notifications of lists of plague-infected areas for circula- tion with District Gazettes. Vernacular translations of these notifications may be prepared and issued by the Collectors themselves.
?Regulations.] 63 Plague Regulations. 108. . . . 109. Collectors and presidents of district boards and chairmen of municipal councils should exercise prudence and care in working the regulations and obtain the best medical, sanitary or other advice before taking action. 110. The regulations apply to all alike without distinction of class or rank but should be enforced only against persons with regard to whom there are reasonable grounds of suspi- cion. Due notice will, be given by Government as soon as it is considered safe to relax any of the restrictions now imposed on trade and on the movement of passengers. Until then, they should be carefully observed. 111. In Cantonments, the military authorities are imme- diately responsible for carrying out the plague measures, and Collectors should delegate to them the necessary powers under the plague regulations. 112. By Command Order, No. 687, dated 18th November 1898, all ranks in the Madras Command are directed to obey the plague regulations, and any infringement of them is punishable as a military offence. Military pensioners have been warned (Superintendent's circular No. II, dated 14th December 1898) that any disobedience or wilful neglect of the regulations or obstruction to any official on plague duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required by Govern- ment as a condition of the continuation of their pensions, and that any pensioner being guilty thereof will be liable to have his pension stopped forthwith, and the same reduced or permanently withdrawn. 113. The plague regulations being orders promulgated, i.e., formally made and issued, by Government under the Epi- demic Diseases Act and not by any public servant, no sanction is required as a condition precedent to prosecution for disobey- ing them (Judgment of the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 551 of 1899).  114. If the Police are informed that a person is evading the plague regulations by giving a false name or a wrong address, they can act under section 57 of the Criminal Procedure Code, and detain the person until satisfied that they have got his true name and address. Failing information as to true name and address or the execution of a bond, the Police can forward the person to a Magistrate.
64      [Appointments & Allowances. Plague Appointments and Plague Allowances. 114-A. In municipalities or districts imminently threatened with an attack of plague, the Collector should make all arrangements for being able to concentrate imme- diately when desirable an ambulance staff together with such equipment as may be prescribed by Government from time to time. The ambulance staff may be constituted as follows: - Sanitary Section.  Medical Section. One certificated sanitary inspec- Two hospital assistants. tor.  One compounder. One dhoby.  One or more trained nurses. Two male toties.  Four male ward attendants. One female toti.  Three female ward attendants. Two dhooly bearers.  One dhoby. Disinfectors (any number up to 50 for a single section, to be re- cruited locally in the infected area, if sepoys be not employed).  Two cooks. When he sees fit, the Collector shall concentrate and hold in readiness either section or both sections of the ambulance staff. 114-B. The Collector may, with the sanction of Govern- ment, strengthen his own office and that of the district medical and sanitary officer by the employment of such temporary clerks as may be required. He may, at his discretion tem- porarily close any existing hospital or dispensary and transfer the whole staff to plague duty, and may also warn for such duty in communication with the heads of their respective departments as many police, salt and abkri, and revenue peons as can be spared. 115. All appointments on account of plague require the sanction of Government. In the case of appointments which are added to an existing establishment in consequence of extra work occasioned by plague, and the cost of which is under the standing orders debitable to the ordinary service heads, the application for sanction should be forwarded with the prescribed proposition statement through the head of the administrative department concerned. No proposition state- ments are necessary in the case of temporary appointments which are not additions to existing establishments and which have been created solely on account of plague. Appointments sanctioned without reference to limit of time require renewal of sanction every six months. 116. . . .
?Appointments & Allowances.] 65 117. Collectors . . . should prepare every month printed list of officers of all classes, including troops, employed on plague duty, in accordance with the instructions con- tained in Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 762, dated 22nd November 1898, No. 1047, dated 28th December 1898, and G.O., No. 1504-P., dated 17th October 1899, and No. 656, dated 7th March 1899. The Inspector-General of Police . . . should prepare similar lists of all police engaged in plague work, and the Surgeon-General should also submit a return showing all medical officers on plague duty and all temporary doctors obtained from England, with their stations, pay and allowances. The lists should be submitted not later than the 5th of each month and should be distributed as follows:- Three copies to the Chief Secretary to Government, Financial department. Four copies to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal department. Two copies to the Accountant-General. 118. The charge of plague operations in an infected district must be regarded as part of the general duty of an executive officer. No encouragement should be given to an impression that duty connected with the plague involves greater risks or is deserving of more favourable treatment than attendance in the infectious wards of a hospital or in a camp afflicted with cholera, which is accepted as part of the officer's ordinary duty. Save in exceptional cases no recommendation should be made for the grant of special salary, allowance or pension for plague duty. The Government of India has, however, authorised the grant of special allowances to medical officers for plague duty performed in addition to their ordinary work in cases where it is sufficiently arduous to deserve special remuneration. The Local Government may also sanction local allowances under article 187 of the Civil Service Regula- tions to officers of other classes provided their plague duty lies entirely outside the ordinary and legitimate duties of their offices. The Secretary of State has also sanctioned the grant of extraordinary pension to the families of police men who die of plague contracted in the execution of their duties in plague-stricken localities, provided such duties entail imminent risk from plague. 119. The special allowances given to certain classes of officers for plague duty and the salaries attached to special I
?66 [Budget and Accounts. temporary appointments created on account of the plague are given in Appendix R. All questions relating to the grant of such allowances should be referred for the orders of Government. Plague Expenditure and Accounts. 120. No expenditure in connection with plague establish- ments or for the carrying out of works shall be incurred without the previous sanction of Government. Collectors are, however, authorised to incur, subject to the existence of budget provision, expenditure on the following items in connection with plague preventive measures:- (1) Petty repairs to sheds. (2) Compensation for destruction of grain, clothes, roofs of houses, &c. (3) Entertainment of temporary servants on daily wages for short periods for disinfection purposes or for attendance upon stray plague cases in out-of-the-way places. (4) Purchase of fuel and tacks for disinfecting machines. 121. All Collectors, the Surgeon-General, the Inspector- General of Police, . . . and the Sanitary Commissioner are required to submit quarterly estimates of plague ex- penditure. These estimates should be forwarded direct to the Financial department so as to reach their destination not later than the 5th of the first month of each quarter. The estimate submitted by the Surgeon-General includes provision for all medical officers, nurses, &c., who have been sent out by the Secretary of State and are temporarily attached to hospitals, &c., in Madras prior to their being posted to duties in connection with plague work . . . 122. In order to enable Government to obtain an approxi- mately correct revised estimate of plague expenditure for inclusion in the preliminary edition of the civil budget estimate which is forwarded to the Government of India, the estimate for the third quarter shall be submitted so as to reach its destination on the 5th November instead of the 5th October and shall show (1) actual expenditure up to the 31st October, (2) estimate for November and December, (3) estimate for the last quarter of the official year, and (4) total.
?Budget and Accounts.] 67 estimate for the year. This estimate shall be accompanied by an estimate for the ensuing official year based on the conditions existing at the time of framing the estimate. This latter estimate need not provide for each quarter of the year separately. 123. The estimates shall cover all plague charges-direct and indirect-under provincial, local, municipal, and canton- ment . . . funds. Provision shall be made therein for requirements based on conditions existing at the time of framing the estimates. 124. Collectors, chairmen of municipal councils and other officers should see that plague expenditure is kept as near as possible to the latest plague estimates sanctioned by Gov- ernment. If they find that their estimates as passed by Government are inadequate, it is their duty to apply for extra grants at once. It should be clearly understood by all officers that expenditure can be incurred only against the quarterly allotments passed by Government, and that although it is not the intention that plague operations should cease, because it is found that the allotment is being exceeded in any quarter, the officer concerned will be held responsible for exercising proper supervision over the expenditure and applying at the earliest possible moment it becomes apparent that funds are becoming exhausted. In any case, therefore, where the expenditure is found to exceed the latest sanc- tioned estimate, the officer concerned should report the fact to Government and state if the amount also exceeds the provision made in the annual budget. Balances arising from the fact that the quarterly estimates do not utilize fully the allotments existing in their sanctioned annual budgets shall not be utilized for non-plague purposes. 125. Collectors can themselves effect transfer of funds from one detailed head to another under the same minor head, and subject to budget provision, they may also sanction all deviations and excesses in estimates previously sanctioned by Government up to a limit of 5 per cent. of the total amount of each estimate. In the case of urgent works and repairs costing Rs. 25 or less, estimates may be dispensed with pro- vided the bills are passed by the Collector, and the usual certificates are furnished by the officers responsible for the work being properly carried out. 126. Forms of the estimates will be printed and supplied by the Accountant-General. No changes shall be made in the
?68 [Budget and Accounts. form without the approval of the Financial department. The figures for each municipality shall be given separately. 127. Each municipality shall bear its own plague charges. As regards district boards, the measures adopted in frontier districts proper, i.e., those districts which adjoin plague- stricken areas outside the Madras presidency, while benefiting those districts themselves as being nearest the seat of infection, at the same time have the direct result of protecting other portions of the presidency as well. This condition is also fulfilled, in some measure, by districts in which railway inspection stations have been established by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette. Expenditure incurred by district boards in such districts on plague preventive measures is therefore distributed by Government in the ratios of one-third in frontier districts proper and of one-fourth in railway inspec- tion districts against the district in which the expenditure is incurred, the remaining two-thirds or three-fourths, as the case may be, being contributed by the other districts of the presidency rateably to their annual receipts as shown in their budget estimates for the year. The estimates shall, however, provide for the gross expenditure to be incurred by each district board, credit for the contribution being taken as subsequently advised by the Accountant-General. 128. If any district board or municipality finds its funds unequal to the burden of plague charges, it shall revise its budget by omitting all avoidable expenditure, and in the last resort may apply for an advance from provincial funds or for a loan from the Government of India. Care shall be taken that advances granted by Government to local bodies to meet plague expenditure are applied to the precise purposes for which the advances were made, and are not utilized to relieve their ordinary funds of expenditure on sanitary, medical and other objects. 128-A. The clothing specified in rule 9 will be supplied to the troops regimentally; and as soon as it has been issued, and the bill countersigned by the Collector . . . the military department will debit the cost to the civil depart- ment in the exchange account rendered by the Controller of Military Accounts to the Accountant-General, who will make the necessary adjustments and recover the amount from the local body concerned. 129. The Accountant-General shall submit monthly state- ments of charges-direct and indirect-under provincial and
?Budget and Accounts.] 69 local (audited) and under municipal, . . . and canton- ment funds, together with summaries under each head show- ing totals to date and the latest grants for each district. These statements shall also include all expenditure incurred in connection with the plague which has not been brought to book as direct or indirect, e.g., the emoluments of officers and establishments forming part of existing departments or ser- vices and not replaced by substitutes, but exclusively engaged on plague duties, and shall reach Government early in the month succeeding that in which the accounts are received by the Accountant-General. 130. The Appendix T shows the proper classification of charges commonly incurred in connection with plague: (i) "Direct" plague expenditure means expenditure exhibited in the Government accounts under the head 24-D. MEDICAL-Grants for Medical Purposes-Expenses in connec- tion with Bubonic Plague. "Indirect" plague expenditure means extra expenditure due to plague but brought to account under the ordinary appropriate service heads. (ii) The amount of indirect plague expenditure is therefore not ascertainable from the ordinary provincial and incorporated local fund accounts and special statements are prepared in the course of audit by the Accountant-General in the case of expenditure from general revenues and by the treasury officer in the case of expenditure from incorporated local funds. (iii) To facilitate the preparation of these statements all officers who draw bills for indirect plague expenditure should write conspicuously at the head of each such bill, beside the account head, the word PLAGUE in red ink. If only some of the items in a bill are indirect plague charges, the word PLAGUE should be written against each such item instead of at the head of the bill. (iv) It is to be noted that pay and allowances of officers and establishments forming part of existing departments or services whose employment on plague duty does not involve the payment of salaries to other persons for the performance of their legitimate duties (even though they may be exclusively engaged on plague duties) and not receiving extra allowances on account of plague, do not constitute indirect plague charges (and of course are not direct plague charges) because they do not involve extra expense. A statement should be forwarded to the Accountant-General by the 20th of each
?70 [Duties of the Railway Staff. month showing the pay and allowances, drawn in the previous month, of officers and establishments so employed. (v) From the above it will be seen that the distinc- tion between direct and indirect plague expenditure affects the accounts of incorporated local funds expenditure and provincial expenditure. As regards excluded local funds this distinction is unnecessary and all extra expenditure, i.e., expenditure which would not have been incurred but for the occurrence or imminence of plague may be shown under the head Plague. (vi) Contingent expenditure on account of plague, e.g., stationery, postage, telegrams, office furniture and such like should be charged against the heads of account to which the salaries of the officers incurring such expenditure are debited. In regard to establishments newly entertained to deal with plague, the principle that officers of superior grades should be charged to PROVINCIAL, and those of inferior grades to LOCAL, should be applied. With regard to establishments dependent on officers newly entertained to deal with plague, the principle that the charge should follow the pay of the officer on whom the establishment is dependent should hold both in regard to establishments and contingencies. The cost of tents supplied to officers on plague duty will follow the debit of the pay of the officers. 131. Fines recovered in prosecutions under the plague regulations should be credited to fines under Law and Justice. Duties of the Railway Staff. 132. The following are the duties of the railway officials under the plague regulations:- (1) To prevent passengers from infected areas from alighting at any station other than an inspection station, and to insist on their proceeding to the inspection station if it is suspected that the passengers are evading the inspection by so alighting. (2) To see with the aid of the platform police that passengers alighting at a railway station do not leave the premises except by the proper exit. (3) To see that the railway tickets issued in an infected area and the fresh tickets issued to persons from infected areas who rebook are punched or clipped as prescribed.
?Duties of the Railway Staff.] 71 (4) To stop all passengers presenting plague-punched tickets from infected or notified stations until their names and addresses are taken down, and they are given passports either by the plague official appointed for the purpose or by the station staff themselves at smaller stations. (5) To disinfect railway carriages from infected areas and carriages in which persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague have travelled. (6) To take steps for tracing and destroying rats that may arrive from infected areas concealed in the goods imported. (7) To put up a notice in all railway carriages inti- mating that passengers from infected parts should take out passports at stations of destination. (8) To lock the carriages before the arrival of the train at the inspection station. (9) To detain the train until the medical inspection is over. (10) To see that no passenger is permitted to leave his carriage until in orderly course the arrangement shall be complete for his examination. (11) To give every assistance to the medical officers conducting the inspection in order to minimise the detention of trains. (12) To carry out the instructions regarding the trans- mission of the names and addresses of passengers. (13) To afford every facility towards the working of the plague regulations generally.
?72 APPENDIX A. PLAGUE PASSPORT. [See Regulation 1 on page 8.] 1. No. of passport. 2. District.  3. Station of issue. 4. Date of arrival.  5. Name of person (in full).   6. Father's name.*   7. Caste and occupation. 8. Age. 9. Sex.* 10. Whence coming (give district, taluq, and village).  11. Destinatio and residence during the next ten days (give district, taluq, village , street and number or name of the owner of the house).  12. To whom the triplicate copy of the passport sent and when.  I declare the information set forth above under headings 5 to 11 to be correct, and I do hereby  bind myself (a) to appear/ present the above-mentioned person for inspection, daily for the next ten days,  before the passport-examining officer of the place where I may be for the time being, (b) to report to the said officer before departure any change in my residence/ the residence of the above-mentioned person within the said period of ten days, and (c) to deliver to the said officer this passport on the expiry of the said period. Date Signature or mark of the traveller or person in charge of him, Declared and signed before me. Date Signature and designation of officer issuing the passport. * May be omitted when clearly not required for identification.   For village in Malabar, give the names of amsam and desam. Date. Signature. 1st day 2nd  3rd  4th  5th  6th  7th  8th  9th  10th  Forwarded to the tahsildar/deputy tahsildar of-/municipal chairman the traveller having been duly observed. Signature and Designation of Passport-examining officer. Date. Station INSTRUCTIONS. 1. This passport should be prepared in triplicate. The original should be retained for record, the duplicate delivered to the traveller, and the triplicate sent without delay to the officer who has to examine him for ten days. The full designation and address of this officer should be entered under heading 12. One pass- port form should not be used for more than one individual. Only persons coming from infected or notified places can be required to take out passports. 2. The passport-issuing officer should explain to the traveller or his guardian the terms of the passport and warn him that any breach of its terms will entail prosecution and punishment with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to Rs. 1,000 or both. 3. The passport-holder should, unless exempted by a written order endorsed on the passport, appear daily for ten days with his passport before the passport- examining officer and obtain that officer's signature on the margin of his passport in token of inspection. 4. The passport-holder is not obliged to remain at a place for ten days by reason of his passport, but should he desire to change his residence within that period, he should give due intimation to the passport-examining officer and get the entries under headings 11 and 12 altered before departure. On the tenth day he should deliver his passport to the passport-examining officer. 5. The passport-examining officer should satisfy himself that the person presenting the passport is the person described therein. He should ascertain from the traveller whether there is any sickness or death in his house. If the traveller exhibits any symptoms of plague or if any sickness or death is reported in his house or if he fails to appear for inspection, the said officer should take immediate steps for detaining him or for making the necessary inquiries as to the cause of sickness, death or absence. 6. For further particulars, see city plague regula- tions when residing in Madras or mufassal plague regulations when residing elsewhere.
?78 APPENDIX B. GENERAL PASS. [See Regulation 31 on page 25.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by road or boat from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. This pass protects the person named above and the members of his family mentioned on the reverse, but it does not authorize journey by rail, for which a separate pass shall be obtained by each individual requiring it, nor does it cover residence outside the village of It will be in force until revoked. Signature. Designation. Date. (Reverse of Form.) Name.  How related to pass-holder. Signature. Designation. Date. K
?74 APPENDIX C. GENERAL PASS. [See Regulation 31 on page 25.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by rail from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. Signature. Designation. Date. APPENDIX D. GENERAL PASS. [See Regulation 31 on page 25.] (To be issued to persons who leave an infected or notified place to attend markets in the adjoining non-infected area.) 1. Inspection station through which the holder will pass. 2. Railway station where the holder will alight. 3. Name of person. 4. Father's name. 5. Caste. 6. Age. 7. Sex.  District. 8. From what infected or notified place  Taluq.   Village.  District. 9. To what market Taluq.  Village.
?Appendix E.] 75 This pass allows the holder to remain in the village of for 24 hours at a time without a passport. On the expiry of the period he must either have left the village or have provided himself with a passport. He must show this pass to the officer in charge of the inspection station through which he will have to pass when proceeding to the village where the market is held and to the passport-issuing officer at the railway station where he alights as also to the local authority of the village at or near which the market is held and obtain their initials on the reverse. He will likewise show this pass on his return to the officers mentioned above and obtain their initials. There is, however, no necessity to present it at the railway inspection station if there be no medical inspection on his return journey from the village. Holder's signature Date Signature of issuing officer. APPENDIX E. SPECIAL PASS. [See Regulation 31 on page 25.] (To be issued to persons leaving an inhabited infected area to reside in its neighbourhood.) No.  District. Station of issue. Number of office of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Occupation. Age. Ordinary residence. The above-named person (and his family consisting of males and females as per reverse) is/are permitted to reside temporarily at (name of site or number of field) on his producing this pass, with the accompanying certificate  duly filled in by the officer responsible for disinfection, Date. Signature and designation. * To be entered when there is more than one office of issue in a town.  If the family leaves a healthy area of the town or a house that has not been infected, this part of the certificate may be dispensed with at the discretion of the issuing officer.
?76 [Appendix F. (Reverse of Form.) Name. How related to pass-holder. Signature. Designation. Date. Disinfection Certificate. I hereby certify that having satisfied myself that arrangements for residence at the site named by the above-described person (and his family) were complete. I immediately before his/their departure carefully him disinfected all clothing and property removed by them. Date. Signature of officer in charge of , disinfection. APPENDIX F. [See Regulation 51 on page 30.] [COUNTERFOIL.] No. Name Father's name Street Village Town Taluq District Date Initials of operator. Plague Inoculation Certificate. No. CERTIFIED that , son of Street , resident of ' Village Town , District ' Taluq , has been, inoculated by me, and that his thumb-mark was at the time impressed before me. Space for left thumb-mark. Signature and designation.  Dated NOTE.-Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, plague, the holder of the certificate is exempted from segregation, from detention when travelling and from ten days' observation under the passport rules. It does not, however, exempt him from liability to evacuate an infected house, except in the case where all the occupants of the house have been inoculated, or to have his clothes disinfected when travelling. The certificate is valid for a period of six months.
77 APPENDIX G. Register of permanent passes issued to persons attending markets. [See Rule 57 on page 50.] Name of person. Pass number. Date of Remarks.   Arrival. Return.       APPENDIX H. Relaxation of Passport Rules. [See Rule 60 on page 50.] The inconveniences and difficulties attending the working of the passport rules in the case of railway officers have been brought to notice both by the railway authorities and Collectors. A general relaxation of the rules cannot be made in favour of any particular class, and in the case of railway servants is especially undesirable, for there is reason to believe that it has been by this class that infection has been carried to several places. The trouble that is now experienced by those con- stantly on the move may be avoided by them if they are willing to be inoculated, and no relaxation of the rules is called for in the case of those who are unwilling to be inoculated and to whom the inconvenience is merely personal. 2. There are persons, however, constantly employed on the railways such as engine drivers, firemen, guards and mail sorters, with regard to whom, as long as they are on actual duty from day to day, the strict enforcement of the passport rules may result in public inconvenience and in their cases some relaxation may be granted. The duties of these men are of a fairly constant nature, and they halt for any length of time only at the larger stations, where their absence from regular
?78 [Appendix H. duty must come at once to the notice of a superior officer. On the appli- cation of the railway or postal authorities, Collectors may exempt by name from the ordinary passport rules individual servants of the classes mentioned, on the understanding that the officer to whom they are immediately subordinate must report at once to the nearest local authority every case of sickness among the servants to whom the exemption is given. Any permanent change in the nature of the duties performed should be reported to the officer granting an exemption certificate. Persons so exempted shall be provided with tickets in the following form:- (Name) , son of , employed as and ordinarily residing at , has been exempted from the passport rules (mufassal plague regulation 1) as long as he travels on duty as such between the stations of and Mark of left thumb. Signature, designation and seal of officer issuing the ticket. It should be understood that exemption from the passport rules does not carry exemption from any of the other regulations framed under the Epidemic Diseases Act. 3. Other classes of railway servants are probably less frequently on the move and the enforcement of the rules among them is likely to result less frequently in public inconvenience. In cases of real diffi- culty, it may be possible to arrange under mufassal regulation 1 (1) for the inspection of the passport holder at the railway station, or, under mufassal regulation 43, railway officers of known and approved character and responsible position may be appointed honorary assistant plague officers, and empowered under mufassal regulation 1 (2) (d) as "local authorities" at certain stations for the working of the passport rules among railway servants. 4. Under regulation 32, Collectors may exempt from the necessity of taking out passports any person with regard to whom there are no reasonable grounds for suspicion of infection. Such exemptions must be made personally, not generally, and should be granted sparingly. 5. Any concession may be withdrawn at any time without assigning a reason.
?APPENDIX I. Intimation Form. [See Rule 66 on page 52.]  Date of arrival. Name of traveller. Father's name. Caste. Age. Whence coming. Destination and residence during the next ten days. Remarks.       District. Taluq. Village. Street. Number or name  of the owner of the house.  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12             N.B.-A single form may be used for more than one traveller proceeding on the same day to the same district. 79
?80 APPENDIX J. Time allowed at inspection stations for plague examination. [See Rule 70 on page 52.] Railway administration  Inspection or passport station. Time required for inspection or  issue of passports. Madras Railway Tungabhadra  Thirty-six minutes for all trains from Bombay or Raichur. Do. Jalarpet Fifty minutes for mail trains and thirty minutes for passenger trains from Bangalore. Do. Coimbatore Twenty minutes for mail trains and thirty minutes for other trains from Pdanr. Southern Mahratta Railway. Hindupur  Thirty-two minutes for all trains from Bangalore. APPENDIX K. Detention Certificate. [See Rules 22 and 77 on pages 39 and 54.] Camp. 1. Name of passenger 2. Number and description of ticket 3. Detained from to 4. Name and designation of issuing officer APPENDIX L. Return of persons detained at inspection stations. [See Rule 78 on page 54.] Return for week ending Monday the 190. 1. Number admitted up to the end of the preceding week. 2. Number accounted for up to the end of the preceding week  3. Balance (i.e., 1-2) 4. Number admitted during the present week 5. Total number to be accounted for (i.e., 3 + 4) 6. Number accounted for- (a.) by deaths  (b.)  by removal to plague hospital (c) by discharge on expiration of detention period. (d) otherwise (give details)  Total (a + b + c + d)  7. Balance at the end of the week (5 - 6)
81 APPENDIX M. Statement to accompany proposals for placing restrictions on fairs and festivals. [See Rule 88 on page 50.] Name  of festival or  fair. Place  where  held. Distance to  nearest railway station. Date of commence- ment and termination of festival  or fair.     Average attendance during the past three years. From what districts in the Madras presidency  and from what places outside the presidency,  pilgrimage should be prohibited, and the number of people expected from each of such districts  or places. 1 2 3 4 5 6     L
?82 APPENDIX. N. Notifications for placing restrictions on fairs and festivals. [See Rule 88 on page 56.] NOTIFICATION No. I. [To be used when the village where the festival or fair is held lies within an infected taluq.] WHEREAS there is plague in the taluq of the district, and whereas it is desirable to prevent its spread: His Excellency the Governor in Council, in exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, prohibits pilgrimage to the festival at in the said taluq from the to the  inclusive, [and also the holding of the usual cattle fair in connection with the said festival,] [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold within the district[s] for the station[s] of on the Railway] [and for the station[s] of on the Railway] to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present. All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back. Secretary to Government. NOTIFICATION No. II. [To be used when the village where the festival or fair is held lies in the vicinity of an infected area and it is necessary to make the prohibition absolute.] WHEREAS His Excellency the Governor in Council is satisfied that there is danger of an outbreak of plague at in the taluq of the district, if pilgrims are permitted to visit that place on the occasion of the ensuing festival of [and the usual cattle fair is per- mitted to be held at that place]: In exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, His Excellency in Council prohibits [the holding of the said fair and also the] pilgrimage to the said festival from the to the , inclusive, [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold within the district[s] for the station[s] of on the Railway] [and for the station[s] of on the Railway] to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present. All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back. Secretary to Government.
?Appendix O.] 83 NOTIFICATION No. III. [To be used in cases where the prohibition is not absolute.] WHEREAS His Excellency the Governor in Council is satisfied that there is danger of an outbreak of plague at in the taluq of the district, if persons from the and other parts declared to be infected with plague are permitted to visit that place on the occasion of the ensuing festival [and cattle fair] : In exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, His Excellency in Council prohibits [the holding of the cattle fair and also] the attendance at the said festival [or fair] from the to the inclusive, of persons from the said parts, [and further directs that be- tween the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold within the district[s] for the station[s] of on the Railway [and for the station [s] of on the railway] to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present. All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back. Secretary to Government. APPENDIX O. Plague Report. [See Rule 97 on page 59.] Plague Report District. Date No. 1. Name of town or village-. 2. Population of town or village-. Imported. Indigenous.      Number of seizures-. 3. Plague cases up to  Number of deaths-. date of last report  Date of last report-.  4. Date of present attack-. 5. When reported by telegram-. 6. Imported or indigenous- ? 7. Brief history of case-.
?84                             [Appendix P. 8.  If imported, had patient a passport on arrival?    If  not, did the local authority  responsible supply   one, or  otherwise maintain surveillance- ? 9.  Steps taken to isolate and treat the patient-. 10.  Steps taken towards the segregation of contacts-. 11.  Steps taken towards the evacuation and disinfection of the infected house-. 12.  Was there any opposition on the part of the inmates of the infected house or of the people of the village to the plague measures-? 13.  Remarks. APPENDIX P.   Destruction of Plague Records.   [See Rule 104 on page 62.] Description of records.                                       When to be destroyed. 1. Daily reports relating to passports.  At the same time as the passports to which they             relate.  2. Daily intimations furnished to the district    medical   and    sanitary officer by  the medical officer in charge  of a  railway  inspection station  under  mufassal   regula- tion 1 (9)                          3. Daily intimations furnished to the  district  medical   and    sanitary officer by passport-issuing officers under mufassal regulation 1 (10).        4. Intimations of change of residence of persons while under observa- tion.                                                        5. Daily reports of plague cases and deaths in the Mysore State. At the close of the month succeeding that to which they relate.   6. Daily reports of plague cases and deaths in Bangalore.                           7. Weekly reports of plague cases and deaths in the Bombay presidency and the Hyderabad State.      8. Weekly returns of deaths in muni-  cipalities. After one year.   9. Daily telegrams of   plague cases received by the Collector and the  district    medical    and   sanitary officer  under   mufassal   regula- tion 24.
Appendix Q.]                                      85   10. Weekly diaries   of  plague  super- visors and sanitary inspectors in  charge of observation circles.  After one year.                                                            11. Daily reports of passengers inspected and of those detained at railway inspection stations.   12. Weekly   returns    of   inoculations                          received    from     the  district  medical and sanitary officer.  13. Weekly   returns    received    from  divisional officers of breaches of  passport   rules   dealt   with   by  them.     APPENDIX Q. Distribution of spare copies of printed orders of Government. [See Rule 105 on page 62.] A. Collector's office (three copies). B. Divisional officers (each one copy). C. Treasury deputy collector (one copy). D. Tahsildars (each one copy). E. Deputy tahsildars in independent charge (each one copy). F. District medical and sanitary officer and civil surgeons (one copy). G. Additional medical officer on plague duty (one copy). H. Medical officer in charge of plague inspection station (one copy). J. Special plague officers (each one copy). K. Municipalities (each two copies). L. President, district board (one copy). M. Taluk boards (each one copy).
?86 APPENDIX R. PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty. [See Rule 119 on page 66.] Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. A. Military officers and troops. (a) When employed on guard duty.* Nil.  (b) When employed on sanitary duty, such as searching, disinfect- ing, superintending, scavengering, &c. -               (i) Combatant British commissioned officers of over 5 years' service. Rs. 300 a month.  (ii) Combatant British commissioned officers under 5 years' service. Rs. 200 a month.  (iii) British non-com- missioned officers. Re. 1 + annas 6 extra ration money per diem.        (iv) British privates. Annas 32 + annas 6 extra  ration money per diem.     (v) Native officers. Rs. 1-8-0 a day.  (vi) Native non-com- missioned officers. Annas 12 a day.  (vii) Sepoys Annas 8 a day.   B. Medical officers wholly employed on plague duty. (i) Commissioned officers transferred from regi- mental or purely mili- tary duty. Same as in the case of British commissioned military officers.  (ii) Commissioned officers in civil em- ploy. Rs. 5 a day.        (iii) Senior military assist- ant surgeons with the honorary rank of Captain, or Lieu-  tenant.  Rs. 5 a day.             * When the troops employed on plague duty have been performing guard and sanitary duties in the same place together, that is to say, when some of the party have been employed on sanitary duties while others have been doing guard duty, the duties being interchangeable, all the troops should be paid [allowances. On the other hand, where the duties assigned to any one body of troops have been exclusively of the nature of guard duties no allowances should be granted. The allowances shall be paid only for the days on which the troops are actually employed on plague duty. All doubtful cases should be referred for the special orders of Government.  Medical officers whose sole duty is the inspection of ships for plague purposes are not entitled to any special fee for conducting inspection in rough weather.  Port health officers called on to inspect vessels from plague-infected ports on Sundays and closed holidays will be granted a special fee of Rs. 16 for each inspection, but not more than double fee in respect to the same vessel inspected more than once on the same day. No port health officer shall, in any one month, receive fees aggregating mure than one-fifth of his salary.
?Appendix R.]                 87 PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty- continued. Class of officers.  Particulars.          Allowances.  B. Medical officers wholly em- ployed on plague duty - cont. (iv) Military assistant surgeons in civil or military employ, on pay  exceeding  Rs. 150.  Rs. 3 a   day. In  addition  to  any acting,  charge  or house allowance they may have been drawing at the time of their deputation to plague duty and which  they  would have  continued  to draw  but for  such deputation.      (v) Military    assistant surgeons in civil or military employ, on pay  not  exceeding Rs. 150. Rs. 2 a day.                      (vi) Civil  assistant  sur- geons. Rs. 2 a day.     (vii) Civil apothecaries Rs. 25 a month, or in the case of men, who, at the time of their deputation, were in independ- ent  charge,  the  full  charge allowance of their grades.  (viii) Hospital assistants engaged on plague duty involving per- sonal risk,  such as attending on plague patients. Annas 8 a day. In addition to house- rent or free quarters, but in lieu of charge allowance.                      (ix) Hospital   assistants engaged  on   light plague duty, such as inspection  of  pas- sengers . Rs. 10 a month.                  C. Medical  officers, doing  plague work in  addi- tion  to  their ordinary duties. (1) *  Commissioned officers.  Such local allowance, not  exceeding one-fifth of the salary, as may be fixed in each case by Government. The allowance should be given only to officer's whose additional plague work, such as that of medical inspection of passengers by road or railway, is entirely separate from, and outside the sphere of, their ordinary duties and not to officers whose ordinary and legitimate work, such as that of attending on the sick in hospital, has been in- creased owing to the occur- rence of plague.  (2) *  Medical sub- ordinates   (3) Nurses or midwives.  * A special fee of Rs. 15 will be paid for every inspection of vessels conducted in bad weather when it involves extraordinary risk.  See note  on the previous page.  When the out-door plague work of a medical subordinate is so heavy as to necessitate the use of a conveyance, carts or jutkas may be provided for him by the local body concerned. The actual charges incurred in the payment of hire should be debited to 'Contingencies.'
?88 [Appendix. R. PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-continued. Class of officers.  Particulars. Allowances.  D. Plague super- visors belong- ing to the salt, abkri and other depart- ments. (i) Appointed in non- municipal areas. Allowance of 25 per cent. of the salary + Rs. 30 fixed travelling allowance + Rs. 15 horse allow- ance, provided the permanent pay + 25 per cent. thereof does not fall below Rs. 80.  (ii) Appointed in munici- pal towns. Same as in the case of D (i), but minus the fixed travelling allowance. E. Compounders on ambulance staff.  Allowance of 20 per cent. of the salary to be granted only when the ambulance staff is on active plague duty. * PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty. Designation. Salary. Remarks. A. Retired commis- sioned medical officers. Rs. 500 a month (in addi- tion to their pensions which will continue to be a military charge).   The officer must have retired before the 1st April 1898, and his re-employment must be either on plague duty or in a post which cannot be filled in the ordinary way by reason of the officers, who would, in ordinary course, be available for it being required for plague duty. The appointment re- quires the previous sanction of the Government of India.  * B. Temporary English doctors. Rs. 500 a month or such salary as may be fixed in their agreements with the Secretary of State.   C. Retired military assistant surgeons. Pay of their grade at the time of retirement + Rs. 100 allowance subject to a maximum of Rs. 350 a month. In special cases the local Government may raise the limit to Rs. 500. A retired honorary com- missioned officer of the Indian Subordinate Medi- cal Department is entitled to donble first-class travel- ling allowance by rail, and eight annas a mile by road. The officers should be required to produce certificates of phy- sical fitness, and their appoint- ments should, in the first instance, be made for periods not exceeding six months. * The Secretary of State has . . . laid stress on the need for showing considera- tion towards doctors and nurses sent from England for plague duty in this country, and the Government of India have decided that some liberality should be exercised in the grant of allowances to nurses to defray such expenses as they may be called upon to incur in the discharge of their duties, and that they should not be expected to defray the cost of carriage from their salary.
?Appendix R.] 89 PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation. Salary. Remarks. D. Uncovenanted medical officers. Such pay not exceeding Rs. 350 a month as the Surgeon-General may find necessary, wich travelling allowances to and from the places to which they are posted at the rates of double second-class fares for journeys by rail and annas 4 a mile for journeys by road. The term of employment may, subject to their good conduct and efficiency, be for a period of three months ; the engage- ment being terminable after the expiry of the first two months by a written notice given by either the Govern- ment or the officer.  E. Temporary civil assistant surgeons. Pay Rs. 100 a month + allowance of Rs. 2 a day, with travelling allowance to and from the place to which they are appointed.  F. Private hospital assistants. Pay assigned to the corre- sponding grades of hospital assistants in Government service + 50 per cent. thereof with compensation for quarters.  F1. Retired hospital assistants. Pay of their grade at the time of retirement (in addition to their pension).  * G. Lady nurses obtained from England. (a) Rs. 175 a month in addition to free quar- ters, fuel, lights and punkahpullers, com- mencing from date of embarkation to India ; If free quarters are not pro- vided, an allowance of Rs. 3 a day should be paid.  (b) double first-class fare by rail when travelling on duty ;   (c) first-class passage when proceeding by steamer from one part of India to another on duty.  H. Qualified Euro- pean, Eurasian or Native nurses locally recruited. Such pay not ordinarily exceeding Rs. 75 a month with free quarters or Rs. 10 for house rent. When the nurses attend on plague patients, a boarding allowance of Rs. 1-8-0 a day in the case of Europeans and Eurasians, or one rupee in the case of natives should be paid. When employed on duties en- tailing a considerable amount of moving about within a limited area and necessitating the frequent hiring of vehicles, they may be paid actual con- veyance allowances irrespective of the five miles limit prescribed in article 1157 of the Civil Service Regulations. For terms on which caste native nurses may be trained, see G O., No. 1835-P., dated 23rd December 1899. * See note * on the previous page. M
?90 [Appendix R. PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation. Salary. Remarks. J. Private gentle- men appointed as plague supervisors in municipal towns. Rs. 2 a day + Rs. 15, horse allowance. Such supervisors should usually be Europeans or Eurasians. They need not be appointed unless the outbreak of plague requires a special organization to deal with it. K. Private gentle- men appointed as plague supervisors in rural areas. Rs. 80 pay + Rs. 30, fixed travelling allowance + Rs. 15, horse allowance.  L. Plague Inspect- ors - [As in Appendix S].   M. . . .   N. Other tempo- rary subordi- nates including menial ser- vants. Such rates as would be sufficient to induce persons to take up the appoint- ments. Menial servants are not eligible for any allowances, and should be conveyed from place to place at the cost of Government. APPENDIX S. PAY AND ALLOWANCES OF SANITARY INSPECTORS EMPLOYED ON PLAGUE DUTY. Classification of Sanitary and Assistant Sanitary Inspectors. Sanitary Inspectors for plague purposes are classed as follows :- Certificated Sanitary Inspectors, or those who possess certificates signed by the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioner to the effect that they have passed the Government Technical Intermediate Examination in Hygiene and have attended a course of theoretical and practical instruction in Hygiene in the Medical College, Madras. Temporary Sanitary Inspectors,* or men who have been specially trained for plague duty by the Sanitary Commissioner and have satis- fied him as to their fitness after undergoing examination by him. Assistant Sanitary Inspectors, or men who have taken low places in the examination lists of either certificated or temporary sanitary inspectors and for this or for reasons of temporary convenience are so classified by the Sanitary Commissioner. Reserve Sanitary Inspectors are men of any of the above classes who are kept in reserve, at disposal of the Sanitary Commissioner, for duty in districts or municipalities to any number not exceeding ten. * Should those trained up to date prove insufficient, Collectors of districts may nominate for training by the Sanitary Commissioner, at times notified by him, men who have passed the Matriculation examination of the Madras University or have been educated up to that standard.
?Appendix S.] 91 Nature of duties in rural areas. Certificated Sanitary Inspectors may be posted as plague inspectors to charge of observation and preventive circles and frontier inspection stations, and as disinfection inspectors attached to sanitary sections of ambulance staffs. Temporary Sanitary Injectors * may be posted as plague inspectors to charge of observation and preventive circles and frontier inspection stations, but shall not be posted to charge of preventive circles or as disinfection inspectors unless neither by rearrangement of duties of the sanitary inspectors at disposal of the Collector concerned for the time being, nor by special application to the Sanitary Commissioner for additional men, is it possible to secure the services of certificated sanitary inspectors. Assistant Sanitary Inspectors may be posted as assistant plague inspectors and are intended solely for observation duties in non-muni- cipal towns. They should not be put on other duties in rural areas, but may be transferred for duty in municipalities as circle inspectors. Pay and Allowances of Plague Inspectors in Rural Areas.  Rs.  Certificated sanitary inspectors in charge of observation and preventive circles. 45  Rs. 15 pony allowance  and Rs. 15 fixed travelling allowance. Certificated sanitary inspectors in charge of frontier inspec- tion stations. 45 Rs. 15 pony allowance and Rs. 15 fixed travelling allowance at the discretion of the Collector. Temporary sanitary inspectors in charge of observation circles. 40  Rs. 15 pony allowance  and Rs. 15 fixed travelling allowance. Temporary sanitary inspectors in charge of frontier inspec- tion stations. 40 Rs. 15 pony allowance and Rs. 15 fixed travelling allowance at the discretion of the Collector. Certificated sanitary inspectors detailed for disinfection duties with the sanitary section of an ambulance staff.  45 When kept in reserve 15 per cent. above pay ; when on actual duty 25 per cent. above pay and fixed travelling allowance of Rs. 15. Assistant sanitary inspectors in charge of non-municipal towns. 25 If the population of the town is more than 5,000, a pony allow- ance of Rs. 15 may be given at  discretion of the Collector. * See note * on previous page.  Request for supply of sanitary inspectors should be made to the Sanitary Commissioner. Reports of their arrival for duty and relief from duty should be made promptly to the same officer.  Certificated, temporary, and assistant sanitary inspectors are entitled on joining and leaving appointments to travelling allowance under articles 1191 and 1243 of the Civil Service Regulations. They are required to give a month's warning before resig- nation. Similarly, Collectors and chairmen of municipal councils should give them a month's warning before dispensing with their services or equivalent pay in lieu.  Under no circumstances should these men be unmounted. On first joining advance of pay may be allowed for purchase of ponies.  Entitled to a tent and certain equipment when on disinfection duties.
?92 [Appendix S. Nature of duties in Municipal Areas. Certificated Sanitary Inspectors only will be employed in municipal areas as plague inspectors in charge of divisions (in the proportion of one to each three assistant plague inspectors in charge of circles) and as plague disinfection inspectors in charge of the sanitary sections of ambulance staffs. Assistant Sanitary Inspectors will be employed as assistant plague inspectors in charge of observation and preventive circles only. NOTE.-When a municipal town has not a chief sanitary inspector on the perma- nent staff, one certificated sanitary inspector shall be employed for plague purposes by the chairman in consultation with the Sanitary Commissioner. Pay and Allowances in Municipal Areas.*  RS.   Divisional plague inspec- tor in charge of a division 35 And 25 per cent. of pay on appearance of plague in any circle in his charge and up to one month after occurrence of last case. Rs. 15 pony allowance.             with        Mounted orderly for divisional plague in- spector. 10  Rs. 15 pony allowance. Assistant plague inspec- tor  in charge of ob- servation or preventive circles. 20 or 25 And 25 per cent, of pay on appearance of plague in the circle in his charge and up to one month after the occurrence of last case.  Chief sanitary inspector.  As drawn  in his last  permanent  sanitary  appoint-  ment. And 25 per cent. of pay. Rs. 15 pony allowance . with    Mounted orderly 10  Rs. 15 pony allowance . Certificated sanitary in- spector detailed as plague disinfection inspector in charge of sanitary section of ambulance staff. 40 And 25 per cent. of pay on appearance of plague in any circle in which he is liable to perform duty, and up to one month after occurrence of the last case.    * See note  on previous page.  When a municipality is financially in a position to do so, certificated sanitary inspectors should be placed in charge of circles on pay not exceeding a sum amounting to Rs. 5 less than allowed for a divisional sanitary inspector.
?93  APPENDIX T. List of Plague Charges.  [See Rule 130 on page 69.] PROVINCIAL-INDIRECT. 8. LAND REVENUE-Charges of District Administration. General Establishments -  (1) Cost of additions to office   establishments of revenue officers  necessitated by plague. Salaries.  Establishment.  Allowances.  Contingencies.  Sub-divisional Establishments- (2) Pay and allowances of tem-  porary additions to the revenue  staff necessitated by plague. Establishment.  Allowances.  Contingencies.  15. POST OFFICE-District Post Charges. Establishments.  (3) Additional post establish-  ments for serving plague camps. Allowances.  Contingencies.  18. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION- Civil Secretariats. Chief Secretariat -  (4) Extra establishment required   for dealing with plague correspond-  ence. Establishment.  Local and Municipal Depart- ment -  Establishment  19-A. LAW AND JUSTICE-COURTS OF LAW-Criminal Courts. Charges of Stationary Sub-  Magistrates. (5) Court required in consequence   of plague. Special Sub-Magistrate.  Temporary Establishment.  Allowances.  Contingencies.  20. POLICE. Presidency Police.  (6) Additional police entertained   in consequence of plague. District Executive Force.  Railway Police.  24-A. MEDICAL-Medical Establishment. District Medical and Sanitary  (7) Extra allowances on account   of plague of medical officers and  subordinates performing plague  duties in addition to ordinary duties. Officers -  Allowances.  Reserve Medical Subordinates -  Allowances.
?94 [Appendix T. 24-C. MEDICAL-Sanitation and Vaccination. Sanitary Department- Establishment. (8) Extra establishment employed in the office of the Sanitary Commis- sioner in connection with plague work. 30-C. STATIONERY AND PRINTING. Government Press  (9) Cost of printing passports and passes at the Government Press (Regulations 1 and 31). PROVINCIAL-DIRECT. 24-D. MEDICAL-Grants for Medical Purposes. Salaries - (10) Pay and allowances of medi- cal officers and subordinates includ- ing clerks and passport-issuing officers exclusively employed on plague duty in connection with the inspection and  observation of travellers by sea and by railway and the segregation and medical treatment of such as are affected or suspected to be affected with plague, at seaports, or at rail- way stations notified as railway inspection stations in the Fort St. George Gazette. Salaries of Plague Commis- sioner, gazetted medical officers and military officers.      Plague allowances of gazetted  medical officers and military officers.      Salaries of subordinate medical officers.    Plague allowances of subordi- nate medical officers.    Exchange compensation allow- ance.    House-rent allowances.  Local allowances. (11) Temporary establishments entertained for the purposes men- tioned in No. (10).   Establishments -   (12) Grants for the construction, &c., of private plague hospitals. Allowances -  Tentage of officers. (13) Cost of construction of sheds and cost of medical stores, disinfect- ants, carbon paper, &c., required strictly for the purposes specified in No. (10). Travelling allowances of gazetted officers.  Travelling allowances of non- gazetted officers and estab- lishments.     (14) Pay and allowances of mili- tary officers whose services are form- ally placed at the disposal of the Civil department for employment on plague duty and of clerks and serv- ants attached to them wherever they may be employed. Supplies and Services -  Petty construction and repair of buildings.  Contribution to private hos- pitals.  Dieting charges.  Cost of instruments, medicines  and disinfectants. (15) Pay and allowances of Gov- ernment officers other than those mentioned in items Nos. (10) and (14) whether belonging to the Indian Civil Service, Forest, Survey, Cus- toms, Salt or other department Hospital clothing and bedding. Other hospital equipment and necessaries.
?Appendix T.] 95 Contingencies - specially deputed by Government for employment in connection with plague measures, and clerks and servants attached to them ; also the emoluments of medical men and nurses procured from Europe and clerks and servants attached to them. Tour charges.  Service postage.  Do. Telegrms.  Purchase of furniture.   Repairs of do.   Office expenses.  Miscellaneous. (16) Extra allowances on account of plague of military officers and men who remain on the strength of their regiments though detailed for plague duty, and all extra expendi- ture due to their deputation if (in the case of men only) their services are utilized for purposes mentioned in No, (10).  The extra allowances on account of plague of military officers are debitable to provincial, whether they are engaged for purposes mentioned in No. (10) or not. LOCAL-INDIRECT. 18-J. GENEEAL ADMINISTRATION-General Establishment of Local Funds. Establishments.  (17) Extra establishment  employed in local fund offices. Allowances.   Contingencies.   24-A. MEDICAL-Medical Establishment. District Medical and Sanitary Officer's establishment -  (18) Additions to the office estab- lishment of district medical and sanitary officer.   Establishments.   Allowances.   Contingencies.   24-B. MEDICAL-Hospitals and Dispensaries. Salaries. (19) Extra expenditure in exist- ing hospitals and dispensaries due to plague. Establishments.  Allowances.  Supplies and Services.  Contingencies.  24-C. MEDICAL-Sanitation and Vaccination. Sanitation and Conservancy - (20) Additions to existing sani- tary staff for plague work. Establishment.   Allowances.   Supplies and Services.  Contingencies.
?96 [Appendix T. LOCAL-DIRECT.   (21) Pay and allowances of  medical subordinates, clerks and passport-issuing officers employed in plague hospitals and at railway stations not notified as railway inspection stations in the Fort St. George Gazette and at road frontier inspection stations.         Salaries -   Salaries of subordinate medical officers.    House rent allowance. (22) Cost of observation staff consisting of plague supervisors, plague inspectors, assistant plague inspectors and their peons (Beg. 15). Plague allowance.  Establishment -  Matrons and nurses.  Compounders.  Ward attendants and servants. (23) Ambulance staff. Storekeepers.  (24) Cost of camp establish- ments, superintendents and gumastahs and menial servants. Establishments entertained at plague camps and road frontier inspection stations and at railway stations not notified as railway inspection stations in the Fort St. George Gazette.     (25) Cost of construction of  plague hospitals and " observa- tion," "suspect," "health" and " staff " camps. (Regs. 13, 17 and 23.)  The cost of sheds constructed in cantonments should be borne by cantonment funds.       Allowances -  Travelling allowances.  Supplies and Services - (26) Cost of stretchers, medical stores, disinfectants, comforts and furniture and clothing for plague hospitals (Regs. 13, 17 and 19). Petty construction and repairs of buildings.  Funeral expenses.  "Dietary charges. Clothing and bedding. Nos. (21) to (26) must be understood as referring to ex- penditure for purposes other than those specified in No. (10). Cost of medicines and instru- ments and disinfectants.   (27) Extra expenditure due to the deputation of troops on plague duties other than those specified in No. (10)- See also No. (16). Other hospital necessaries.  Contingencies -  Purchase of furniture.   Repairs of do. (28) Rewards for the destruction of rats. Tour charges.  Postage charge (29) Cost of carbon paper supplied to passport-issuing officers at railway stations not notified as rail-way inspection stations in the Fort St. George Gazette. Telegraph charges.  Office expenses.  Miscellaneous.
