Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. SUPPLEMENTARY VOLUME. ANSWERS RECEIVED TO SELECTED QUESTIONS FOR THE NATIVE ARMY. Published under the orders of the Government of India. CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1895. Price One Rupee.
This volume contains the questions addressed by the Commission to Com- manding Officers of Native Regiments and their replies. The answers are quoted by number only, as for various reasons it is not considered desirable to make public the name of the Regiment to which each reply refers. See Resolution of Government of India No. 1369, dated 21st March 1895, paragraph 45.
QUESTIONS FRAMED BY THE COMMISSION. INSTRUCTIONS TO COMMANDING OFFICERS. THE questions are printed on half margin, with some space between the questions. It is desirable that when the answer is brief, it should be written in the blank space opposite the questions. More space will, however, be required to answer some of the questions. In these cases the answer should be written on a separate sheet, a reference being made to it in the margin. 2. Attention is specially invited to the necessity for distinguishing between the different narcotic products of the hemp plant (ganja, charas and bhang), between the different methods of using these products, and between each of these products and any preparations of it involving the admixture of other drugs. Unless this is carefully borne in mind by the witness, confusion will result which must render his evidence on many points of little or no value. It will be borne in mind that hemp drugs have no connection with opium, and the latter is entirely excluded from this enquiry. 3. It is suggested that Commanding Officers should, in replying to these ques- tions, freely consult the medical officer in charge, and Native Commissioned and Non-Commissioned Officers. Questions 45 and 46 should be answered by the medical officer. 4. The answers should be sent direct to "The Secretary, Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, Camp," and should be despatched so as to reach him by the 1st March 1894 at latest. SELECTED QUESTIONS FOR THE NATIVE ARMY. 20. Give the total strength of your regiment, and the numbers of each caste or class of which it is composed, showing separatelyiv have no recorded ganja history confess to the use of the drug? In such cases of the alleged connection between insanity and the use of hemp as are known to you, are you of opinion that the use of the drug by persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease to obtain relief has been sufficiently consi- dered in explaining that connection? And do you think there is any evidence to indicate that insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect? Give an account under each of these points of any cases with which you are acquainted, or regard- ing which you may be able to trace information on the medical history sheets of the regiment. 46. Discuss the same question in regard to the habitual excessive use of any of these drugs. 49. Is the use of any of these drugs practised as an aphrodisiac? 51. Are any large proportion of bad characters habitual consumers of any of these drugs? What connection, if any, has the use with crime in general or with crime of any special character? 53. Does excessive indulgence in any of these drugs incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise? Do you know of any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy? 54. Are these drugs used by persons to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of vio- lence or other crime? 55. Do persons intending to commit crime, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs and so stupefy themselves? Can complete stupefaction be thus induced by this drug without admixture?
INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION ARMY. Answer No. 1. 20. Total strength2 Yes. Mental anxiety or brain disease has been sufficiently considered in cases of alleged connection between insanity and the use of hemp. Insanity may sometimes tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs. One Ram Sarup, a Muharrir in the military hospital, was addicted to the use of charas. The quantity he smoked daily was not much for his age, which was 23. Gradually the use of charas began to tell upon his mind, and although no other cause existed, he became insane and remained in the hospital. He was ultimately cured, but after a time took to smoking charas again and became insane again. 46. The excessive use produces worse results and insanity sometimes dangerous. 49. Bhang is sometimes used as an aphrodisiac. 51. A large proportion of bad characters are habitual excessive consumers of charas and ganja, but not of bhang. Petty thefts and debauchery are the crimes generally committed by these men. 53. No; and no case is known in which the excessive indulgence in any of these drugs has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. No, as far as known. 55. Yes, complete stupefaction can be induced by the excessive use of any of these drugs without admixture. Answer No. 2. 20. (a) Combatants 912 (b) Non-combatants 8 (c) Authorised camp followers 102 None. 24. None. 25. None of these drugs are in use in the regiment. None are sold in the bazar. 45. During the two months I have been in this country, I have had no experience of the use of these drugs, and therefore am unable to answer these questions. 46. Have had no experience of their use. Questions 45 and 46 [answered by Medical Officer.] Answer No. 3. 20. (a) Combatants 8 (b) Non-combatants 24 (c) Authorised camp followers 104 (a) Combatants3 Answer No. 4. 20. Muammadans 65 Brahmans 43 Chhatris 43 Others 41 TOTAL 192 (a) Combatants 181 (c) Authorised camp followers 11 Hindu 42 Muhammadan 9 Smoke ganja. No one takes charas, which is not available. 24. Hindu 25 Mussalman 10 Either eat or drink bhang. 25. There are no reliable data under this head. The force is too small to afford any clear inform- ation on the subject. 28. I cannot give proportions; but so far as I am aware, excessive indulgence is not very com- mon. 33. There is no public opinion against the moderate use of ganja among the sepoys. 39. It is popularly supposed that smoking is less injurious than any other form of consump- tion. 41. Moderate use is generally believed to have beneficial effects as follows:4 Answer No. 7. 20. (a) Combatants5 Answer No. 8. 20. (a) Combatants6 49. Charas and bhang are used as aphrodisiac. 51. The Minas in the regiment are the chief consumers, but they cannot be called bad characters. 53. Yes. No. 54. Yes. 55. Yes, charas is used with this object Yes. Answer No. 9. 20. (a) Combatants7 42. There is not sufficient evidence here to enable me to answer this question. 43. I should say yes. 44. Clears the mind and acts as a tonic gen- erally. At first distinctly refreshing, but if conti- nued, its action is in some cases stupefying, whilst others become exhilarated. Allays hunger in confirmed consumers. Stimulates the appetite in moderate indulgers. Length of effect varies with amount consumed, and whether custom is estab- lished. After-effects uncertain. Uneasiness and longing certainly felt. 45. No cases have come under my observation in which any deviation from perfect health could be attributed to these drugs, nor have I had reason to suspect that they were or had been indulged in. As regards insanity, I cannot hear of any reliable case worthy of being chronicled either for or against the use of hemp. 46. Vide ante. 49. Bhang acts as an aphrodisiac. Not used by prostitutes. In time hemp is said to produce im- potence. 51. There is not sufficient evidence available here to answer this question. 53. I cannot say. I know of no case in which it has led to temporary homicidal mania. 54 and 55. Vide answer to question 51. Answer No. 11. 20. The following are the numbers in each branch of the forces:8 or twelve years, the body loses its strength. Tempo- rary insanity is also produced, of which the fol- lowing are the signs: Sleeplessness, want of appetite, foolish ideas (khayalál kham), silly talk, sometimes friendships are forgotten, and the rights of neighbours neglected. When insane, people generally conceal the consumption of bhang, ganja, or charas; and, as a rule, those who suffer from these illnesses get better when they take the drug again. Some also go mad from taking excessive quantities, all at once when they are not used to it, and in four days they generally get well by taking curds and whey. Sometimes recovery takes longer. Besides this, when they are intoxicated, they in- crease their dose at the instigation of others. 49. As a general rule the reason for using these drugs is that given in the question. 51. As a general rule habitual consumers of these drugs are not bad characters, and they do not seem to be addicted to any special crime. 53. I have never seen any special inclinations to any crime spring from these drugs and can give no instance. 54. These drugs do not seem to be used by criminals to prepare themselves for crime. 55. Criminals mix with these drugs other in- toxicants to make their victims senseless. I have never heard that insensibility follows quickly on these drugs. Answer No. 12. 20. In this regiment there are9 Four Muhammadans (3 combatants, 1 camp fol- lower) and 2 Mahrattas (combatants) smoke ganja only in moderation mixed with tobacco. 24. Five Brahmans (combatants) drink bhang in moderation. Charas does not appear to be used at all. 25. Judging from past experience, on the decrease. 28. The ganja-smokers consume about half a pice worth daily, and the bhang-drinkers consume about 1 pie worth daily. 32. Bhang is offered to the God Mahadev on the Shivratri, and other Hindu festivals. 33. Ganja is smoked with tobacco in a dry state and bhang is taken with water. The use of these drugs by the consumers is considered beneficial. The hemp plant is said to be considered sacred by the worshippers of Mahadev. 41. In moderation ganja and bhang are con- sidered to be beneficial; the former is said to be particularly good in its effect in cases of rheu- matism. 42. Said by the consumers to be perfectly harmless. 43. No. 44. Acts as a stimulant to a certain extent; it is considered to allay hunger. Does not produce intoxication in moderation. Abstinence does not produce any longing or uneasiness. 45. The drinking of bhang does not produce noxious effects, but ganja and charas-smoking produces irritation of the mental power to those who do not take nourishing food and are constitu- tionally weak. It does not impair the constitution in its moder- ate use. It neither impairs the digestion nor causes loss of appetite. The bhang-drinkers do not get any of these diseases, but ganja and charas-smokers get bron- chitis and asthma after long-standing habits. These drugs in moderate use do not produce any of these mischiefs. It does not deaden the intellect power nor pro- duce insanity, but it rather excites the mental power by its long-standing use. Such cases have not come under my regular observation, hence I could not give any affirmative opinion of this. I have explained the above questions as a medical man, but I have not treated or properly observed any case in the regiments during my stay here. 46. In the excessive use of these drugs, the smokers and drinkers can get the noxious effects physically and mentally, and some are affected with insanity, but no such case treated in the regimental hospital during my stay here. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Perhaps in some cases. 51. No cases have been brought to notice in connection with this question. 53. Not necessarily. No case has been brought to notice in which it has led to homicidal frenzy. 54. In some cases perhaps, but not necessarily so. 55. No cases on record. Answer No. 14. 20. Total strength of regiment10 slight intoxication to those in its vicinity who are unaccustomed to its smell. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of charas and bhang would appear to be refreshing; it neither produces intoxication nor allays hunger, but it creates appetite; the effect lasts for three or four hours only. The want of subsequent grati- fication produces a good deal of uneasiness and loss of appetite; only, however, lasting for a few days. 45. The number of men using these drugs in the regiment is very small. In the cases I have seen there is no general impairment of the consti- tution which can be attributed to the habit. It does not injure the digestion or cause loss of appe- tite, but when persons accustomed to the drug are deprived of it, both these effects ensue. Deprivation of the drug is stated to produce dysentery, but no cases have come within my experience. Its use sometimes produces bronchitis and occa- sionally asthma. It induces laziness, though habi- tual smokers state that they can work longer without feeling fatigue when under its influence. I am not aware that it induces habits of im- morality. I have not met with any cases of insanity in men addicted to the use of these drugs. 46. I have never met with any cases in which the drug was used to excess. 49. Yes, charas is so used. 51. Bad characters are often habitual consumers of all these drugs, and when under their influence are undoubtedly more likely to commit crime in general. 53. Probably, but no special case is known. 54. Yes, in the same way that a man might take a dram to fortify himself for the same pur- pose. 55. Yes, the stupefaction can be produced by hemp alone, but dhatura is often mixed with it. Answer No. 15. 20. (a) Combatants11 Has no after-effects. Produces no longing or uneasiness. 45. I have no knowledge of these drugs myself, and the following information has been derived from the senior Hospital Assistant with the regiment, who has 34 years' service and has had large experience in civil employ. The moderate use of charas and ganja (which are smoked) often produces chronic bronchitis, men- tal deterioration and mental irritability. Bhang (which is used as a sher bet) does not in moderate use produce any of these symptoms. The smoking of charas and ganja diminishes appe- tite and produces emaciation; bhang produces hunger. The smoking of charas and ganja do not materi- ally predispose to dysentery; but when dysentery is developed it is of a very serious type owing to the weakness and incapability of resisting disease produced by the drug. It does cause bronchitis and asthma, but into this question must enter the consideration that the smoking of these drugs may have been due to asthma in the first instance. The smoking of Cannabis indica preparations does cause laziness and induces habits of immorality. The use of these drugs does deaden the intellect and has a tendency to produce insanity of a maniacal character, which, however, may usually be stopped by a discontinuance of the drug. There are no typical symptoms. There is a great tendency to conceal the use of the drug. When insanity is pro- duced the insanity is due to the drug itself, which is not merely the exciting cause. There are no known Cannabis indica smokers in the regiment: what has been written above only refers to smoking charas and ganja, and not the drinking bhang, which in moderate use is harmless. 46. The excessive use of charas and ganja produces similar symptoms to the moderate use, except that they are much more aggravated The excessive use of bhang causes insanity in the same way as smoking charas and ganja and destroys the appetite. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by MedicalOfficer.] 49. Has, on the contrary, the reputation of being the very reverse. 51. Bad characters, on being found to be such, are promptly got rid of, so I have no data to reply to this query. My whole knowledge on this subject is really summed up in an extra regimental impression, founded on reading, that some men "bhang themselves up to the eyes" before undertaking a murderous outrage. The native officers say "bhang"has the effect of making a man concentrate his whole attention on one thing, oblivious of all else. The native officers say such a man would not drink bhang but smoke ganja or charas. 53. One case is known of a man who had in- dulged in ganja when checked on sentry, com- ing to the charge, and threatening a native officer with the bayonet. No other data. 54. Vide reply to question 51. 55. No regimental data. Native officers consider such a use is not availed of. It might, in persons unaccustomed to it, produce complete stupefaction without admixture. Dhatura would be the thing employed, and not any preparation of the hemp plant. Answer No. 16. 20. (a) Combatants12 46. Vide answer to question 45. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Not known to be used as such. 51. Not known. 53. The effects of these drugs vary with differ- ent men: some they make violent and quarrelsome, others simply sleep off the effects. 54. Not known. 55. Not known. I have no personal knowledge of these drugs, and all my answers are from information obtained from the regiment. Answer No. 17. 20. (a) Combatants13 (c) Authorised camp followers14 Ganja15 Answer No. 22. 20. (a) Combatants16 causes inconvenience and longing; but bhang does not do so. 45. No. No. No. No. No. No. Nil. 46. Charas when used in excess impairs the constitution and weakens all the functions of the body. Bhang in excess is much less injurious. 49. No. 51. A somewhat large proportion of bad charac- ters consume charas or bhang. No connection with crime in general. 53. Very seldom. No. 54. No. Spirits or country liquor would be used. 55. Sometimes, but seldom. Complete stupefaction can be induced by both charas and bhang if partaken of in excess. Answer No. 25. 20. The total strength of the regiment is 746, composed of:17 the eyes. In some cases these two drugs (ganja and charas) tend to make a man insane, either temporarily or permanently. Charas on account of its being too expensive is not smoked as much as ganja. 41. No, the use of these drugs are not beneficial in their effects. 42. A moderate use of bhang may be harmless, for it acts somewhat like a stimulant and dispels fatigue, etc., but ganja and charas-smoking is always injurious if taken moderately or immoder- ately, because these latter two affect the brain and the chest more directly, whereas this is not the case with bhang. 43. A moderate consumer of any of these drugs is not offensive to his neighbours. 44. As mentioned above, bhang is stimulating; it is refreshing; its intoxication is not the same as that of liquor; it does not allay hunger; yes, it creates hunger, which is not easily satisfied; its effects last for three or four hours; yes, the con- sumer feels lazy after the effects have passed off; yes, those who take bhang oftener than once a day have a craving for another dose as often as the time for repeating arrives, and until this craving is gratified he feels uneasy and restless; the same feelings come on to those who only take bhang once a day. Ganja, as mentioned before, is used for smoking, and the immediate effect is that the smoker's head is at once affected and the appetite is checked; it is not refreshing; yes, there is a kind of intoxica- tion which comes on after smoking ganja. Yes, it allays hunger; no, the appetite is spoilt after smoking this drug; there is no certainty as to the length of time the effects last; yes, the after- effects are that the smoker becomes drowsy; yes, the want of subsequent gratification does produce a longing and uneasiness. 45. This question is answered by the Medical Officer in charge of the regimental dispensary:18 28. Out of the four persons, every one requires bhang worth two or three annas. His daily ex- pense on this account is only one pie and no more. 32. On public Hindu holidays, such as Maha- Shivaratra, Saturnalia Padwa and Diwali, all the people join together and partake the drink of bhang and very scarcely drink a few drops of opium (kusumba), and thus make themselves merry during the whole of the festive day. The drinking of bhang or eating of opium or charas, has no religious bearing at all. 33. Nobody in this regiment ever worships the hemp trees. 39. By adding a few other things to bhang, such as milk, sugar, cardamoms, etc., it gives a nice taste and loses its bad effects. If ganja is also smoked without mixing in it tobacco or wash- ing it several times with water, it will produce constant burning in the heart of the smoker, and thus the man will soon die if he smoke it con- stantly. 41. If in the hot season the bhang be used moderately, it conduces to the health and digests food properly. 42. If moderately used bhang is harmless. 43. No reports were made against the men wno drink bhang moderately to show that their drink- ing was in any way injurious to their neighbours. 44. The eyes of habitual drunkards are some- what reddish for a couple of hours after drinking. If bhang be mixed with sugar, badam, pepper, cardamom and badishep, it agrees with health when carefully and moderately used. Those who daily use it are never intoxicated. Drinking creates appetite and its effect never lasts more than five or six hours. Those who use it seriously on occasions become lazy for twenty-four hours; they feel sleepy and wish to eat anything as if they were hungry for the last one or two days. 45. Not to my knowledge. The smokers of ganja lose, I am confident, their brains and con- stant memory. Such people generally suffer from dysentery. The bhang never produces these bad effects or insanity. The ganja can produce per- manent insanity. As regards queries Nos. 46, 49, 51, 58, 54, 55, having had no personal knowledge or information from my subordinates, I am unable t"o answer them. Answer No. 27. 20. (a) Maratha. Mussalman. Paradesy. Geytkee Brahmans. Vangara. Bhal. Rajput. Paralhu. Dhangar. Mali & Gurav. Khatri & Ligazet Mochi. Wanting. Total. Strength 180 133 83 9 1 2 5 6 12 5 2 3 23 450 Smokers. Ganja Chara 8 9 2 1 2 22 Bhangdrinkers* 4 4 7 15* * Answer to question 24, (b) and (c) Syees. Bhistees. Bhangees. Kamalhi. Masalchi. Hospital Servants. Troop Maochis. Nabyas. Dhobees. Mali. Troop Barbers. Karkoons. Total. Strength 225 4 12 1 1 2 3 4 6 2 6 3 289 Smokers. Ganja Charas 14 14 2 1 1 22 Bhang drinkers 24. Fifteen combatants are eaters or drinkers of bhang, as shown in the above tables. 25. The use of the hemp drug is on the decrease because when this regiment was organized the heavy duties here required have very much reduced the number of men addicted to this vice. 28. For each ordinary consumer ganja of half anna, bhang of one pice and charas of half anna is required per diem. 32. Bhang is used on Shivaratra, the religious day of Hindus, Bhang and ganja are much, used among Hindus, by Shiva-worshippers. Charas is used by Baluchis; ganja is used in low classes, while bhang in high ones; these are given to friends when they are to be honoured, and special regards are to be shown to them. 33. Moderate consumers of bhang and ganja are not regarded with contempt by other men, but the charas-smokers are not treated with respect. Among the Hindus there is no custom of wor- shipping the hemp plant. 39. The smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant is more injurious than the drinking or eating of the same. In smoking, the seeds of this plant, which are more injurious, are used, while in bhang the leaves are only used and some other substantial things are added. 41. Moderate use of bhang and ganja assists digestion, and the effects of bad water and air are not so felt, and it allures hunger for a time. Even the moderate use of charas is not bene- ficial. 42. Except bhang, the other forms of this drug are harmful. 43. Moderate consumers of bhang and ganja are offensive to their neighbours, but immoderate consumers are troublesome. 44. To the habitual consumers the drinking and smoking of bhang and ganja is stimulating and refreshing. It brings energy to them. If it is used much it produces intoxication. After a time of its use it commences to check hunger. The intoxicating effect of these drugs lasts for about two hours, and when the effect is totally gone it produces headache and uneasiness and confused ideas. If the habitual consumers are not able to gratify, they become crazy and bewildered and are likely to commit a theft for satisfying the gratification. 45. It affects physically a person if continued for a long time, and produces physical and mental weakness. Yes; man loses flesh and becomes lean and weak.
19 In a moderate dose immediately increases the demand of food, but after a short time, when the effect of the drug is over, then man suffers from hunger. It makes the lung weak and it is hoped to suffer afterwards with bronchitis and asthma. It does not impair the moral sense, but induces laziness, and the habits of immorality or debau- chery are checked. A constant smoker does not suffer from the les- sening of intellect, but a new beginner may suffer from it. Sometimes a man may become mad from the use of that drug. By the use of the drug partial insensibility is produced, and it is temporary. It depends on idiosyncrasy, i.e., some persons may suffer more from small doses, while others escape if given in large doses. No, very few instances of confessions could be met with. No, cases are found in which such connection is shown. Yes, insanity induces weak-minded persons to use this drug. 46. All the above-mentioned effects and intoxi- cation are increased many fold by the habitual exces- sive use of these drugs. 51. Yes they are; they become irritative and are more quarrelsome. Men addicted to ganja and charas-smoking often steal trifling things as would suffice to purchase the gratification. 53. These drugs when taken excessively do at times incite the consumers to commit slight crimes not previously thought of. No such case has come to my knowledge yet. 54. At times the use of these drugs is shown as an excuse for offences committed. 55. These drags are used for alluring persons and getting one's objects done. Without admixture these drugs could not be given to non-consumers. Answer No. 28. 20. (a), (b) and (c). Establishment. Wanting to complete. Eurasian. Marathi. Muhammadan. Purasashi. Brahman. Phrahaboo. Shenavi. Bhatt. Comahie. Sidhi. Dhangar. Moochi. Dhobi. Gasari. Bajarmukti. Rajput. Bohi. Mala. Gujrati Brahman. Gurad. Baria. Marvadi. Hajam. Bhangi. Bhanchi. Dhedd. Mahor. Present total. Effective. 487 35 1 168 143 53 9 1 1 2 1 2 7 2 1 5 3 11 6 2 2 2 1 1 1 432 Non-effective 3 2 1 1 3 Camp-follow- ers. 271 79 1 14 3 1 1 8 70 39 55 192 GRAND TOTAL 741 114 1 169 157 53 11 9 1 2 1 2 7 5 1 5 3 11 6 2 3 2 1 1 2 8 70 3 55 627 24. Unable to ascertain facts. 25. It is my belief that these drugs are on the increase. 28. Cannot ascertain these facts. 32. Bhang is used during the native festival "Sewrathri," but I am unable to give details. S3. The practice of using these drags is re- garded as an evil. I am not aware of any sect worshipping the hemp plant. 39. Bhang and ganja are both intoxicating when drunk; but the latter, when smoked, is more injurious than when drunk, because it is not diluted. 41. The habitual moderate users of charas, ganja and bhang derive temporary relief owing to the mental faculties being stupefied. 42. This is injurious. 43. What is moderation ? Moderation has no limits. 44. It produces a peculiar kind of intoxication, attended with exhilaration of the spirits and hallu- cinations; stupefies, produces hunger, increases the appetite, and is followed by narcotic effects, sleep and stupor. Its after-effects are considered less unpleasant than opium. 45 and 46. It produces hallucinations of the men- tal functions, drowsiness, sleep, nausea and headache. The pupils of the eyes are contracted, and it affects the spinal cord. When indulged into excess it produces death. It acts as a stimulant, especially in males, and is employed as an aphrodisiac. With regard to these drugs a resolution of the Indian Government, dated the 17th December 1873, declares "that its habitual use does tend to produce insanity " and that "of the cases of insanity produced by the excessive use of drugs and spirits, by far the largest number must be attri- buted to hemp. Return: "East India (consump- tion of ganja)," 1893, No. 97. It produces both temporary and permanent insanity, and the symptoms may be reinduced by use of the drugs after liberation from restraint. 49. Yes. 51. Not necessarily. It acts as a stimulant and tends to nerve the person about to commit a crime. 53 and 54. 55. Yes. Complete stupefaction can be induced by these drugs without admixture, and victims axe induced to partake of them. D 2
20 Answer No. 29. 20. The total strength of the corps is 726, composed of the undermentioned castes: 21 Answer No. 30. 20. Total strength of regiment 539 Composed thus 22 Answer No. 32. 20. Strength of the corps 148 (a) Combatants23 Answer No. 33. 20. (a) Combatants24 Answer No. 34. 20. (a) Combatants25 this regiment, and as far as it is concerned, there- fore, there are no grounds for the formation of an opinion on any of the queries made under this section 45. 46. No grounds for any opinion, as stated in45. 49. No. 51. None. 53. I have never come across a case in this regiment. 54 and 55. Not to my knowledge. Answer No. 36. 20. Eight hundred and eighty- nine. (a) Combatants26 Answer No. 37. 20. (a) Combatants27 Answer No. 39. 20. Strength 193, including 3 vacancies. The numbers of each caste or class are stated as per Form A appended hereto. The numbers on each caste or class that smoke ganja and charas are stated in the Form B append- ed hereto. 24. At present only one, a Brahman, drinks bhang habitually, and one, also a Brahman, drinks it but occasionally. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the de- crease. The decrease is attributable to the absence of habitual consumers, who left the service, and around whom many other casual smokers used to flock for pleasure's sake, as well as to its being ex- pensive. Charas is not at all used because it is not obtain- able. 28. The average allowance of ganja to habitual moderate consumers is the most 6 pies worth or . 2 tolas weight per day. That of bhang, which is not drunk in the cold season but in the hot season, as a cooling beverage, with a mixture of black pep- per, rose-petals, almonds, poppy-seed, milk, sugar and dill, this preparation being occasional and among those that can afford to make, costs one to two annas a day; but the usual preparation by the habitual moderate drinker consists of hemp leaves, black pepper and kasni and water and costs one paisa or three pies. 32. In social gatherings, such as religious festivals, singing and nautch parties, ganja only is smoked and passed round as a form of etiquette. Also a dry preparation of the hemp leaf in sugar is eaten as sweetmeat which is called majum. 33. The general opinion on the use of these drugs is unfavourable because they are intoxicating, but every one has his own particular views on some particular preparation, which he prefers. As for the opinion in the native army, there is none to my knowledge. The use of these narcotics is in disrepute because I suppose it is nothing short of vice. The hemp plant (i. e.) bhang is not worshipped, but its drink- ing preparation is on Shivratri festival poured on the god Shiv generally by consumers of the drug during the adoration of the deity, or puja, and even non-consumers regard it obligatory to use the drug on the occasion in memory of the great pre- dilection the god Shiv had for the plant. 39. The drinking preparation is considered less injurious than the smoking and eating ones. Though its intoxicating effects last longer than those of the smoking one, it is considered less in- jurious, because of its cooling properties; ganja is heaty. 41. The moderate use of ganja or bhang seems to be beneficial. 42. The moderate use of ganja or bhang is con- sidered to be harmless, because it does not in any way injure health. 43. To my knowledge moderate consumers are not found to be offensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect upon the moderate habitual consumer of ganja is that he feels himself at once active, fit for, and inclined to do his work with a will; that of bhang is slower in its effects, which are almost the same. Bhang is refreshing, and ganja is not. They are both intoxicating; they do not allay hunger; they create appetite. The effect of ganja lasts more or less one hour, and that of bhang three hours or so. There do not seem to appear any after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification does create a craving for it. 45. It produces no noxious effects. It does not impair the constitution in any way. It does not injure digestion or cause loss of appetite. On the contrary, bhang produces good appetite when taken in small quantities. It does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. On the contrary, hemp plant preparations are often used in these diseases to alleviate the sufferings. It does not impair the moral sense, etc. It does not deaden the intellect or produce insan- ity. I have seen no case of insanity from the habi- tual, moderate use of any of these drugs. [Answered by Medical Officer.] 46. This question is discussed afc full length in a separate sheet, marked C, attached hereto. 49. The use of either of these drugs does not seem to be practised as an aphrodisiac. 51. There are not many habitual consumers of the drugs ganja and bhang serving under my com- mand, as is shown in the Form B; but hitherto I have not found any bad character among them. On the contrary there are some good and exemplary men, 53. The excessive indulgence of ganja and bhang does not seem to incite to unpremeditated crime, nor to lead one to temporary homicidal frenzy; on the contrary, from what I hear, it incapacitates him from doing any action whether violent or otherwise, and he lies helpless. 54. I have not come across any case in which a person has fortified himself with either ganja or bhang to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55. It is possible to stupefy one's victim by means of ganja or bhang in order to commit any crime either on his (victim's) person or property, but to my knowledge no such case has hitherto occurred. Complete stupefaction can be induced by either of these drugs, without any admixture, on non- consumers. Habitual consumers, from what I hear, will not easily permit it on themselves. FORM A. Showing the numbers of each caste or class of which the Regiment is composed. DESIS. PARDESIS. FOLLOWERS. Names of castes or classes. Brahmans. Baniyas. Khowasis. Kolis. Durzis. Christians. Israel. Maharattas. Muhammadans. Brahmans. Thakurs. Baniyas. Ahrirs. Lodhis. Kurmis. Bhats. Bhoi. Kajasth. Gossain. Vacancies. Total. Mohammadans. Barbers. Bhangis. GRAND TOTAL REMARKS. Number 2 2 1 2 1 35 4 41 21 35 19 6 4 3 4 2 1 1 1 3 188 2 2 1 193 E 2
28 FORM B. Showing the numbers in each caste or class that smoke ganja and drink bhang. DESIS. PARDESIS. FOLLOWERS. Names of castes or classes. Brahmans. Baniyas. Khowasis. Kolis. Durzis. Christians. Israel. Mahrattas. Muhammadans. Brahmans. Thakurs. Baniyas. Ahirs. Lodhis. Kurmis. Bhatts. Bhoi. Kayasth. Gossain. Total. Muhammadans. Barbers. Bhangis. Grand Total. REMARKS. Ganja 1 6 4 3 8 2 1 3 1 29 2 1 32 Bhang 2 2 2* *1 habitual drinker; 1 casual drinker. C.29 (b) Yes; in the manner noted above. (c) No, except in so far as these may be asso- ciated with asthma or chronic bronchitis. (d) It does not cause dysentery, but may be- come a factor in the production of bronchitis or asthma, as stated above. (e) No. (f) I am unaware of any case in which the habitual moderate use of bhang, ganja or charas produced or tended to produce insanity. 46. (a) I have known no case of habitual exces- sive use of these drugs in this regiment. Speaking generally, however, the effects of bhang, ganja and charas, when they are consumed in excess, are noxious-physically, mentally and morally; charas being perhaps the most objectionable form. (b) They provoke debility and emaciation, and in the forms of ganja and charas, chronic bron- chitis and asthma. (c) Yes; both. (d) It would appear that they never induce dysentery, but the smoking of ganja and charas does cause asthma and chronic bronchitis. (e) Yes; they would seem to lead to all these results. (f) The habitual excessive use of these drugs dulls and impairs the intellect; I have, however, no experience of their relations with insanity. 49. Yes. 51. None. 53, 54 and 55. No. Answer No. 41. 20. (a) Combatants 910 (caste Gurkha). (c) Authorised camp-followers 33 (23 Hindus, 10 sweeper caste). No men in the battalion smoke ganja, and only a very few, probably three or four of the Gurkha- damahis, habitually smoke charas. In the cold season it is consumed by perhaps something like 50 men, and occasionally when on service in Burma and Lushai. 24. None. 25. Rather on the decrease since the establish- ment of a battalion canteen. 28. Each man smokes about a tola's weight, its cost being one pice. 32. I know of no religious or social custom in connection with the consumption of these drugs that are observed by any of the men of this battalion. 33. An habitual consumer of charas becomes slack in every sense as a soldier; his senses and perceptions become dulled, and if persisted in, he usually breaks down. Such men are naturally looked down upon by their comrades. There is no worship of the hemp plant amongst Gurkhas. Kumaonis and other hill-men on certain occasions place the hemp plant soaked in milk and sugar on the idol of Mahadeo. 39. The hemp plant in this battalion is only smoked in conjunction with native tobacco. It is never in any form drunk by the Gurkha. 41. The moderate use of the charas ration once a day is held by the men to be an antifebrine. 42. If strictly in moderation, and in regard to the men who take it, I am inclined to believe the use of these drugs would not be attended with any harm. 43. They are. 45. (1) In my experience it is never habitually used in moderate quantity. There is a craving to increase the dose, and it injuriously affects the consumer, physically, mentally and morally. (2) It causes indigestion, which is followed by emaciation, and predisposes to bronchitic affections. (3) It does. (4) It is the principal cause of insanity, as observed by me, in this country. It is a powerful exciting cause. The monomania induced by it is not permanent, if the subject is debarred the use of the drug. Re-indulgence in the drug will re-induce the insanity. The symptoms are not typical, but an examination of the hands of the insane, if addicted to hemp, will show the usual stains; but apart from that, the craving for the drug induces the subject to confess to the habit. (5) I do not think indulgence is in any measure due to want of self-control through a congenitally weak intellect. (6) My knowledge of the drug as above stated has been acquired in civil practice, and not among the men of my regiment. 46. My views are fully expressed in my answer to the previous question. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer]. 49. Not in this battalion. 51. There is such an utter absence of crime amongst Gurkhas, who, as I have said, with very few exceptions, do not indulge in narcotics, that I could not say to what extent our bad characters are affected. My Subadar Major sums up by saying that the constant use of these drugs rather tends to unnerve a man, which is only to be expected. 53. No. I do not think so, but ganja and bhang, I believe, might have such a tendency. I have never known a case in this regiment which could be attributed to indulgence in any exciting drugs. 54. Gurkhas assuredly require no Dutch cour- age; if a man has made up his mind to commit a violent crime, he would more likely do so on the spur of the moment. I do not say this is absolutely the case at all times; but my experience is happily most limited on this point. 55. No. Certainly not. Stupefaction could doubtless be produced by an overdose of any narcotic, or a state closely resembling it.
30 Answer No. 42. 20. Strength 959 (a) Combatants31 (i) No worship of hemp known. (ii) No. (iii) Not worshipped. (iv) Never heard of worship of hemp. 39. (i) Smoking ganja worse for a man than drinking bhang. Worse for both stomach and temper. (ii), (iii) and (iv) Both bad. 41. (i) No good for any body. (ii) Moderate use good with food; bad on an empty stomach for those accustomed to it. (iii) Better to be without; but to man used to it, moderate use no harm. (iv) Not known. 42. (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv), Vide last ques- tion. 43. (i), (ii) and (iii) Yes. (iv) No experience. 44. (i) Not known. (ii) No experience. (iii) Does not know. (iv) Not known. 45. No doctor to answer this or following question. 46. (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) Vide last question. 49. (i) Not known; do not produce lust. (ii), (iii) and (iv) Not known. 51. (i) Bad characters do take it, and it pro- duces crime. (ii) Yes. Is connected with crime. (iii) and (iv) Not known. 53. (i) Yes. Certainly. (ii) and (iii) Yes. (iv) Not known. (i) No special case known. (ii) No case actually known. (iii) Remembers at Kirkee quarrels at religious festivals (from bhang), but no one actually killed. 54. (i) Yes. (ii) Yes, those who are in the habit would. (iii) No experience. (iv) Not known. 55. (i) and (ii) Yes. (iii) and (iv) Not known. (i) Yes. (ii) They can be quite stupefied. (i) My own head syee, an old man, very intelligent. (ii) A lascar orderly. Sharp young fellow. (iii) The head jemadar of syces; middle-aged; fairly intelligent. (iv) The tindal of lascars; old man of weak character, very respectable, but timid. Answer No. 44. 20. Total strength Native ranks 877. Regi- ment being 35 short of strength. (a) Combatants32 fully the questions relating to the effects produced from the constant use of hemp drugs. I have only been a short time in the country and have had no opportunity of watching the effects produced by the hemp drugs upon habitual consumers. [Medi- cal Officer in charge.] 49. Not known to be used as such. 51. No experiences of this in regiment; bad characters in towns and cities are often habitual consumers. 53. Probably leads to crime, such as causing a man to run "amuck." Have seen no such case myself. 54. Yes, they are said to be so used at times by bad characters, fanatics, etc. 55. Yes, chiefly down country, but it is doubtful if complete stupefaction would be induced without admixture of dhatura, etc. Answer No. 45. 20. (a) Combatants33 It seems to be taken to produce intoxication, perhaps, at first to allay mental anxiety; some- times as an aphrodisiac. Afterwards its use can- not be discontinued without great effort. There is very little of these drugs used in the regiment; if a man takes to drinking or smoking these drugs, he is very secret about it. He is discovered by his inability to do his work efficiently, and is promptly got rid of. 46. The excessive use of any of these drugs produces the same consequences as related in answer to question 45, only in a more marked degree. 49. Yes; ganja is used. 51. No. No connection, judging by the consumption in this regiment. 53. Excessive indulgence in these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime, because con- sumer usually becomes so very quickly insensible No case is known where consumption has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. These drugs are not consumed with a view to fortifying a man to commit violence or crime. 55. Ganja and charas are given so as to cause recipients to become stupefied. Complete stupefaction can be obtained by above two drugs without admixture. Answer No. 46. 20. (a) Combatants34 (e) Authorised camp followers35 Answer No. 49. 20. (a) Combatants36 33. The occasional use of bhang, as a cooling drink, is looked on as in no way disreputable. The smoking of ganja and charas is considered disreputable. 39. I have no knowledge. 41. The occasional moderate use of bhang is decidedly beneficial in its effects. I cannot ascer- tain that any benefit arises from the use of charas or ganja. 42. Any consumption of charas and ganja is said to be injurious, but I have no personal expe- rience of the subject. The harm arising there- from is said to be physical, mental and moral. 43. I have no personal acquaintance with this subject, except as regards bhang, and occasional moderate consumers of it are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. I can only speak of bhang. It does not if moderately used produce intoxication, or allay hun- ger or create appetite, nor does the want of it pro- duce uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of either charas or bhang does produce noxious effects. Habitual smokers of charas are always lean and ill-conditioned, less liable to bear fatigue or the effects of illness, and may die suddenly from slight illness. Drinkers of bhang are not lean, but ill- conditioned, but in other respects they suffer in the same ways as smokers. Both smoking and drinking impair the constitu- tion, as already stated. Charas-smoking injures the digestion, both by its effect on the stomach; it also impairs the teeth and causes them to fall out. Bhang increases the appetite and does not cause indigestion. Bhang is said to cause dysentery. Smokers of charas are much troubled with bronchitis. Both bhang and charas impair the moral sense. Smokers are careless, quarrelsome and lazy. There is slight moral impairment (smokers generally in- clined to thieving) and cowardice. Smoking impairs the moral sense, but does not lead to debauchery. Drinkers are careless, slightly less quarrelsome than smokers, but more lazy, more immoral and more inclined to debauchery. Both smoking and drinking deaden the intellect. I know of no case of insanity. Only one case of bhang-drinking has come under my notice. The results were as described in the above remarks. 46. I know no case of the habitual excessive use of these drugs; nor do the Hospital Assistants, whom I have questioned on the subject. Bhang and charas only has been dealt with, as I can obtain no inform- ation about ganja. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. I have no knowledge of this subject. 51. Not in my regiment. 53. I have no personal knowledge on this sub- ject. 54 and 55. I cannot say. Answer No 52. 20. (a) Combatants37 of the day, and were apt to be faint from want of food in the early morning. 46. I have had no experience of such cases. 49 and 51. No. 53. Yes. I can quote no instance. 54 and 55. No. Answer No. 53. 20. Strength of regiment38 effect lasts some two or three hours. It leaves no after-effects, nor does the want of subsequent grati- fication produce any longing or uneasiness. Charas and ganja even in moderation are noxious. They produce loss of appetite and intoxication and leave bad after-effects and a longing for subsequent gratification with great uneasiness if ungratified. 45. The moderate use of these drugs produces no noxious effects whatever. It does not impair the constitution in any way. It does not injure the digestion or cause loss of appetite. It does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. It does not impair the moral sense or induce laziness or habits of immorality or debauchery. It does not deaden the intellect or produce in- sanity. Have known none such. There is no evidence to indicate that insanity tends to indulgence in the use of the drug by a person deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. Nil. 46. (1) Prolonged and excessive use produces noxious effects, both physical and mental; but I have not observed any noxious moral effects there- from. (2) It weakens the constitution like excess in any other vice. (3) Does not specially affect the digestive organs. (4) Does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. (5) I have not observed that it impairs the moral sense or induces to laziness and habits of immo- rality and debauchery. (6) It does not deaden the intellect, but, on the contrary, produces insanity by hyper-activity of the brain, and is the direct exciting cause and not the predisposing cause. The insanity may be tem- porary or permanent. The symptoms may, of course, be re-induced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. There are no typical symptoms after insanity is absolutely established (though the symptoms of the acute stage of deliri- um from cannabis sativa differ somewhat from that produced by alcohol (delirium tremens), owing to the nature of the poison). Just as repeated attacks of delirium tremens from alcohol produce, in a definite percentage of cases, permanent madness, so repeated attacks of acute cerebral excitement from over-in- dulgence in Indian hemp cause permanent aberra- tion of intellect. The two cases are, in my opinion, analogous. Insanes have no reluctance to confess the use of the drug: on the contrary, the sane soldier, fearing the result, would be reluctant to confess the use of it. The excessive consumption of hemp may, and often does, cause madness: but insanity would scarcely lead to excessive indulgence in the drug; that is " placing the cart before the horse." The only cases during an experience of some fifteen years with the regiment which I can recall are the following:39 55. I believe they do, but having no experience cannot say for certain. Yes, any of these drugs will produce complete stupefaction if taken in sufficient quantities-a statement which applies to beer, wine and spirits. Answer No. 54. 20. (a) Combatants40 ganja or bhang, except as stated in the last answer, the use of narcotics generally is looked on unfa- vourably by strict adherents of the various castes. The moderate use, however, is not deprecated. Worshipping the hemp plant is unknown in this part of India. 39. The immoderate smoking of ganja is said to be the most injurious form of consuming the drug. 41. The moderate use of the drug is known to have a beneficial effect generally, having a quieting effect on the brain, increases the appetite, soothes pain, and causes sleep. 42. In moderate use, is considered not only harmless but beneficial. Moderate use is under- stood to render men less irritable, acts as a mental and physical stimulant and refreshes a tired man. Smoking ganja and afterwards drinking water is said to allay hunger. 43. No. 44. Please see my answer to No. 42. When taken to excess produces intoxication. Moderate use creates appetite. Effect lasts about eight hours. No after-effects, except on immoderate use. Want of subsequent gratification does produce longing. 45. Habitual moderate use stated not to have any noxious effect, either physical, mental, or moral. Stated not to impair constitution in any way. On the contrary, it is said to increase appetite and improve digestion. Causes none of these diseases, when used in moderation. Stated not to impair moral sense or to induce lazy habits, but tends to increase the sexual ap- petite. Does not deaden intellect, or produce insanity when used moderately. I have had no practical experience of the con- sumption of any of the preparations made from Indian hemp. 46. The habitual excessive use produces insanity, usually acute mania with a tendency to use violence. Dysentery is also common, and often causes death among ganja insanes. It is stated ganja both predisposes to, and excites, insanity and dysentery. Deprivation of the drug renders consumers helpless. Insanity caused by it is often curable if the drug be withdrawn, but may be re-induced by further abuse. Ganja insanes usually ask for it to be given them. 49. Yes. 51. No. None. 53. No. No. 54. Yes, and then taken to excess. 55. No. Yes. Answer No. 56. 20. (a) Combatants41 Answer No. 57. 20. Muhammadans 166 Sikhs 158 Brahmans 6 Rajputs 139 Jats 153 Other Hindus 2 624 (a) Combatants 604 (b) Non-combatants 20 (c) Authorised camp followers 352 None that I know of. 24. None. 25. I am unable to say, as these drugs are not in use in the regiment. 28. We have no recognised habitual moderate consumers. 32. I know of none. 33. I am unable to give a reply to this ques- tion. 39. Have never been in a position to ascertain this fact, and the regiment does not recognise that the practice of either drinking or smoking it is carried on in the regiment. 41. I am unable to say. I have never tried it. 42. I cannot say. 43. Perhaps; have never had a neighbour who used the drug to my knowledge. 44. Cannot say. 45. I cannot say. I cannot say. Do not know. Do not know. I cannot say. I cannot answer this question. I have no opinion on this subject. I know of none. No record of such cases ever having occurred in the regiment. 46. I am unable to enter into any discussion on the subject. 49. Not that I know of. But I remember reading somewhere that the drug produces "exhi- laration of spirits and hallucinations said to be generally of a pleasing kind." 51. There are no bad characters in my regi- ment. 53. No. 54. Perhaps; I cannot positively give any reply to this. 55. Possibly; I have never been in a position to judge. I do not know. Answer No. 58. 20. Total strength of regiment42 51. There is no connection noticeable between the use of the drug and the commission of crime of any character. 53. No. This has not been observed. 54. It has not been noticed that this is so. 55. It is not believed that is so. Complete stupefaction may very possibly be effected by the drug. Answer No. 59. 20. (a) Combatants43 hand, it goes against a man to be known as a ganja consumer. Consumption of these drugs is not connected with crime in general or any crime of special character. 53. No; it has a deadening effect on the intellect and tends to oblivion rather than incites to violence. I know of no such case. 54. I have never come across a case of this sort. 55. Yes; no doubt such cases do occur, as it is quite feasible to stupefy a victim by inducing him to partake of ganja, etc., under the guise of friend- ship or hospitality. Yes; complete stupefaction can be thus induced Answer No. 60. 20. Total strength of the regiment on 15th February 1894-815. Numbers of each caste as follows:44 Answer No. 61. 20. (a) Combatants45 The exciting cause of insanity; mania, which is only temporary; but symptoms may be reinduced, even by moderate doses, I am informed. There is no typical symptom: all confess without pressure. Amongst the women it is only taken by prosti- tutes, and that in moderation. Weakened intellects are prone to fall victims. There is no case in this hospital, but I have given my opinions from the few cases I have seen elsewhere. 46. It causes insanity, and is difficult to give up the habit; causes dysentery and diarrh46 Answer No. 65. 20. (a) Combatants 909 (b) Non -combatants 7 (c) Authorised camp followers 39 (a) Combatants about 3 per cent. (b) Non-combatants Nil. (c) Authorised camp followers 8 24. None. 25. Neither ganja nor bhang are apparently obtainable here. The amount of charas sold is much less than formerly. The reason of this decrease in consumption of charas, as far as I have been able to ascertain, is that the old charas-smokers have died, or taken their discharge, and the men entertained in their place have not contracted the habit. 28. About 22 grains, worth 3 pies, per diem. 32. There are none, as far as I have been able to ascertain. 33. A charas-smoker is looked on as a man of bad repute. The men generally smoke it secretly. The other men say that a smoker of charas generally loses his soldierly instincts, gets nervous, starts at the least thing, his perceptions get dim, and he loses courage. I have not been able to ascertain any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 39. I believe that low-caste Hindus and poor people smoke charas or ganja, which has a much more injurious effect and is more intoxicating than eating bhang. 41. No benefit from the moderate use of charas or ganja. Bhang is said to be cooling in the hot weather, and to give a good appetite when drunk before meals. 42. The moderate use of charas dulls the in- tellect for the time being, but apparently, it is said, increases the appetite. In small doses bhang does not harm. 43. Yes. 44. After charas-smoking in small doses, slight intoxication is the first effect. Not refreshing. Does not allay hunger. Increases appetite. In- toxication lasts about two hours, afterwards some- times headaches, always laziness. There is always a longing for more after the first intoxication. 45. Charas-smokers lose their muscular develop- ment and become thin. Bhang has apparently not this effect. Ganja has also a bad effect on the muscular system. Charas does not cause loss of appetite or hinder the digestion, and the same applies to bhang and ganja in moderate doses. Charas causes bronchitis and asthma. All the preparations induce laziness, but not habits of immorality, though they may induce debauchery. They deaden the intellect markedly and produce insanity, but this injurious effect is principally due to charas. The use of bhang not predisposing to insanity with anything like the same effect as charas. Not having seen any cases of insanity due to the use of these drugs, I cannot give any reliable information as to the type, symptoms, etc., etc. 46. From the habitual excessive use of charas the person becomes emaciated, the appetite is lost, digestion impaired. Bronchitis and asthma are induced, and the intellect is so dulled that the smoker passes into a state of imbecility. I can give no information as regards excessive use ofbhang. I am unable to instance any cases of insanity, as the drug is not in great demand here. 49. I believe it is no use as an aphrodisiac. 51. No. 53. It makes a man talkative, argumentative, and sometimes insubordinate. 54 and 55. I cannot say. Answer No. 66. 20. Six hundred and twenty-five. Sikhs 153 Hindustani Muhammadans 210 Muhammadans of Darajat and Panjabis 111 Other Hindus 32 Christians 4 Pathans and Afridis beyond and within British territory 105 (a) Combatants 615 (b) Non-combatants 36 (c) Authorised camp followers Nil. Few Pathans only use charas, but they are not habitual consumers. 24. None. 25. It is certainly not on the increase, as no one has been noticed consuming them. 28. Price varies in localities. In the country where these drugs are grown the cost of them would be small. Carriage and octroi dues add greatly to the original cost. 32 and 33. Unknown. 39. Perhaps. 41 and 42. They may be. 43. Have never heard any complaint. 44. Unknown. The following answers are not the result of per- sonal experience but obtained by interrogating some men of this regiment who used charas only. 45. Used for many years it appears to impair the mental, physical and moral powers. Prolonged use impairs the constitution. In some cases it quick- ens appetite, in others impairs digestion. It does not. In some cases it tends to laziness; in others it leads to debauchery. It at first appears to sharpen the intellect. I have no evidence that it produces insanity, having no personal experience of the narcotic or deleterious effects of any of the products of this drug. In some cases it appears to relieve persons suffer- ing from mental worry and anxiety. I have not been able to acquire any information regarding this subject in the Medical History Sheets or Medical Records in the hospital of this regiment. 46. The prolonged excessive use of charas seems
47 to induce premature old age, general debility, and attenuation of all organs. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49 and 51. No experience. 53. No personal experience. 54. No experience. 55. No personal experience. Answer No. 67. 20. (a) Combatants- Muhammadans 123 Hindus 667 Christians 15 Jews 6 TOTAL 811 (b) Non-combatants48 Answer No. 68. 20. Eight hundred and fifty-one. (a) Combatants 826 (b) Non-combatants 1 (c) Authorised camp followers 24 Smoke ganja49 Answer No. 69. 20. (a) Combatants None. (b) Non-combatants 23 (c) Authorised camp followers 87 Nine Koris smoke ganja; no charas used. 24. None. 25. Said to be on the decrease. There are none. 28. About 3 pies daily for ganja. 32. I am acquainted with none. 33. Generally with indifference. No. Charas is considered the worst form. Not in this corps. 39. Smoking less injurious. The same difference exists as between the smoking and chewing of tobacco. 41. Ganja said to be beneficial; bhang used medicinally as a cordial. 42. Certainly, as with tobacco, having regard to the difference of individual constitutions. 43. Perfectly so. 44. I am not sufficiently acquainted with the vernacular to elicit this information in a reliable manner. 45. Yes, leads to insanity especially. Yes, when used in excess only. No. No. Yes. Yes. Exciting cause. Permanent, mania. Hallucinations, homicidal mania. Not as a rule. Yes. The use of hemp drugs leads to insanity, not vice versa. Nil. 46. The same, only in an exaggerated degree. 49. I am not sufficiently acquainted with the vernacular to elicit this information. 51. No bad characters here. No doubt occasion- ally gives occasion to the military crime of sen- tries and men on duty being found asleep on their posts. 53. Certainly, as in the case of whiskey, etc. No. 54. Not to my personal knowledge. 55. Opium and dhatura are said to be chiefly employed for such purposes. A full dose of 2 or 3 grains of extract of Canna- bis indica (or its equivalent of any of the prepara- tions of hemp) will produce complete insensibility and somnolence, lasting for hours after the initial period of excitement is over. Answer No. 70. 20. (a) Combatants50 Answer No. 71. 20. (a) Combatants 8 (b) Non-combatants 4 (c) Authorised camp followers 116 No ganja consumed. Two sweepers and 7 Hindus (Chamars) smoke charas. 24. None. 25. No perceptible increase or decrease. 28, About 1/64 of a chittack, costing about 3 pies. 32. None in the battery. 33. The consumption is not regarded as a vice. Opinion is passive. No. 39. None in the battery eat or drink it. 41. Cannot say. 42. Appears harmless in the battery. 43. Absolutely. 44. Cannot say; they appear to enjoy it. 45. Not in the battery. No. No. No. No. No. No cases in the battery. 46. The men are too poor to afford smoking in excess. 49. No. 51. No. None. 53. No. No. 54. No. 55. There is no crime. Cannot say. Answer No. 72. 20. Seven hundred and seventy-four. HINDUS. HINDUSTAN. DECCAN ANDCONCANMARATHAS. RAJPUTANA. PANJAB. PARWARIS. MOCHIS. MANGS. MUSSALMANS [NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted 51 The symptoms are likely to be reinduced at any time by further excess. I do not think that insanity from other causes would produce a tendency to the use of the drug. 7. The case of 52 hours to two or three days. The after effects are laziness, a good deal of coughing and bleared eyes, not the same craving that want of opium would cause nor apparently much the same as a tobacco- smoker amongst Europeans feels. No uneasiness of any kind. 45. The habitual moderate use of these drugs undoubtedly does lead to physical debility and moral degradation. But so far as this regiment is concerned, in the few cases in which the drug is known to be consumed, viz., among bandsmen, no ill-effects have been noticeable, save a general tendency to loss of tone and appetite, with nausea in the morning. True, one man died of pulmonary phthisis who was known to be addicted to the habitual use of charas, but how far his disease was aggravated by its use, or perhaps by its disconti- nuance after his admission to hospital, is doubtful. Those addicted to these drugs are wholly lazy and disinclined for fatigue. No cases of insanity from the use of hemp preparations, or from other causes, has ever occurred in the regiment. 46. No case of habitual excessive use of these drugs has been known to have occurred in the regiment. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by MedicalOfficer.] 49. No, they have a contrary effect. 51. Yes, it is chiefly bad characters, such as bazar loafers and especially gamblers, who are consumers as well as fakirs (see 28 and 44). Prostitutes are not addicted to the use nor would thieves be, for obvious reasons. The people I questioned seemed to think there was no connec- tion between it and crime. Habitual consumers sit or even stand or sleep in a stupefied sort of way, noticing nothing and doing nothing. 53. No, they think not, for reasons given in the previous reply. One man I questioned knew of two cases of homicide committed by men drunk or stupefied with this drug. 54. No, unlike our wines and spirits in this respect. 55. Undoubtedly. At Amritsar this form of crime prevails, and one native officer had himself almost fallen a victim. The practice is to offer it mixed in sweetmeats. Complete stupefaction can be induced by the plain drug, but it seems that the effects are slower; and of course, from the fact that the taste is un- pleasant, it is seldom or never administered plain. Answer No. 74. 20. (a) Combatants53 or alcohol and is later on followed by a desire to sleep. It does not allay hunger, but produces appetite. Its effects last for from four to five hours. I cannot ascertain if any immediate after-effects follow. The want of it produces uneasiness, but after abstinence for a week or two the uneasiness passes away. 45. There is no doubt that the habitual moder- ate use of these drugs will produce bad physical mental and moral effects. Bhang seems to be less injurious in its effects. It does decidely impair the constitution and makes the user spiritless, emaciat- ed and decrepit. Although its temporary effect is to create appetite, its ultimate effect is to impair digestion and destroy appetite; its continued use is very likely to cause dysentery, bronchitis and asth- ma. The moral sense is dulled and from its powerful aphrodisiac effect it is likely to cause immorality and debauchery, but its ultimate effect in this direction will be to cause impotence. It deadens the intellect and causes insanity. In the only case which has come under my notice during my short service, I considered it both the exciting and predisposing cause. This was a case of acute mania resulting from its use, and that of a temporary nature. The symptoms would cer- tainly be likely to recur on liberation from restraint and fresh indulgence. It is my opinion that in- sanity would become chronic unless indulgence in their use were ceased. I cannot say if there are any symptoms particularly typical of the insanity caused by use of the drug. 46. The excessive use of the drug will produce a train of symptoms similar to those described in question 45, which will be marked by more rapid onset and be more pronounced. 49. Yes, apparently; but it is believed that lengthened use leads to impotence. 51. It is believed that habitual use leads to a craving which must be gratified, and that if other means fail to obtain the drug, gambling and steal- ing are resorted to. 53. No case known. 54. It is not known. 55. It appears that the simple administration of these drugs does not produce complete stupe- faction. Answer No. 75. 20. (a) Combatants54 44. It is considered to give a whet to the appe- tite and cause a feeling of pleasure in the system. Bhang placed in any drink is thought to quench the thirst and refresh one as a temporary measure. A moderate quantity would not cause intoxication in an habitual consumer. Hunger is rather increased and appetite creat- ed. An hour or so. The after-effects are rather weakening than otherwise. The want of subsequent gratification would produce longing and uneasiness. 45. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Exciting cause. Homicidal mania, generally temporary. Yes. Symptoms of hemp intoxication and homicidal impulses. No. Yes. Yes, may be; but indulgence as a rule leads to insanity and not contrariwise. No cases traceable in regimental records. Ex- perience of civil cases enable me to give above general answers. No one in this regiment uses any preparation of hemp in any form as far as I know. 46. The same as above detailed, only in an ex- aggerated form. 49. Not so far as is known. 51. There are not sufficient data in the regiment on which to give an opinion. It is, however, believ- ed that ganja or charas-smoking in excess does incite to violence. 53. Yes, it is believed that excessive indulgence in the smoking of ganja or charas might incite to crime otherwise unpremeditated. No case is known of in this regiment. 54. This might be the case, but no certain in- formation on this point is available. 55. In some cases this would very probably be done, but no such case has been known. By smoking ganja and charas complete stupe- faction can be induced. Answer No. 76. 20. (a) Combatants55 41. I do not think that the use of charas or ganja, in moderation, can be beneficial. I do not know that the use of bhang, in moderation, is the reverse of beneficial. 42. I have never noticed any bad effects from use of charas or ganja, except that habitual consumers are inclined to be inattentive in their duties ("slack"). 43. Yes, but non-consumers find the odour of the charas or ganja smoke objectionable. 44. Stimulant. Refreshing. Does not produce intoxication in moderate use. Said to allay hunger and increase appetite. Effect lasts for about two hours or more. No after-effects to speak of. Habitual consumers would feel the want of the drug, if deprived of it, for a time. 45. Not that I have ever noticed. Not that I am aware of. No. No. No. Have had no experience of this kind. Have had no experience of this kind. Have never seen any bad effects traceable to hemp smoking, and there are no records of such cases in the medical history sheets of the regiment. 46. Most of the Kahars are habitual smokers of hemp moderately, and I have never noticed any bad effects. I have had no experience of cases of habi- tual excessive use. 49. Yes. 51. Not that I am aware of: smokers of charas and ganja (Muhammadans) are looked upon as low class persons. No connection with crime. Consumers of charas and ganja are not, as a rule, smart soldiers56 33. Consumption considered bad. Generally speaking adverse. Because it causes physical and mental debility. No worship of hemp plant known. 39. Not known. 41. The use of bhang is said to have a fatten- ing effect. 42. The answer to this question depends on the meaning of moderate use, for I believe small quantities are considered injurious. 43. Yes. 44. Effects at first refreshing; produce intoxi- cation. Impart a kind of appetite. Duration of effect said to be three hours. Yes. 45. I regret that, owing to my experience being so limited, I am quite unable to give an opinion which would be of any value. 46. No case of excessive use has ever come under my notice. 49. Yes. 51. Not known. Said to have no connection with crime, but I rather doubt this assertion. 53. Said not to incite. No. 54. Said to produce timidity rather than courage to commit violence. 55. Said to be used for this purpose. It is stated this is possible. Answer No. 79. 20. (a) Combatants 23 (b) Non-combatants 94 Ganja 25 per cent; charas none. 24. None. 25. Said to be slightly on the increase, owing to the force of example. 28. Two to 3 pies. 32. I can find out nothing about this. 33. I cannot answer this question. 39. I am given contradictory statements about this. 41. Yes. 42. Said to be harmless. I have no evidence to enable me to form an opinion. 43. I believe so. I have never heard any com- plaints. 44. I have not seen any effect. I am told it is nice and refreshing, produces an exhilarating effect, and creates an appetite. 51. I cannot say. 53. I cannot say. No. 54. and 55. I cannot say. Answer No. 80. 20. (a) Combatants57 43. Yes, certainly. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of bhang is refreshing, produces little intoxication, and has a soothing effect, and creates appetite; effect lasts for three hours; that of charas and ganja has an exciting effect and lasts for an hour. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 45. None, so far as ascertained. No. No, rather the contrary. Smoking of ganja and charas said to cause tendency to bronchitis and asthma. No. Have known of no case of insanity influenced by use of these drugs. None. None. Excessive use of bhang is said to cause heaviness and general laziness, followed by irritability. Excessive smoking ganja and charas is irritat- ing to bronchial tubes, and causes excitement and noisy conversation. 49. Ganja and charas are said to be used as an aphrodisiac. 51. Have had no opportunities of judging. I should say not. 53 and 54. No. 55. Cannot say; have had no opportunities of judging. Yes; certain men can be affected in this way but only about 10 per cent. of all cases. Answer No. 81. 20. Total strength of regiment 791 Combatants. Followers Total Mahrattas 360 11 371 Sikhs 14 1 15 Jains 13 0 13 Hindustanis 144 2 146 Rajputs 34 0 34 Parwaris and Mochis 110 13 123 Muhammadans 116 7 123 TOTAL 791 34 825 (a) Combatants 791 (b) Non-combatants 2 (c) Camp followers 32 TOTAL 825 Smoke ganja58 I have no experience of such cases. Not that I know of. Yes, in the above case the man admitted the use of it. I have not had sufficient acquaintance with cases of insanes to justify me in drawing any conclu- sions. With reference to effect on digestion and appe- tite, there is a man in this regiment who has been known to drink four gallons of bhang water, and then sit down and eat at a meal two pounds of mutton and three pounds of flour. I have had two or three cases of bronchitis with symptoms of asthma in hospital which were un- doubtedly caused by ganja-smoking. They re- covered speedily when the drug was stopped. A confirmed ganja-smoker or drinker in excess is more likely to become mentally disturbed bynot getting his usual morning dose than by taking an overdose. 46. The excessive smoking of ganja or charas induces asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, mental decay and moral aberration. It often produces diarrh59 Answer No. 83. 20. (a) Combatants 744 (b) Non-combatants 4 (c) Authorised camp followers 26 The regiment is comprised of Hindus, with a very small sprinkling of Muhamadans. The regiment being comprised mainly of Raj- puts, the use of any of these drugs is by no means universal: about ten per cent. smoke ganja, but owing to the difficulty of procuring charas, but few smoke this drug. 24. The members who eat or drink bhang are about the same; those who eat it in the cold wea- ther drink it in the hot weather. The number eating and drinking bhang is about 13 per cent. 25. As far as I can ascertain, the present use of all these drugs is much the same as it has always been; but, as has been before explained, the use of charas is now very limited. 28. The average allowance per diem to habitual moderate consumers is:60 46. Constitution is impaired, especially from ganja; indigestion, loss of appetite, bronchitis, frequent diseases, induces laziness. The effects of ganja always worse than those of charas or bhang. 49. No experience. 51. Unable to answer this; no experience. 53. Unable to answer this since drug not used in detachment. 54. Not in my experience. 55. The Thugs were in the habit of doing this. Yes. Answer No. 85. 20. (a) Combatants61 Malabars 7 Southern Gentus 2 Northern Gentus 5 Other castes 4 (b) Non-combatants62 25. Ganja and charas not consumed. Neither increasing or decreasing in the case of bhang. 28. Ganja and charas not consumed. When bhang is used the allowance is about 1/5th of an ounce per month, it being taken only once or twice in the month. The cost is 1/4 to 1/2 anna per month. 32. Not known. 33. Ganja and charas are supposed to be inju- rious if habitual: bhang also if habitual, but use- ful if used only occasionally and medicinally. The above is the opinion in this battery. Habitual use is in disrepute, as the man's nerves, feelings and strength suffer thereby. No custom of worshipping the hemp plant is known of. 39. The smoking of ganja or charas is more injurious than the drinking of bhang, as the fumes of former act directly on the brain and nerves, whereas the bhang diluted with water has first to pass through the stomach and system be- fore it can affect the nerves. 41. The very moderate and occasional use of bhang is decidedly considered beneficial. 42. From my experience I should say that this very moderate and occasional use of bhang is harmless, as I have never noticed any one case of a man being affected by it, and as a rule all the men are subject to very severe physical work, and the non-commissioned officer and senior gunners to advanced intellectual strain also in professional sub- jects. 43. I have not noticed this, nor, as far as I can find, has any case arisen causing offence. 44. The effects of ganja and charas not known. Very moderate use of bhang, as used in this battery, appears refreshing. If taken to excess, it would, of course, produce intoxication; it usually acts as a tonic, though it is said it also sometimes allays hunger. The habitual consumer is, I hear, under the effects for four to six hours, but the moderate consumer feels the effect only every tem- porarily and feels no after-effects. The habitual consumer does feel a longing for it, but this longing does not pursue the moderate consumer. 45. Yes. There is physical, mental and moral degeneration. Yes. It renders the person more liable to disease; he has less recuperative power. Causes loss of appetite. Predisposes to diseases of the respiratory organs. It impairs the moral sense and induces laziness. It deadens the intellect, and it is said sometimes to produce insanity. Does not know of a case in which insanity was produced by the drug alone but cases of insanity have sometimes a history of ganja or charas-smoking. It seems to be taken to produce intoxication perhaps at first to allay mental anxiety, sometimes as an aphrodisiac. Afterwards its use cannot be discontinued without great effort. No information on the subject can be found in the medical history sheets. 46. The excessive use of these drugs produces the same consequences as related in answer to question 45, only in a more marked degree. 49. It is said it is, but I can find or hear of no case to corroborate this. 51. I have no experience of this, though it is natural to suppose bad characters cultivate bad habits and that bad habits of this kind would lead a man to commit crime 53. Yes. I should say it did : I know of no case, however. 54. I know of no case to prove this. 55 I am told that extract of bhang is so used and that complete stupefaction can thus be induced. Answer No. 89. 20. (a) Combatants63 Answer No. 90. 20. Total strength 625 Muhammadans 242 Mahrattas 140 Jat Sikhs 141 Hindustani Brahmans 14 Rajputs 13 Chattris 15 Jats 50 Christians 10 (a) Combatants 623 (b) Non-combatants 2 (c) Authorised camp followers 403 Twelve syces from Hindustan only smoke ganja. The syces are private followers and are not enlisted. 24. Nil. 25. So little used in this regiment, have no data to go on. 28. One pie per diem, I understand, is what a syce spends. They are paid R6-8 per mensem by silladars. 32. None known to me. 33. A ganja-smoker is looked down on to a cer tain extent. Bhang is a stimulant of higher re- pute. The practice is looked down on as degrading by the men of this regiment. None so far as I know. 39. Smoking is injurious, as it violates the respiratory passages to quite a marked degree afterwards: it also promotes thirst. 41. Those who drink bhang in moderation say it benefits them during hot weather. 42. I think the probabilities are moderate use of these drugs is not adhered to. 43. Yes. 44. They increase appetite, give a sense of well- being and promote pleasant sleep; are also aphro- disiac. No after-effects or uneasiness. This is when taken in strictest moderation. 45. No. No. No. Smoking causes bronchitis. They may perhaps make a man more sexually active. I have no experience. 46. I have no experience. A man who runs "amuck" is often spoken of as "bhanged."* But I do not know how this state is arrived at, or what it is when produced. 49. I think so, from what I have been told. 51. I have no data to give. 53. I have no experience. 54. It is commonly so supposed. 55. I do not know. * i.e. prepared by ganja-smoking. Answer No. 91. 20. (a) Combatants 82364 20 and 24. It is impossible to say. The order prohibiting the use of these drugs prevents men coming forward, but, as far as I am aware, very few (probably 20 to 40 men) are in the habit of using these drugs. 25. I do not think the use of ganja, charas or bhang or any of these drugs is either on the in- crease or decrease. I can give no reasons for it. 28. The average allowance and cost per diem of each of these drugs is, as far as I can ascertain, about as follows:65 28. Said to be 1/2 anna. 32. I do not know any. 33. (1) Askance. (2) As far as this regiment is concerned, those who use bhang or charas are ashamed of it. Why I cannot say. (3) I can find no trace of any such custom among consumers in this regiment. 39. I cannot say. 41. No. 42. I cannot say. 43. Inoffensive. 44. The habitual and moderate consumer of charas or bhang is said to be rendered happy by its use. (b) Is refreshed. (c) Is slightly intoxicated. (d) Has not his hunger allayed. (e) Has an appetite created. (f) The effect lasts about one and a half hours. (g) No. (h) Yes. 45. Said to be as under. No. No. No. No. To a certain extent. No. I know no cases. I know no cases. 46. The excessive use of charas and bhang is said to be destructive from both a moral and physical point of view, and ultimately to lead to insanity. But no such cases can be instanced in this regiment. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Said to be often so used. 51. I cannot say. 53. I do not know. 54. and 55. I have not met with a case. Answer No. 93. 20. (a) Combatants Nil. (b) Non-combatants 9 66 33. The consumption of charas and ganja is re- garded in a bad light owing to its bad effects. No opinion with regard to bhang. No custom of worshipping. 39. No. 41. Bhang in medicinal doses might be useful in dysentery and diarrh67 44. It is refreshing if taken in moderation. (2) It does produce intoxication. (3) It does not allay hunger. (4) It does stimulate the appetite. (5) The effect of ganja or charas lasts about two hours, and bhang intoxication lasts about six hours. (6) The after-effects are lassitude and a feeling of weariness. (7) The want of a drug to a habitual consumer is not felt to any extent-not like opium-there is no great longing or weariness. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not, as far as I have ascertained, pro- duce noxious effects, except in the case of charas, which causes bronchial irritation with considerable expectoration. I believe a number of the sepoys of this regi- ment employ these drugs habitually in moderate doses, with, as far as I am aware, no injury to health. 46. The habitual excessive use of the drugs produces noxious effects. It impairs the constitution, causing general debility, except in the case of bhang, which is said to produce no ill-effects. Charas and ganja injure digestion, &c.; bhang not. Charas and ganja cause bronchitis and asthma. Charas and ganja induce laziness. The drugs cause, I believe, insanity, sometimes, and are probably the exciting cause, but I have no knowledge of any cases. No case of excessive use of the drugs has come under my observation in the regiments to which I have ever been attached. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. We are not aware of the use of these drugs being practised as an aphrodisiac. 51. No. Some of the worst characters in the regiment are in the band, and none of them con- sume the drug. However, the use of bhang and other preparations of hemp is frequently the cause of crime. Lately it has been in the regiment the cause of an attempt at suicide. Excessive indul- gence is known to produce homicidal or suicidal mania. 53. Yes. See answer 51. We know of no case of homicidal frenzy in the regiment, but a sepoy who lately shot himself while on sentry was an habitual consumer and there was no known motive for his attempt. 54. Yes, the drug is said to be used for this purpose. 55. Yes, it is said that the drug has been so used, but we believe that complete stupefaction is induced by admixture with opium or dhatura seeds, and administered in sweetmeats. Answer No. 97. 20. Total strength of the regiment:68 54. Yes, vide above, last paragraph. 55. Yes, to both. A fresh man could be made insensible by either unmixed with anything else; but for an old hand it has to be mixed with sugar and other ingredients. Answer No. 98. 20. (a) Combatants69 Answer No. 99. 20. (a) Combatants70 them in regiment: these apply particularly to ganja. 28. Half tola, cost 1 pice. 32. Forbidden in all religions. 33. It is considered by all respectable men as a most vicious habit, and though many indulge in it that is the opinion. It makes a man unfit for his duty. None that I know of. 39. Smoking is worse than drinking or eating, as it affects the brain and all the bodily powers. 41. None from charas or ganja. Natives say that bhang taken moderately in the hot weather has a cooling effect, and they take it for the same reason that English officers take pegs of whiskey and soda. 42. Charas and ganja always injurious, in what- ever quantities they are taken. If bhang taken in small quantities, it is not in- jurious. 43. Bhang-consumers are not troublesome to their neighbours. Charas and ganja-consumers quarrelsome and are never to be trusted. 44. Ganja71 41. Of the two former, no. The drinking of bhang in moderation is harmless and stimulates appetite. 42. The smoking of charas and ganja is harmful, producing as it does coughs and weakened chest. 43. Inoffensive. 44. Bhang is refreshing, and creates appetite. It produces intoxication. No after-effects. The effect is temporary. Habitual users feel a craving for it. 45. The Medical Officer states:72 There being strict regimental orders pro- hibiting the use of these drugs, I know of none. 24. The greater number are reported to eat the drug. Men from Hindustan generally drink it. The exact numbers of each caste or class it is impossible to obtain. 25. The use of bhang is reported to be decreas- ing. Ganja and charas seldom heard of. 28. From what I can gather, habitual moderate consumers even do not exist in the regiment. 32. None known of a religious nature. It is a social custom to take bhang at the Holi festival. 33. The use of ganja and charas is generally dis- approved of on account of their demoralising ten- dencies. I can learn of no custom of hemp wor- ship. 39. Smoking is considered the more injurious. 41. No. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is con- sidered injurious generally to health; always a liability to increase the amount taken or smoked. 43. Generally inoffensive. 44. It produces intoxication. Creates no appetite. Effect does not last more than three hours. The after-effect, languor, and the want of the drug does create longing and uneasiness. 45. Presuming that this question refers to cases which may have come under my notice in the regiment, my reply is that no habitual moderate consumers of the drug have come under my notice, nor have any immoderate consumers. 46. Vide answer to question 45. 49. Not known. 51. Habitual consumers are bad characters. From my own experience I can name one case only73 I believe that bhang is frequently resorted to by those who wish to get relief from mental anxieties; and insanity is probably more frequently the result when the taker suffers from these conditions: but it is most probable that it is the drug and not the mental anxiety, even in these cases, which produces the insanity. I believe that persons deficient in mental control and of weakened intellect are more prone than others to become consumers of the drug. 46. The excessive use of the drug habitually causes mental and moral effects. I cannot say whether the constitution, digestion or appetite are affected by it. I am not aware of its causing dysentery, bron- chitis or asthma. It produces laziness, impairs the moral sense, and induces immorality. The remarks as regards its effects on the intellect, stated with reference to the moderate use, apply to the excessive use, but in a greater degree. The insanity is more likely to be of the acute form and to be permanent. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Bhang or decoctions containing bhang are used to produce an aphrodisiac effect, both by be- ing voluntarily taken and by being administered with or without the knowledge of the party prac- tised on. 51. There are not at present any habitual consum- ers in the regiment, but a large proportion of bad characters have been consumers of bhang Several men who were noted for violence and quarrelsome- ness were consumers, and therefore I consider there is some connection between bhang and criminal violence. 53. Vide answer to No. 51. I have known (but not in this regiment) two cases of homicidal frenzy said to be produced by bhang. 54. No, because the effect is stupefying; spirits are said to be preferred for this purpose. 55. Yes, in the Punjab. Yes. Answer. No. 105. 20. (a) Combatants 10 (b) Non-combatants Nil. (c) Authorised camp followers Nil. None. 24. None. 25. No 28. Unknown. 32. I can find out nothing on this point. 33. I am unacquainted with the Native Army: the few native drivers I have under my command are so stupid, they can give me no information. 39 and 41. I am unable to say. 42. I cannot give an opinion. 43 and 44. Unknown. 45. I do not know enough about the question to answer. 46. I am unable to do so. 51. There are no bad characters under my command. 53, 54 and 55. Unknown. Answer No. 106. 20. (a) Combatants 149 (b) Non-combatants 32 (c) Authorised camp followers 36 Smoke charas74 Answer No. 107. 20 (a) Combatants 9 (6) Non-combatants 16 (c) Authorised camp followers None. None. 24. None. 25, 28,32,33, 39, 41,42, 43, and 44, I cannot say. 49 and 51. I do not know. 53, 54, and 55. I cannot say. Answer No. 108. Telegu. Christian. Moothur. Commatta. Mussalman. Hindu. Pariah. Parwari. Mahratta. Madrasi. Bhudora. TOTAL. (a) Combatants 1 3 1 1 2 8 2 1 (b) Non-combatants 10 1 2 5 9 13 40 3 1 1 (c) Authorised camp followers 21 TOTAL 11 4 2 6 10 15 69 5 2 1 125 Smoke ganja 1 1 2 4 24. None eat or drink bhang. 25. Ganja only is used and is on the decrease. 28. One pice worth. 32. The custom is to smoke ganja before a meal. If ganja cannot be obtained, smoker does not eat. 33. Natives apparently think it helps digestion. Is not in disrepute. No. 39. Have no experience. 41 and 42. Cannot say. 43. Inoffensive. 44. Refreshing. Produces a feeling of intoxi- cation. Does not allay hunger, but creates appe- tite. The effect lasts. No after-effects. The want produces longing and causes uneasi- ness. 45. Not that I know of. Have not sufficient experience to answer these questions. Have never known any case. 46. Never met any case. 49. Do not know. 51. No. The use of this drug (ganja) has no connection with crime generally or specially. 53. No. No. 54. No. 55. No case known. Complete stupefaction can be induced. Questions 45 and 46 have been answered by Medical Officer in charge. All other replies have been obtained from low caste natives, and are, I consider, unreliable. I have had no experience in these cases of any sort and it appears to me these questions are intended for native or mountain batteries and not for Euro- pean. Answer No. 109. 20. (a) Combatants75 or 7 per cent. of them drink bhang during the hot season, as a stimulant like tea, which they substitute for it in the winter. None of them eat bhang. 25. Bhang is used as a prophylactic against bad water by the Sikhs. Its use appears to be neither on the increase nor decrease. 28. Bhang76 44. The effect of bhang in moderation on habit- ual consumers braces up the nerves, and makes them feel vigour for a time, but does not produce in- toxication or allay hunger. It creates appetite. Its effects last for about four hours; has no after- effects. In very exceptional cases the want of bhang with habitual consumers makes them feel enerv- ated and causes a loathing for food, but only in a very slight degree even in those who suffer at all. The habitual charas and ganja-smoker does not get intoxicated. Charas and ganja do not usually create an appetite, but allay hunger for a short time. The want of these drugs causes the person to feel lazy and- indolent and often quite prostrate and helpless. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja and charas produces physical, mental and moral deter- ioration almost always. This cannot as certainly be said of the use of bhang. The constitution of charas-smokers is usually distinctly impaired; they are physically weaker and liable to bronchial attacks. The digestion is injured by bhang, and loss of appetite is caused by ganja and charas. Dysentery is not caused by the use of these drugs. Bronchitis and asthma are caused by smoking charas. The use of all these drags induces laziness. It produces more laziness than active immorality. The intellect is usually impaired. The moderate use in a poor man who cannot obtain sufficient food does occasionally produce insanity. In these cases it is, perhaps, often the exciting cause. The insanity is occasionally temporary, but often permanent. The symptoms may be re-induced after liberation from restraint. Insanes usually do not confess to the use of the drug. I do not know. No insanes in the regiment. 46. The habitual excessive use of charas fre- quently causes insanity of an active maniacal char- acter. I have known this insanity apparently cured, yet reinduced a second time. The habitual excessive use invariably produces great physical, mental and moral deterioration. 49. Bhang is used as an aphrodisiac; ganja and charas usually have the reverse effect, and impot- ence is frequently caused by the excessive use of these drugs. 51. Bad characters invariably smoke charas and ganja. I do not know. 53 and 54. No. 55. No; dhatura is almost always used for this. Non-smokers get stupefied by smoking charas or ganja. Answer No. 111. 20. (a) Combatants 12 (b) Non-combatants 15 (c). Authorised camp followers 163 Smoke charas77 32. I know nothing of any of these matters. 33. I know nothing about the sentiments on the subject. 39. I do not know, because I have never tried. 41. I dare say it might. 42. Quite harmless. I should say, as I have had good servants who I know were addicted to these drugs, and did hard work in the hills well. 43. Probably so. 44. I have never tried these drugs. 45. I have no knowledge on these points. 46. I cannot discuss a question with the rudi ments of which I am unacquainted. 49. Being, I believe, narcotics, I should say most probably not, but do not know. 51. I should think this matter could be elucid- ated by the Police force. 53. Very likely. No. I do not. 54. I never came across any person working himself up to a premeditated crime. 55. Again I have no intimate experience of criminals nor any means of studying their ways. Answer No. 113. 20. (a) Combatants78 It is valuable in anorcosia and useful in dys- pepsia, but I am not in a position to say how far it would prove injurious if kept up for an indefinite period. I should think, on the contrary, that it would act as a preventive. I cannot say. I am inclined to think that the prolonged use of the drug would have a tendency to dull the intellect and in toxic dose would produce tempo- rary insanity. I do not know of any case bearing upon the subject, hence am unable to say how far one predisposed to insanity could have the disease excited by the use of the drug; in the temporary insanity of hemp, there is disordered consciousness of personality, time and place, with exaltation of feeling and hallucination, followed by restless delirium, and finally sleep or coma leading to death. I have not been able to form an opinion, hav- ing had no cases to judge of the relationship. 46. I am of opinion that the habitual excessive use of these drugs would speedily ruin the system of one and so reduce his intelligence as to bring him to the level of a machine. I am, however, unable to give an opinion based upon experience, as I have never met with one addicted to the use of Indian hemp either moderately or in excess. 49. I do not know. 51. I cannot say; there are no bad characters in the battery I command. 53. I have no experience. 54 and 55. I am told so. Answer No. 115. 20. Total 887 of all native ranks. (a) Combatants79 completed by some sudden shock acting upon a mind, and rendered ill-balanced by the previous consumption of the drug. Type of insanity usually mania with delusion likely to become chronic and result in dementia. Should it disappear for a time, it is likely to be renewed by again taking the drug. It is possible that a weak-minded person may take to the drug, but many persons previously of perfectly well balanced minds have become weak- minded owing to the use of the drug. A Dogra Subadar used to smoke charas. During an expedition his party were suddenly surprised and he acquitted himself very well, but shortly after signs of insanity appeared, for which he had ultimately to be invalided, suffering from mania, with delusions of a grandiose nature. Three years ago a Pathan smoked charas and ultimately became insane. The above remarks, as far as can be distinguished, mainly apply to "charas" smoking. 46. This is rare and produces the above-noted conditions in a more exaggerated degree; in addi- tion actual unconsciousness or maniacal acts are apt to follow its ingestion. Fifteen years ago two Sikhs came to hospital after an excessive dose (one was a more or less regular consumer); they were both very violent and maniacal and had eventually to be sent to an asylum. Six years ago a charas-smoker became insane, and had to be put under restraint. When taken in excessive quantities (as in the case of the two Sikhs), ganja is taken. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. After making enquiries, I hear that ganja is sometimes taken in milk, and in excessive quantities as an aphrodisiac. 51. I cannot tell proportions, but the chances are that a consumer of any of these drugs will be a more or less unreliable, if not bad character. 53. It is generally supposed to have a tendency to create sudden anger and its consequences. I do not know of a case in the regiment, but a native officer tells me of a murder from this cause; also of a quarrel where one man laid another's head open with a stick, inflicting a severe wound, done under the influence of bhang. 54. No. I am told a man under their influence would usually not have sufficient sense to carry out the crime properly. 55. This is said to be very common, the drugs being administered .without the knowledge of the victim. The victim can be reduced to complete stupefaction. Several instances of this being carried out or attempted are told me. I consider the use of any of these drugs noxious in the extreme, and in accordance with regimental standing orders it is always punished in this regiment when discovered. None of these remarks refer to opium, which I have excluded from this enquiry. Answer No. 116. 20. (a) Combatants80 in a new station from drinking water with pro- perties they are not accustomed to. 42. The moderate consumption of charas and ganja by discreet habitual consumers is considered harmless; it apparently has no harmful effect on their health or disposition. The use of bhang is not considered harmless; it is said to dull the intellect of habitual consum- ers; to non-habituès it causes intoxication and renders them unfit and disinclined for exertion. Habitual consumers are considered liable to vary the doses, and sometimes take it in excess; if deprived of it, their health suffers and they become unfit for exertion. 43. Of ganja and charas, yes. Of bhang, they are avoided by non-smokers. They are all considered liable to be irritable when they do not get the drugs. 44. Of ganja and charas, it increases the warmth of the body; it refreshes, but produces slight intoxication sufficient to be observed; it creates appetite especially for ghee and milk. The effect lasts for about two hours: there are slight after-effects, i. e., headache and listlessness, unless food is taken after smoking; the want of it produces uneasiness and nausea. Of bhang, it cools the blood and refreshes them; it produces slight intoxication and induces sleep; it creates appetite and does not allay hunger; its effects last for an hour or two. The want of bhang to a moderate consumer makes him uneasy and irritable. 45. A Dogra belonging to the battery who consumed about twelve pipes of charas or ganja per diem became a lunatic; he was harmless and has disappeared. Yes. The habitual moderate use, at a stated period, of any of these drugs tells on the system. In the beginning consumers show signs of im- provement constitutionally, but when they become regular indulgents they materially injure it. In the beginning all improve the digestion and give a kind of indescribable pleasure, but later on the nerves of the stomach are more or less paralysed, causing dyspepsia and anwesira. In old age they conduce to bronchitis, emphy- sema and asthma; the tendency is to impair the moral sense and induce laziness, eventually causing impairment of intellect, and even insanity. No case of actual insanity caused by these drugs has come under my immediate observation. 46. When these drugs are used excessively they impair the general health, conducing to emphy- sema, dispn81 ate use of bhang only increases and perhaps creates appetite; the other preparations seem to have an opposite effect. The effect lasts in proportion to the quality and quantity of the drug. After effect is depressive, the consumer feels he must have more, and a want produces longing and un- easiness. 45. It does all these. It makes a man thin, and gives him a pinched look. Not when moderately used only, but when used in excess. No. Yes. Moderate use does not produce any of these things. Immoderate does. I have no proofs to go by. The Medical History sheets would show nothing, as no sepoy is supposed to use these drugs, nor will they acknowledge their use even when the eyes seem to show they are addicted to it. 46. Excessive use produces immediate intoxica- tion followed by great depression. It gives a peculiar look to a man, the chief feature being great thinness of the body, hollow cheeks, sunken eyes and the whites of the eyes blood-shot. It produces a kind of chronic bronchitis, and perhaps asthma but not dysentery. It induces laziness;excessive use would produce insanity, but it depends on the constitution of the man. Cutting off the supply seems to cure the man if the disease be not of long standing. 49. Yes, majum is. 51. This cannot be replied to, as we have no knowledge of the criminal classes. 53. Only one case on record: a sepoy of the regiment ran amuck in 1887 at Yamethin in Upper Burma: he was a known ganja-smoker, though never caught in the act. Ganja, I believe, was found in a parcel sent to him from India, and after he was shot down, a large quantity of majum was found in his kit-bag. This was the only instance I know, and fairly proves that excessive indulg- ence in hemp incited unpremeditated crime. 54. No case on record, though I am certain that it is done by men to give themselves a sort of Dutch courage. 55. This cannot be stated. Answer No. 118. 20. (a) Combatants 23 (b) Non-combatants 100 (c) Authorised camp followers 30 None. 24. None. 39. I have no experience. 41, 42, 43 and 44. I do not know. 45 and 46. I have no experience. 49, 53, 54 and 55. I do not know. Answer No. 119. 20. (a) Combatants82 (5) About one hour. (6) A certain amount of depression. (7) To some extent. 45. No. No. No. No. No. (1) Not in moderation. (2) Have seen no case of insanity attributable to the use of the pure drug. (3), (4), (5) and (6) Not known. Have not seen such cases. None. 46. No cases of injury, from excessive use of drug have occurred in regiment. 49. Not known 51. A large proportion of bad characters are habitual consumers, because the intellect being deadened, they have not the energy to do right, when it is more difficult than to do wrong. Such men as a rule are of loose morals, 53. (l) Undoubtedly. (2) No. 54. Not known. 55. (1) Not known. (2) Yes, for a short time. Answer No. 120. 20. (a) Combatants83 a man is thought little of who is a habitual con- sumer. No particular person is more than another looked down on. Worshipping not practised. 39. Bhang usually eaten or drunk. Charas and ganja generally smoked. Smoking is considered less injurious than eating or drinking preparations of hemp, as the effects of smoking pass off quicker. 41. Beneficial only to moderate habitual con- sumers. 42. Moderate use to habitual consumers is not injurious physically, but has mentally a stupefying effect, and makes a man slow and dull. 43. Yes. 44. (1) Yes. (2) Exhilaration not quite amounting to intoxication. (3) No. (4) Yes. (5) Four to six hours. (6) No. (7) Yes, both. 45. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No information can be traced. 46. Will more certainly bring on physical and mental deterioration sooner or later followed by insanity or imbecility. 49. No. 51. Most of the habitual consumers are not good characters. The offences in connection are not civil crimes, but military, such as slackness on duty and so forth. 53. No. No. 54. Yes, in some cases. 55. Yes, in some cases. Complete stupefaction can be induced by over- indulgence. Answer No. 122. 20. (a) Combatants84 46. Habitual excessive use does without doubt result in physical and moral deterioration. Physi- cally its effects are impaired digestion, general debi- lity, and a variety of nervous conditions, such as insomnia, delirium when suffering from wild attacks of fever, etc. Morally I cannot judge of the effects. Mentally also I think it deteriorates the functions, as a con- firmed bhang consumer is invariably unintelligent and slow in his nervous processes. 49. Not that I am aware of. 51. They say that fakirs and gypsies indulge largely in these drugs. The chief reason given was to prevent them feeling scarcity of food. 53. Not that I know of. 54. The native officers to whom I have referred say it is not used in this way. 55. I do not know. Answer No. 123. 20. (a) Combatants85 of any cases of men suffering from the use of these drugs. 46. No cases have occurred. 49. No information on this point is available. Presumably not. 51. There is no connection between crime and the use of these drugs in my regiment. 53 and 54. No such cases have occurred in my regiment. 55. No case of this kind has occurred in my regiment. It is believed that stupefaction could be induced without admixture. Answer No. 125. 20. (a) Combatants86 I am consequently unable to answer any of these questions. 45. I do not know. I do not know. I do not know. I do not know. I do not know. I was in medical charge of the Madras Lunatic Asylum for five years, and during that time I saw numerous cases of insanity supposed to be caused by the abuse of ganja, chiefly amongst sepoys. It produces temporary acute mania, often with suicidal and homicidal tendencies. I should say the drug was the exciting cause. Typical symptoms: excitement, delirium, dilated pupils, sleep. The symptoms are re-induced by the use of the drug. I have seen re-admissions amongst individuals addicted to its use. They confessed to the use of the drug. I do not know. I do not know of any evidence. I know nothing about the use of the drug ex- cept as stated above. 46. I can tell nothing of the effects of the drugs, as I have no knowledge of what would be the moderate or excessive use of them. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by MedicalOfficer.] Answer No. 127 20. (a) Combatants87 Answer No. 128. 20. (a) Combatants88 Sikhs Nil. Dogras 2 (daily) Pathans 6 (3 daily) Panjabi Muhammadans Nil. 24. Sikh 1 (drinks daily.) 25. The use of these drugs is on the decrease. 28. The average allowance of each drug daily is 1 tola, the cost being 1 anna. 32. Sikhs are not permitted by their religion to smoke; there is no social or religious custom affect- ing the use of bhang by them. Mussalmans are not permitted by their religion to drink bhang. There is no social or religious custom affecting the use of ganja or charas by either Mussalmans or Dogras. 33. (1) It is generally regarded as a luxury, and is used by the consumers chiefly as a stimulant. (2) There is no strong feeling regarding the use of any of these drugs in the native army. (3) Nil. (4) No custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 39. Smoking charas is considered the most in- jurious preparation of the hemp plant. The chief reason being that it affects the brain to a greater extent than any other preparation. 41. It is not considered to affect a moderate consumer either for bad or good. 42. I consider moderate use harmless. My reasons for above are from no medical know- ledge, but from experience. 43. Quite inoffensive. 44. (1) It is refreshing. (2) Does not intoxicate. (3) It allays hunger, in so far as it is some- times used as a substitute for food. (4) About three hours. (5) No after-effects. (6) As a rule it requires to be left off by degrees. 45. No effect. No. Charas produces loss of appetite; ganja and bhang do not do so. Ganja and charas do not cause asthma, and dysentery; it produces coughing. The use of all may tend to make a man lazy. No. No. It is believed so, but not from moderate use. Not known from experience. Not known from experience. Unknown from experience. Unacquainted with any case. 46. I have never seen a case of excessive use since I have been in the service. 49. No. 51. Unknown from experience. 53. It is believed so. None. 54. It is believed to be the case. 55. It is believed so. Complete stupefaction can be produced, especially by charas. Answer No. 130. 20. (a) Combatants89 enfeebled, and it is the predisposing cause of mania and melancholia. Patients do not confess ordinarily to the use of the drug. X at 28 began smoking ganja for first time in 1891. Since then smokes morning and evening. He was an exceptionally robust man, and is now emaciated and weak. He has tremors, sense of depression and timidity, aversion from being ob- served; his utterances are jerky and short. His intellect is so enfeebled and dull, the simplest con- versation is trying. He is restless, hides his face when observed, has lost all self-respect, and is cruel to his family. His moral character is impaired. He suffers from insomnia and is unable to fix his attention. In many respects the case resembles that of an ordinary inebriate. He is abject and miserable as a case of alcoholism after a bout, but the pulse is stronger, and there does not appear to be the same tendency to fatty degeneration. 46. An excessive dose of ganja causes great ex- citement and intoxication. The individual speaks and shouts at random, runs about, tosses and con- torts his body, and probably eventually sleeps heavi- ly. Many cases of "running amuck" and suicide have been noted amongst persons under the influ- ence of ganja. The result, if persevered in, is phy- sical weakness, deadened intellect and wreck of moral character, with probable insanity. 49. No. 51. It is said that the longing of the habitual consumers leads them to theft for the purpose of obtaining the means of buying the drug. 53. I could not say. 54. No. 55. I do not know, having never come across characters of this sort. Answer No. 131. 20. (a) Combatants 108 Muhammadans 125 Hindus 17 (b) Non-combatants. 13 (c) Authorised camp followers 72 Only 1 Muhammadan known to smoke ganja. 24. Rajputs 4 Brahmins 1 25. Decrease. The native officers state that in their opinion the use is not so general as it was. 28. About 2 pies worth. 32. At Hindu marriage festivals it is largely consumed. Muhammadan fakirs use it freely at their festi- vals90 Answer No. 132. 20. (a) Combatants91 45. Causes mental weakness and nervous debi- lity. Causes confusion of ideas, nervous debility and muscular weakness. Impairs digestion and causes morbid appetite. Tends to induce asthma. Impairs moral sense and induces laziness. Impairs intellect, and in some cases produces insanity. The exciting cause. Acute mania. Yes, may be reinduced by use of the drug. None. No. Have not met such cases. None. No records kept of such cases, so unable to com- ply. 46. No records of such cases kept. 49. Yes. 51. (i) Not in the regiment. (ii) Absence without leave and desertion are often said by the native soldier to be in consequence of his having become insensible and wandered off somewhere, till perhaps days after he came to his senses again, and found himself in a strange place. I should say this state might be induced by the consumption of these drugs. 53. (i) Not in my experience. (ii) No. 54. No. I have never met with a case in any re- giment that I have served in. 55. Have never met with such a case during my service. Answer No. 134. 20. Total strength on the 1st January 189492 32. I cannot find any to exist. 33. (i) That the consumption of ganja is bene- ficial to those who require stimulants to enable them to work; that of bhang is the opposite. (ii) The custom is not approved. This seems to be a general opinion on the subject. (iii) I can attribute no reason. (iv) I cannot ascertain any such custom. 39. Smoking is the better way of using the hemp drug: the effect is quicker, therefore less is used. 41. To use the words of the native officers, the moderate use of these drugs is three-fourths good and one-fourth bad, or three men benefit when one does not. 42. Vide answer to question 41. 43. No. 44. It is refreshing. If taken in excess, it produces intoxication. Ganja allays hunger, but bhang does not. Bhang produces hunger. The last two questions are answered together. If the drug is not obtainable, the habitual consumer becomes lazy and more or less incapable of work. 45. I have not had sufficient experience of persons who I know to use these drugs habitually to give evidence of any value with respect to the point. I cannot say. Probably when in moderate increased doses. Bhang is supposed to increase the appetite in small doses. I cannot say. I do not know. I have seen so very little of the effects of any of these drugs that I can give no opinion. The same. No entries in the Medical History sheets. 46. I have not seen a case in which the excessive use of ganja or bhang has been proved. Many people appear to use the drug to excess occasionally, but not often habitually. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. In some cases. 51. About 25 per. cent. The use has apparently no connection with crime in general or specially. 53. No. 54. There does not appear to be any such custom. 55. Not in its prime state : if used for this purpose, dhatura is mixed with it. No. Answer No. 136. 20. (a) Combatants93 The smoking of charas is in my opinion the worst and most disreputable form of indulgence owing to its production of perhaps a more violent, sudden and certain mental disturbance than is produced by the other uses of the drug. 39. Not so far as I know. On the contrary, I believe that the smoking of charas (ganja is also occasionally used in this manner) is the worst form of this indulgence. My reasons are that the intoxicating effect produced is more sudden, quicker, and more certain. I believe brain mischief invariably results in a lesser agreeable degree from habitual smoking of charas. 41. The moderate use of bhang is said to increase appetite. No doubt these drugs have their medicinal and legitimate uses. Indian hemp is of great value in cases of obstin- ate malarial fever, though not usually prescribed by English physicians. As a form of indulgence, however, native opinion, so far as I know it, regards the use of these drugs as deleterious morally, and ultimately physically also. 42. Strictly moderate use may be harmless as regards constitutional effects. I have no instance of incapacity for service pro- duced by moderate use. 43. Yes, apparently so. 44. More soporific or intoxicant than refreshing. Does not allay hunger. Bhang in moderation creates appetite. Effects of slight indulgence lasts for two or three hours. The effects of a large dose might be apparent for 24 hours. Moderate use pro- duces only insignificant after-effects. A larger dose results in headache and dizziness. Occasional use produces no constitutional craving; habitual use does. 45. I regret that during my short sojourn in India and Burma, I have not seen sufficient cases of the effects of these drugs, nor been able to follow them long enough to be able to give an opinion that would be of any value. There are no records on the subject in this hospital. 46. Vide reply to question 45. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. The preparations of Indian hemp are said to act as aphrodisiacs and are undoubtedly so used. Generally so, I imagine, at the time of the Holi. 51. I cannot say for certain. The use of these drugs would undoubtedly predis- pose to acts of violence if the dose were regulated with this result in view. Generally the use of these drugs would weaken self-control, favour illusions and distort the moral perceptions. 53. Probably. I know of no cases of the nature described. 54. Yes, the dose being regulated with the object in view. 55. Yes, this is a common practice among criminals. Complete stupefaction can be so induced. Answer No. 138. 20. (a) Combatants94 and disinclination to movement; the want of subse- quent gratification is only felt for a few days. 45. Yes, physically, mentally, and therefore morally. It depends on the constitution of the consumer. Yes, it injures the digestion. Not within my experience. Yes, it does. I consider it deadens the intellect. I have had the experience of only one case in which it was the exciting cause. The case was not sufficiently advanced to give me that experience to answer the remainder of the questions. No man has suffered in this regiment since 1873, and his medical history sheet is not forthcoming. 46. Its habitual excessive use is decidedly harm- ful. 49. Among natives it is supposed to have this action. 51. Yes. Tends to the commission of crime in a state of temporary insanity, which is of a homicidal nature, as the nerves are specially excited and fortified. 53. Yes. No. 54. Yes. 55. Yes, I believe so. Yes, I am told it can. Answer No. 139. 20. (a) Combatants95 ments and restlessness; he had a great idea of himself and resented restraint. The case was improved by treatment and cutting off the use of the drug, but recurred on his being discharged the service and resuming its use. I am of opinion that once insanity is induced, unless the person can be kept under constant control it is sure to be per- manent. 46. The habitual excessive use of bhang, charas, or ganja produces all the symptoms previously noted, and leads to more rapid deterioration, mental, moral and physical, and generally ends in hopeles insanity. 49. Yes, by those that take them. 51. There are none in this regiment. 53. I have no means of judging. 54. Not that I am aware of. 55. (a) No; they usually give (so I am in- formed) a drug called dhatura, either as a smoke or drink, or mixed with some eatable. (b) Yes, but dhatura is not usually taken alone. Answer No. 140. 20. Total strength of the regiment 912 (a) Combatants96 nature. I do not know whether any large pro- portion of bad characters are habitual consumers of any of these drugs, but the probabilities are that a large proportion of bad characters could trace their first step in crime to the use of the drug. 53. In some cases it certainly does so. I know a case which occurred less than a year ago in the Kurram Valley, in which it led to temporary homi- cidal frenzy. This case did not actually occur in the regiment, but I know of some cases which have occurred in the regiment in previous years, which have led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Opinions seem to differ on this point. 55. Yes, more especially by means of "majum,"the narcotic product of the hemp plant, which would generally be given to the victim mixed with sweet- meats. Complete stupefaction can be induced by the drug in this form without admixture, as also by the drug in the form of ganja, charas, or bhang. Personally I know very little of these drugs. The above replies have been compiled from en- quiries amongst all ranks and classes of the regiment. Answer No. 141. 20. (a) Combatants97 Ganja-smokers98 Bhang-consuming is more in disrepute than ganja-smoking. I am told that formerly, the Hindus used to worship the hemp plant, the same as they do the tulsi plant now. 39. They say that smoking is the least injurious form of taking the ganja plant. I cannot give any reasons for this. 41. The moderate use of ganja allays fatigue. 42. I should consider the use of all form of these drugs to be bad. I can give no reasons, except that it has been so reported to me. 43. Moderate consumers are perfectly inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. In a moderate degree ganja is refreshing. Too much produces a sort of intoxication. Does not allay hunger. Produces appetite. Want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 45. Produces noxious effects on the body, mind and morals. Yes, indirectly by inducing lazy habits. No; on the contrary, increases appetite. Yes, bronchial affections. Yes, induces laziness and is an aphrodisiac on first using drug. Yes, produces insanity, as an exciting cause and deadens the intellect always. Temporary insanity results from moderate use of these drugs, and the symptoms may be re-in- duced by use of drug after liberation from restraint. No typical symptoms. Yes, the use of the drug is often begun to drown pain or mental anxiety, and I have no evidence to show that a person of weak intellect may begin the habit by reason of his mental deficiency. No account can be given, as hemp-users are not allowed in this regiment99 32. I know of none. 33. The consumption of these drugs is con- sidered generally to be bad for the health in the long run by the natives. It is customary on the Shivratri festival for ganja-smokers to repair to the temple of Mahadeo and there smoke ganja. 39. Smoking is the most injurious form of con- sumption, as it gets sooner into the system. 41. It is not beneficial. 42. The moderate use for the time being is ap- parently harmless, but habitual consumers bear the appearance of premature age after years of con- sumption (personal observation). 43. Yes. 44. (1) Refreshing and non-intoxicant, if taken in small quantities. (2) Supposed both to allay hunger when food is not procurable, and also to act as an appetiser. (3) The effect lasts for two or three hours. (4) No. (5) Abstinence to a confirmed smoker is keenly felt. 45. (1) I cannot call to my mind any cases where the habitual moderate use proved injurious. (2) It deadens the sensations of hunger. (3) Natives say it causes asthma. I do not know of its bringing on dysentery or bronchitis. (4) No. (5) It does produce insanity, when used in large quantities, mania and dementia. In regimental hospitals occasionally occur cases of acute mania with violence due to ganja; these men are violent and have sometimes homicidal tendencies, at other times their language is obscene. Fakirs and devotees usually acknowledge the use of the drug; sepoys rarely, unless they desire discharge. The latter portion of the questions can only be properly answered by the medical officer of an asylum. 46. The habitual use of these drugs in excess is bad for body and mind: it causes furious delirium of a homicidal variety, and after a while the per- son becomes broken down, insane or prematurely aged. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Occasionally used as an aphrodisiac. 51. The regiment does not contain bad charac- ters in a sufficient quantity to enable a reply to this question being made with any certainty. 53. Incites to "running amuck." (1) No. 54. Yes. 55. I am unable to reply to this question. Answer No. 145. 20. (a) Combatants100 I have never known these diseases produced. I have never known such results produced. The only case which has come before me was that of a young recruit who was apparently under the influence of a large dose. He had not been in the habit of using the drugs. He was in a state of acute dementia. He recovered from this. He eventually deserted. I have had no experience of insanity caused by the use of hemp. 46. I have had no experience of the habitual excessive use of the drugs. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Ganja taken in small quantities probably. Yes. Bhang, no. 51. Bad characters often are consumers of ganja, but the consumption of it is believed to have no connection with crime of any special character. 53. Ganja might do so, but no special case is known. 54. Ganja is used for this purpose. 55. Bhang could be used for this purpose, but not ganja. Bhang can complete stupefaction by itself with- out admixture. Answer No. 146. 20. Total strength 730 Muhammadans 338 Hindus 145 Sikhs 114 Dhairs (syces) 133 TOTAL 730 (a) Combatants 543 (b) Non-combatants 14 (c) Authorised camp followers 173 Three Dhairs (syces) smoke ganja. 24. One Sikh drinks bhang. 25. Decrease. No reason noticeable, unless it is that liquor ("saindi" and "daru") has become more common, is cheap, and readily procured locally; also those addicted to these drugs are generally avoided by respectable persons. Idlers and those having a sedentary occupation seem to take to or consume these drugs. In the cavalry service there are very few so situated. 28. These drugs not being consumed by the men of the regiment, information on these points cannot be given. Enquiries made. The cost is said to be for ganja one pice per diem, for charas 1 annas per diem, for bhang 1 anna per diem; daily allowance about 1/8 of a seer. 32. None noticeable as prevailing; if any, it would be social. (33). (1) With disfavour. (2) None in the regiment; in the army favour- able, if not practised to an excess. (3) Vide answer to question 25. (4) Not worshipped by any sects in the regiment or in this part of India. 39. No experience or knowledge on this point. 41. Said to be not beneficial in any way, as moderate use leads generally to excess. 42. Harmful under all conditions both for body and mind, unless used as a medicine under profes- sional advice. Moderation cannot be observed by those ignorant of its ultimate effects. 43. Said to be inoffensive. Some object to the smell of the smoke. 44. (1) Is said to stimulate the consumer in his work or occupation. (2), (3) and (4) Yes. (5) No. (6) One hour. (7) Lassitude. (8) Yes. 45. No. No. No; moderate doses increase the appetite. No. No. I have not met with any cases of insanity produced by the moderate use of ganja. 46. Excessive use of these drugs produces noxious effects and impairs the constitution, induces bronchitis, dysentery and asthma and leads to lazy and immoral habits, in some cases producing in- sanity. No cases of the latter have come under my immediate observation, nor are any recorded in the Medical History Sheets of the regiment. 49. Yes, said to be resorted to when power and desire begin to fail from age or excess. This practice is not known to exist amongst men of the regiment. 51. (1) None in the regiment. (2) Cannot say; no records or experience; a large portion of bad characters are said to be habitual consumers of these drugs. Speaking generally, but not with reference to those connected with the regiments. 53. Cannot say. No experience of persons addict- ed to these drugs. (2) No, never heard of a case. 54 and 55. Cannot say, not having any experi- ence of persons addicted to these drugs. General Observation. The use of these drugs does not appear to be common amongst the people of this part of India. As will be read above, its use is almost unknown amongst those connected with the regiment. Un- dersigned has little or no knowledge or experience of the life and habits of persons who are addicted to the use of these drugs. Both in the regiment and native community with which undersigned has been associated during his 18 years residence in India he has not come across, to the best of his know- ledge, persons who use these drugs, therefore the value of the above answers to questions cannot be taken as being worth much, as they have been compiled from information obtained chiefly from the native officers of the regiment. The men of the regiment, as a rule, are not addicted to the use of any drugs, even as moderate
101 consumers, for fear of being known as such, and taking to the habit of consuming the drug to an excess to the detriment of their health and the chance of forfeiting their pension or a portion of it as being men addicted to drugs and who have injured their health thereby. Answer No. 147. 20. (a) Combatants102 Answer No. 149. 20. (c) Authorised camp followers 13 Tindal 1 Lascars 8 Bhistis 4 None of these men smoke either ganja or charas 24. Nil. Under the above circumstances I am unable to give any reliable information with respect to the following questions. Answer No. 150. 20. Strength 214 Muhammadans 57 Hindus 142 Christians 15 TOTAL 214 (a) Combatants 163 (b) Non-combatants 45 (c) Authorised camp followers 6 None. 24. (a) and (b) None. 25, 28, 32, 33, 39 and 41. Not known. 42. Vide preceding. 43 and 44. Not known. 45. Have not had sufficient experience of the effect of moderate use of the drug to give an opinion. I certainly think there is evidence to indicate that insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of these drugs. 46. (a) The habitual excessive use of these drugs produces noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. (b) Yes. (c) and (d) Not known. (e) Yes. (f) May produce insanity. In cases known to me these drugs were the exciting cause of insanity from mania. No experience as to remainder of questions. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Not known. 51. Vide preceding. 53, 54 and 55. Not known. Answer No. 151. Extract from a letter from Commanding Officer, dated 22nd February 1894. I regret to say that, under the existing circumstances, it is not convenient to answer the questions seriatim. I may, however, mention that the total Military force of the State is composed of 285 men, rank and file, of whom 71 are Hindustanis, 60 Gurkhas, 59 Tipperas and Manipuris, 64 Mussalmans, 11 Bengalis, 12 Christians and 8 Assamis. Of these, 9 Gurkhas and 10 Hindustanis are said to smoke ganja and 4 Hindustanis drink bhang. The daily cost of ganja to each smoker is said to be about 6 pies in average. The use of ganja or bhang does not appear to be on the increase. The public opinion is not in favour of ganja-smoking or bhang-drinking, particularly the former. Ganja is genera'ly held to be more injurious to health and intellect than bhang; but moderate consumers of both of these drugs, however, are generally known to be inoffensive to their neighbours. Charas or any other preparation of ganja does not appear to be in use here.
103 Answer No. 152. 20. The total strength of the regiment is 625 men. The number of each caste or class is given below:104 Answer No. 153. 20. The total strength of the infantry regi- ment is 1,027 men and is composed of the follow- ing:105 45. Not to my knowledge. Not to my knowledge. Yes, frequently. No, beneficial in most cases. Most likely it does so. Yes. Have not met a case in which insanity could be in any way attributed to the use of these drugs, although I believe it does do so. Have had no experience of insanity induced either directly or indirectly by these drugs. No information traceable. 46. Have seen no cases of excessive use of these drugs. 49. I cannot say, having had no experience of the drugs. 51. It is said that men intending to commit crimes do take the drug, but I have no certain knowledge of this. 53. I have not come across a case of this kind. 54. They are said to be used for the purpose. 55. Have no knowledge of this. Answer No. 155. 20. (a) Combatants Nil. (b) Non-combatants 9 (c) Authorised camp followers 30 I cannot say. 24. I am unable to say. 25. I do not know. 28. I have no means of finding out. 32. I have never heard of any such customs. 33. I cannot say. 39. I have no experience of this subject. 41. I have never tried, so cannot say. 42. I do not know. 43. I cannot say. 44. I have never tried. 45. The medical officer in charge has had no ex- perience of any cases of the use of these drugs. [Answered by Medical Officer.] 49. I do not know. 51. I have no means of judging. 53. I am unable to say. No. 54. I have no idea. 55. I cannot say. Answer No. 156. 20. (a) Combatants106 Answer No. 157. 20. (a) Combatants107 Ganja-smokers108 (7) No, not at once; but the nerves go in time. (8) Yes. 45. Yes. Gradually moral and physical de- generation. (a) Yes. But not markedly. (b) and (c) No. (d) Yes, so the Medical Officer says; but person- ally I think ganja consumption is possibly only a particular vice favoured by a man of naturally lax habit. If he did not consume ganja, he would probably drink bazar spirits. (e) No experience. (f) I have not any personal experience of any cases, but the Medical Officer tells me he knows of two men who have steadily gone from bad to worse and have become lazy indifferent soldiers, losing their nerve altogether. 46. No experience of excessive use. The Medical Officer says the abovementioned cases appeared to be only moderate consumers. 49. Apparently the occasional bazar smoker uses it with this idea. 51. One generally suspects a slovenly and in- different soldier of using bhang or ganja, much in the same way I fancy that most of the crime amongst British soldiers is the accompaniment if not actually the result of drink. I have never met a case in which one could say the use of these drugs was the cause of the crime. Apparently when a native wishes to run "amuck" he primes himself for the occasion, but it does not follow that he had been an habitual consumer. 53. I do not know, nor does the Medical Officer, of any; but indulgence to excess in any intoxicant is liable to make a man violent, and if then angered he may commit violent and quite unpremeditated crime. 54. It appears so, though I have never myself seen any such case. 55. (a) This is a question that might well be referred to the police. (b) Yes. Therefore it is reasonable to suppose that the reply to (a) of this question is also yes, but I have no experience myself. Answer No. 160. 20. (a) Combatants109 Answer No. 161. 20. Total strength 625 men, composed entirely of Muhammadans. (a) Combatants 625 Pathans Border Tribes110 25. The use of these drugs is on the decrease in the regiment, owing to the Purbia Rajputs, who are the largest consumers of it, being on the decrease. 28. Ganja 1/8 tola, about 6 pies; charas 1/16 tola, about 6 pies; bhang 1 tola, about 6 pies. 32. Fakirs generally smoke ganja and charas, while Purbia Brahmins eat or drink bhang. I am not aware of any social or religious custom in particular with regard to the consumption of these drugs, except that they are offered by a host to a guest as an act of ordinary hospitality. 33. All consumers of these drugs are generally regarded in the regiment with suspicion as being incapable of any deeds of valour or prowess, except when under their influence, and dangerous to society in general when excited by them. There is no tendency to worship the hemp plant. 39. Ganja and charas are generally smoked in the cold weather, while bhang is eaten or drunk in the hot weather. Ganja and charas being considered too heating for the hot weather, while bhang is considered cooling. 41. If taken in moderation, the use of these drugs is supposed to be beneficial, inasmuch as it is said to promote digestion, create appetite and nullify the effects of bad water. 42. I cannot say that the moderate use of these drugs is altogether harmless, as I consider that in course of time it destroys the digestive powers, and produces a craving to induce the consumers to become immoderate in the use of them. 43. Moderate consumers are as a rule quite inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of any of these drugs is refreshing and exhilarating to the habitual consumer; it does not allay hunger, but creates an appetite, and produces slight intoxi- cation, inasmuch as it renders a man more talka- tive and energetic in his actions. The effect lasts about two hours. Its after-effects are enervating, and there is a longing to indulge in it again. 45. I have no personal experience of cases in which these drugs have been habitually taken in moderation. I am therefore unable to furnish original information. I have not met with any cases. The medical history sheets do not record any. 46. From observation of the few cases in which these drugs have been so used that have come under my notice, I am of opinion that the consti- tution becomes impaired, but I am not prepared to state that any specific disease is the result of such practices. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. I believe these drugs are chiefly taken with the idea that they act as an aphrodisiac. 51. I am not aware that the proportion of bad characters who use these drugs is large. But the immoderate use of these drugs usually incites men to acts of insubordination and violence. 53. The excessive use of these drugs does in my opinion incite to unpremeditated crime. Nearly twenty years ago, I know a man in the regiment incited by the use of ganja to a temporary homi- cidal frenzy 54. I believe these drugs to be so used. 55. I am not aware of any such case, nor do I think that complete stupefaction can be produced by the use of the drugs without admixture. Answer No. 163. 20. 744. (a) Combatants 623 (b) Non-combatants 2 (c) Authorised camp followers 119 Government syces 87 Cooks and bhistis 32 TOTAL 744 Four public followers only smoke charas. 24. Nil. 25. From enquiries made from the native offi- cers, the use of ganja, charas and bhang is on the decrease. 28. The average allowance of charas is 2 mash- as per man per diem, which costs 6 pies. 32. The use of charas and ganja is against all religious customs. The use of bhang is only allowable amongst the Sikhs. 33. The consumption of these drugs seems to be generally regarded as injurious. As far as can be ascertained, the use of any form of the narcotic does not seem to be in disrepute. It is not known whether certain sects of the peo- ple worship the hemp plant on certain occasions. 39. Ganja and charas is only smoked; there is no other method of consuming it. 41. No, and the effects of these drugs would be injurious should they be used moderately. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is not harmless, as it weakens the brain, stomach and heart. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The moderate use of these drugs produces little effect on the habitual consumer. They produce intoxication. Charas and ganja allay hunger; bhang creates appetite; effect of cha- ras and ganja lasts for about two hours, but that of bhang lasts for about six hours. The want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 45. None of the lascars of this regiment use this drug in any form. I have not prescribed this drug and have not had under treatment any one who was in the habit of taking it. I presume hearsay information is not asked for in questions numbers 45 and 46. 46. None of the lasears in this regiment con- sume this drug in any form. 49. These drugs are not used for this purpose. 51. Yes, a large proportion of the consumers of these drugs are bad characters. The consumption of charas and ganja makes men inclined to be riotous. Those who consume bhang are often careless in the performance of their duties. 53. The excessive indulgence in any of these drugs incites unpremeditated crime and often causes insanity. 54. They use charas and ganja to fortify them- selves to commit acts of violence. The consumers of bhang are always lazy. 55. They do not induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs. Complete stupefaction can be induced by this drug without admixture.
111 Answer No. 164. 20. (b) Non-combatants112 (h) See reply to (f). No information traceable in any medical history sheets. 46. (a) Ganja and charas-smoking does produce noxious effects. Bhang-eating or drinking appears not to. (b) Ganja and charas weaken the constitution and cause loss of flesh. Bhang tends to increase flesh and appears not to impair constitution. (Wrestlers use this drug freely.) (c) Apparently does not injure digestion. (d) Ganja and charas, but not bhang, will cause asthma and bronchitis. (e) Ganja and charas impair the moral sense, induce laziness, but I believe do not induce habits of immorality or debauchery. Bhang to a less extent. (f) Ganja and charas deaden the intellect. Bhang merely while its intoxicant effect lasts; I have known of no case where it has induced in- sanity. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 51. No case has ever occurred in this regiment in which the moderate use of drugs has caused crime. 53. No such case has ever come to my notice. 54. Not known. 55. Not known. No. Answer No. 166. 20. (a) Combatants113 Answer No. 167. 20. Total strength114 32. There is no social or religious custom regarding this, as those who do not drink intoxi- cating liquors use these drugs. 33. The consumption is apparently regarded unfavourably. I have not had enough intercourse with the native army to say. I have heard of no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 39. There is no regimental medical officer to consult. 41. Can form no opinion. 42. The moderate use is said to be harmless. 43. They are said to be. 44. Said to be refreshing. Ganja produces intoxication a few minutes after it is smoked; beyond this I can gather no informa- tion. 45 and 46. There is no regimental medical officer. 49. Not understood. 51. No such conclusions can be arrived at from among the natives of the battery. 53. There has been no serious crime, and conse- quently I cannot say. 54. As above. 55. Cases such as those referred to have never come within my experience. Answer No. 169. 20. (a) Combatants 623 (b) Non-combatants 4 (c) Authorised camp followers 367 TOTAL 994 (a) Combatants115 55. Yes, this is occasionally done. Complete stupefaction can be produced on a person unaccustomed to the drugs, but dhatura is often used to strengthen them. Answer No. 170. 20. (a) Combatants 881 (b) Non-combatants 2 (c) Authorised camp followers 32 In the three classes about 200 smoke ganja, which is taken medicinally. Charas is scarcely now taken. 24. Bhang is not eaten in the regiment; there may be 40 at the most who drink bhang. 25. From information obtained from native officers, the use of these drugs is neither on the in- crease or decrease. 28. The average allowance of ganja or charas per man given to the drug is equal in weight to the lift of a pice. Price of 1 pice weight of ganja is 4 pice; of the same weight of charas, 3 pice; bhang is scarcely consumed. 32. The use of these drugs is not forbidden in any religious writings. 33. Those who exceed arc looked down on, ashabitual drunkards by Europeans. No opinion against moderate use; there is no custom of wor- shipping the hemp plant. But when partaking of ganja or charas a small portion is put aside as an offering to the God Mahadeo. 39. Smoking is less injurious than drinking, as a good deal of the strength of the drug is modified by being drawn through the water in the hukka. 41. Yes, it is supposed to alleviate pains in case of chill and extreme cold; generates heat. 42. See answer 41. 43. Yes. 44. No immediate effects. It is refreshing. No, not intoxicating. Allays hunger. Does create appetite. Effect lasts about two hours. No after- effects. No longing or uneasiness for a day or two. 45. As the men of the regiment do not use these drugs, I cannot say whether the habitual moder- ate use of these drugs would or would not produce the effects in question. 46. My limited personal experience does not enable me to discuss the point in question. 49. No. 51. No. No connection with crime of any character in this regiment. 53. No excessive indulgence. No crime owing to consumption of these drugs in this regiment for thirty years. 54. See answer 53. 55. Not known in the regiment, but no doubt is practised. Ganja or charas cannot be smoked without mix- ing with tobacco. Answer No. 171. 20. (a) Combatants116 49. Ganja is sometimes used. 51. No. The effects are said to be soothing and not exciting. 53. Excessive indulgence stupefies. No. 54. No, but mixed with dhatura, it produces frenzy. 55. No cases are known. When taken in considerable quantities it pro- duces unconsciousness. Answer No. 172. 20. (a) Combatants 1,095 (b) Non-contatants 2 Brahmins 1,024 Other Hindus 8 Jat 1 Rajput 1 Christians 5 Muhammadans 58 TOTAL 1,097 (c) Authorised camp followers 89 Four camp followers (kahars) smoke ganja. No men smoke charas. 24. Thirty sepoys (Brahmins) cat bhang; none drink it. 25. Bhang on the decrease, owing to its gene- rally being taken with milk, and milk being more expensive than formerly. Ganja and charas on the increase, owing to their being less expensive, and thus those who cannot afford to buy bhang take charas and ganja in place of bhang. 28. Bhang from 1/2 to 1 tola, cost 3 to 6 pies. Ganja 1/4 tola per diem, half to one anna. Charas 2 to 3 pice worth per diem. 32. It appears to be a social custom for Brah- mins to take bhang on the festivals of the Holi and Shivratri, and other classes also take ganja and charas. 33. As regards my regiment, it is not con- sidered wrong to take bhang, but taking ganja and charas is considered a bad habit, because they excite the brain and weaken the body. They do not wor- ship the plant itself. 39. My regiment being a Brahmin corps, only take bhang. I am unable to answer this question. 41. The medical officer of the regiment states that it is injurious taking any of these drugs except medicinally, bhang being less harmful than the other two. My native officers agree in the above opinion as regards ganja and charas, but consider that taking bhang in moderation is beneficial. 42. The medical officer's opinion is that all these drugs are harmful. The native officers only con- sider that ganja and charas is so because it excites the brain and weakens the body, bringing on insanity, dysentery, etc. 43. Yes. 44. First excitement, which later on is followed by a desire to sleep. Its effects seem to be re- freshing. It does not allay hunger, but increases the desire for food; it produces slight intoxication; the effect lasts about four to eight hours; it produces longing and uneasiness. 45. There is no doubt that the habitual use of these drugs, particularly ganja and charas, will produce noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. Some of the men I examined to ascertain the effects of the drugs are living examples of the injurious effects resulting from the habitual mo- derate use of these drugs. Bhang seems to be less injurious than the other two. The constitution is decidedly impaired; the consumer becomes spiritless, emaciated and decrepit. Although its temporary effect is to produce appetite, yet it ultimately impairs digestion. Continual use of bhang is very likely to cause dysentery, and con- tinued smoking of charas and ganja to cause bronchitis and asthma. The moral sense is dull- ed, and from its powerful aphrodisiac effect it is likely to lead to immorality and debauchery, but its ultimate effect is to produce impotence. It deadens the intellect and produces insanity. In the only case which came under my own im- mediate observation I considered it the predis- posing and exciting cause. This was a case of acute mania and that of a temporary nature. The symptom of mania would certainly be likely to recur on liberation from restraint. I cannot say if there are any symptoms typical of mania resulting from use of these drugs. 46. In the case of habitual excessive use the symptoms as described in No. 45 are more pro- nounced and much more rapid in onset. This particularly with regard to insanity. 49. Yes. 51. Yes. And when not able to obtain them are ready for mischief produced by a craving for the drug. 53. Yes. I know of no case. 54. No. 55. Yes. Yes, if taken in large doses. Answer No. 173. 20. (a) Combatants 805 (b) Non-combatants 16 (c) Authorised camp followers 8 The following smoke ganja:117 32. At certain feasts the Hindus, when mak- ing puja, bring these drugs with their other offerings of cheroots, liquor, etc. 33. The consumption of these drugs is general- ly looked down upon in Madras, and the native army shares this opinion. I attribute the sentiment holding these drugs in disrepute to the deleterious effect they have upon the men. In the Madras presidency there is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 39. The smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant is more injurious than eating or drink- ing it, as it causes the body to become emaciated. 41. The moderate use is not beneficial in its effects. 42. Moderate use is not harmless in that it leads to increased consumption. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use is stimulating. It is refreshing, when only a little is taken. It does produce intoxication. It allays hunger, but at the same time the men who use these drugs are large feeders. The effect lasts about four or five hours. The after-effects are thirst and weariness. If a man cannot get these drugs (when accustomed to them) his craving for them is great and causes con- siderable uneasiness. 45. The moderate use of these drugs is pernici- ous, in that it leads to excessive use as the dose is increased. At first no evil effects may be present, but even after continuous moderate use physical, mental and moral deterioration takes place. The constitution becomes impaired, the body loses flesh, and the muscles become wasted; the mind takes part in this degenerate change. After continuous use the digestion becomes impaired. Have had no cases of dysentery, etc., traceable to the use of these preparations. After a time the moral sense becomes perverted and there is a disinclination for work. Am not aware that immorality or debau- chery is produced by it. Have had no cases of insanity under my care since arrival in India either due to the use of these drugs or to other causes, so do not feel qualified to express an opinion. In one case known to me the effects caused by the use of ganja are extreme wasting of the body, inability to do his work, atonic dyspepsia and great general weakness; the man is also reported to talk nonsense and be greatly excited when under the influence of the drugs. Am not aware in this case that immorality and debauchery have been produced by it. No information has been able to be traced by the medical history sheets. 46. Habitual excessive use produces deterioration, physical, mental and moral. The body wastes, the person becomes absent-minded, incapable of concentration, vacillating, and in some cases the mind gives way altogether and insanity supervenes. The moral sense is perverted. It causes atonic dyspepsia and loss of appetite. Have had no cases of dysentery, etc., traceable to this. Have had no experience of insane cases trace- able to the use of any of these drugs. 49. Native doctors do use bhang as an aphro- disiac. 51. (a) No. (b) None. 53. The excessive indulgence in these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime, nor do I know of any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. No. 55. No, but complete stupefaction can be induc- ed by ganja or bhang without admixture. I do not refer to charas, as it is not used by any in the regiment, nor are its effects understood. Answer No. 174. 20. (a) Combatants118 41. No A man may take of all three in moderation when tired and worn out; this will stimulate at first and then cause a deep sleep, but in the morning he will feel the evil effects. An habitual moderate use of these drugs is very rare. The longer a man takes them, the more often will he do so, increasing the amount. 42. No, the moderate use is harmful, as it be- comes a habit not to be shaken off. The drugs also weaken the body by emaciation, and the senses become dull. 43. Moderate consumers are not as a rule offen- sive. 44. It acts as an almost immediate stimulant. It is not refreshing. It does not produce intoxication. It does not allay hunger. It does create appetite. A man will feel the effects till the evening if he consumes in the morning, or till the morning if he consumes in the evening. He will become lazy and slack. If consumption is suddenly stopped, it is hurt- ful, and great longing will be entailed with un- easiness. 45. My experience is too limited to allow of my making any statements with regard to the ques- tions asked. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. From my experience as medical officer of Colaba Lunatic Asylum, I can say that I have seen cases of insanity arising from over-indulgence: in some it has been the exciting cause, in others it has been the predisposing cause of hitherto latent insanity: the insanity is generally mania with often homi- cidal tendencies119 [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. No; from what I have heard, they are supposed to have the opposite effect. 51. It is impossible, in the absence of any evidence, to answer this question. 53. There being no evidence forthcoming, no opinion can be formed by me. I do not know of any cases in this regiment, but I have often heard that excessive indulgence does lead to crime, and also tends to homicidal frenzy. 54. This I have also heard is the case, but we have no experience here to prove the truth or otherwise of this theory. 55. During a long residence in India I have often heard and read of such cases, but cannot bring any forward in proof or corroboration of the same from personal experience in the regiment under my command. Answer No. 176. NOTE.120 stupefying and, as my native officers express it, as "drying up (khuskkerta) the body." 41. Only if given medicinally. 42. It is not thought to be harmless, and is considered to be quite unnecessary. The medical officer thinks it would tend to have a detrimental action on the brain, and my native officers add, on the heart also. 43. No; because if deprived of the stimulant they would become morose and quarrelsome for want of it, and if unable to get it owing to poverty, would probably steal from their neighbours any- thing saleable and thus afford the requisite means. 44. On the habitual consumer121 49. No. 51. The first portion of this question cannot be replied to from information at my disposal. The use of the drug appears to have no con- nection with crime in any way: it tends to induce cowardice, which would be against the committing of such crime as theft, murder, assault. I know of a case of a pensioned sepoy violently assauting another man with stones while under the influence of charas. He was under the mis- taken impression that the other man wished to kill him. 53. A confirmed charas-drinker, when deprived of the drug, is easily roused to acts of violence. In- dulgence in charas-smoking is said to deaden all moral sense. About fourteen years ago a murder was committed by an Afridi sepoy in the regiment without apparently any great provocation. The man was a charas-smoker. The only other case I know of has been mentioned in my reply to question 54. 54. No. 55. (1) Yes, robberies and other crimes are undoubtedly committed on victims who have pre- viously been stupefied with this drug. (2) Yes. Answer No. 178. 20. The total strength of natives attached to my battery is122 [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. No. 51. No. There is no connection. 53. I do not know. I know of no cases. 54. No case has come under my personal observa- tion. 55. I do not know. Answer No. 180. 20. (a) Combatants123 25. A far as I can ascertain, it is on the dec- rease, epecially among the higher classes. 28. About 1 masha (1/6 oz.), cost about 1 pice. 32. On the day of the Pooran Mashi the Sikhs take it. This festival occurs at the end of each month. 33. The Muhammadans do not approve of the custom; the Hindus see no harm in it. In former days the Hindus used to worship the hemp plant at the Shivratri festival, but, as far as I can ascertain, the custom is dying out. 39. The smoking of charas and ganja is consi- dered more injurious than drinking; the reason being that it rises quicker to the brain and affects the head. 41. Taken moderately in a very cold climate, seems to be beneficial, as the natives have an idea it warms the blood. 42 I consider from what I hear that moderate- ly taken it may be beneficial to a native. 43. Nothing has ever been brought to my notice during the 33 years I have been in India. 44. It refreshes and stimulates for a time. Taken in excess it produces intoxication. Charas is supposed to allay hunger. Bhang, on the contrary, acts as an appetizer. The effect of charas soon passes off, but the effect of bhang lasts longer, depending a great deal on the amount taken. To habitual consumers it does produce a longing for it. 45. This depends a good deal on what is implied by the term "moderate use," but I consider that in the great majority of cases in which hemp drugs are taken, no noxious effects result. In such cases it does not mpair the constitution. It is a well-known fact that it improves the ap- petite. It is said by those who use it, to relieve chronic bronchitis. I do not think it impairs the moral sense. Kahars who smoke it regularly seem to me to work better than the others, and it renders them less suseepti-. ble to cold, hence they smoke it more in cold weather. I have never heard of its producing insanity. but I know that persons suffering from disease or mental anxiety are in the habit of taking it to soothe their misery. No cases of admission for the effects of hemp- taking occur in the records of the regiment The Sikhs take it very moderately on their festi- vals and in the hot weather, when they say it acts as a refrigerant. 46. I consider that all manner of noxious effects might arise from the excessive use of these drugs. 49. The natives consider it decreases the power. It is taken by some fakirs for the above reason. 51. No experience. 53. In large quantities it certainly does have this effect. I cannot call to mind any case of homicidal frenzy, but I have always heard that a man previous to running "amuck" plies himself with bhang. 54. Yes, by fanatics, as noted above. 55. I have heard that dacoits use these drags to stupefy their victims. I am unable to find out anything about the latter portion of the question. Answer No. 182. 20. Strength of the regiment 124 43. Quite. 44. In five minutes after smoking it produces slight intoxication, lasting about 1/4th of an hour. It does allay hunger. Does not create appetite. No after-effects. After the habit is formed, the want is felt. 45. Yes, the continued use produces noxious effects, both physically, mentally and morally. Yes. Yes. Causes bronchitis and asthma. Yes. Induces habits of immorality. I have seen a case of insanity following the use of charas; and charas seemed the exciting cause. The insanity was mania. This case recovered under restraint. My experience in this is very limited, never having seen a case in my regimental work. 46. The excessive use of the drug is noxious; causes immorality and debauchery and also in- sanity. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. I cannot say. 51. There are no bad characters in the regi- ment. 53. No case has ever come under my notice during 27 years' service in India. 54. Not that I am aware of. 55. I cannot say. Answer No. 183. 20. (b) Non-combatants125 Bhang 126 51. No. No connection. 53. In cases of poisoning by the excessive use of hemp preparations, there is loss of control but more of a cataleptic than a maniacal nature. No case is known to the writer. 54. Only in the same way and not to the same extent as alcoholic liquors among nations addicted to alcohol. 55. No knowledge on this point. No. Answer No. 186. 20. Combatants127 Answer No. 188. 20. (a) Combatants128 Answer No. 189. 20. Total strength of regiment129 51. No. If an habitual consumer cannot, for instance, obtain money to purchase the drug, the want of it may cause him to steal money from his neighbours to obtain it. No crime prevalent in this regiment. 53. No. No cases have ever come under my notice. No. 54. It is presumed to be so generally, but no in- stances have ever come under my notice tending to prove the correctness or otherwise of this presumption. 55. I can obtain no evidence on this subject, as nothing of the sort has ever occurred in this regiment. Answer No. 190. 20. Strength of regiment130 not respected. Any use of drugs in excess of 11 grains per day is considered wrong and leading to the loss of faculties. 39. To smoke charas and ganja is considered harmful and leads to intoxication. The decoction is never drunk except as bhang. 41. Any use of charas and ganja is considered harmful, but the moderate use of bhang is not considered injurious. 42. As in 41. 43. All charas and ganja-smokers are considered offensive, and bhang-drinkers the same if in excess. 44. To habitual users of these drugs, if they do not partake of it at their regular time, it affects their appetite and renders them dull and stupid, but if taken regularly at regular hours it increases appetite and generally freshens up the system. 45. The habitual moderate use of bhang, so far as I can judge from the few cases I have seen, does not produce any noxious effects. The digestive power and appetite are increased. No disease appears to be induced by it, nor is laziness. The moral sense is not impaired, so far as I am aware. The intellect is unimpaired, and I have not met with any case of insanity which was attributable in any way to the use of this drug. I am not aware that there is any evidence to indicate that insanity may tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by persons deficient in self-control, through weak- ened intellect. Of the 2 men who use bhang in this regiment, one is a man of 23 years' service. He appears to be in every way fit for further service. Of his admissions to hospital, one has been for catarrhal bronchitis, the remainder being for surgical dis- eases or for ague. The other man has done 31/2 years' service, and has not yet been admitted for any of the diseases mentioned in the question. I do not know of any case of habitual use of charas, nor of habitual use of ganja. 46. I do not know of any case of excessive use of these drugs. 49. These drugs are used as aphrodisiacs. Natives freely admit it. 51. Habitual and excessive consumers of ganja and charas are generally bad characters. 53. Excessive indulgence leads to thieving, high- way robbery, suicide and homicide. No actual case has come within my knowledge: but I know that all the fanatics in Afghanistan were all primed with charas before "running amuck." 54. It is well known that "Ghazis" are well intoxicated with charas before they "run amuck." 55. It is taken to deaden the faculties prior to crime. Complete intoxication can be obtained, and when in such a state, can be fatal to life. Answer No. 192. 20. Caste Return. CASTE. Subadars. Jemadars. Havidars. Naigues. Trumpeters or Drum- mers. Privates. TOTAL. Number recruited during the month. (1) Muhammadans. Northern Circars, including Northern Coast Collector- ates 1 2 61 64 Central and Southern Car- natic (Madras, Chingleput. Vellore, Arcot, etc., Trichi- nopoly) 3 3 13 10 106 135 2 Salem, Coimbatore 1 1 Ceded Districts (Bellary, Kurnool, Cuddapah) 3 3 Belgaum 2 2 Mysore 1 12 13 Hyderabad 3 3 12 13 Hindustan 2 2 (3) Hindus. Tamils 3 6 6 114 129 15 Agambadians Moravers. Cullers 1 1 9 11 Telugus, Buliewars from Northern Cirears 4 6 8 103 121 Telugus, other parts of Southern India 4 6 48 58 2 Pariahs 16 16 Brahmins 4 4 Mahrattas 11 11 Rajputs 2 3 3 18 26 Indo- Britons 5 5 Native Christiana 2 3 10 52 67 1 Other Castes 1 1 30 32 TOTAL 8 8 41 42 15 604 718 20 (a) Combatants 731 (Including 13 British offi- cers.) (b) Non-combatants 3 (Including Me- dical officer.) (c) Authorised camp followers 16 The following are as nearly as possible the num- bers who smoke ganja and charas respectively:131 decreases. The lungs are injured and digestion impaired. 41. Ganja is said to counteract the effects of bad water and unhealthy climate. It is also said to enable greater fatigue to be undergone. 42. Used in moderation it does not appear to do much harm. 43. Yes, except ganja-smokers who sometimes, if irritated when under the influence of the drug,become very violent and unmanageable. 44. They stimulate, and produce feelings of happiness, and make a man pleasant and sociable. Bhang refreshes, but neither ganja nor charas; all produce intoxication. It does not allay hunger, but creates appetite. Intoxication from bhang lasts about six hours;from charas and ganja only an hour or two. Heaviness and stupidity are the after-effects. If not procurable, it produces a sense of longing and uneasiness. 45. It is very difficult to say, as sepoys when asked if they take the drug in any form, strenuous- ly deny its use, nor can others be got to say if a particular sepoy is in the habit of using it or not; but there is little doubt that some are addicted to its use. Used in moderation it apparently does not im- pair the constitution, nor injure the digestion, nor produce any decided evil effects, physical or mental, as cases have not come directly under my observation. It does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. It does produce insanity and seems to be the predisposing cause. Of four cases of insanity in the regiment in the last ten years, three have been attributed to the use of ganja, and several cases of temporary insanity have also been attributed to the use of some narcotic drug, probably ganja. There are no typical symptoms. Sepoys will never confess to the use of the drug at any time. Type of insanity produced. Two were cases of acute mania marked by excitement. They were noisy, troublesome and violent, abusive, talked or sang incessantly, filthy habits and suffered from hallucinations and delusions. The third case was at first noisy, troublesome and abusive, and subsequently passed into a state of melancholia, became listless, taciturn and quiet. Was also broken down and emaciated. 46. Produces insanity occasionally. Makes them quarrelsome, troublesome and a nuisance to their neighbours. Often become bad characters. Breaks down the constitution, become weak, thin and prematurely old. Destroys the appetite Often taken on purpose when they want to commit crimes and will commit murder under the influence of the drug. 49. Yes, occasionally. 51. Those who are addicted to ganja often become bad characters. Often taken intentionally by those intending to commit a crime. 53. Excessive indulgence is apt to deprive a man of all consciousness of his actions, and in some cases might lead to unpremeditated crime. 54. Frequently taken for this purpose. 55. Such cases are frequent. Yes. Answer No. 193. 20. The corps is purely local, entirely recruited within the state from three classes only. (a) Combatants 400 Konkan Muhammadans, 167 Mahrattas 180 Native Christians 53 (b) Non-combatants Nil (c) Authorised camp followers 4 None smoke charas, and there are no regular daily consumers of ganja, but 12 men in the corps, 9 of whom are Mahrattas, and 3 Konkani Muhammadans, are believed to be in the habit of smoking ganja occasionally. 24. None; the habit is unknown in the corps. 25. It has very greatly decreased as compared with former times. It is among the old men only that the habit has survived. The reason seems a little difficult to arrive at, but it is said that the habit was acquired in former times, when the men of this corps came more frequently in contact with regular regiments, in the ranks of which were many men from Upper India. Of later years such contact has ceased. The habit is not of the country, and the younger men have not taken to it. It will probably die out entirely in a year or so. 28. There are no habitual daily consumers, but the Native Officers say that a paisa worth would last any of the men in the regiment who indulge in it for four days. 32. There are no such customs among the men of the corps. The dozen men who occasionally indulge in the habit are said to do so more or less secretly, and the indulgence is not connected with any custom, social or religious. 33. (a) It is regarded with disapproval; the feeling in the corps is against it. (b) There is an idea that the smoking of ganja has a weakening effect on the brain. (c) The Indian hemp, annabis I ndica or canna- bis satira, is not indigenous to this part of the country, and there is no custom of worshipping it known in the corps. 39. Neither drinking nor eating being practised in the corps, the comparison cannot be made. 41. The opinion seems to be that it is not bene- ficial, but it is said to be soothing in irritation and consoling in time of trouble. 42. Though it does not appear that the occa- sional smoking of ganja has done any harm to the few men in the corps who indulge in it, the general opinion, in which the Medical Officer concurs, is that it cannot but be harmful. 43. The men in the corps who occasionally in- dulge in the habit are said to be quite inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. Ganja.132 impaired the constitution, injured the digestion or caused loss of appetite. He is not aware of any case of dysentery, bronchitis or asthma in the corps which could be attributed to this cause. It has not been observed to impair the moral sense or to induce habits of laziness, immorality or debauchery. In eighteen years there has only been one case of insanity in the corps, and in that case there was no history or suspicion of the use of ganja or any hemp drug. 46. There is no habitual excessive use in the corps. 49. It is not known in the corps. 51. (a) No. None. (b) None. 53. (a) There is no case known in the corps. (b) No. 54. Not as far as is known in the corps. 55. No instances are known in the corps. Answer No. 194. 20. (a) Combatants 814 (b) Non-combatants 5 (c) Authorised camp followers 56 Smoke ganja.133 dyne, antispasmodic, and nervine stimulant, they are useful for the relief of painful affections. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect is stimulant, raising the spirits, increasing the force of circulation, sharpening the intellect, and exciting the appetite. It is refreshing. It does not produce intoxication. It does not allay hunger, but arouses appetite. The effects last only a few hours. There are scarcely any after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing. 45. No. No. No. No; on the contrary, it alleviates these affec- tions. No. No; I have already stated that it sharpens the intellect, and I have not met with any case where it has caused insanity. 46. The habitual excessive use of the drug is undoubtedly injurious, physically, mentally and morally; it predisposes to insanity in a form closely resembling delirium tremens; the insanity is temporary, disappearing with the disuse of the drug, and recurring upon its resumption; its typi- cal symptoms are not violent outbreaks, as in the case of alcohol; but a placid self-complacent vanity combined with inordinate self-esteem, the victim considering himself to be the wisest, the most beautiful, the healthiest, and the best of mankind. I have no knowledge of a case in which a person having no record of ganja history has confessed to the use of the drug. 49. Yes, occasionally. 51. A large proportion of bad characters in this regiment are habitual smokers of this drug. No particular instance of the use of these drugs can be traced as regards crimes; but ganja- smokers, being always under its influence, are very ready to quarrel. 53. In very rare cases excessive smoking leads to unpremeditated crime. No. 54. No. 55. No. Complete stupefaction can be obtained by an excessive use of ganja. Answer No. 196. 20. Total strength134 54. Premeditated acts of violence are often committed by persons who have fortified them- selves with ganja. 55. Yes, but generally mix something else with the bhang or ganja. Complete stupefaction by means of bhang or ganja could only be arrived at by taking excessive doses. This information, except question signed by Me- dical Officer, I have gathered from the native rank. Answer No. 197. 20. Total strength of regiment 968135 45. I have not noticed any bad effects in this regiment from the moderate use. Not the moderate use. Not in my experience. Not in my experience. I think that it probably impairs the moral senses if used for a long time, particularly charas. I have not known it produce insanity. I have met with no such cases. Nil. 46. Impairs the mental condition. Impairs the physique. Charas particularly. I have never known it produce insanity. 49 and 51. Not to my knowledge. 53. Cannot say, as excessive iudulgence is not practised in the regiment. 54 and 55. Not known. Answer No. 199. 20. (a) Combatants136 41. Those who use the drug assert that the moderate use is extremely beneficial. 42. Can not say whether harmless or otherwise. 43. So I have been given to understand. 44. Exhilarating, refreshing, intoxicating to a slight degree; it does not allay hunger, but creates an appetite; effect lasts from half to two hours; as alcohol produces a longing by want of subsequent gratification, so with these drugs. 45. Less deleterious in its effects than the habitual moderate use of alcohol. No. No. Useful in asthma and bowel ailments; does not produce these affections, and is of no avail in bronchitis. Apparently not. No. Ganja is the powdered leaf made into flat cakes with water, not used internally, but smoked in a pipe. Bhang, used as a drink, is a mixture of ganja, cocoanut-water, kuskus (poppy- seeds), sugar, milk and spice. Charas is a mixture of ganja with tobacco. Am not acquainted with any. 46. The habitual excessive use would impair health, retard digestion, lessen the mental faculties, produce laziness, immorality and debauchery, and develop latent diseases, just as the excessive use of spirit-drinking would. 49. Yes. Bhang is said to be frequently used for that purpose. 51. No. 53. Have read and heard of instances where sepoys have run amuck or revenged an imaginary grievance after premeditation and the use of bhang 54. Occasionally. 55. Am informed that complete stupefaction without admixture is never induced. Answer No. 201. 20. (a) Combatants137 Jats138 and a slight feeling of lassitude and drowsiness. The subsequent want produces slight uneasiness. I have twice personally smoked ganja in small quantities to test its effect, and am bound to say without results, comfortable or otherwise. 45. I am not aware of it. The men I have seen are of sound constitution, physically, mentally and morally; the latter of course according to the status of the consumers. No. No. No. It induces laziness, but not habits of immorality, unless the consumption is excessive or the consumer unused to the drug. I know of no cases. 46. I have noticed that men who use these drugs to excess are often thin and wasted, with a drowsy, stupid look, and have heard that they often become mad. I have not seen a case. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Bhang is said to be : and ganja is sometimes put into sweetmeats for this purpose. Medically speaking, I believe, cannabis indica is prescribed to prevent too rapid ejaculation, and it is probably to attain this result, so desired by natives of India, that it is used. 51. I cannot say, as there are no habitual bad characters in the regiment under my command. 53. I do not know of any case. 54. I have heard so as a tradition, but no case has come under my observation. 55. I have heard that fakirs and bairagis are in the habit of giving them to their devotees. I believe dhatura is added to cause stupefac- tion. Answer No. 204. 20. (a) Combatants 21 (b) Non-combatants Nil. (c) Authorised camp followers 73 TOTAL 94 Smoke ganja139 33. Amongst the Sikhs no smoking of any kind is allowed, hence any drugs which require a pipe are prohibited: consumption not considered by Sikhs and Hindustanis, in moderation, wrong. Not if taken with milk or melon-seeds, etc. No. 39. The usual custom is to drink or eat it and not to smoke, hence no reply can be given to this question. 41. Yes. 42. It is considered beneficial. 43. Yes. 44. It is refreshing and not intoxicating, but stimulates and invigorates. It does not allay hunger, but creates appetite. It acts as a tonic and is used as such, having no after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification is only felt by immoderate consumers. 45. No evil effect. No. No. No. No. (a) No. (b) Exciting, I think (immoderate use). (c) Temporary mania. (d) Yes, by excessive use. (e) Symptoms of mania vary. (f) Not aware. I am unable to answer this question. Cannot at this distance of time do so. Only one case occurred in this regiment since its formation. Not clearly traceable to the use of these drugs. 46. The excessive use of these drugs undoubtedly causes mania of a temporary kind. As regards the other effects on the digestion, etc., I cannot speak. While Superintendent of the Madras and Waltair Lunatic Asylums for a lengthened period, I saw several140 Answer No. 207. 20. Total strength141 33. Practice generally looked down on and con- demned, because it is supposed to deaden the senses. None worship the plant. 39. Smoking is considered more injurious, be- cause, the natives say, it has more effect on the liver and internal organs. 41. No practical benefit, except to stop dysen- tery or diarrh142 affecting memory, but often of finally injuring his faculty and producing insanity. 43. They are generally inoffensive. 44. It produces noisy or quiet excitement, often sexual, and hallucinations, followed by sleep. It is refreshing at the time and is a great intoxicant. It both increases the appetite if food is taken, and it allays hunger after a little if the appetite is restrained. The effects last about one hour. Afterwards some dryness of the mouth is left in persons accustomed to it. There is a craving for gratification if the drug is not taken. 45. In my opinion it occasionally produces physical, mental and moral deterioration in all forms. It deteriorates the constitution in some cases. It causes loss of appetite if the usual stimulant is not taken. It frequently causes bronchitis, and specially when inhaled. It is used to encourage habits of immorality. A case of majum-poisoning came under my care in April 1893. Deterioration of health will induce laziness. It occasionally induces insanity, and may be the exciting cause, or predisposing, as the case may be. It may produce temporary or permanent insanity. Temporary cases are excitable, as far as my experience goes. I am not in a position to furnish reliable inform- ation on these points. A case under my care occurred some years ago when a recruit was insane for many weeks from one single inhalation of ganja. No record is avail- able. Ganja was the exciting cause. A case was admitted on 2nd April 1889, of toxic insanity from bhang. The patient was excitable and violent, and had been insane ten years before. I have noted that there was a predisposing cause in this case. A case was admitted 19th April 1887, due to ganja, but denied. The man was excitable and violent, and was ultimately sent to a lunatic asylum. He had previously shown symptoms of insanity in his former regiment. 46. The habitual excessive use of any of these drugs undoubtedly produces all the symptoms as shown in answers to paragraph 45 in a marked degree, where otherwise they may only be occa- sionally found. 49. Yes, commonly. Besides in the form of ganja it is used here in the form of sweetmeat called "majum," a compound of bhang, sugar, flower, butter and milk. A syce was admitted with accidental poisoning from this preparation in April 1893. 51. Yes, but no statistics are to hand. 53. Yes; presumably in the same way that alcoholic intoxicants do. I personally know of no case of homicidal frenzy. 54. Yes; it is well known that bhang is thus taken when a man is desirous of running "amuck." A case occurred in this regiment before or about 1870 on parade when a man attacked his Euro- pean officers and was at once cut down by the other men. 55. Yes, this is a well-known fact also. Com- plete stupefaction can be induced by dangerous doses of the drug without admixture with other narcotics. [Questions 28, 32, 33, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 49, 51, 53, 54 and 55 answered by Medical Officer.] Answer No. 210. 20. (a) Combatants 625 (b) Non-combantants 347 (c) Authorised camp followers 72 Muhammadans 1 per cent and Hindus 2 per cent. smoke charas. None smoke ganja. 24. No one eats bhang; one per cent. drinks it in the winter, and ten per cent. drink it in the summer. 25. The use is on the decrease, and is very small now. My authority for this is the native officers of my regiment. 28. To habitual moderate consumers143 with marked stupidity. It induces a bronchitic or asthmatic condition, with cough. If good food is not taken, the constitution becomes distinctly impaired. The health of excessive consumers does ultimately suffer in any case. More or less moral deterioration results from excessive use. (Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.) 49. Bhang is, but the other forms are not. 51. No. It is not supposed to have any con- nection with crime in general, or of a special character. 53. It does not incite crime nor violence. I know of no case where it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Yes. It is sometimes used for this purpose. 55. Yes, it is thus used, and complete stupefac- tion can be induced by means of a large dose. Answer No. 211. 20. a. b. c. CLASSES. Gurakha Officers. Havildars. Naiks. Buglers. Rifle men. TOTAL. Hospital Assistants. Lascars. Bazar establishment. Cavalry servants. Mule drivers. Kahars. Porters. Saddlers. TOTAL. REMARKS. Brahmins 2 1 1 2 6 Thakur 4 3 1 24 32 1 1 This does not in- clude 15 recruit boys below the age of 16. Chettri 3 8 3 12 26 2 2 Magar 2 18 24 5 520 569 3 8 11 GURKHA CASTES. Gurung 3 1 4 2 172 182 1 2 3 Kawar 1 1 2 4 Newar 1 2 1 13 17 5 5 Rai 1 2 1 1 3 8 1 3 4 Lama 1 1 1 5 8 4 4 Khawas 2 2 Kami 4 4 Sooki 2 2 Damai 2 3 12 17 1 1 Hindustanis 1 1 3 5 10 26 4 31 9 1 85 Jharwa 1 1 1 11 14 3 3 Christians 2 2 Muhammadans 1 5 6 3 1 7 8 TOTAL 16 40 40 15 789 900 6 5 10 32 11 31 38 1 128 Smokers of ganja144 Charas is said to be not available in Shillong. 28. The amount of ganja smoked is about one tola per week per man, the cost of which is eight annas. 32. No social or religious custom as to the use of these drugs appears to exist as far as enquiries made can ascertain. Ganja and charas are said to be used medicinally, to alleviate stomach disorders. Men who perhaps have commenced in this manner contract the habit of using these drugs. 38. The habitual consumers of these drugs appear to be looked on rather contemptuously as slaves of a habit they cannot give up. There does not however appear to be any very decided public opinion amongst the men against the users of these drugs. The hemp plant itself does not appear to be an object of worship, but the leaves are placed as offerings during the worship of the God Mahadeb. 39. It is impossible to give reasons in replying to these questions, as the numbers of users of hemp drugs in this regiment are too few to make their habits very noticeable. I am dependent, therefore, in replying to these questions for the information afforded me by the Gurkha officers of the regi- ment, the regimental chowdhry and the baniyas of the establishment. Smoking these preparations is said to be less injurious than drinking them or eating them. 41. Ganja smoked in cold places is said to pro- duce warmth in the body, whereas drinking bhang is said to lower the temperature of the body. 41. The use of ganja is said to be good for stomachic disorders. The use of the other two drugs is not supposed to be beneficial except in so far as they are narcotics. 42. The moderate use of ganja is said to be harmless in so far as it produces a feeling of warmth, but does not interfere with the smoker's working, nor is it said to produce any feeling of lassitude. Charas is said to produce a cough in the user. Neither charas nor bhang is used at all in this regiment. 43. Moderate consumers of ganja and charas are apparently harmless. Drinkers of bhang are liable to become intoxi- cated and are thus liable to be offensive to their neighbours. 44. The moderate use of ganja is said to be re- freshing, producing a pleasant sensation of easiness and happiness. It is said to be non-intoxicating, nor does it allay hunger, but rather increases the appetite. The effects are said to last three hours. There are said to be no after-effects except a craving for re-indulgence. A habitual consumer deprived of his ganja can- not work effectually, and suffers greatly from the craving for his usual stimulant. No replies as regards charas or bhang-consumers can be given, as none are available for questioning. 45. As I have not come into contact with persons addicted to excessive indulgence in hemp drugs, and have therefore had no personal experi- ence of such cases, I am unable to record an opinion on the subject. I may state that in this regiment there are only 5 men who are ganja-smokers, and they only indulge in a moderate degree, and there is nothing in the physical appearance of any of them to indicate that they indulge in this habit, and their medical history sheets show that they have suffered from no unusual amount of sickness. 46. See paragraph 45. 49. The question cannot be answered as regards charas or bhang. Ganja-smoking does not appear to be practised with the view of producing sexual excitement, but doubtless partially has that effect, being used as a stimulant. 51. No connection in particular is traceable between ganja-smoking and crime in general or crime of any particular character. Four of the 5 men who are ganja-smokers in this regiment have clear defaulter sheets. 53. Not as far as is known to the persons whom I have consulted. No cases of temporary homicidal frenzy from this cause have been known in this regiment. 54. No evidence on this point can be obtained in this regiment. 55. Ganja-smokers do not appear to become so stupefied as not to understand what takes place round them. Complete unconsciousness is said to be not pro- ducible by ganja-smoking. No answers can be given to these questions as regards bhang or charas. Answer No. 212. 20. (a) Combatants145 No social or religious custom with regard to use of drug is known of in the regiment. 33. It is not thought well of in the native army. Smoking it is considered worse than eating it, owing to the smell it creates and to the stronger effect it causes. 39. Charas is considered to be worse than ganja, in any shape, but smoking ganja is worse than eating ganja, as the effects of the drug are more strongly brought out. 41. Charas is believed to be never beneficial. It is injurious. The other drugs have the effect of stimulating some people without injuring them when taken in moderation. 42. See answer to 41. 43. Ganja taken even in moderation causes an unpleasant smell. 44. It exhilarates at first, but only for a short time. It produces effects of intoxication; it does not allay hunger; its effects last for three or four hours. Yes, regular consumers feel a longing if suddenly deprived of the drug. 45. No. Except it excites sexual organs. No. No. No. No; but in small quantities it increases the appetite and therefore is largely used by the natives as an aphrodisiac. It produces laziness. The exciting cause of insanity; mania which is only temporary; but symptoms may be re- induced even by moderate doses I am informed; there is no typical symptom; all confess without pressure. Amongst the women it is only taken by prosti- tutes, and that in moderation. Weakened intellects are prone to fall victims. There is no case in this hospital, but I have given my opinions from few cases I have seen else- where. 46. It causes insanity and is difficult to give up the habit; causes dysentery and diarrh146 some of the Sikhs take it habitually, and that no case has been discovered in which ill-effects could be traced to its use seems to point to the above conclusion. Of charas I have no experience. There is an impression among the men of the regiment that it is injurious, and there are very few users of it. I have been unable to discover any case in which injurious effects could be traced to its use. It is considerered a disgrace to smoke charas, and men will not admit that they do so. I have no evidence that these drugs impair the constitution, injure digestion or cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma or cause laziness or immo- rality. No case of insanity has occurred in the regiment during my connection with it, and I have never seen a case of insanity due to the use of these drugs. There is no trace of any information on these points in the medical history sheets of the regiment. 46. I have no experience of any cases who used these drugs excessively. 49. Bhang is said to be used as an aphrodisiae in the same way as opium, and to have a similar effect. 51. Statements made to me show that there is an impression that many bad characters smoke charas, but I can give no instances. 53. None have been brought to my notice, and the general impression is to the contrary. 54. No instances are known in the regiment. 55. No instances have occurred in this regiment. I would like to add that during the seven years I have been in command of this regiment, no crime has been attributable to the use of any of these drugs. Answer No. 214. 20. (a) Combatants- Mussalmans 249 Hindus 514 Native Christians 31 Other castes 39 (b) Non-combatants147 51. No; though a bad character often takes to over-indulgence in these drugs as Western nations take to drink, with the result that they often do and say what they should not. 53. Yes, generally to insubordination; but as far as I can learn, very seldom to homicidal frenzy. I know of no case. 54. Very seldom in Southern India. 55. I do not think that this drug would be of much use without mixing with opium. An over- dose would appear to be instant. Answer No. 215. 20. (a) Combatants 932 (b) Non-combatants 4 (c) Authorised camp followers 78 TOTAL 1,014 Ganja is not in use. About 30 men smoke charas, 24. So far as can be ascertained, no classes eat or drink bhang. 25. There is said to be a decrease in the use of these drugs. No reason is known. 28. One ounce costs 8 annas. The average consumption is about 1 pice worth per man per diem. 32. I have not been able to find out that any exist. 33. Consumers are generally held in contempt, on account of the physical weakness caused by indulging in the use of these drugs. No such custom exists, so far as can be ascer- tained. 39. Eating or smoking bhang is considered more injurious than drinking it. Charas and ganja are not eaten or drunk, but smoked. 41. No. 42. The moderate use of them is not considered harmless. It is said to produce cough and weakness. 43. Yes. 44. Charas produces intoxication. It is re- freshing, but does not create or allay hunger. The effects last about an hour when small amounts are taken. After-effects, headache and constipation. There is longing and uneasiness if more cannot be obtained. 45. None under my observation. Not that I am aware of. No. No. Certainly not; quite the reverse. Not that I am aware of. No. No cases. [Answered by Medical Officer.] 46. I have not met with habitual excessive users in the regiment. 49. Charas is so used. 51. None, so far as I am aware. 53. I have not met with a case of this kind. The excessive use of these drugs is said to incite to violence. 54 and 55. No cases have come to my notice amongst Gurkhas. N. B.148 He recovered completely after three months' sick leave. No further experience of insanes. 46. Persons taking these drugs to excess are said to become quite unfit for work of any sort. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Such a question I am certainly not able to answer. 51. The bad characters, such as I understand by this question, are not allowed to be enlisted in the regiment. 53. I should think so. No. 54. I fancy not. 55. I really know nothing about these things. Answer No. 217. 20. Total strength149 Longing and uneasiness are caused and in some cases sickness. Effects last:130 53. Ganja appears to be the only drug which incites to crime, as it has the effect of making people quarrelsome. No particular case can be mentioned, but in all cases of men running amuck, they have generally had their wits about them. 54. Ganja may be used, but not the other drugs. 55. Bhang without admixture has the effect of stupefying. One whiff of charas or chandu is enough to stupefy a man at once, and might be used as suggested. Answer No. 220. 20. Total strength 1,135151 tobacco, and there is no preparation by which the smoking of either charas or ganja can be less injurious. 41. Even the moderate use of charas, ganja or bhang is not beneficial in its effects. 42. The moderate use of any of these drugs, instead of being harmless, is always injurious. Forgetfulness, indolence, loss of intellect, emacia- tion, cough, bronchitis, hard breathing and similar other ailments are the results of habitual long use of these drugs. 43. Moderate consumers of these drugs are offensive to their neighbours, inasmuch as other men also imbibe the habit of using these drugs by the bad influence of their society. 44. The moderate use of any of these drugs produces intoxication. It refreshes its habitual consumer, revives at once his dormant life, and thereby enables him to attend to his personal requirements; but failing to get it at the proper time, he becomes quite uneasy, restless, and unable to take care of his person, and longs to have his usual dose. The effects of charas and ganja are instantaneous, and their intoxication lasts for an hour or two; while bhang is slow in its effects, and its intoxication also lasts for a longer time, according to the quantity taken. 45. The number of habitual consumers of these drugs is so small in the regiments here that the required information cannot be supplied from per- sonal observation of cases suffering from the bad effects of these drugs. It may, however, from a medical point of view, be stated that the habitual moderate use of any of these drugs produces noxi- ous effects. It impairs the constitution; injures the digestion and causes dysentery, bronchitis and asthma; but it does not necessarily induce habits of immorality or debauchery. It may also pro- duce insanity. 46. The habitual excessive use of any of these drugs is still more injurious both to the mind and the body; but as cases suffering from an excessive use of any of these drugs have not been seen in the regiments here, the required information can- not be supplied. 49. These drugs are used both by men and women as an aphrodisiac. 51. Men of bad characters only are not neces- sarily the habitual consumers of these drugs, the use of which has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs does not necessarily incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise, nor there has been any case in the regiments here in which it has led to tem- porary homicidal frenzy. 54. These drugs are not used by persons to for- tify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55. Complete stupefaction can be induced by the administration of these drugs in sufficient quantity without admixture. Criminals have sometimes been heard to stupefy their victims by the ad- ministration of these drugs, and then to accomplish their evil intent.
152 A Answers to questions Nos. 20 and 24. HINDUS. MENIAL CASTES. Musulmans. TOTAL QUESTION NOS. 20 and 24. QUESTION No. 20. Rajputs. Darrogas. Khutries. Gujurs. Malees. Sarawgecs. Ahirs. Goshanees. Sikhs. Raos. Sonars. Meenas. Charans. Ranas. Naees. Kanderas. Kataryas. Jats. Punjabi muhyals. Kahars. Kabir bunsees. Kalas. Kayashths. Brahmans. Khatiks. Nayaks. Balaees. Dhoonds. Brigies. Chamars. Jhinwurs. Moochies. Dhobies. Mehtars. (a) Combatants 55 47 7 28 2 6 3 30 3 1 5 1 5 2 1 1 9 3 1 1 3 14 7 4 29 1 4 1 2 1 331 608 (b) Non-combatants 1 1 2 1 1 1 7 (c) Authorised camp followers 8 3 6 8 4 29 TOTAL 55 47 8 28 11 2 6 3 31 3 1 5 1 5 5 1 1 9 3 2 1 3 1 14 7 4 29 1 4 1 2 1 6 8 335 644 232 14 63 335 644
X
154 B. Answers to questions ANSWER TO QUESTION HINDUS OF HIGH CASTES. QUESTION NO. 20. Brahman. Rajput. Kayesth. Khathari. Saraogi. Dhoosar. Mahajan. Swami. Jat. Ahir. Goojar. Mina. Mali. Daroga. Kunbi. Hajjam. Saikalgar. Bhat. Rana. Kunmbar. TOTAL. FORCE INCLUDING CAVALRY AND INFANTRY. Combatants 286 1,231 33 1 2 2 4 1 66 121 448 117 32 7 7 3 11 2,372 Non-combatants 11 1 11 23 Authorised camp followers TOTAL 286 1,231 33 1 2 2 4 1 66 121 448 117 32 7 7 11 1 3 11 11 2,395 ANSWER TO QUESTION NO. 20. Number of men smoking ganja Number of men smoking charas 2 1 1 1 1 1 6 ANSWER TO QUESTION NO. 24. Number of men eating bhang 1 1 Number of men drinking bhang 32 4 1 1 38 TOTAL
155 Nos. 20 and 24. No. 20. Total of high and menial castes. ANSWER TO QUESTION No. 24. Total of high and menial castes. Christians. GRAND TOTAL. HINDUS OF MENTAL CASTES. MUSSULMANS OF HIGH CASTES. MUSSUL- MANS OF MENIAL ASTES. Dhanka. Balahi. Raigar. Khatik. Naik. Dhobi. Mochi. Oria. Bargi. Chamar. Bhailya. Keer. Khakrob. TOTAL. Shahikh. Sayid. Moghal. Pathan. Rajput Mussalman. Nagori. TOTAL. Jodha. Sakka. TOTAL. 2,372 871 181 118 909 331 69 2,479 2,479 10 4,861 228 138 1 6 7 7 3 17 1 8 5 3 20 444 467 7 122 129 129 596 228 138 1 6 7 7 3 17 1 8 5 3 20 444 2,839 871 181 118 909 33 60 2,479 7 122 129 129 10 5,457 6 3 1 4 4 1 11 1 1 1 1 1 2 38 1 1 1 1 39 X 2
156 Answers to questions from No. 25 to 55 by157 or special, fortifying himself by using these drugs only. 55. No, persons intending to commit crimes, in order to further their designs, are not known to induce their victims to partake of these drugs, and so stupefy themselves. Answer No. 223. 20. The strength of battery is 75 native officers, non-commissioned officers and gunners. (a) Combatants158 43. Yes, as far as is known. 44. Not known. 45. My experience of the habitual moderate use of any of these drugs is too limited to justify an opinion. I do think there is evidence to indicate that insanity may tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. No information is to be traced on the medical history sheets of the regiment. 46. The habitual excessive use of these drugs produces noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. Its use deadens the intellect, and may produce insanity. In cases known to me where it has produced insanity it appeared to be the exciting cause. The type of insanity was temporary violent mania. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Not known. 51. Not in this regiment. Not known. 53. Not known. 54. No experience of such a fact in this regi- ment. 55. Not known. It is believed so. Answer No. 225. 20. (a) Combatants159 Answer No. 226. 20. (a) Combatants 794 (b) Non-combatants Nil. (c) Authorised camp followers 24 About 30 to 40 in the whole regiment smoke ganja; nearly all these are Hindus. 24. Not known. Very few. 25. The use of ganja is apparently somewhat on the increase in Southern India. I can give no special reasons. 28. For ganja, which is practically the only drug used, at present prices about 3 pies worth per diem. 32. Not known. 33. Some consider it disreputable. Not among any sepoys in the regiment. 39. Smoking is less injurious than eating or drinking for quantities being equal: in smoking, a man does not absorb the whole as he does in eating or drinking it. 41. It may be, if taken occasionally to relieve pain. 42. Not harmless, for the habit undoubtedly grows, and the effects of continued use of even moderate quantities show themselves. 43. Yes. 44. Refreshing and stimulating. Reaction soon sets in, and produces depression and intoxication. It allays hunger. The effects last for about two or three hours. The after-effects are laziness and languor. The want of subsequent gratification does produce longing and uneasiness. 45. Yes. Physically it impairs their constitu- tion; mentally it stupefies the intellect and renders it blunt; morally it induces laziness and habits of immorality and debauchery. It does not seem to affect their digestion. They suffer from bronchitis or asthma. I have not seen cases of dysentery. It does deaden the intellect and produce insani- ty. In cases known to me it acted as the predis- posing cause. The type of insanity generally is mania. Occasionally cases of melancholia also occur. They are generally temporary, and are reinduced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. In cases known to me the practice of smoking ganja was not taken to obtain relief from men- tal anxiety or brain disease. I have had no cases illustrating the last point, so cannot offer any opi- nion on it. 46. The habitual excessive use of the drug in- tensifies the symptoms noted in paragraph 45, and produces a gradual loss of memory, nervous debility, impotence, cerebral softening and insanity. 49. Yes. 53. Yes. I do not know of any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Yes. 55. Yes. Complete stupefaction can be induced without admixture if taken in large quantity. Answer No. 227. 20. (a) Combatants160 (a) Combatants161 43. The 4 men in the regiment who use these drugs are perfectly inoffensive to their neigh- bours. 44. There are none in the regiment, only 4 very moderate consumers. 45. During the period that I have been connect- ed with this regiment no case of the use of any of the hemp drugs has come under my observation, I am therefore unable to state whether it produces any of the effects enumerated in the margin. 46. See answer to No. 45. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. I have never heard of their being so. 51. On the contrary : one of the 4 men who use these drugs, is in possession of a long-service and good-conduct medal. No connection in the use of it with crime has come to my knowledge in the regiment. 53. No case has ever come to my knowledge in the regiment. 54. Have not so been used in this regiment. 55. I have never heard of this being done by any one in the regiment. Answer No. 231. The officers of the army wrote that there was not a single person in the army who used either bhang or charas or ganja. Hence it was thought unnecessary on the part of the army to record answers to the questions of the Commission, for evidence in the way of answers to the questions asked should be recorded only in such cases where the person giving evidence is fully conversant with the facts of the case. The officers of the army have reported that ganja, charas, etc., are not consumed by any mem- ber of the force, hence it is unnecessary to record their answers. Besides the questions to which the soldiers have been asked to give answers are almost the same whose answers have been recorded by the State officials and already forwarded. It is therefore ordered that this Rubkar be for- warded for the information of the Secretary, Hemp Drugs Commission. Answer No. 232. 20. Sikhs 50 Rajputs 38 Dogras 46 Afghans 79 Purbias 23 Panjabi Muhammadans 240 " Hindus 30 Mussalmans of this State 49 Hindus " " 3 TOTAL 558 (a) Combatants 457 (b) Non-combatants 40 (c) Authorised camp followers 61 Sikhs 3 Afghans 2 Purbias 6 Panjabi Mussalmans 42 " Hindus 6 Mussalmans of this State 1 Hindus " " 1 TOTAL 61 There is only 1 charas-smoker, being a Mussal- man of this State. 24. (a) None eats bhang. (b) Numbers of those who drink bhang are as follows:162 digestion to some extent during the early stages, yet loss of appetite and indigestion result in the later stages. The habitual consumer loses his appetite. Dysentery, bronchitis or asthma is not caused by the use of the drugs, but indolence increases by and by. The consumer becomes timid. Sexual appetite gradually disappears altogether. The use of charas impairs the intellect, affects the brain, and even induces acute mania. The use of charas is the predisposing cause of insanity. As a general rule, misars, pujaris,. fakirs, sadhus and sanyasis are excessive consumers, and fall a prey to the above disease Long excessive use would make insanity permanent. Moderate use for a limited period would be attended with tem- porary insanity. Restraint upon a patient suffer- ing from insanity induced by the drug would effect improvement, but he would be disposed to again use the drug on liberation from restraint, and the symptoms would be re-induced. People confess the drinking of bhang. In regi- ments, Pathans of Yusafzai tribe and Rajputs are generally habitual consumers of charas and ganja, and smoke them openly. They do not regard it a vice. Some people think that the thought present (before the mind) at the time of drinking bhang remains there so long as the intoxication lasts. It is under this pretence that some fakirs and sadhus drink it, alleging that their thoughts would be concentrated upon God. But such is not the effect of bhang. A consumer of charas does not retain control over his brain and intellect; and his temper be- comes irritable. The moderate use of bhang, however, is not so injurious. 46. I have not had occasion to come across such an excessive habitual consumer in this regiment as was reduced to insanity. I have, however, seen two excessive consumers of bhang and charas, who had become half crazy, but were cured subse- quently. 49. It is practised as such by some. But the use has a contrary effect after a time. 51. The use of bhang has no connection with bad characters; nor is it the cause of crime. Some miscreants do, indeed, deliberately cause physical and mental injury to others by making them smoke charas. 53. A consumer of charas may commit crime, but a bhang-consumer is timid, and dare not commit serious crime. 54. No : bhang and charas would not serve the purpose. Liquor, indeed, does impart fortification for such a purpose. 55. A habitual consumer cannot be victimised by being induced to partake of the drug; but one unaccustomed to bhang-drinking would be stupe- fied by its use, and could be victimised thereafter. Dhatura is occasionally mixed with bhang to fur- ther such designs. Such admixture brings about complete stupefaction. Answer No. 283. 20. Total strength163 about 1 tola is sufficient for two or three days, value in this case being about 1 pie. 32. Among the Muhammadans or Hindus of Southern India I am told that there are no cus- toms, social or religious, in regard to the consump- tion, the reason stated being that Madrasis in general view the consumption of Indian hemp in any form with disfavour. But among the few Bengal Hindustanis still in the regiment it appears to be the custom at all the big feasts, such as the Holi and Das- sera, etc., to make certain quantities of bhang (amount according to the number of the men, the allowance per man, as above stated, being ad- hered to), and before consuming it, they all repair to the temple of worship and before attempting to consume any of it to lay it as an offering to their god. Also I understand that, even when making their daily portion for consumption, it is customary with the most strict to lay it before the image of the god in their own houses, as an offering, before appropriating it to their own use. It is also customary among this class, I am in- formed, for a host to serve out bhang or ganja to the guests at a wedding or any other entertain- ment that he may have invited his various friendsto. 33. In the regiment it is regarded with dis- favour, and I am informed by all I have asked that it is not only so in my regiment but that a simi- lar opinion holds throughout the Madras army. That in Southern India even in the villages a ganja-smoker or eater and bhang-drinker is gener- ally looked on with disapprobation. I understand that a Madrasi, be he Mussalman or Hindu, invariably goes away to consume the drug in secret, either alone or with another con- sumer (this latter case very rare). That he will never openly use it before others. This is not the case with the Hindustanis of Bengal in the regiment, who use it openly As well as I can ascertain, the use of the nar- cotic is in disrepute, as it is not the custom in Mad- ras and is looked on as a bad habit. There seems to be no custom of worshipping the hemp plant as far as I can find out. Certainly none among the sects to be found in Southern India. 39. Smoking, I am informed, is more injurious than eating or drinking the drug. That the bad effects, causing in the end death, are more rapid in the case of a smoker than in the case of an eater or drinker. That the habitual smoker after a time suffers from a species of wasting, is continually coughing and spitting up phlegm mixed with blood. That, on the other hand, with the habitual eater or drinker the final stage, which in this case is imbecility, is not reached so rapidly, though the difference in time is not very great. That taking two equally healthy subjects who consume equal amounts, the bad effects will be apparent on the smoker before the one who only eats or drinks the drug. 41. If used medicinally, I am told that the drug has a beneficial effect, and that the moderate use of it seems to have neither a good or a bad effect. All asked agree in saying that if the use of it were never begun the want would never be felt. That, in fact, is a luxury that can easily be done without, but that, if used in moderation, and that moderation adhered to, it seems to do neither harm nor good. 42. As shewn in my answer to question 41, the moderate consumption of Indian hemp appears to do no harm, but should the consumer have, by any chance, to go without, he becomes restless, un- easy and miserable and gets ill, so, speaking as a Commanding Officer, I cannot consider the moder- ate use even as harmless for a sepoy; as should the occasion arise when on active service that the con- sumer had run out of his stock, or was unable to get more, he becomes useless as a sepoy. It is true that it is obtainable in most places where sepoys are likely to serve, and I have seen it brought in by Chins for sale to my own camp, but at the same time the above contingency is quite possible. There seems to be no harm in the moder- ate consumption of it, the harm becoming apparent when the moderate consumer has to do without. 43. I am told that among Madrasis moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours; but, on the other hand, a father would not knowingly allow his daughter to marry a moderate or other consumer of the drug, though the parent may be on friendly terms with the consumer in question. This, I am informed, is not only the opinion in the regiment, but is the idea held in their several vill- ages. 44. To the habitual consumer the effect is re- freshing and enervating. It does not produce intoxication. It does not allay hunger. It does create appetite. The effect lasts about three or four hours, when the consumer becomes languid and begins to again feel the want of it. The subsequent non-gratification of the want makes the habitual consumer restless and uneasy;he cannot set himself to do any work he is required to do, and eventually from abstention from it he becomes ill, and I am told in cases of a large con- sumer abstention from it sometimes ends in mad- ness. 45. During the two and half years of my In- dian service I have never had an authentic case of disease in any form, mental or otherwise, due to the consumption of ganja, bhang and charas. The percentage of sepoys in Madras regiments who take it is said to be small. It grows in the Chin Hills in many localities, and is said to be consumed to a certain extent by. the Panjabi muleteers, who are a hardy set of men and work very well. The want of it to a habitual consumer is said to cause dysentery after a few days. In excess, or continued for a length of time, insanity is said to be produced, and insanity is also sometimes brought on if the drug is suddenly withheld in the case of a person who has been a habitual consumer. 46. See question 45 for answer. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. My informants say, not in the regiment; that they have heard of it being so used and are aware that it is used to increase the sexual appe- tite, but that they know of no instances. Y 2
164 51. No, not in my regiment. The larger propor- tion265 53. Not at all. 54. None uses these drugs to fortify himself for crime. 55. Many people do so, for their use induces stupefaction. But those who are addicted to these drugs never become stupefied, but feel slight intoxi- cation. These drugs, even if used without an ad- mixture, induce stupefaction. Answer No. 235. 20. One hundred and fifty-three. (a) Combatants166 Ganja-consumers become insane in the end, and are teased by boys in the streets, whom they hit with stones, which may cause slight or serious injury. 53. It has been stated in the preceding answer that the man who uses these drugs turns insane in the end, and it is no wonder if he becomes guilty of any serious offence, because one under their influ- ence would not understand what the results of his acts would be. 54. People do not consume these drugs to for- tify themselves to commit premeditated acts of violence or other crime. They use the drugs solely to satisfy their cravings. It is not likely that one who has not used these drugs before would be guilty of any violence, as their use rather makes the consumer coward. Indeed, one who smokes charas does, until he is intoxicated, appear to be bent upon committing crime. 55. Since the stupefied man cannot discern friend from foe, how is it possible for him to further any design? One unaccustomed to the use of these drugs will become stupefied by an ordinary does and one accustomed to a small dose by an exces- sive one, and then the person intending to commit crime can easily prey upon the victim. Bhang with an admixture of dhatura is more stupefying than bhang alone, while ganja is more stupefying Charas smoked soon after a drink of bhang induces complete stupefaction. Answer No. 236. 20. Total strength167 Answer No. 237. 20. Five hundred and ninety. (a) Combatants 565 (b) Non-combatants 25 Two men of the Purbias only use charas, and none use ganja. 24. No one eats or drinks bhang. Ganja, charas and bhang are now more largely used than they were in former times. 28. The average cost of charas is 9 pies, of bhang 1 anna, and of ganja 6 pies per head (consumer) per diem. 32. It is a social custom among mendicants and beggars (sic). 33. No opinion can be expressed, but still the use of these drugs is not considered good. The brain is deranged and the redness of face utterly vanishes away by the use of these drugs. So, on the whole, it makes the man contemptible. It is the Shiva's hemp, and is used in his worship. 39. To smoke the bhang is more injurious than to drink it. 41. Its moderate use by the mendicants saves them from sins, concentrating their minds towards God, but it is of no good to a layman. 42. In my opinion none of these drugs is harm- less. 43. They are not offensive to their neighbours, because the use of these drugs makes them coward. 44. These drugs are refreshing for the habitual consumer. They do not produce senselessness. Does not allay hunger. It creates appetite. The intoxication of charas and ganja lasts for two hours, while that of bhang for about twelve hours. The consumer looks dull after the intoxication is over. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 49. No. 51. It has no connection with crimes. The habit is formed by associating with con- sumers, and the habit develops into excess. 53. It is not practicable. 54. I do not think so. 55. Yes, because there have been several instances by excessive use. Answer No. 238. 20. Three hundred and seventy. (a) Combatants 342 (b) Non-combatants 28 Rajputs 171 Sans 36 Thakurs 4 Brahmins 18 Other Hindus 9 Jats 7 Mussalmans 109 Mashkis 8 Neghis 8 Nobody in this regiment uses ganja and charas. 24. No soldier of any caste or class in the regiment uses bhang. Of course out of the limits of cantonments some Nihang fakirs might be using the drugs, but this could not be ascer- tained. 25. The use of ganja and charas in the regi- ment is neither on increase nor decrease, but else- where it is on increase. 28. In the regiment none of the drugs is used. The average allowance and cost of each of these drugs per diem cannot therefore be stated. Of course a consumer would spend 1 anna a day. 32. The Nihang Sikhs and fakirs generally like the drugs. According to Islam the use of the drugs is prohibited, but this is not the case among Hindus. Most of the Hindus and Muham- madans, however, became accustomed to it and, the custom is a social one. 33. As one or two hours after taking the drug the consumer goes into a sound sleep and becomes quite senseless through its effects, it is not ad- visable to allow its use among the native army. The use of ganja is most degrading, because the consumer's clothes and hands remain dirty and give out very offensive smell. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 39. The smoking of bhang in a hukka is more injurious than its drinking, but the effect of smok- ing lasts for a short time only. 41. No, on the contrary, it is injurious; as it emaciates the consumer, but cures the watery mouth. 42. The moderate use also is not harmless. It is more injurious to the health of the consumer as well as the comfort of his neighbours. 43. No, because sometimes they begin using abusive language to their neighbours, and their habit of consuming the drugs leads neighbours also to their use. 44. Is somewhat refreshing. Does not produce much intoxication. Does not allay hunger. Sharp- ens appetite. The lasting of the effect depends upon the quantity taken. The after-effects are phlegm and a sort of idleness. The want of subsequent gratification brings about the following effects upon the consumer:168 53. No, except that the consumer sometimes talks nonsense. 54. Yes. 55. Yes, because persons not accustomed to the use easily become victims to them, while habitual consumers cannot be stupified without some admix- ture such as dhatura, etc. Answer No. 239. 20. The total number of men in the battery is 164. (a) Combatants 124 (b) Non-combatants 40 All the above are authorised camp-followers. No one in the battery uses any drug prepared from bhang. 24. No one in the battery uses bhang. 25. As no one uses these drugs in the battery, no increase or decrease can be stated, but in a gene- ral way it may be said that the use of these drugs is on the increase, because now-a-days vagabonds go into the company of such beggars who use these drugs, and thus become habitual consumers. It is evident that now-a-days it is very difficult to obtain employment, hence the people become idlers, who oblige their friends to use the drugs. 28. The daily cost of the drugs for a poor man is 3 annas and for a rich man 8 annas to 1 rupee. The above expenses include the cost of diet also. 32. There is no religious custom in this part of the country in regard to the use of these drugs. Most of the sadhus use them. There is a social custom as stated in reply to question 25. 33. Evidently there is no benefit in using these drugs, and no opinion can be formed by the native army. As these drugs produce intoxication, hence the consumers often become degraded : for instance one drinks bhang or any other intoxicant; he talks nonsense and appears to be a madman. These intoxicants make the consumer coward. The Hindus consider bhang the plant of Shiva, but it is difficult to decide whether the people worship it or not. 39. Bhang-smoking is more injurious than its drinking, because it weakens the chest. Other preparations of bhang are not harmful, because most of the sweetmeats in which the bhang is mixed contain such ingredients, which lessen its effect. 41. It does no good. 42. Even if it be used moderately (sic), still it is injurious. Some people who often fall ill, or whose health is impaired, use bhang to increase their appetite and it thus serves as an accessory to food. 43. Not at all. 44. The people who use these drugs moderately do not feel any instantaneous effect, but after half an hour they feel some intoxication. It is not refreshing but exhilarates those who are in the habit of using it. It gives no intoxication (Masti), but makes the man coward. It does not allay hunger. It increases appetite. It is often seen that a man eats double the quantity his usual meal. If moderately used, its effects would last for three hours, and if used in excess the effect lasts longer; when the intoxication is over the man becomes too weak. The want of subsequent gratification causes uneasiness to the habitual consumer. 49. It gives no benefit, but rather weakens the men. 51. Yes, most bad characters use these drugs, their use has no connection with crime. Of course, the consumer uses abusive language. 53. No. 54. No one uses them for this purpose because they do not produce boldness. 55. Yes. But the habitual consumers never become completely stupefied. Answer No. 240. 20. Two hundred and three men169 44. The use of these drugs is refreshing and not creative of laziness. It does not allay hunger, but sharpens the appetite. The lasting of effect depends upon the quantity consumed. The after-effects are phlegm and a sort of idleness. The want of subsequent gratification brings about the following effects on the consumer:170 produces great uneasiness, so much so that a habit- ual consumer is unable even to walk. 49. The use of all these drags produces impo- teucy. 51. The excessive use of ganja produces insanity, and its consumers are in the end sent to lunatic asylums. When a consumer has no money to purchase the drug, his desire to satisfy his craving sometimes leads him to commit thefts. Consequently the use of ganja leads its consumer to the commission of theft and makes him offen- sive to the public. 53. The use of ganja produces avidity in the brain. The consumer sometimes throws stones at those who annoy him. I have never seen any consumer of bhang or ganja committing murder. 54. The use of these drugs does not produce boldness, but, on the contrary, makes him coward. 55. As already stated, the use of any of these drugs does not encourage the consumers to further their designs; on the contrary, it stupefies them and makes them worthless. The use of these drugs with an admixture of dhatura or ak leaves produces complete stupefac- tion. Persons intending to commit robbery or murder can succeed undoubtedly in their designs by inducing their victims to partake bhang or charas, provided the latter are not accustomed to their use. Answer No. 242. 20. One hundred and thirty-one. Rajput Mians 13 Sahads 8 Brahmins 27 Mussalmans 39 Thakurs 23 Other Dogras 4 Purbias 2 Hindu Jhiwars 2 Sweepers 2 Other Hindus 11 TOTAL 131 (a) Combatants 125 (b) Non-combatants 6 (c) Authorised camp followers Nil TOTAL 131 Persons who smoke hukka 171 Answer No. 243. 20. Six hundred and twenty-seven. (a) Combatants 601 (b) Non-combatants 26 (c) Authorised camp followers 615 None of these persons uses ganja, charas or bhang. Of course, they smoke hukka. 24. Nobody drinks bhang in this regiment. 25. Now-a-days the use of these drugs is on the increase among the ignorant masses. 28. The average allowance and cost of each of these drugs cannot be stated. Consumers spend according to their means and the number of the companions who indulge with them. 32. There is no religious, but there is a social cus- tom in regard to the consumption of these drugs. Indeed Nihang Sikhs use bhang. Perhaps there may be any religions custom among them. 33. The use of these drugs by employés and lay- men is degrading for them. It is, moreover, physi- cally and socially injurious for them. It is equally injurious to military men, as it brings on bron- chitis, cough and asthma while on drill. 39. People prepare majum with bhang, but it is not known whether or not the majum is injuri- ous. Khatai, etc., which are also prepared from bhang and smoked in a hukka (sic) are more inju- rious. These admixtures are very injurious, be- cause they affect the brain. 41. The moderate consumption of bhang is even not harmless. It creates laziness, aridity and emaciation in the body. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is not harmless, because it creates aridity. 43. The consumption of these drugs greatly affects the senses of the consumers; such consumers are very troublesome to their neighbours. 44. The use of charas produces aridity, bronchi- tis, etc.; it sharpens the appetite, but affects the di- gestive power. It creates intoxication, which is in- jurious to the body. It also brings on timidity. It does not allay hunger, and over-feeding is fol- lowed by indigestion. 49. Nobody uses the drugs as an aphrodisiac. On the other hand, its use causes laziness, emacia- tion and sexual weakness. 51. The bad characters as well as other people use these drugs. The use has no connection with crimes of any special character. 53. The excessive consumer does not commit a heinous crime, such as "murder." Of course, it would not be strange if they commit trifling offen- ces. 54. Yes, the habitual consumers after taking their dose recover their senses and become forti- fied, while an abstainer becomes stupefied if he takes any of these drngs in order to commit any offence or violence. 55. Yes. Answer No. 244. 20. Five hundred and eighty-four. (a) Combatants172 Thakkars 4 Mahus 3 1 Sihal 11 Thakurs 9 Kalorias 6 Jasrohas 4 Bandrals 2 Jaswals 2 Sonklas 2 Jamwal 1 Sarjahas 3 Thakalias 2 Dalambas 2 5 24. Nobody drinks bhang in this regiment. 25. Now-a-days the use of these drugs is on the increase among the ignorant masses. 28. The average allowance and cost of each of these drugs cannot be stated. Consumers spend according to their means and the number of the companions who indulge with them. 32. There is no religious, but there is a social custom in regard to the consumption of these drugs. Indeed, Nihang Shikhs use bhang. Per- haps there may be any religious custom among them. 33. The use of these drugs by employés and laymen is degrading for them. It is, moreover, physically and socially injurious for them. It is equally injurious to military men, as it brings on bronchitis, cough and asthma while on drill. 39. People prepare majum with bhang, but it is not known whether or not the majum is injurious, Khatai, etc., which are also prepared from bhang and smoked in an hukka (sic) are more injuri- ous. These admixtures are very injurious, because they affect the brain. 41. The moderate consumption of bhang is even not harmless. It creates laziness, aridity and emaciation in the body. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is not harmless, because it creates aridity. 43. The consumption of these drugs greatly affects the senses of the consumers; such consumers are very troublesome to their neighbours. 44. The use of charas produces aridity, bronchi- tis, etc.; it sharpens the appetite, but affects the di- gestive power. It creates intoxication, which is injurious to the body. It also brings on timid- ity. It does not allay hunger, and over-feeding is followed by indigestion. 49. Nobody uses the drug as an aphrodisiac. On the other hand, its use causes laziness, emacia- tion and sexual weakness. 51. The bad characters as well as other people use these drugs. The use has no connection with crimes of any special character. 53. The excessive consumer does not commit a heinous crime, such as murder. Of course, it would not be strange if they commit trifling offences. 54. Yes, the habitual consumers after taking their dose recover their senses and become fortified, while an abstainer becomes stupefied if he takes any of these drugs in order to commit any offence or violence. 55. Yes. Answer No. 245(a). 20. Total strength173 ed to it. As long as the effect lasts they are active, but they become quite weak and languid afterwards. 46. Excessive habitual use of all narcotics is in- jurious. 49. No one takes this drug as a medicineMedical men can say if any intoxicating drug is beneficial in any illness 51. The proportion of bhang-drinkers is given above. As regards crime in general, all regard the use of these drugs as criminal; the law can show the crime of the special character. It is also clear that the use is religiously criminal, for it is for- bidden among Muhammadans and they may be taken to be a special crime. 53. When a man is over-intoxicated he loses his senses, and in such a state he involuntarily does to what his inclination may lead. 54. No, because one is not master of his actions in a state of intoxication. 55. Complete stupefaction can be induced by this drug alone (without admixture) in those who are not addicted to it. Excessive intoxication sometimes kills a man. Answer No. 245(b). 20. Present strength 286 all ranks, including followers:174 24. Ganja175 24. (a) Bhang eaters176 25. The use of ganja, bhang and charas is. day by day decreasing, because they are growing dear. 28. For bhang 3/8 of a seer in a month is used by one, i.e., about 11/2 tola a day, costing every day 3/4 of a pice. A man requires ganja about 1/4 of an anna a day. Charas is not used in this regiment. 32. There is not any social or religious custom in regard to the consumption of any of these drugs. 33. When moderate it is regarded neither good nor bad. There is no settled opinion about thepractice. The use of any form of the narcotic is in disrepute. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion. 39. Ganja and charas are used as smoking only. Bhang is used both in eating and drinking; but the drinking of bhang is better than its eating; by eating the consumer suffers from choler. 41. The moderate use of these drugs is bene- ficial, because they keep up the faculties of the consumer fresh in working longer than usual. He feels no fatigue even though he works hard. 42. The moderate consumption is harmless, as no bad effect is seen over the consumer. 43. They are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The habitual consumer has the pleasing sen- sation as the immediate effect of the moderate use. It is not refreshing in general. It produces no in- toxication to the moderate habitual consumer. It rages hunger; creates appetite. The effect lasts to the time at which the habitual consumer uses to take daily. Uneasiness and weakness are its after- effects. The want of subsequent gratification pro- duces uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use produces no ap- parent noxious effect, physical, mental or moral. The use of bhang does good to the constitution, but that of ganja occasionally impairs it. It in- creases the digestion and appetite. The use of bhang does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma; but that of ganja causes bronchitis and asthma when the consumer cannot get the nourishing substances as ghee, etc., to eat. The moderate use of bhang does not impair the moral sense nor render the consumer lazy; ganja, if smoked with force, occasionally maddens the consumer by entering the head. As for immorality and debau- chery, in both the cases it depends upon the nature and company of the consumer. 46. The habitual excessive use of ganja makes great damage to the physical strength. The use of bhang does not make any harm to the physical constitution of the consumer; he loses his power over his senses and so is unable, to perform any work well. 49. The use of any of these drugs are not prac- tised as an aphrodisiac. 51. It cannot be affirmed that the greater num- ber of vicious persons can be found among the consumers. The excessive use occasionally maddens the consumer. In this state, having no control over the mind, he may commit a crime, but what sort of crime he shall commit cannot be stated. 53. The excessive indulgence does not incite like liquor any premeditated crime. No case is known in which the consumer has been led to commit the homicidal frenzy. 54. No man is known to have taken these drugs with the intention of committing a crime, violent or otherwise. 55. Persons intending to commit crime do in- duce their victims to partake any of these drugs and stupefy themselves; but such case is not known to have occurred here. Without admixture complete stupefaction can not be induced. Answer No. 249. 20. The present total of the regiment is 328 in number, and they belong to different castes, as shown under:177 seen even that it has produced any disease or caused insanity. It produces good appetite, and is very useful for digestion. 46. These drugs when used excessively are injurious by all means. 49. No experience. 51. The habitual moderate consumers are not of bad character generally, but they become hardy and laborious instead. 53. Not acquainted with the result produced from excessive use of these drugs. 54. Some men purposely take bhang to perform their premeditated cause. 55. Some persons try themselves to induce their victims to partake of these drugs, in order to stupefy them with a view of plundering them also. A man cannot be stupefied by a simple dose of bhang without admixture. Answer No. 250. 20. Present strength 605 all ranks, including followers. (a) Combatants178 smoke a pipe is generally made sick by it, when commencing to smoke). Regarding (6), I can offer no reliable evidence. 46. Excessive use is considered to induce bron- chitis, general debility, and to take away all sexual desire, and to be followed by insanity; but then chiefly when other poisons are mixed with it. Habitual excessives become very thin. [Questions 45 and 46 answered by Medical Officer.] 49. Not by regimental consumers. They can- not speak as to its use by others in this way. 51. The small number of men in the regiment who smoke ganja (charas and bhang not being con- sumed) are generally well-behaved and efficient men. What crime there is in the corps is caused by excess in drinking the country liquor. 53. Excessive indulgence would have this effect. The effect being what would be called in respect to a man greatly excited from alcohol a state of "mad drunkenness." The victim goes off his head, and for the time is practically insane. 54. No such use known in the corps. 55. Ganja taken alone does not stupefy, but would do so when mixed with dhatura. No case known to witnesses. Answer No. 251. 20. (a) Combatants179 (c) Authorised camp followers180 Yes, in time. No. No. Induces laziness. Not that I am aware of. Never known a case. None. None. 46. None ever in regiment. 49. Charas sometimes used, but not in regiment. 51. None in regiment. 53. No cases known. No. 54. Report says yes. 55. No cases known of. Yes. Answer No. 254. 20. Total strength 632 (a) Combatants181 Answer No. 255. 20. Total strength 670 (a) Combatants182 on the decrease, but among the public in general it appears to be on the increase, seeing that the value of leases for the sale of these drugs increases every year. 28. The average allowance and cost of each of these drugs per diem is183 people that the use of intoxicants is anything but, beneficial. 54. Yes. 55. Yes. If a man has vehement desire to take away a thing from the possession of another man who would not part with it, the former would induce the latter to partake of one of these drugs, in order to obtain his object by stupefying him. Answer No. 258. 20. Total strength 654 (a) Combatants184 44. The immediate effects are red eyes and giddiness. It is refreshing for the habitual consumers only. It certainly produces intoxication. Does not allay hunger. It creates appetite but does not increase digestive power The effects last for about twenty-four hours. The after-effects are yawning and pain in limbs. It certainly causes uneasiness and longing. 49. Yes, doctors prescribe the drugs with some other medicine for the purpose. But the drugs themselves decrease the sexual power of the consumer. 51. Bad characters or gamblers use these drugs, and when they have no money to provide them- selves with the drug, they commit thefts. 53. Yes, it does; but I have never seen such an occurrence, though I have reasons to believe that such is the case. When one has lost self-control it is not strange if he should commit crime. 54. When a person intends to commit a pre- meditated act, he takes a little quantity of these drugs to fortify himself. 55. Yes, they do, by giving him some sweetmeat mixed with one of these drugs. Complete stupe- faction can be induced by the drugs without admixture. Answer No. 260. 20. Total strength 7,412 (a) Combatants185 Answer No. 261. 20. (a) Combatants 1,644 (b) Non-combatants 164 Sikhs 879 Hindus 449 Mussalmans 417 Sweepers 63 TOTAL 1,808 (c) Authorised camp followers186 Of the combatants and the non-combatants the following smoke ganja