THE MADRAS MARINE PLAGUE REGULATIONS. (Revised up to 30th September 1910.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 1 anna 6 pies.] 1910. [3 pence.]
THE  MADRAS MARINE PLAGUE  REGULATIONS.  (Revised up to 30th  September 1910.)    MADRAS:  PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS.  1910.
?CONTENTS.  PAGE I. - Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 .. .. .. .. .. 5 II. - Notification of the Government of India, Home Department (Sanitary - Plague), No. 2256, dated 22nd December 1906, delegating to Local Governments powers under the Epidemic Diseases Act . . . . . . . . 7 III. - The Madras Marine Plague Regulations .. .. 9 APPENDICES. APPENDIX A.- Health Officer's Certificate under Regulation 10 .. 24  B. - Do. under Regulation 31 .. 24  C. - Bill of Health under Regulation 35 .. ..  25  D. - Do. under Regulation 36 .. .. 25  E. - Health Certificate 26  F. - Plague Certificate .. .. .. .. .. 26  G. - Instructions for disinfection and destruction of rats in holds . . . , .  27  H.- Rules for the working of cargo 29
?I  THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897).  An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of  Dangerous Epidemic Disease.  WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention  of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby  enacted as follows;-  Short title, extent and 1. (1) This Act may be called the  commencement. Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897;  (2) It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive  of British Baluchistan, the Santhal Parganas and the Pargana  of Spiti); and  (3) It shall come into force at once.  Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2. (1) When at any time the Governor-General in Council is  satisfied that India or any part thereof is  visited by, or threatened with, an out-  break of any dangerous epidemic disease,  the Governor-General in Council, if  he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the  time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take  or require or empower any person to take such measures,  and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary Regulations  to be observed by the public or by any person or class of per-  sons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of  such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what  manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including  compensation if any) shall be defrayed.  (2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene-  rality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in  Council may take measures and prescribe Regulations for-  (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or  arriving at, any port in British India and such detention there-  of, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving  thereby, as may be necessary; and  (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or  otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommo-  dation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting  officer of being infected with any such disease.  (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general  or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred
6  by this Act may also be exercised by any local Government  with respect to the territories administered by it.  Penalty.  3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made  under this Act shall be deemed to have  committed an offence punishable under  section 188 of the Indian Penal Code.  Protection to persons  acting under Act.  4. No suit or other legal proceeding  shall lie against any person for anything  done or in good faith intended to be done  under this Act.
?7  II  NOTIFICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME DEPARTMENT  (SANITARY-PLAGUE), NO. 2256, DATED CALCUTTA, THE  22ND DECEMBER 1906, DELEGATING TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS   AND ADMINISTRATIONS POWERS CONFERRED BY THE EPIDEMIC  DISEASES ACT, 1897.  WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others  threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease  known as plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise  of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3), of the  Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897), is pleased to direct  that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised,  to prevent the outbreak of plague or the spread thereof, by  local Governments and administrations with regard to their  respective territories as follows:-  (a) all the said powers by the Governors of Fort St.  George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governors of  Bengal, Eastern Bengal and Assam, and Burma;  (b) the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (1)  and sub-section (2), clause (b), by the Lieutenant-Governors of  the United Provinces and the Punjab, and the Chief Commis-  sioners of the Central Provinces, the North-West Frontier  Province, Coorg, British Baluchistan and Ajmer-Merwara.
?9  III  THE MADRAS MARINE PLAGUE REGULATIONS.  IN exercise of the powers conferred by the Epidemic  Diseases Act, 1897, and delegated to him by the notification  of the Government of India in the Home Department, No.  2256 of the 22nd December 1906, the Governor of Fort St.  George in Council is pleased to prescribe, in supersession of  all regulations previously issued on the subject, the following  regulations to be observed in all ports of the Madras  Presidency :-  1. In these regulations-  (1) 'Vessel' includes anything made for the conveyance  by-water of human beings or of property.  (2) 'Port Officer' includes any person acting under the  authority of Government in charge of port discipline.  (3) 'Master' when used in relation to any vessel, means  any person (except a pilot or harbour master) having for the  time being the charge or control of the vessel.  (4) 'Sanitary authority' means, as regards the port of  Madras, the President of the Corporation of Madras and, as.  regards other ports, the Collector of the district in which the  port is situated. The jurisdiction of every sanitary authority  shall, for the purposes of these regulations, extend to seaward  for a distance of three miles beyond low water mark on all  parts of the coast line bounding the area ordinarily under its  jurisdiction.  (5) 'Port Health Officer' shall mean any person  appointed by the Government, either by name or by virtue  of his office, to be Health officer of a port and includes an  additional or assistant Health officer of a port and any officer  appointed by the Government or by the President of the  Corporation of Madras or by a Collector of a district, as the  case may be, either by name or by virtue of his office, to  perform any of the duties of a Health officer.  (6) 'Observation' means segregation either on board  a vessel or in an isolation camp or other place.  (7) 'Surveillance' means that the persons subjected  to it will not be isolated; they will at once obtain free  pratique, but will be kept under supervision.  (8) 'Infected vessel' shall mean a vessel which has  on board a case of plague or of illness in respect of which  2
10  reasonable grounds exist for believing it to be a case of  plague, or on board of which there has been a case of plague  or of illness reasonably suspected to be plague during the  seven days immediately preceding her arrival.  (9) 'Suspected vessel' shall mean a vessel on which  there has been, at the time of departure or during the voyage,  a case of plague or of illness in respect of which reasonable  grounds exist for believing it to be a case of plague, but on  which there has been no case of plague or of illness reason-  ably suspected to be plague during the seven days imme-  diately preceding her arrival.  (10) 'Healthy vessel' shall mean a vessel which has  come from, or which during the voyage has touched at, an  infected port, but which has had no death or case of plague  or of -illness in respect of which reasonable grounds exist for  believing it to be a case of plague on board, either before  departure, during the voyage, or on arrival.  (11) 'Infected' when used with reference to any  articles shall mean infected, or suspected by the Port Health  Officer to be infected, with plague.   (12) 'Infected port' shall mean any port which the  Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George  Gazette, declare to be infected.  (13) 'Medical inspection of a vessel' includes such  medical examination of the officers, passengers and crew as  the Port Health Officer deems necessary.  2. (a) The master of every 'infected' vessel shall, when  within three miles of the coast of any part of the Madras  Presidency, cause to be hoisted by day and by night the port  signals for 'infected' vessels, viz., from sunrise to sunset the  flag L of the Commercial Code at the foremast head, and  from sunset to sunrise a triangle of lights which shall be  arranged at a distance of not less than six feet apart, white  at the apex and red at the base, to be hoisted where best  visible clear of the anchor lights.  (b) The master of every 'suspected' or 'healthy'  vessel, or of every vessel on which plague or unusual morta-  lity has been observed among rats, or of every vessel which  has been in communication otherwise than orally or by signal  with a vessel from an infected port shall, when within three  miles of the coast of any part of the Madras Presidency, cause  to be hoisted by day and by night the port signals provided  for quarantine, viz., from sunrise to sunset the flag Q of the   Commercial Code at the foremast head, and from sunset to  sunrise three white lights in a vertical line one over the
11  other not less than three feet apart, to be hoisted where best  visible clear of the anchor lights.  (c) The master shall also signal the fact of the vessel  being 'infected,' ' suspected ' or 'healthy' immediately to  the port authorities independently of the above signals.  (d) No tindal or other person in charge of or naviga-  ting any registered boat shall attempt to make such boat fast  to, or shall take it alongside of, a vessel detained under these  regulations or coming from an infected port, until such vessel  has been granted pratique by the Health Officer of the port.  3. The Port Officer, on the arrival of any vessel dis-  playing the flag or lights aforesaid, or if he ascertains from  the master of such vessel, or otherwise has reason to believe,  that the vessel is 'infected,' ' suspected,' or ' healthy', or  that there is unusual mortality among the rats on board, shall  detain such vessel, and order the master forthwith to moor  or anchor the same in such place as may be fixed by him,  and the master shall moor or anchor accordingly. Provided  that in the case of any vessel which has not communicated  with the shore, the master, if he objects to submit to the  obligations imposed by these regulations, shall be free to put  back to sea. In such case, the Port Officer shall send immediate  information to the sanitary authorities of the port to which  the vessel is bound or at which she is next about to call.  4. While a vessel shall be so detained no person shall  leave the same.  5. The Port Officer, on the approach to the port of any  vessel displaying the flag or lights aforesaid, or on his detain-  ing any vessel as aforesaid, shall forthwith give notice thereof  and of the cause of such detention to the sanitary authority  of the port, and also to the Port Health Officer.  6. The detention by the Port Officer of a vessel under  regulation 3 shall cease as soon as the vessel shall have been,  as hereinafter provided, duly visited and examined by the  Port Health Officer, or, if the vessel shall, upon such examin-  ation, be found to be 'infected' or 'suspected,' as soon  as the same shall be moored or anchored in pursuance of  regulation 11,  7. The sanitary authority shall, as speedily as prac-  ticable, with the approval of the Port Officer, fix some place  where vessels may be moored or anchored for the purposes of  these regulations, and shall make provision for the reception of  plague patients and other persons removed from vessels under  these regulations. The place to be fixed as aforesaid shall  be some place within the jurisdiction of the sanitary authority,  unless the local Government otherwise order, in which case
12  the place so fixed shall for the purposes of these regulations  be deemed to be within such jurisdiction.  8. On receiving the notice prescribed by regulation 5  the Port Health Officer shall forth with visit and examine  the vessel in regard to which such notice shall have been given,  for the purpose of ascertaining whether she is 'infected,'  'suspected,' or 'healthy' or whether there is unusual mor-  tality or any indication of the existence of plague among rats  on board. He shall also do so if he have reason to believe  that any vessel which has arrived or is within the jurisdiction  of the sanitary authority, whether detained by the Port  Officer or not, is 'infected' or 'suspected' or has come from,  or touched at, a port where plague prevails, or has passen-  gers or crew on board who have been within an infected area  within the preceding seven days. The master of such vessel  shall permit it to be so visited and examined, and shall afford  all reasonable facilities for such examination as the Port  Health Officer may deem requisite.  9. For the purpose of ascertaining the state of the  vessel as aforesaid, the Port Health Officer may demand from  the doctor of the vessel or, failing him, from the master a  declaration on oath whether there has been or has not been a  case of plague on the vessel since her departure, or whether  any person suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from  plague has left or been removed from the vessel prior to or  during the voyage, or whether unusual mortality or any  indication of the existence of plague has been observed among  rats on board and all particulars relative to any such  circumstance; and the doctor or the master, as the case may  be, shall be bound to make a true declaration to the best of  his knowledge and belief. The master of a ship, any passen-  gers or any members of the crew on board of which have within  the preceding seven days been in an infected area, shall be  bound to transmit duplicates of passports to the Port Health  Officer with his bill of health and to offer him all reasonable  facilities for such examination as that officer may deem  requisite.  10. When the Port Health Officer has made such exami-  nation as aforesaid, he shall forthwith prepare a certificate  in duplicate in the form shown in Appendix A or to the  like effect, and shall deliver one copy to the master and  transmit the other to the sanitary authority. He shall also,  if the vessel is 'infected' or 'suspected,' give immediate  information of the fact to the Sanitary Commissioner for  Madras.
13  11. The master of any vessel certified by the Port Health  Officer to be 'infected' or 'suspected' shall thereupon  moor or anchor her, if he has not already done so, at the  place fixed for that purpose under regulation 7 where she  shall remain until the requirements of these regulations  have been duly fulfilled, and from which she shall not depart  without the written or, where communication with the vessel  is impracticable owing to stress of weather, the signalled  permission of the Port Health Officer.  12. No person shall leave any such vessel until the  examination hereinafter prescribed shall have been made.  13. In the case of a vessel certified to be 'infected'  the following rules shall be observed:-  (i) The Port Health Officer shall examine every person  on board.  (ii) If any person on board such vessel is found to be  suffering from plague or from any illness which the Port  Health Officer suspects may prove to be plague, the Port  Health Officer shall certify accordingly. Every person who  shall be so certified by him shall, if possible, be disembarked  and shall be detained for treatment in a suitable hospital or  isolation camp or other place.  (iii) Every person who shall not be so certified by him  and whose destination is the port at which the vessel is lying  shall be permitted to land immediately on giving to the  sanitary authority or the Port Health Officer his name and  place of destination, stating his address at such place, and on  accepting a passport in accordance with regulation 1 of the  Madras Plague Regulations in force outside the Presidency  Town or the Regulations for the City of Madras as the case  may be. Provided that every person who has been in contact  with a case of pneumonic plague shall be disembarked and  detained under observation in an isolation camp or other place,  and that any other person on board whom the sanitary  authority or the Port Health Officer considers in any way likely  to carry the infection of plague shall also be disembarked  and shall have his clothing and personal effects disinfected.  Provided also that passengers arriving at the port of  Madras who have their clothing and other personal effects  disinfected by means of the steam disinfector at that port  shall not be required to take out passports as aforesaid.  (iv) All other persons remaining on board the vessel  (except those referred to in regulation 32 who shall be sub-  ject to the restrictions therein specified) shall be placed under
14  surveillance during the time the vessel is in port and shall not  be allowed to land without the written permission of the Port  Health Officer.  (v) Persons remaining on board shall be kept apart  from the crews and other occupants of boats going to and  from the vessel.  (vi) The rules laid down in regulations 25 to 30 shall  be observed in carrying out measures of disinfection and  rat destruction.  (vii) The maximum period of detention of persons,  arriving by an 'infected' vessel, kept under observation  outside a camp, shall- be seven days from the date of leaving  the vessel; or in the case of persons placed in a camp seven  days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague  in such camp, or, if no such case occurs, seven days from the  date of leaving the ship.  14. In the case of a vessel certified to be 'suspected'  the following rules shall be observed:-  (i) The medical examination prescribed in clause (i)  of the last preceding rule shall be carried out, provided that  the said examination shall not be required in the case of  coasting vessels arriving from ports in India.  (ii) All persons disembarking from any such vessel  shall be served with passports as prescribed in the last pre-  ceding rule subject to the exceptions therein mentioned.  Provided that they shall be under surveillance for only five  days from the date of the arrival of the vessel in port, the  date being entered on the passports issued under this rule.  (iii) The crew and the passengers on board whose  destination is not the port at which the vessel is lying shall  be placed under surveillance for a period not exceeding five  days from the date of the arrival of the vessel. The crew  shall during this period be prohibited from leaving the vessel  except on duty.  (iv) No communication shall be allowed during the  said period of five days between the crews of boats going to  and from the vessel and the persons remaining on board such  vessel.  (v) The rules laid down in regulations 25 to 30 shall  be observed in carrying out the measures of disinfection and  rat destruction.  15. 'Healthy' vessels other than those referred to in  regulation 16 shall be subject to the same measures as are  prescribed for 'suspected' vessels in regulation 14. But (i)
15  the period of surveillance (five days) shall be reckoned from  the date on which the vessel left the infected port last visited,  and (ii) such members of the crew and passengers as are in good  health may be permitted to disembark before the expiry of the  above period, provided that their clothing and personal effects  are first disinfected to the satisfaction of the Port Health  Officer, and they are subjected to surveillance while they  remain on shore.  16. Vessels on which rats are found by bacteriological  examination to be infected with plague or on which there is  unusual mortality among rats shall be subject to the following  measures:-  (i) Medical inspection of passengers shall be carried  out as in the case of 'infected' vessels.  (ii) The rules laid down in clauses (i) to (iv) of regu-  lation 13 shall apply to the crew and passengers in these  vessels, provided that in exceptional circumstances the Port  Health Officer may extend the period of surveillance to seven  days.  (iii) The rules laid down in regulations 25 to 30 shall  be observed in carrying out measures of disinfection and rat  destruction.  17. If on the  medical examination prescribed in rules  14 to 16 there appears to be a case of plague or of illness  in respect of which reasonable grounds exist for believing it  to be a case of plague on board a vessel certified to be  'suspected' or 'healthy,' the vessel shall be treated as an  'infected' vessel for the purposes of these regulations.  18. In the case of vessels other than those referred to in  the forgoing regulations, which are found to have on board  any persons who have been within an infected area during  the preceding seven days, the Port Health Officer shall, when  the destination of the passenger or the port of visit of the  crew is within the Madras Presidency, issue a passport to each  individual concerned, if one be not already in his possession,  and advise the fact to the next Port Health Officer by the  quickest safe method.  19. No persons other than intending passengers shall go  on board vessels arriving from infected foreign countries or  from infected ports in India, provided that coolies and represen-  tatives of shippers may be permitted to do so for the working  of cargo in accordance with the rules in Appendix H. No  persons other than such coolies and representatives shall quit  such vessels after embarking thereon.
16  20. No person detained for treatment or placed under  observation shall leave the hospital, camp, place or vessel in  which he is detained under treatment or observation before  the expiry of seven days from the date of the occurrence  of the last case of plague in such hospital, camp, place or  vessel, or if no such case occurs, from the date of his leaving  the 'infected' vessel, provided that the sick shall be detained  till they recover or for such period not exceeding seven days  as may be necessary for ascertaining whether the illness is or  is not plague.  21. Body-linen, soiled clothing, used bedding (except  when carried as the personal baggage of travellers), rags and  waste-paper shall not be imported into any port in the Madras  Presidency from any infected foreign country or from any  infected area in India, provided that this prohibition shall not  be enforced if the Health Officer of the port of arrival is  satisfied that the articles in question were packed in an  uninfected country or area and could not have come into  contact with contaminated articles on the way, or that the  articles were despatched not less than five days before the  outbreak of plague. The articles, the importation of which is  prohibited under this regulation, are liable to be destroyed  without compensation on arrival at the ports of this  Presidency.  22. Articles of merchandise landed at any port in this  Presidency which are in the opinion of the Port Health Officer  infected shall be disinfected, provided that letters and cor-  respondence, printed matter, books, newspapers, business  documents, etc. (not including parcels conveyed by post)  shall not be subject to disinfection or to any restriction  whatsoever. If the articles of merchandise, whose disinfec-  tion is considered quite necessary, cannot be disinfected they  shall be stored during a period not exceeding two weeks,  provided that there is sufficient storage accommodation in  the port concerned. The Port Health Officer shall, if so  desired by the owner of the articles of merchandise subjected  to the measures prescribed in this regulation, grant a certifi-  cate stating the action taken.  23. Cargo shall be landed only after the medical inspec-  tion and the measures of disinfection and rat destruction  have been carried out in so far as they are required by these  regulations in respect of vessels arriving at the ports of this  Presidency. The rules in Appendix H shall be observed in  the landing of cargo.
17  24. The Port Health Officer may, at his discretion, permit  the landing of mails arriving from infected foreign countries  or from infected ports in India as soon as the preliminary  inspection provided for in regulation 8 is over. The landing  of mails shall not be delayed till the other measures prescribed  in these regulations are carried out unless such a course  is rendered necessary by exceptional circumstances.  25. The destruction of rats on vessels arriving at the  ports of this Presidency shall be carried out in the case of-  (i) 'infected' vessels;  (ii) vessels on which rats have been shown by bacterio-  logical examination to have plague; and  (iii) 'healthy' vessels on which unusual mortality  among rats has been observed, if the measure is considered  by the Port Health Officer to be necessary.  The rats shall be destroyed either before or after dis-  charge of cargo as quickly as possible and, in any case, with-  in a maximum time of forty-eight hours, and in such a  manner as to avoid damage to merchandise and to the ship's  plating and engines.  The instructions given in Appendix G shall be observed  in carrying out the destruction of rats.  26. In the case of vessels lying in infected ports or arriving  in harbour from infected ports precautions shall be taken to  prevent rats obtaining access from the shore to the ship and  vice vers. Between the hours of sunset and sunrise no  such vessels shall, except while actually loading or unloading,  lie within three feet of the shore or of anything attached to the  shore, or be connected therewith by a gangway, rope or  other means of communication.  27. If a 'healthy' vessel from an infected port has been  subjected to measures of rat destruction in the course of her  voyage, these shall not be repeated unless sick or dead rats  are found on board.  28. The Port Health Officer shall, whenever requested,  furnish the master of a vessel on which measures of rat  destruction have been carried out with a certificate to that  effect duly signed and sealed by him.  29. The following rules shall be observed in carrying out  disinfection in the ports of this Presidency:-  (i) In the case of 'infected' and 'suspected' vessels-  (a) such soiled linen, wearing apparel and articles  belonging to the crew and passengers as are in the opinion of  the Port Health Officer infected shall be disinfected on shore;  3
18  (b) such parts of the vessel as have been occupied by  persons ill with plague, or are in the opinion of the Port  Health Officer infected, shall be disinfected.  (ii) In the case of 'healthy' vessels-  (a) such soiled linen, wearing apparel and other arti-  cles belonging to the crew and passengers as the Port Health  Officer has special reasons for regarding as infected shall be  disinfected on shore; and  (b) such parts of the vessel and such articles as the  Port Health Officer regards as infected shall be disinfected in  case there is plague or plague is suspected among rats on  board.  In carrying out disinfection under these regulations, the  instructions given in Appendix G shall be observed. The  master of the vessel shall execute all orders given by the  Port Health Officer for purposes of disinfection. If the  master neglects to comply with any such orders within a  reasonable time, the sanitary authority or the Port Health  Officer shall cause the same to be carried into execution at  the expense of the said vessel.  30. Vessels from an infected port in respect of which  disinfection has already been carried out and which have  undergone adequate sanitary measures shall not, on their  arrival in another port, be again subjected to these measures,  if they have not called at an infected port and no case of  plague has occurred on board since the disinfection was  performed. A vessel which has merely disembarked passen-  gers and their baggage or mails at a port without admitting  on board any person or article shall not be regarded for the  purpose of this regulation as having called at the port.  31. (i) As soon as the master of an 'infected' vessel  has complied with the requirements and directions of the  Port Health Officer as provided in these regulations, the Port  Health Officer shall grant him a certificate in the form  prescribed in Appendix B and thereupon the vessel shall have  all the privileges of a 'healthy' vessel in the port concerned.  (ii) Provided that if a case of plague, or of illness  suspected to be plague, occurs on board subsequent to the  grant of the above certificate, the certificate shall become  invalid and the vessel again become subject to the requirements  of the regulations regarding ' infected ' vessels.  32. If any person suffering from plague or from any  illness which the Port Health Officer suspects may prove to be  plague cannot be disembarked under regulation 13, he may  be detained on board the vessel, which shall remain subject,
19  for the purpose of this regulation, to the control of the Port  Health Officer. Such person shall not be removed from or  leave the vessel, except with the consent, in writing, of the  Port Health Officer, and if the illness from which such person  suffered is, or proves to be plague, the vessel shall be treated  as an ' infected ' vessel.  33. In the event of any death from plague on board  such vessel, the master shall, as directed by the sanitary  authority or the Port Health Officer, either cause the dead  body to be taken out to sea and committed to the deep pro-  perly loaded to prevent its rising, or shall deliver it into the  charge of the sanitary authority for disposal, if the former  procedure be not in accordance with caste or race customs.  34. It will be the duty of the Port Officer to facilitate  the conveyance, to all vessels with plague on board, of such  supplies of provisions, stores or other articles as may be re-  quired by those on board. Such supplies will be placed on  the boats of the vessel, to be subsequently removed by the  crew.  35. No vessel bound for Aden, Perim or any port out of  India shall commence her voyage from any port in the  Madras Presidency until she has been inspected by the  Health Officer of the port and the master or person in charge  of such vessel has obtained from such officer a bill of health  or certificate in the form prescribed in Appendix C.  Such bill of health or certificate shall not be given unless  the officers and crew of, and also the passengers if any by,  such vessel have been examined by the Port Health Officer  before sailing and have been found to be free from plague or  illness in respect of which reasonable grounds exist for  believing it to be a case of plague, and unless the bedding  and personal effects of such members of the crew as have  embarked in the vessel at the port and of all the passengers  below the second class have been disinfected, before being put  on board, to the satisfaction of the Port Health Officer.  Provided that the medical examination prescribed in this  regulation shall, in the case of the officers, passengers and  crew of the vessel who have been continuously on board during  the stay of the vessel at the port and have not newly em-  barked in the vessel, be carried out on board and not on  shore.  Provided also that the disinfection prescribed in this  regulation shall not be necessary in the case of passengers  proceeding to any port in Ceylon, except such as have come  from an infected area.
20  Provided further that, if any port in the Madras Presi-  dency becomes infected with plague, a certificate in the form  prescribed in Appendix F, in addition to the Bill of Health  prescribed in Appendix C, shall be granted to vessels bound  for Aden, Perim or for any port out of India.  36. In the case of a vessel bound for Aden, Perim or  any port out of India that has called at any port in the  Madras Presidency in the course of her voyage, the inspection  with reference to such vessel by the Port Health Officer shall  be limited to the medical examination * on shore, prior to  embarkation, of such members of the crew or passengers as  intend to embark in such vessel at the said port, coupled  with the disinfection, as aforesaid, of the bedding and per-  sonal effects of the same persons below the second class, and  the bill of health under this regulation shall be in the  form prescribed in Appendix D.  Provided (1) that, if any port in the Madras Presidency  becomes infected with plague, any vessel calling thereat, and  bound for Aden, Perim or any port out of India, shall have  no communication with such infected port except under  such precautions as the Government may prescribe or the  Port Health Officer think necessary.  Provided (2) that all vessels shall be inspected by the Port  Health Officer at the last port of call in this Presidency prior  to proceeding to Aden, Perim or any port out of India.  37. In the case of any vessel bound, from any port in  the Madras Presidency uninfected with plague, to any port in  India excluding Aden and Perim, the medical examination of  the vessel, crew and passengers and the disinfection of their  bedding and personal effects above prescribed shall not be  carried out.  Provided that, if any port in the Madras Presidency  becomes infected with plague, the same rules with regard to  medical inspection and disinfection as are above prescribed for  vessels proceeding to ports out of India shall be enforced in  the case of vessels proceeding to ports in India.  38. In the case of vessels of the Royal Navy and foreign  vessels of war, the inspection, prescribed in the preceding  regulations, of all officers, men, crew and of the persons on  * A certificate in the form prescribed in Appendix E by a commissioned medical  officer appointed for this purpose, and dated not more than 12 hours before the departure  of the vessel, shall be accepted in lieu of examination of passengers of the first and  second classes by the Port Health Officer at an uninfected port. Such certificate shall be  annexed to, and form part of, the bill of health.   This rule does not apply to vessels bound out of India which call at one or more  Indian ports in the course of their voyage.
21  board, if any, may be made just before the vessels start by the  Naval Medical Officer on board, in the presence of the Health  Officer of the port, who shall countersign the Naval Medical  Officer's certificate, if he is able to do so.  39. All vessels belonging to the Ceylon Government  which may leave ports in the Madras Presidency with emi-  grants for Ceylon shall be exempted from medical inspection  and disinfection of bedding, etc.  40. No person shall be allowed to embark on board a  boat or vessel leaving-  (a) any port on the east coast of India south of  Madras, or  (b) Mangalore, or any port south of Mangalore, on the  west coast of India,  for any place on the coast of the Northern Province of Ceylon  or any island adjacent thereto, or for any place on the west  coast of Ceylon between Colombo and the southern limit of  the Northern Province, or any island adjacent to such west  coast.  41. No Asiatic or African passenger shall be permitted  to embark on board a boat or vessel bound for a port in  Ceylon at any port in the Madras Presidency where an officer  of the Ceylon Government is stationed for the purpose of  regulating emigration, unless he holds a permit to land in  Ceylon granted by the said officer of the Ceylon Government.  42. (a) Should the Health Officer of the port consider  that any passenger examined in accordance with these  regulations is suffering from plague or suspected plague, or  is not free from the infection of plague, he shall prevent such  person as well as those who, he has reason to think, have  been in dangerous communication with the said passenger  from embarking, and their baggage and personal effects shall  not be allowed on the vessel and, if already placed on board,  shall be removed as early as possible and shall be disinfected  to the satisfaction of the Health Officer.  (b) Should the Health Officer of the port consider that  any member of the crew or passengers already on board of the  vessel is suffering from plague or suspected plague, or is not  free from the infection of plague, he shall prevent such  person from sailing on such vessel and shall refuse to give the  bill of health, unless and until the baggage and personal  effects of such person have been removed from the vessel and  disinfected to the satisfaction of the Health Officer and such  parts of the vessel as have been occupied or frequented by  4
22  such person shall have been disinfected to the satisfaction of  the Health Officer, and all such procedure and precautions  taken as regards the disinfection of the vessel shall be  noted in the bill of health. The baggage and personal effects  also of such persons as were in dangerous communication  with such infected case shall, according to the discretion and  under the supervision of the Health Officer, be disinfected,  and the names of those persons shall be given to the vessel's  surgeon or the master or person in charge of vessel.  (c) All persons so removed or prevented from sailing  shall, at the discretion of the Port Health Officer, in accordance  with the requirements of individual cases, be detained in a  hospital or isolation camp or other place, or be placed under  surveillance; and such persons as are detained in a hospital  or isolation camp or other place shall not leave it until the  chief medical officer present at the spot shall have certified  that they are free from the infection of plague.  (d) All contaminated or suspected articles shall be  thoroughly disinfected on shore under the supervision and  to the satisfaction of the Port Health Officer.  43. After the master or person in charge of the vessel  has obtained a bill of health under the provisions of these  rules, no person or cargo * or goods of any kind shall be  embarked or disembarked before the vessel leaves the port  unless such vessel is again inspected by the Port Health Officer  and another bill of health obtained from such officer by the  master or person in charge of the vessel.  44. Vessels not leaving port  before 6 A.M. of the day  following the medical inspection may not leave without  reinspection and the grant of a fresh bill of health. Such  reinspection may be conducted on board.  45. The Port Health Officer shall intimate by express  telegram the departure of any 'infected' or 'suspected'  vessel or any vessel on which there has been plague or un-  usual mortality among rats to the Health Officer of the next  port at which the vessel is expected to call.  46. If there are on board a vessel which is not 'infected',  'suspected' or 'healthy' passengers or crew who have within  the preceding seven days been in an infected area, the Port  Health Officer shall, when the destination of the passenger or  the port of visit of the crew is within the Madras Presidency,  issue a passport of the kind prescribed in the Madras Mufassal  * Mail bags are included in 'cargo' under this regulation.
23  or City Plague Regulations to each individual concerned, if  one be not already in his possession, advise the fact to the  next Port Health Officer by the quickest safe method and also  note it on the bill of health.  47. No port clearance shall be delivered to any vessel  bound from any port in the Madras Presidency to Aden,  Perim or any port out of India until the master or person in  charge of the vessel shall produce a bill of health or certi-  ficate granted under these Regulations, provided that the  Customs Officer may entrust the port clearance to the Port  Health Officer for delivery by him to the master or person  in charge together with the bill of health.*  48. The rules in these regulations with regard to the  importation and disinfection of articles of merchandise, etc.,  shall apply, as far as may be practicable, to the exportation of  such articles in vessels sailing for foreign ports and coasting  vessels leaving for Indian ports if the ports at which the said  articles are shipped are infected.  49. Any person disobeying or contravening any of the  foregoing regulations shall be deemed to have committed an  offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal  Code and shall be liable on conviction to be punished with  imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  * If any port in the Madras Presidency becomes infected with plague, this rule  applies also to vessels leaving such port for any port in India.
24  APPENDIX A.  Health Officer's Certificate.  [See regulation 10.]  I hereby certify that I have examined the vessel , of  , now lying in the port of , and that I find  that she is  (a) 'infected' with plague  (b) 'suspected'  (c) 'healthy'  (d) that plague (suspicion of plague, or unusual and suspicious  mortality) was observed among the rats on board  (e) that she has on board persons/no (passengers and crew)  who have been in an infected area within  the last seven days.  Date Port Health Officer.  APPENDIX B.  Health Officer's Certificate.  [See regulation 31.]  I hereby certify that the master of the vessel , which is  classed under the Madras Marine Plague regulations as 'infected,' has  complied with the requirements of these regulations to my satisfaction  and the vessel may therefore, within the limits of this  port, be permitted the privileges of a 'healthy' vessel.  Date Port Health Officer.
25  APPENDIX C.  Bill of Health.  [See regulation 35.]  Certified that the ship/steamer sailing under the  flag, under the command of of tons  bound for with a crew (including officers and able-bodied  seamen) of persons, and passengers, laden with a  cargo of is to-day the of  at the time of leaving the port of in a satisfactory sanitary  condition, and that no case of plague exists among its passengers and  crew.  Certified also that the town and port of are at present  declared by the Board of Health/Health officer to be free from plague/infected with * Plague   Health Officer.  Date Port of  APPENDIX D.  Bill of Health.  [See regulation 36.]  This is to certify that no case of plague exists among any of the  passengers or crew embarked at the port of on board  the ship under the command of as  steamer  master bound for, and that the bedding and effects of  such passengers below the second class and of such members of the crew  have been duly disinfected.   There are persons on board who have been in an  infected area within the preceding seven days, all of whom are protected  by passports.  It is further certified that the town and port of are at  present free  from plague.  Date Port Health Officer.  * Here enter epidemic or sporadic as the case may be.    Vide separate certificate attached.   This clause is necessary only when the vessel is neither 'infected,' or 'sus-  pected' or 'healthy.'   Or as the case may be.
26  APPENDIX E.  Health Certificate.  [See note under regulation 36.]  I do certify that I have examined , who is  personally known to me (or whose identity has been proved to my  satisfaction) a passenger on the vessel not more than  twelve hours before the departure of the vessel from the port of  , and find him in good health, except as noted in  the margin, and free from any symptoms of plague.  (Rank.)  Date (Official designation.)  APPENDIX F.  Plague Certificate.*  [See regulation 35.]  [To be attached to the bill of health in the case of all ships sailing to a port beyond  India from an infected port-see regulation 35.]  Certified that the passengers and the crew of the ship/steamer  leaving the port of on the have  been examined before embarkation and found to be free from plague.  Also that the clothing and bedding of the native crew and of the third  class or deck passengers have been disinfected on shore.  2. Certified also that the precautions prescribed for adoption in the  port of to prevent the ingress of rats into ships have, as  far as possible, been duly observed.  Health Officer.  Date Port of  * Certificate prescribed by the Government of India.
27  APPENDIX G.  Instructions for Disinfection and for Destruction of rats in holds.  Effects of no value to be burnt.-Personal effects, rags, infected  bandages, papers and other articles without value should be destroyed  by fire.  Disinfection by Steam.-Under-clothing, bedding, wearing apparel,  mattresses, carpets, etc., which are contaminated or suspected, and  other articles to be disinfected should be exposed for fifteen minutes to  saturated steam-under pressure if possible-at a temperature not less  than 100 C. (212 F.), care being taken that the steam shall reach all  parts of each article to be disinfected.  Before a steam disinfector is passed as efficient for the purposes of  disinfection, it should be subjected to a test with the aid of a signal  thermometer, showing the moment when the temperature in the middle  of a mattress rises to at least 100 (Centigrade).  To ensure that the disinfection is effective, this temperature must  be maintained for from 10 to 15 minutes.  Disinfecting Solutions.-Perchloride of mercury has been disconti-  nued as a disinfectant for plague-vide G.O., No. 350 P., dated 28th  April 1909.  The following disinfecting solutions may be used:-  (a) A solution of cyllin, 1 part in 40.  (b) A 5 per cent. solution of pure crystallised carbolic acid, or 5  per cent. of crude commercial carbolic acid in a warm solution of soft  soap.  (c) * Fresh slaked lime.  Special instructions to be observed in the employment of disinfecting  solutions.-The linen, clothing and articles soiled by the excreta of  patients should be soaked in the solution of cyllin (1-40). The  solution of pure carbolic acid and the solution of soap and carbolic acid  are equally suited to the purpose. The articles should remain in the  solution for half an hour. Stir about once or twice and see that they  are thoroughly soaked with the fluid.  Articles which cannot be subjected to the temperature of the steam  disinfector (100 Centigrade) without injury, such as leather goods,  wooden articles stuck together with glue, felt, velvet, silk, etc., should be  washed with solution of cyllin (1-40) or one of the other solutions  mentioned above; coins can be disinfected with the solution of soap  and carbolic acid.  Persons engaged in nursing the sick should wash their hands and  faces with one of the carbolic solutions.  * To get very strong slaked lime take lime of good quality and slake it by  moistening it gradually with half its weight of water. When the operation is comple-  ted, put the powder in a carefully corked receptacle and place it in a dry spot. As  each kilogramme of lime absorbs 500 grammes of water in order to become slack, it  acquires a volume of 2 litres 200 grammes and it is sufficient to dilute it with double  its volume of water, say, 4 kilogrammes 400 grammes, to obtain a whitewash which  will be of about 20 per cent. strength of lime.
28  The carbolic solutions will be useful more particularly for disinfect-  ing articles, such as metals, instruments, etc., which cannot be subjected  to a temperature of 100 Centigrade.  Slaked lime is particularly recommended for disinfecting excreta.  Expectorated matter should be burnt.  Disinfection of Vessels with plague patients on board.-The cabin or  cabins and all parts of the vessel occupied by the sick or the suspected  should be cleared out, and all articles in them should be treated as  described above.  The partitions should be disinfected with kerosine oil emulsion or  such other pulicide as the Health Officer may think fit. The washing  should commence from the top, horizontally, and be continued down-  wards, so that the whole surface of the partition becomes covered with  a coating of minute drops.  The boarding should be washed with the same solution.  Two hours after, the walls and flooring should be washed over with  plenty of water.  Launches, cargo-boats, small craft, etc., should similarly be disin-  fected with such pulicide or disinfectant as the Health Officer may  deem suitable.  Disinfection of the hold of an infected vessel.-To disinfect the hold,  sulphate of iron, in quantity sufficient to neutralize the sulphuretted  hydrogen, should first be thrown in, the bilge water should be pumped  out, and the hold washed with sea water. Solution of cyllin (1-40)  should then be thrown in.  The bilge water should not be pumped out while the vessel is in  port unless the bilge has been thoroughly disinfected.  If the vessel is empty, steam should be blown down the sounding  pipe to cause the solution to mix thoroughly, after which the bilges  can be pumped out in port.  If the vessel is full of cargo, steam cannot be blown through till  the vessel is empty, but as soon as she is emptied this can be done and  the bilges may then be pumped out.  Destruction of rats in the hold.-This should be carried out by means  of asphyxiation with the Clayton machine. In places where this  machine is not available sulphurous acid fumes should be utilized. This  is obtained by burning sulphur in the proportion of 11/2 to 2 lbs. of  sulphur for every 1,000 cubic feet of air space in the hold, after closing  up every likely channel of escape. Several furnaces may be charged  with sulphur in the same hold. The fumes should be confined to the  hold for about six hours, no person should enter the hold for six hours  after opening out the hold, that is, the fumigation is best done at or  about 12 noon and the hold can then be left open all night. Where  the Clayton machine is used fresh air can be pumped in and the hold  may then be entered sooner.
29 APPENDIX H. Rules for the working of Cargo. [See regulations 19 and 23.] 'Healthy ' vessels on which no plague or suspicious mortality among rats has been observed will be allowed to work cargo on the following conditions :- (i) Crews shall be inspected night and morning and shall not leave the vessel. (ii) Only registered coolies shall be employed to work cargo. (iii) A representative of each shipper may be permitted by the Port Health Officer to go on board in connection with the landing and shipping of cargo. (iv) Policemen shall prevent any but those referred to in clauses (ii) and (iii) from going on board. (v) Boats and cargo shall be examined for rats. A list with addresses of shore coolies employed to work cargo should be maintained by the Port Health Officer who may at his discretion, place under surveillance any such cooly who does not return each day to work.
