Malarial Fevers A STATEMENT DRAWN UP FOR THE USE OF ASSISTANT SURGEONS HOSPITAL ASSISTANTS ? AND STUDENTS ? By S. P. JAMES, M.D. (Lond.), D.P.H. Major, Indian Medical Service THIRD EDITION Re-written and enlarged Issued under the Authority of the Government of India by the Sanitary Commissioner with  the Government of India, Simla  CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1908
Malarial Fevers A STATEMENT DRAWN UP FOR THE USE OF ASSISTANT SURGEONS HOSPITAL ASSISTANTS ? AND STUDENTS ? By S. P. JAMES, M.D. (Lond.), D.P.H. Major, Indian Medical Service THIRD  EDITION Re-written and enlarged Issued under the Authority of the Government of India by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India, Simla CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1908
CONTENTS. CHAPTER I.  PAGE Definition, cause, and mode of spread      . . . . . . . 1 CHAPTER II. Subjects regarding which every student of the malarial fevers must have a practical knowledge        . . . . . . . . . 10 CHAPTER III. Symptomatology and diagnosis        . . . . . . . . 49 CHAPTER IV. Treatment, prevention and extirpation     . . . . . . . 72
MALARIAL FEVERS. CHAPTER I. Definition, cause, and mode of spread. Definition. MALARIAL fevers are the class of fevers caused by the specific organisms named the plasmodia of malaria; their chief clinical character is the regular recurrence of paroxysms of fever at definite intervals* of 24, 48 or 72 hours; if recognised at a sufficiently early stage they always yield to proper treatment by quinine; they are carried from person to person by mosquitoes of a particular kind. The cause of malarial fevers. Cause. In the year 1880 Laveran, a French army surgeon, discovered that malarial fevers are caused by a special organism which is present in the blood of patients suffering from the disease. This organism is called the plasmodium of malaria. It is an animal of a primitive type classified by zoologists in the division of the animal kingdom known as the PROTOZOA. The essential character of an animal belonging to this division is that it is formed of only one cell. Thus the first fact to be learned about the plasmodium of malaria is that it is an animal composed of a single undivided cell of proto- plasm. Such an animal is sharply separated from those in the other great division of the animal kingdom, the METAZOA, even the simplest of which is formed of many cells. The second important fact to be learned about the organism is that it is a parasite, which means that it passes its life in and at the expense of other animals, which, for this reason, are called its hosts; to indicate this mode of life and for the sake of simplicity the plasmodium is often referred to as "the malaria parasite." The malaria parasite lives in two hosts. Now it frequently happens that the environment in which a protozoal parasite is situated in one kind of host is not suitable for all stages of its life, * The interval is the period that elapses between the beginning of one paroxysm and the beginning of the next. The intermission i the fever-free period between the end of one paroxysm and the beginning of the next. B
?(   2   ) Structure of the parasite. Mode of reproduction. The sexual mode of reproduction is essential for continued life. and in order to prevent the parasite from becoming extinct it is needful for some stages to be passed in a host of a different kind; it is needful also that there should be some means by which, when necessary, the parasite can be transferred from one host to the other. As regards such protozoal parasites as require two hosts, it is usual for one of the hosts to be a vertebrate animal and the other an invertebrate. This is the case with the malaria parasite, for part of its life is passed in man and the remainder in a particular kind of mosquito: in man it is parasitic in the red blood corpuscles; in the mosquito it is parasitic in the tissues of the stomach wall and in the salivary glands. This wonderful arrangement for the preservation of so minute an animal adds great interest to the subject of malaria, but it makes the life history of the parasite difficult to follow in all its details, and before tracing it out it will be well to deal briefly with some other characters which the malaria parasite possesses in common with other protozoa. These have to do with its structure and mode of reproduction. As regards struc- ture it is necessary only to note that the malaria parasite, like all protozoa. is provided with a nucleus and that the substance of which its body is com- posed has the same general properties as the protoplasm of the cells which build up the tissues of the higher animals; it is "irritable," it moves, it assimilates food, it grows and divides, and it produces, by chemical processes, a variety of chemical compounds. As regards reproduction it must be men- tioned first that in the malaria parasite, as in the vast majority of protozoa, reproduction takes place by two methods-asexual and sexual. The asexual method consists simply in the division of a fully grown parasite into a num- ber of smaller ones, each of which is exactly similar, excepting in size, to the original one. The sexual method consists essentially in the union of two individuals which have acquired different properties (male and female) follow- ed by growth of the fertilized cell and its division into a number of smaller cells, each of which becomes a parasite exactly similar to the original one. It may be said that, as a general rule, all protozoa, at the commencement of their life, multiply by the asexual method only, and that after a certain number of generations have been produced by this method, sexual forms appear, which are capable, under suitable conditions, of carrying on multi- plication by the sexual method. Without sexual reproduction the organism would, after a certain number of asexual generations, become worn out and
?(    3    ) die. It is impossible here to give the reasons why, when the energy with which a protozoon started life is almost all used up in multiplying by simple division, sexual forms appear. The answer to such a question would involve a consideration of the whole problem of the origin of the sexes. It is sufficient with regard to the malaria parasite to say that after a certain num- ber of asexual generations have been formed, sexual forms appear, which, if transferred to the body of another host (the mosquito), can, by a process of fertili- zation and subsequent growth and division, produce forms which, when retransferred to the original host, develop into entirely rejuvenated young parasites with as much energy for asexual reproduction as was possessed by the original organism. Parthenojene- sis. It is held by some very able observers that the malaria parasite has yet a third method of reproduction, the process being known as parthenogenesis. This word is derived from two Greek words, parthenos, a virgin, and genesis, birth or production, and means in this instance the production of a number of small parasites from a fully mature female parasite which has not been fertilized by the male element. It is said that the female forms of the para- site are capable of continuing to live in the blood long after all other forms have died off, and that, perhaps months or even years after a patient has apparently recovered, a special stimulus such as a chill or shock to the system may rouse these forms to renewed activity, when they reproduce themselves parthenogenetically and cause the appearance of a fresh crop of young parasites in the blood, thus occasioning a " relapse." The parasite's life history. The asexual cycle in man. With this preliminary explanation we are in a position to describe the complete life history of the malaria parasite.* It has been stated already that part of its life is passed in man and the remainder in a particular kind of mosquito, and for the sake of simplicity we may commence with the young form of the parasite [schizont] as it is found inside one of  the red corpuscles of a man's blood. It will be seen under the microscope as a small unicellular mass of protoplasm, undergoing amoeboid movement and occupy- ing but a small portion of the whole corpuscle (Pl. I, 2). It gradually grows larger, feeding upon the substance of the red blood corpuscle and converting * A careful study of Plate I will render the following description easily understood.  The correct names of the different stages of the parasite are inserted  between square brackets. It is not necessary for the beginner to remember these names. B 2
PLATE I PLATE I. 1. Normal red blood corpuscle. 2. Red corpuscle containing Malignant Tertian parasite. 3. Larger form of the same parasite containing pigment in short rods. 4, 5. Segmentation of the parasite. 6. The small parasites have escaped from the red cell and are free in the plasma. 7. A young sexual form (crescent) developed from a similar parasite to 3. 8. Male sexual form. 9. Female sexual form. 10, 11. Further develop- ment of these forms. The remains of the red blood corpuscle still surround them. 12. Free male form which has developed microgametes. 13. Free female form. 14. Fertilization of the female by a microgamete. 15. Travelling vermicule. 16, 17. Zygotes in the stomach wall of the mosquito. 18. The sporozoites fully deve- loped have burst from the zygote. The mode of reproduction by parthenogenesis is not shown in this plate.
?(   5   ) the hmoglobin into dark granules of pigment (melanin), which can be plainly seen in the parasite (Pl. I, 3). When it has grown to its full size. so that it nearly or quite fills the corpuscle, the grains of pigment collect together into a mass, and the parasite begins to divide up into a number of small parts (Pl. I, 4, 5), each of which is capable of becoming a new para- site identical in all respects with the original one. These parts or segments (" spores ") [merozoites] remain in contact with each other for a short time and then burst through the red blood corpuscle-which forms at this time little more than a thin shell round the parasite-and become free in the blood (Pl. I, 6). Each of them now seeks out and enters a red blood corpuscle, in which it begins to grow in the same way as the original one did, ultimately reaching its full size and dividing up into a number of embryo parasites which again enter other corpuscles and go through the same cycle. This is the asexual method of multiplication [schizogony] by simple division of a full grown parasite into a number of small ones, and it is clear that even if originally only one corpuscle contained a parasite, a very large number of corpuscles will, by this method, soon become infected. The sexual cycle in the mosquito. After this method of multiplication has gone on for a number of days, some of the parasites in the red blood cells instead of going on to their full size and dividing up into a number of small parasites, proceed to the formation of sexual forms [gametocytes]. These sexual forms are, as a rule, readily distinguished from the full grown asexual forms. Two kinds are present, viz., male forms [microgametocytes] and female forms [mac- rogametocytes]. Having attained to their full size, they appear as coarsely pigmented round or crescent shaped bodies enclosed within the thin shell or envelope of the red blood corpuscle (Pl. I, 8, 9). In the blood of man they undergo, as a rule, no further development, and if they remain in this host they gradually die off.* It is at this stage of the life history therefore that a second kind of host in which these forms can continue to live and develop becomes necessary. Such a host is found to be a mosquito of a particular kind, namely, an Anopheline. When a mosquito of this kind bites a person with these sexual forms in his blood, some of them are carried into the mosquito's stomach with the blood which the insect extracts, and undergo the * See, however, the remarks regarding parthenogenesis on page 3.
?( 6 ) The sexual cycle in the mosquito- contd. following development there. As a result of the mixture of the blood with the fluids in the mosquito's stomach, aided by the digestive action of the stomach juices, the thin envelope of red blood corpuscle which protected the parasite while it was in the blood of man, becomes disintegrated, and the parasite escapes and is free in the fluid of the mosquito's stomach. Imme- diately following its escape from the corpuscle great changes are seen to take place in the character of the parasite. The female sexual form becomes a granular spherical body (Pl. I, 13). The pigment of the male sexual form is seen to be agitated violently, and then, from the periphery of the parasite, three or four long filaments [microgametes] are suddenly pro- truded (Pl. I, 12). After lashing about for a few moments the filaments break off from the main body of the parasite and swim about in the fluid in the mosquito's stomach. They are the true male element in the sexual pro- cess. When one of them meets a female sexual form it enters it and fertilizes the true female element [macrogamete] contained in it (Pl. I, 14). After this act of fertilization has occurred, the female parasite acquires new characters. Changing from the shape of a sphere to that of an ovoid with a pointed end [ okinet] (Pl. I, 15), it begins to move about, and making for the inner wall of the stomach of the mosquito it passes through the internal coats and comes to rest between the epithelial and muscular layers. Here a thin capsule is formed round it, and it begins to absorb nourishment from the host and to grow, until in a few days it has attained a comparatively large size (Pl. I, 16). At this stage it is usually called a zygote [ocyst]. By a process of division (called sporogony, which distinguishes it from the process already described under the term schizogony) an enormous number of embryo parasites called sporozoiles, elongated in shape and provided with a nucleus, are formed in the full grown zygote (Pl. I, 17, 18). After a time the capsule of the zygote bursts, and the sporozoites are liberated into the lymph sinuses which surround the outer surface of the stomach. Thence they are conveyed by the circula- tion to the salivary glands, and penetrating the outer wall of the gland cells they come to rest in them and in the salivary duct, which has its external opening at the point of one of the piercing stylets of the proboscis which enter the skin in the act of biting. This completes the history of the life of the parasite in its second host, and if this host dies before the parasite can be
(7) transferred again to the first host the parasite dies also. But a mosquito which has lived through the ten or twelve days required for the development just described is not likely to die very soon, and before it dies it will, in all probability, have many opportunities of biting human beings. Its salivary gland cells and duct are crowded with innumerable sporozoites, and each time it bites a person it injects some of these into his blood with the salivary or poison fluid. * Having got into the blood of man again the sporozoites, after a certain time, are found in the red blood corpuscles as young parasites identi- cal in all respects with those from which the description of the life history was commenced. The malaria parasite exists in nature nowhere except in one or other of its two hosts. It will be seen from this description that the whole life of the malaria parasite is passed in one or other of its two hosts and that no part of its life is passed in air or water or soil. This is very important because it is obvious that if the organism does not exist in these media malarial fevers cannot be contracted from them. The method by which malarial fevers are contracted. How malaria is contracted. From what has been said above it will readily be seen how malarial fevers are contracted. An Anopheline mosquito bites a man who has been suffering for some days from malarial fever, and has sexual forms of the parasite in his blood. These sexual forms are taken into the mosquito's stomach with the blood which it sucks in, and there they undergo the development that I have just described, resulting after some days in the formation of numerous sporo- zoites which lodge themselves in the salivary or poison gland of the mosquito. When this mosquito next bites a healthy man, it injects some of these sporo- zoites into his blood with the salivary fluid, and so produces a malarial infec- tion in him similar to that of the man from whom it originally sucked blood. Fortunately every kind of mosquito cannot act as a suitable host for the human malaria parasite, and in all probability only mosquitoes of one kind, namely, Anopheline mosquitoes, can do so. Malarial fevers can therefore be con- tracted by the bite of an Anopheline mosquito only. It must be remembered also that malarial fever cannot be contracted even by the bite of an Anopheline * It should be particularly noted that the tube down which the salivary fluid and sporozoites pass when injected into man, is quite separate from that through which blood is sucked up by the mosquito.
(8) mosquito, unless that mosquito has sporozoites in its salivary glands. This means that it must have bitten a man with malarial fever a week or more previously, and that the temperature and other factors necessary for the development of the parasites in the mosquito's body, were favourable. Again it is not sufficient for an Anopheline mosquito to have bitten a man with malarial fever unless sexual forms of the parasite (which alone can develop in the mosquito) were present in the man's blood at the time he was bitten, and in addition the sexual forms must have been fully developed, for, as a general rule, sexual forms cannot proceed to further development even in an Anopheline unless they have reached a certain stage of maturity. Thus in order that an Anopheline mosquito may be able to carry infection it must have previously bitten a malarial fever patient at a particular period of his case. In malarious places, however, cases of malarial fever are so frequent, and the number of Anopheline mosquitoes is so great, that many opportunities occur for all the required conditions to be fulfilled, so that it is always possible in malarious places to find a number of Anopheline mosquitoes with sporozoites in their salivary glands. Recapitula- tion of the chief facts. The most important facts which we have learnt so far may be summed up as follows:- (1)  Malarial fevers are  caused by the presence in the blood   of  the patients of a small parasitic animal belonging to the lowest grade of the animal kingdom, the PROTOZOA. (2)  This parasite passes its life in two hosts, viz., man and Anopheline mosquitoes. (3)  In man it multiplies itself by a process of simple division for some time, and then produces sexual forms, which for their further development require to be taken into the body of the second host which is an Anopheline mosquito. (4)  This is effected when such a mosquito bites a man with those forms in his blood. (5)  In the mosquito's body the female sexual form is fertilized by the male, the cell which results being called a zygote. By the growth and division of the zygote an enormous number of new forms of
(9) the parasite, called sporozoites, are produced, which become lodged in the salivary or poison gland and duct of the mosquito. (6) When this mosquito next bites another man, some of the sporozoites are injected into him with the salivary fluid. (7) In his body they develop into the young parasitic animals in the red blood cells exactly identical with the original ones. (8) As the malarial parasite does not pass any part of its life in any other environment than men and mosquitoes, it follows that men and mosquitoes are the only sources of infection of malarial fevers. (9) It has been proved almost beyond any possible doubt that there is no other method by which malarial fevers are contracted in nature than by the bite of a properly infected Anopheline mos- quito. (10) We cannot contract malarial fevers from drinking impure water, or from the soil, or by breathing impure air; and water and air are only indirectly connected with malarial infection in the sense that they are the homes of the malaria-carrying mosquitoes.
(10) CHAPTER II. Subjects regarding which every student of the malarial fevers must have a practical knowledge. BEFORE continuing our account of the malarial fevers we must discuss  some subjects of which every student who desires to study these fevers seriously should have a practical knowledge. 1.-The examination of the blood, Any one who wishes to understand fully the life history of the malaria parasite or desires to be able to diagnose and treat cases of malarial fever successfully, must be thoroughly familiar with the appearances assumed by the parasite in human blood. In order to acquire this knowledge, it is necessary to be able to make preparations of blood for examination, and to be able to recognise the parasite in such preparations. The matter is not really difficult if one sets about it in the way I shall endeavour to describe, but it should be noted that no directions given in a book are of any value in com- parison with the practical demonstration of parasites by one who is familiar with the subject, and no student should leave college without having made it his duty to obtain such a demonstration from one of his professors. The first thing to be learned is how to take specimens of blood and how to prepare them for examination. It is almost unnecessary to say that the blood can be examined microscopically either in the fluid state or in dried, stained preparations, and that whenever possible both methods should be used and results compared. How to take specimens for the examina- tion of liquid blood. The articles required for preparing fluid specimens of blood are:-(1) Thin cover glasses, (2) glass slides, (3) a pair of forceps for holding the cover glasses, (4) alcohol, (5) a surgical needle. The thinnest and best cover glasses and slides only should be used, and they should be perfectly clean and well polished. Immediately before being used the slides and cover glasses should be rewashed in alcohol, thoroughly dried and polished with a silk cloth, and placed on a sheet of white paper under a glass tumbler in order to keep them free from dust. The palmar surface of the patient's finger tip where the prick is to be made is then thoroughly cleaned with alcohol.
(11) The prick is best made with an ordinary surgical needle. If it is made without hesitation, sharply and not too deeply, no pain will be felt by the patient; but even this simple operation requires practice. The first drop of blood which appears should be wiped off, and before the second drop is squeezed out a cover glass should be taken up in the forceps and held ready over the finger. As soon as the second drop of blood-which should not be larger than a pin's head-appears, the centre of the cover glass is made to touch it. The drop of blood comes away on the cover glass which is then quickly laid on to one of the glass slides. If the operation has been done successfully the blood immediately spreads out in a thin film between the cover glass and the slide. A slight tap with the end of the forceps on the upper surface of the cover glass sometimes assists the blood to spread out more easily, but if the slides and cover glasses are perfectly clean this should not be necessary. After waiting a few seconds, the edge of the cover glass may be ringed with vaseline in order to prevent evaporation. The specimen will then keep good for several hours. How to take specimens for the examina- tion of dried blood. For making stained preparations dried blood films must be used. A straight surgical needle, the eye of which has been removed with a pair of forceps, and glass slides are all the articles necessary for taking these films. Cover glasses are not required. The finger is pricked and a clean glass slide is lowered on to the drop of blood that exudes so that it touches the drop about half-an-inch from one end of the slide. The slide is then held between the finger and thumb of the left hand, and the shaft of the needle (which is held by the point) is placed crosswise on the slide over the drop of blood. The blood will run along the under surface of the needle which is then drawn evenly along the slide to the end, thus making a broad thin film of blood.
(12) Films prepared in this way should be allowed to dry in the air and then fixed by immersion in absolute alcohol for ten minutes. Siaining the specimen. It is better for the beginner to get accustomed to one stain than to attempt many different methods, and the best stain for our present purposes is that recommended by Romanowsky. This is a triple stain consisting of a combination of a particular kind of eosin and medicinal methylene blue. A modification of it called Leishman's stain can now be obtained in the form of compressed tabloids * which are very convenient to use. Each tabloid should be dissolved in 10 cubic centimetres of pure methyl alcohol, and the stain is then ready. If this stain is used, previous fixation of the blood film is unnecessary. After the film has dried in the air it is covered with a few drops of the stain. A few seconds afterwards, and while the stain is still liquid, an equal quantity of distilled water is added to the stain, and the slide is moved about so as thoroughly to mix the water with the stain. This mixture is allowed to remain on the film for from ten to twenty minutes, and is then washed off with a stream of distilled water. The slide is then allowed to dry in the air. It is not necessary to cover the film with a cover glass; the oil for the oil-immersion lens may be placed directly on the film of blood. When it is desired to send specimens of blood for examination in a laboratory dry films taken in the manner just described must be sent, but they need not be fixed or stained ; each slide should be wrapped in a piece of clean paper on which the particulars of the case are written. Microscopic examination. When the making and preparing of blood specimens has been sufficiently practised one will take up the task of microscopic examination. For this purpose a good microscope provided with a one-twelfth inch oil-immersion objective is necessary. We must commence our examinations not with specimens of blood from patients in hospital but with specimens of ordinary normal blood because "It is impossible to make reliable examinations of the blood for malarial parasites without first being familiar with the ordinary appearances of normal blood and the more common pathological changes." * From Messrs. Burroughs, Wellcome & Co., London, and from many chemists in India.   Lectures on the malarial fevers, by W. S. Thayer, M.D., Professor of Medicine in the Johns Hopkins University.
(13) The necessity of being familiar with the appear- ance of normal blood. This axiom cannot be too strongly impressed upon all who enter upon the microscopic study of malaria parasites, and many pages might be filled with an account of errors that have been made by observers who have confused normal constituents of the blood, such as blood platelets and even leucocytes, to say nothing of such common pathological changes in the red corpuscles as vacuoles, crenations, fissures, etc., with malaria parasites. Before commencing to study the appearances of malarial blood it is essen- tial, therefore, for every one to make himself familiar with the appearances of normal blood, and to be able to distinguish differences in the colour, size, and shape of the red corpuscles, and to recognise such changes in them as crenations, vacuoles, and fissures, and also to be thoroughly familiar with the different varieties of leucocytes and with the blood platelets. A description of these constituents of normal blood cannot be included in this book, and it must suffice to repeat yet once again that learning to recog- nise these constituents and the various pathological changes just mentioned both in preparations of fresh blood and in stained preparations, must be the first task which the beginner will set himself seriously to undertake, and that he will not consider his task complete until he is sure that when he comes to examine specimens of blood from patients who have fever he will not mistake for malarial parasites any of the appearances (including particles of dirt, deposits of stain, etc.) with which he has become familiar during the examination of normal blood. Having attained a good knowledge of the appearances in specimens of normal blood the student may commence to search for malaria parasites, and at the outset it is necessary to mention that the reasons why beginners make so many mistakes in regard to the find- ing of malaria parasites are firstly because they are not familiar with the appearances of normal blood and secondly because they do not search in suitable cases at the beginning of their study. The majority of men who are commencing the subject expect to find parasites in the most unlikely cases-cases the temperature charts of which show no sign of intermittency or cases of chronic cachexia which have been drenched with quinine. Even an experienced observer would not be able, in all probablity, to find parasites in such cases. The truth is that a hospital is not, as a rule, the place in which one should begin the search for malaria parasites. The following
( 14 )    How to obtain specimens of malarial blood.    plan is much more likely to be attended with success. Find a native village in which a large proportion of the young children are suffering from enlarge- ment of the spleen, and in the evening take the temperatures of half a dozen children whose spleens are enlarged. It will almost certainly be found that some of the children have a rise of temperature although they may be playing about apparently quite well. In return for a small present these children will allow their blood to be examined as frequently as may be desired, and the finding of malaria parasites in their blood is generally an easy matter. When a child whose blood contains malaria parasites has been found in this way the course of the temperature and the changes which the parasites undergo from day to day can be studied with great ease.    As regards the actual examination of the film the beginner should remember above all that-      (1) the parasite must be looked for inside a red blood corpuscle-             so-called " free " parasites are almost never seen; and      (2) the malaria parasite has a very definite structure and appearance,             and if once seen cannot well be mistaken for anything             else; nothing which is at all "indefinite" is likely to be a             parasite.    How to examine the film.        Preparations of fresh blood should be examined first with a one-sixth inch objective; if the preparation is a successful one, the red blood corpuscles in many parts of the specimen will be found to be lying flat in a single layer with their edges nearly touching each other but not overlapping, and these are the parts of the specimen to be examined for parasites. Nearer the edge of the cover glass the corpuscles will be found heaped up and overlapping each other. Having found a suitable field, a small drop of cedar wood oil is placed on the cover glass and the oil-immersion lens turned on. A substage condenser and a low-power eyepiece must be used, and the iris diaphragm should be nearly closed so that only a moderate amount of light passes through the specimen; if the illumination is too brilliant the parasites may be easily missed.     A beginner should not attempt to find small unpigmented parasites; he should search for large pigmented forms.
(15) How to find the parasite. On searching each corpuscle he will presently come across one in which fine black dots of pigment are seen. On focussing carefully he will find that these dots are contained in a transparent mass of pale protoplasm which is undergoing amoeboid movement inside the corpuscle. After a short time the movements will become less marked, and the outline of the body will become more distinct. Careful watching will convince the observer that he is looking at a living parasite. Once having found a parasite, the beginner will know what sort of body to look for, and will easily be able to educate himself to pick out the smaller forms. Stained films. Stained films can be examined at once with the one-twelfth inch objective, and the illumination should be as brilliant as possible. The drop of cedar wood oil should be placed on one of the side edges of the film, and different fields along this edge should be searched until the examination is ended. By the method of staining which has been described here the red blood corpuscles are stained pink and the blood platelets and the nuclei of the leucocytes a deep ruby-red. Leucocytes. Polynuclear leucocytes will be recognised by their large irregular nucleus ; their body protoplasm is unstained and contains fine red granules. Large mononuclear leucocytes have generally a large oval or horse-shoe shaped nucleus and faintly blue stained body protoplasm which is free from granules. They may contain grains of intensely brown or black malarial pigment (melanin) which should be carefully looked for as they are a sign of recent infection. Lymphocytes have a round, ruby-red nucleus surrounded by a thin rim of blue stained protoplasm. Eosinophile leucocytes have generally two pear-shaped nuclei joined together at the top, and numerous large, round, red granules scattered through the cell, which make them very easily recognisable. Blood platel ets. The blood platelets are deep ruby-red, and will generally be found in groups looking something like bunches of grapes. Many beginners mistake them for the "spores" of malaria parasites. Malaria parasites are very easy to detect in the red blood corpuscles by
(16) this method of staining. Young "ring" forms of the parasite in the red blood corpuscles present the following characters:- The parasite. (1) A brilliant red dot at the periphery (the nucleolus of the parasite). (2) A clear space almost unstained (the nucleus of the parasite). (3) A circle of blue stained protoplasm surrounding the clear nucleus (the body of the parasite). Larger forms of the parasite present the same characters, viz.:- (1) One or more red patches of chromatin. (2) A clear space. (3) A large blue stained body, in which grains of brown or black pigment can be plainly seen. Changes in the red corpuscles. The red corpuscles containing parasites may be variously altered. In Benign Tertian infections, for example, the corpuscles containing parasites may be swollen to more than double their original size, and with this stain they may be infiltrated with red stained dots to such an extent that the parasite itself is almost hidden. When corpuscles studded with these red dots (Schffner's dots) are seen, we may be sure that the case is one of an infection with Benign Tertian parasites. When the parasites have arrived at the segmenting stage it will be seen that the patches of chromatin have divided up into a number of parts, each of which represents a "spore." A thin rim of corpuscle may still be seen round the group of red stained spores, and near the centre of the group a mass of black pigment will be collected. The sexual forms of Benign Tertian and Quartan fevers are difficult to distinguish in stained specimens from the full grown asexual forms, but the sexual forms of Malignant Tertian fever, viz., "crescents," will be very easily recognised from their characteristic shape and from the grains of pigment collected at their centre. They are stained light blue with Romanowsky's stain, and near their centre, partly hidden by the pigment, a mass of red stained chromatin will be seen. We may take the opportunity here to explain the terms Benign Tertian, Quartan, and Malignant Tertian which have just been mentioned.
(17) Clinically the malarial fevers can be separated into three chief types, namely:- (1) A comparatively mild type in which (counting the day of a febrile paroxysm as the first day) the febrile paroxysms recur with great regularity every third day, the intervals * between the paroxysms being of 48 hours' duration (Benign Tertian fever). (2) A severe type in which the paroxysms also recur approximately every third day but not with such regularity as in the first type and in which "pernicious" symptoms are very liable to develop (Malignant Tertian or stivo-autumnal fever). (3) A comparatively mild type in which (counting the day of a febrile paroxysm as the first day) the febrile paroxysms recur with great regularity every fourth day, the intervals between the paroxysms being of 72 hours' duration (Quartan fever). The three species of parasite. Their differences. It has been found that these different clinical types are due to infections with different species of the malaria parasite; that there are, in fact, at least three distinct species of the malaria parasite, each of which causes a type of fever different from that which is caused by the other species. These species are called respectively the Benign Tertian parasite, the Malignant Tertian parasite, and the Quartan parasite.  It is important to be able to distinguish these species from one another by a microscopical examination of the blood. In the very young stage before the parasites have acquired pigment, this is a difficult matter, but in later stages it is easy. At a microscopical examina- tion the points of distinction depend on the following observations:-(1) the stages of the parasite which are found in the peripheral (finger) blood; (2) the effect of the parasites on the red blood corpuscles containing them; (3) the character of the amboid movements of the parasite; (4) the number of spores into which the parasite divides up; (5) the character of the sexual forms; (6) the character of the pigment seen in the parasite. *See the definition of interval on page 1. Do not confuse it with intermission.   The English names only are given because as regards Latin names no two authori- ties employ the same terminology. C
?( 18 ) The  differences  between the  three  species  of  parasite  in the  above respects may be tabulated thus :- Species of parasite. Stage found in the peripheral (finger) blood. Effects of the parasites on the red blood corpuscles containing them. Character of the amoeboid movements of the parasite. Number and arrangement of spores.  Charac- ter of the sexual forms. Charac- ter of the pigment. Quartan All stages The corpuscle is practically unaltered. generally oval or more or less rect- angular.  Very  sluggish so   that  the parasite is corpusele and    are arranged with   great regularity " like  a daisy." 8-10. They occupy  the whole of the Round. Rarely seen. Coarse black grains. Benign Tertian All stages . The corpuscle is very much swollen   and decolourised Very active so that the parasite is irregular in shape. 20-23.Not so regularly arranged. Round. Fine brown granu- les or rods. Malignant Tertian. Only young "ring" forms and crescents. Very   rarely an occasional segmenting form. The corpuscle is   generally shrunken and decolourised. Never  swol- len.    Very active and with a great tendency to     assume the      ring form.  9-10.  The segmenting form occupies only   about 1/2 - 2/3 of the red   corpuscle. Crescent- shaped.  Fine Brown granu- les   or rods. Hints. From the point of view of diagnosis by a microscopical examination the following hints may be useful. If in a film we find a " crescent," we know at once that we are dealing with a case of Malignant Tertian fever. If, at different examination of the same case, we find nothing but small ring forms, the case is also probably one of Malignant Tertian. Small rings and crescents are characteristic of Malignant Tertian infections. If we find a large irregularly shaped parasite in a corpuscle which is distinctly larger than the surrounding ones, we may be sure that this is a Benign Tertian parasite. If we find large regularly oval or rectangular parasites in corpuscles which are practically unaltered in size and colour, these are probably Quartan parasites.
?( 19 ) Search for segmenting forms should be made an hour or so before the time of onset of the febrile paroxysm. If one can secure a case of regularly intermittent Quartan fever, very perfect segmenting " daisy like " forms will be easily found in the peripheral blood. The spirillum obermeyeri. The Filaria nocturna. Trypanoso mata. 2.-The examination of specimens of blood for other parasites. The possibility that other parasites than those of malaria may be present in a blood film must always be kept in mind during the examination of the film, and occasionally we should turn our attention away from the careful scrutiny of the red blood corpuscles and concentrate it upon the clear spaces between the corpuscles, focussing upwards and downwards with the fine adjustment especially with a view to ascertain the presence or absence of the spirillar or spirochete organism which is the cause of relapsing fever. (Plate II, g.) This organism is about three times as long as a red blood corpuscle, but it is exceed ingly thin and therefore is not easily detected in stained preparations unless the observer's attention is concentrated upon the attempt. In the examination for this parasite as well as for other parasites which occur free in the blood plasma, such as trypanosomes and embryos of filari, it is best to employ in the first place specimens of fresh blood. The fresh film to be examined for the spirochetes of relapsing fever should be taken during a period of pyrexia and examined with a one-sixth inch objective. The movements of the parasites cause a vibratory disturbance of the corpuscles which plainly indicates that a living organism is moving about amongst them. Afterwards dry films should be prepared and stained and examined with the one-twelfth inch objective. The fresh film to be examined for filarial embryos should be taken as late in the even- ing as possible, because as a rule they appear in the peripheral blood at night- time only. The examination should be made with a two-thirds inch objective with which, owing to their comparatively large size, the embryos can be plainly seen violently pushing the corpuscles about in all directions. (Plate II, d.) Trypanosomes (Plate II, f) have not been found in human blood in India up to the present but, they have been found in human blood in Africa where they are the cause of the prolonged and fatal fever called trypanosomal fever and of the deadly disease called sleeping sickness. They occur, however, in many animals in India and one species, Trypanosoma lewisi, can be easily studied in the blood of rats. Another species, Trypanosoma evansi, is the cause of the fatal disease of horses, oxen, mules, camels, etc., named surra. \ill\
(    20    ) The Leish- man-Donovan parasite. There is still one more parasite to be thought of during our examinations of human blood, but as it is very rarely present in the peripheral blood and then is present in the leucocytes only, it is not likely to be encountered during the examination of films taken for the purpose of diagnosing malaria. It is known as the Leishman-Donovan parasite and is the cause of the fatal disease called kala azar which occurs in Assam, the Madras Presidency and some other parts of India. In cases of kala azar the spleen and nearly always the liver are greatly enlarged, and in order to find the parasite it is necessary, as a rule, to obtain blood from one or other of these organs. The operation of puncturing the spleen in this disease is by no means free from danger and should not be undertaken if it is possible (as it usually is) to arrive at a correct diagnosis by any other means. It is far preferable from the point of view of the safety of the patient, as Sir Patrick Manson has suggested, to puncture the liver than the spleen, and although the parasites sometimes are not present in the liver in such large numbers as in the spleen, they are usually sufficiently numerous for a diagnosis to be made with ease. If one has to puncture the spleen the precautions which must be taken are: (1) do not use a needle with larger calibre than that of an ordinary hypodermic needle; (2) sterilize the needle and the skin of the patient; (3) with the left hand press in the abdominal wall so that it is in close contact with the spleen while the puncture is being made; (4) make the stab firmly and to the full length of the needle so as to ensure that the needle enters the spleen immediately it has passed through the abdominal wall; this is very important because if the needle passes through the abdominal wall but fails to enter the spleen at the first stab its point will scratch the surface of the spleen and cause bleeding; (5) when the needle is in the spleen do not move it about with the object of obtaining bits of " splenic pulp "; the blood which immediately wells up in the syringe on gently withdrawing the piston will contain numerous parasites if the case is one of kala azar; (6) after the operation compress the point of puncture with a pad and firm abdominal binder and make the patient rest in bed in the recumbent posture for 24 hours. The blood obtained in this manner should be spread in thin films on glass slides, dried in the air, and fixed and stained in the same manner as for malaria parasites. The examination is to be made with a one-twelfth inch objective, and the parasites will be recognised
PLATE II. Line Block. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, 1908. a, Egg of Ascaris lumbricoides; b, egg of Trichocephalus trichiurus; c, egg of Ankylostoma duodenale; d, embryo of Filaria bancrofti in blood; e, method of taking blood for the serum test; f, a trypanosome in blood; g, three red blood corpuscles (stained) and four spirilla or spirochetes; h, four Leishman-Donovan parasites as they appear when free (stained); i, a leucocyte containing many Leishman-Donovan parasites (splenic blood, stained).
?( 21 ) very easily as small oval or round bodies with a very definite contour lying in large numbers inside the leucocytes and free in the plasma. (Plate II, h and i.) Each has two masses of chromatin, one being large and round or oval, the other small and rod shaped. 3.-The method of collecting samples of blood for serum diagnosis and for the culture of bacilli. Every practitioner in the tropics should know how to examine for and how to recognise the parasites dealt with above, but it is not within his province to undertake bacteriological methods of diagnosis. It is sufficient if he knows how to collect and send suitable material to a laboratory where these methods can be carried out in a trustworthy manner. How to collect blood for the scrum test. To collect blood for examination by the serum test (for the diagnosis of enteric and Malta fevers) one requires (1) small glass capsules of the shape shown in the figure (Plate II, e); these can be obtained from any laboratory, and a supply of them should always be kept, (2) a spirit lamp, (3) an unused sur- gical needle, (4) alcohol or ether for sterilizing the skin, (5) a pair of forceps. To collect the blood proceed thus: (1) place all the required articles on a sheet of clean glass or paper on a table by the bedside of the patient; (2) light the spirit lamp; (3) sterilize the tips of the forceps by passing them through the flame and the two closed ends of the blood capsule by the same method; (4) with the forceps break off the tips of the glass capsule so as to open both ends of it and lay it down on the clean glass or paper on the table; (5) sterilize the tip of the patient's finger with alcohol and dry it thoroughly with a sterilized cloth; (6) let the patient's hand hang down- wards so that the blood collects in it and wind a corner of the sterilized towel tightly round the base of the finger so that the tip of the finger becomes congested with blood; (7) prick the finger tip moderately deeply, and a large drop of blood will immediately flow; hold the open end of the curved limb of the capsule in the blood, the bulb of the capsule being at a lower level (see Plate II, e) : (8) when the capsule is half full of blood remove it and seal the open end of the straight limb by keeping it for a few seconds in the flame; (9) seal the open end of the curved limb by the same method; (10) place the capsule in cotton wool in a small box and despatch it with full particulars of the case to a laboratory.
?( 22 ) The cultiva- tion of bacilli from the blood. At some laboratories (for example at the Central Research Institute at Kasauli in India) one can obtain small bottles containing a proper quantity of a medium called Conradi's ox-bile medium which is very suitable for the cultivation from the blood of the bacilli of typhoid and allied fevers. By the use of this method it is possible for a diagnosis of enteric fever to be made on the first or second day of the disease, which is very much earlier than is possible by the use of the serum test. All the physician in charge of the case has to do is to withdraw about two or three cubic centimetres of blood under strictly aseptic precautions from the patient and transfer it to the bottle of medium which is then returned to the laboratory. To collect the blood one needs a syringe marked in cubic centimetres.* The following are the directions furnished with the bottles of medium sent out from the Central Research Institute in India: (1) the front of the bend of the patient's elbow is sterilized with 1 in 20 carbolic lotion which is removed with alcohol and ether; (2) a vein is made prominent by pressure at the bend of the elbow; (3) a syringe and needle having been previously sterilized by boiling, the needle is introduced into the prominent vein and two and a half cubic centimetres of blood are withdrawn; (4) the blood is immediately injected into the bottle of medium by passing the needle through the rubber cap which closes the mouth of the bottle; (5) the small hole made by the needle in the rubber cap is sealed by melting the paraffin which covers it. This can be done with a lighted match; (6) the bottle is shaken, labelled, and returned to the laboratory with particulars of the case. 4.-The examination of the sputum and of the fces, The tubercle bacillus. The practitioner who desires to make no mistake in the diagnosis of cases of malarial fever must know how to examine the sputum for the presence or absence of tubercle bacilli and how to examine the fces for the presence or absence of the eggs of different kinds of worms. *2 c. c.=34 minims, approximately, and 3 c.c.=50 minims, approximately.  If the operation of obtaining blood from a vein does not appear justifiable, sufficient blood can usually be obtained by puncturing the lobe of the car. It is not essential to employ exactly 21/2 c. c. of blood, but the amount should never be less than 1 c. c. The opera- tion of obtaining blood from a vein is, however, an exceedingly simple and almost painless one, which if once carried out will always be preferred to the sometimes difficult and often painful endeavour to obtain 2 or 3 c. c. of blood by stabbing the ear or finger.
?( 23 ) The following are the necessary directions regarding the examination for tubercle bacilli in sputum * or in pus:- (1) Make a thick film on a slide. (2) Dry it in the air and fix it by immersion in absolute alcohol for 15 minutes. (3) Heat some carbol fuchsine stain in a test tube nearly to boiling point and pour it on the film, taking care that the film is well covered, but that none of the stain spills over the edges of the slide. (4) Hold the slide over a spirit lamp so that the stain keeps steaming, but not boiling, and allow the stain to remain on the film for ten minutes. (5) Wash the film in water. (6) Pour a 25 per cent. solution of sulphuric acid on the film to decolourize it until it is lightly pink. (7) Wash the film in water. (8) Stain the film with Loeffler's methylene blue for two minutes. (9) Wash in water, dry, and examine with a one-twelfth inch oil immersion objective. Eggs of intestinal worms. The only directions that need be given regarding the examination of fces for ova of intestinal worms are that the portion of fces which is placed on the slide should be very minute and should be mixed with water so that when the cover glass is applied the layer will be very thin; it is little use trying to identify eggs in a thick film of fces. The specimen should be examined with a two-third inch objective. The appearance of ova of the three more common intestinal worms is so definite and characteristic that, with the aid of the diagrams in Plate II, a, b, c, there should be no difficulty in identifying them. 5.-The study of mosquitoes. The general appearance of a mosquito is probably well known to all, but it may be necessary to mention that mosquitoes may be distinguished from other flies (such as " sand-flies," etc.) which seem to resemble them, by the following characters:- (1) They have a long sucking proboscis. * Tubercle bacilli are usually more abundant in the first sputum coughed up in the early morning.
?( 24 ) (2) The veins of the wings are covered with scales (which can be plainly seen with a small magnifying glass). The veins of the wings of other flies have no scales. The metamor- phosis of mosquitoes. The following are the stages through which mosquitoes pass before they reach the adult state. An adult female mosquito lays its eggs on a pool or other collection of water. In a few hours these eggs hatch into small worm- like wriggling animals called larv, whose life is spent entirely in water. After a variable time, depending chiefly on the temperature, the larv change their shape and character, and become small comma-shaped creatures called pup which spend their time struggling to the bottom of the water and floating up to the surface again to breathe. After one or two days the pup are transformed into the adult insect or imago, which emerges at the surface of the water from the skin or pupa-case en- closing it, and which it leaves behind in the water. After resting for a while on the surface of the water, the adult mosquito flies away to seek its food. The study of mosquitoes therefore includes the study of their ova, larv, pup and imagines. Classification. Species, genera, and sub-families. For purposes of classification and identification the family of insects called Culicid or mosquitoes has been separated by entomologists into groups of species, genera and sub-families. Thus, if a large collection of mosquitoes were in the hands of an entomologist for examination, he would note in the first place that some of the individuals were of exactly the same appearance and could not be distinguished from one another; for this reason he would say that all such individuals were of the same species or kind. Next he would examine specimens of different species and would find that although the individuals of one species could be distinguished from those of another (because, let us say, the legs or wings presented different colour markings) yet the mosquitoes of perhaps two or three species possessed an important anatomical character in common, while the mosquitoes of two or three other species did not possess this character. He could, therefore, classify the different species in a number of groups or genera, each genus containing the different species which possessed an important anatomical character in common. Finally, by examining mosquitoes in different genera, he might find that the members of one genus were quite different in an obvious and important anatomical manner from the members
?( 25 ) of another genus and so on these grounds could group the mosquitoes in the different genera in perhaps two or three or more sub-families. The sub- family Anophelin is most important. This plan of classification simplifies the subject, and at present the 700 or 800 species of mosquitoes which are known have been classified in 109 genera and 10 sub-families. It is obvious that if such a classification is founded upon anatomical characters which are constant and easy to observe, there should be no difficulty in ascertaining first the sub-family and then the genus of any particular mosquito, and that since the number of species in any genus is, as a rule, small, we ought to be able to name any mosquito correctly without much difficulty. So far as the student of tropical medi- cine is concerned, it is fortunate that only two sub-families of mosquitoes (namely, the sub-families Anophelin and Culicin) are known to act as carriers of human disease and that the members of only one sub-family, the Anophelin, act as carriers of the malaria parasites. For our present purposes, therefore, we have to deal with the Anophelin only, and it may be said at once that the characters of mosquitoes in this sub-family are such that there is no difficulty in distinguishing a malaria-carrying from a non- malaria-carrying mosquito. In dealing with this subject we shall discuss first the collection, examination and identification of adult Anopheline mosquitoes. How to collect adult Anopheline mosquitoes. One of the habits of Anopheline mosquitoes is that they fly about only after dusk and during the night ; in the daytime they seek some dark shed, outhouse, or stable, where they rest on the walls and roof. In these places they can be easily caught, the necessary implements being a few dry test tubes, a large dry bottle and some cotton wool. When a mosquito is seen resting on the wall or roof, the mouth of a test tube is placed very gently over it. It will fly into the tube, the mouth of which can then be closed with a plug of cotton wool. Each mosquito caught may be transferred to the large glass bottle by placing the mouth of the tube over that of the bottle and removing the cotton wool plug. The mosquito will fly into the large bottle, and the tube can be used again. If Anophelin are at all abundant, twenty or thirty can be caught in this way in a very short time. The best places in which to search for them are outhouses, cowsheds, woodsheds, and thatched unoccupied rooms with dirty smoke-blackened walls and many cobwebs. It is almost useless to
?( 26 ) The appearance of Anophelines. search in a freshly whitewashed house. Even in places which appear favourable, Anopheline mosquitoes are often difficult to detect, and some species hide among the straw of a thatched roof or in holes and corners of the wall with great success. For searching the roof a ladder should be used, so that the eye is not more than a foot or so off the roof, and every part of the thatch should be carefully examined. Two characters of Anopheline mosquitoes are of great service to the collector ; they are (1) the structure of an Anopheline is such that an imaginary line drawn along its proboscis and through its head, thorax and abdomen is practically straight, and for this reason it happens that if an Anopheline is resting on a wall with the tip of its proboscis touching the wall the hinder end of the insect projects outwards so much that the insect appears to be standing on the tip of its proboscis. Thus, in a dark outhouse or hut the commoner Anophelines (which are light coloured) stand out against the dark back- ground of dirt and soot, looking like little white thorns stuck in the wall or hanging from the roof. On the other hand an imaginary line drawn through the proboscis, head, thorax and abdomen of any other mosquito than an Anopheline would not be straight, but would slope upwards to a point near the top of the thorax and then downwards to the end of the abdomen, thus forming an angle. For this reason when such a mosquito is resting on a wall with the tip of its proboscis touching the wall the anal end of the abdomen is also nearly touching the wall and the insect appears " hunch- backed." (2) As a general rule most Anopheline mosquitoes have spotted wings whilst the wings of most other kinds of mosquitoes have no spots. How to mount, examine and identify adult Anopheline mosquitoes. The mosquitoes that have been caught should be killed by placing a drop or two of chloroform on the muslin cover of the bottle. The dead mosquitoes are then turned out on to a clean white sheet of paper and mounted as quickly as possible. The following articles are necessary for mounting a mosquito - (1) A supply of fine silver pins, No. 20 size. (2) A pair of forceps for holding the pins. (3) Small discs of thin cardboard. (4) Ordinary pins. (5) A box in the bottom of which a layer of cork or pith is fixed.
( 27 ) Mosquitoes which are required for identification should never be touched with the fingers. A pin or needle should be used for moving them when this is necessary. A card-disc should be taken, and one of the No. 20 silver pins thrust through its centre, so that about half the pin projects each side. The mosquito to be mounted is turned over on to its back, and the point of the pin carrying the disc is entered into its thorax at the point of origin of the legs, and made to emerge through the dorsum of the thorax. On turn- ing the disc over, the mosquito will be found to be mounted in its natural position, right side uppermost, and its legs and wings can be gently arranged on the card-disc with the aid of a pin. An ordinary pin is now thrust through the edge of the card-disc to attach it to the cork in the bottom of the box. (See figure.) METHOD OF MOUNTING A MOSQUITO. A. pin through card-disc, B; C. label for date, locality, etc.; D. No. 20 pin through card-disc (B) and mosquito (F); E. point of D through thorax of mosquito.
?( 28 ) Examination of mosquitoes. For the proper examination and identification of adult mosquitoes a low power microscope is almost a necessity, but in the absence of this it will be found that most of the markings and characters, except those relating to the shape of the scales, can be made out, though less easily, with a hand-lens. For the examination under a microscope, the mosquito, which has already been mounted on a card-disc in the manner above described, is fixed by a pin thrust through the edge of the disc to a flat piece of cork about an inch square. This cork is placed on the microscope stage and can be moved about at will, so as to bring all parts of the mosquito under the lens. The different parts of the external anatomy which the student must learn to recognise are shown in Plate III. It is best to begin by examining the antennae, proboscis, and palpi, because it is by the examination of these structures that one can tell firstly whether the mosquito is a male or female, and secondly whether it belongs to the sub-family Anophelinc or not. To ascertain the sex of a mosquito examine the antenn. In male mosquitoes the antenn are covered with long hairs so that each antenna forms a feather-like tuft in front of the head. In female mosquitoes the antenn have no long hairs and are nearly bare. (Plate IV, h. and f.) The sex is often obvious to the naked eye when, for example, the abdomen is distended with eggs or with blood. It is important to make no mistake in the sex of a mosquito because since only female mosquitoes suck blood they are the only ones which can carry malaria parasites and the only ones which we need to study. To ascertain whether a mosquito is an Anopheline examine the antenn, the proboscis and the palpi- (1) Examine the antenn to make sure that the specimen is a female. (The student of tropical medicine need not complicate the subject by dealing with male mosquitoes.) (2) Examine (a) the proboscis and (b) the palpi. If the proboscis is straight and the palpi are as long or nearly as long as the pro- boscis the mosquito must be an Anopheline. These two characters, namely, a straight proboscis and palpi as long or nearly as long as the proboscis, are present in the females of no other kind of mosquito than an Anopheline.
PLATE III DIAGRAM OF A FEMALE ANOPHELINE.
?( 30 ) A detailed examination is necessary for identifica- tion. Having ascertained that the specimen belongs to the sub-family Anophe- lince the student will proceed with the minute examination necessary for making a complete identification of the mosquito. In the examination of the palpi it will be noted whether they are densely scaled or not and whether they are uniformly coloured or encircled with white bands, and the number, relative size, and position of such bands will be carefully described. In addi- tion to definite bands a few white scaled patches may be present (as " speckling ") on one or more segments of the palpi. Passing on to the examination of the head the characters of the scales will be noted, and in particular the characters of the upright forked scales (Plate IV, g & l) can be readily made out. In most Anophelines a prominent tuft of white hairs projecting forwards from the anterior end of the head will be seen. The thorax will next be examined, and it will be noted whether the dorsum is covered with scales or with hairs or with both, and the characters of these structures will be described. Passing on to wards the abdomen the scutellum will be examined; it will be seen that it is always simple-never trilobed as in all other sub-families of the Culicid-and that it carries scales or hairs. The bare horse-shoe shaped metanotum or post-scutellum will next be seen, and then the halteres, the knobs of which are clothed with numerous small scales. The examination of the abdomen is of great importance. In some species, although the abdomen is thickly covered with long hairs, no scales are present. In other species it will be seen that in addition to the hairs covering the majority of segments a few scales can be discovered on the ventral surface of the last one or two segments only. In other species, again, it will be seen at once that the dorsum of each segment is thickly set with white or golden-brown scales which in some species are very broad and in others more or less spindle-shaped. (Plate IV, q & s.) It will readily be recognised that the presence or absence and the character of these scales is very important. The wings and legs will next be examined. The best way to describe the wings is to make a diagrammatic drawing showing the number and relative width and position of the different dark and light-scaled areas on each vein. (Plate IV, i.) The shape of the wing scales must be noted by separate examination of a wing mounted under a cover glass.
?( 31 ) A careful description of the markings on each leg, commencing with those on the femur and ending with those on the fifth tarsal segment, should be made. In some species complete bands of white scales encircle the legs near the joints, and the position of these bands should be noted. In addition small patches of white scales will be found in some species on certain seg- ments of the legs ("speckling") and in some species one or more of the terminal tarsal segments of the hind legs will be found to be white-scaled in their whole length. Finally the ungues, sharp-pointed horny structures attached to the tip of the fifth tarsal segment of each leg, will be examined. Generic dif- ferences are founded upon scale charac- ters. The description being completed we must attempt to classify the mosquito in its correct genus and species. At present the shape and arrangement of the scales found on the head, thorax, abdomen and wings of mosquitoes are the anatomical characters upon which the distinctions between the different genera in the sub-family Anophelin are based, but there are many who maintain that a generic grouping founded upon these characters is not satisfactory, and the matter is not yet settled. The subject of scale structure, however, is interesting, and, with the saving clause that the opinions now held by entomologists on the matter are liable to correction as a result of future work, we may give here a brief sum- mary of the characters by which the different genera in the sub-family Anophelin met with in India are distinguished from one another. These genera are:- 1.  Anopheles. 2.  Myzomyia. 3.  Stethomyia. 4.  Pyretophorus. 5.  Myzorhynchus. 6.  Nyssorhynchus. 7.  Cellia. 8.  Neocellia. The shape and arrangement of the scales and hairs on the thorax and abdomen serve as the primary characters by which these genera are distin- guished, and our examination must be directed firstly to these regions. So far
?( 32 ) as they are concerned the following table indicates the characters of the different genera:-- Genus. Thorax. Abdomen. Anopheles  Hair like curved scales (Plate IV, p) Hair like curved scales. Myzomyia. Hair like curved scales Hair like carved scales. Stethomyia Hair like curved scales Hair like curved scales. Myzorhynchus. Hair like curved scales Hairs on the dorsal surface, but a distinct  tuft of scales on the ventral surface of the terminal segment. (Shaped as in Plate IV, o, q or r. ) Pyretophorus Narrow curved scales (Plate IV, o). Hairs. Nyssorhynchus . Narrow curved and spindle- shaped scales. (The latter somewhat as in Plate IV, s.) Small tufts of flat scales on the dorsum and a few tufts projecting laterally. Cellia Flat spindle-shaped scales . Nearly completely covered with scales (shaped as in Plate IV, q) irregularly disposed on the dorsum and dense tufts projecting laterally. Neocellia . Flat spindle-shaped scales. As in Cellia, but no lateral tufts. It will be seen that the characters of the genera Anopheles, Myzomyia and Stethomyia in the above table are the same, and we must therefore search for minor distinguishing characters. According to Mr. Theobald these characters are :- Anopheles Wing scales large and lanceolate in  shape. (Plate IV, r.) Myzomyia Wing scales mostly small, long and  narrow, or slightly lanceolate. Stethomyia In addition to the upright forked  scales present on the head of all  Anophelin  there are some flat  scales (Pate IV, s and t) on the  median area of the head. These are  not present in any other genus.  Wing scales lanceolate in shape. The genus Myzorhynchus is not difficult to recognise because in addition to the characters already given, the palpi are thickly scaled and the wing scales are very large and lanceolate in shape.
PLATE IV. Line Block. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, 1908. a, Egg of Anopheline; b, larva of a "culex" mosquito; c, larva of an Anopheline mosquito; d, a palmate hair much, magnified; e, pupa of an Anopheline mosquito; f, head of a female Anopheline mosquito; g, the upright forked scales at the back of the head, magnified; h, head of a male Anopheline mosquito; i, wing of the Anopheline called rossii; j, the scales of the wing fringe, magnified; k, the lanceolate shaped scales of the wing; l, upright forked scales; m, twisted scale; n, broad curved scale; o, narrow curved scale; p, hair like curved scale; q, blunt ended lanceolate scale; r, sharp pointed lanceolate scale; s, spindle shaped scale; t, broad flat scale.
?( 33 ) In the genus Pyretophorus no scales at all can be found on the abdomen, only hairs being present. The three remaining genera are not difficult to distinguish by the charac- ters of the abdominal scales. The Anopheline most commonly met with in India, namely rossii, cannot be placed in any of the above genera, and a new genus called Pseudomyzomyia is to be created for it. If the student succeeds in placing in its correct genus any specimen which he wishes to identify, the remaining portion of his task will be comparatively easy, for there are only a few Indian species of Anophelines in each genus. They are the following:- In the genus   Anopheles: - (1) gigas.  (2) lindesayii.  (3) aitkenii.  (4) immaculatus. In the genus  Myzomyia: - (1) listoni.  (2) culicifacies.  (3) turkhudi. In the genus Stethomyia: - (1) culiciformis. In the genus Myzorhynchus: - (1) barbirostris.  (2) nigerrimus. In the genus Pyretophorus: - (1) nigrifasciatus.  (2) jeyporiensis.  (3) elegans. In the genus Nyssorhynchus:- (1) maculatus.  (2) stephensi.  (3) willmori.  (4) karwari.  (5) theobaldi.  (6)  maculipalpis.  (7) jamesii.  (8) fuliginosus. In the genus Cellia: - (1) pulcherrima.  (2) punctulata. In the genus Neocellia: - (1 ) indica.  (2) dudgeonii.  (3) intermedia. Species  described by Mr.   Theobald from  only one  specimen are   not included in this list. D
?( 34 ) The distinctions between the different species in the above genera are based upon the markings on the wings, legs, and palpi, these markings being caused by patches of light and dark scales. The species named above can be distinguished by the use of the following tables:- 1. GENUS Anopheles. A.-WINGS SPOTTED. A. gigas (Giles) The wing has two large black spots along the costa. The legs are band- ed with pale white bands at the joints. The palpi are unbanded. A. lindesayii (Giles) The wing has one large white spot near the apex. The femora of the hind legs have a broad pure white band. The palpi are unbanded. B.-WINGS UNSPOTTED. A aijkenii (James) The first submarginal cell of the wing is much longer and narrower than the second posterior cell.  Palpi with no trace of banding. Legs with no trace of banding. A. immaculatus (James and Theobald). Palpi with a broad white band includ- ing the tips and two narrow ones. Tarsal segments of the legs have pale bands apically. 2. GENUS Myzomyia. M. listoni (Liston) .... Wings spotted. The third longitudinal vein is white scaled in almost its whole length. Legs black with no trace of banding. Palpi with three white bands, the outermost of which includes the tips. M. culicifacies (Giles) Wings spotted. The third longitudinal vein is black scaled in its whole length. Legs black with a few light scales at the tibio-metatarsal joints. Palpi with three yellow bands. M. turkhudi (Liston)   .  .  . A large brown mosquito quite different in appearance from the above. The palpi have three white bands, but the tips of the palpi are black. There are light scales at the distal extremities of the femora and tibi in all the legs, and the hind femora have a broad pale area in the middle third of their length.
( 35 ) 3. GENUS Stethomyia. S. culiciformis (James and Liston) Wings unspotted. Palpi with no trace  of banding. Legs brown, without  banding. 4. GENUS Myzorhynchus. M. barbirostris (Van der wulp) Palpi unbanded and covered with  broad black scales.  The costa of  the wing is black scaled except for  one white spot at its distal extremity.  The legs have white scales at the  joints. M. nigerrimus (Giles) Palpi with four white bands, the outer-  most of which includes the tip.  Costa with two large white spots.  The legs have white scales at the  joints. 5. GENUS Pyretophorus. P. nigrifasciatus (Theobald) Palpi with three white bands, but tips  of palpi black. Legs unbanded. P. jeyporiensis (James) . Palpi with three white bands.  Tips  white.  Legs black with minute  bands at the tarsal joints. It is a  small dark mosquito like listoni and  culicifacies. P. elegans (James) .... Palpi with four white bands. Tips white  Legs speckled and banded. A broad  white band at the tibio-metatarsal  joint of the hind leg. D 2
?( 36 ) 6. GENUS Nyssorhynchus. A.-PALPI WITH THREE WHITE BANDS. One of more of the hind tarasal segments are pure white.                   N. maculatus (Theobald) . Only the 5th hind tarsal segment is   white.  N. willmori (James) . Only the 5th hind tarsal segment is   white, but differs from maculatus in   having the abdomen thickly scaled.  N. fuliginosus (Giles) . . The 3rd, 4th and 5th hind tarsal seg-   ments are white. Legs not speckled  N. jamesii (Theobald) . Like fuliginosus, but the legs are   speckled.  N. maculipalpis (Giles) . Like fuliginosus, but the legs and palpi   are speckled.  N. theobaldi (Giles) . . Only the 4th and 5th hind tarsal seg-   ments are white. Legs speckled. N. stephensi (James and Liston)  . The legs are speckled. Tarsal joints   banded, but none of the hind   tarsal segments pure white. B.-PALPI WITH FOUR WHITE BANDS. N. karwari (James) . The 5th hind tarsal segment is white.  Legs not speckled. 7. GENUS Cellia. C. pulcherrima (Theobald) Palpi with four white bands. The last  three hind tarsal segments pure  white. C. punclulata (Dnitz) Palpi with four white bands. None of  the hind tarsal segments pure white. 8. GENUS Neocellia. Ne. indica (Theobald) Palpi with three white bands.  The  tips of the palpi black. Only the  terminal tarsal segment of the hind  leg is white. Ne. dudgeonii (Theobald) Palpi with three white bands.  The  tips of the palpi white. Only the  terminal tarsal segment of the hind  leg is white. Ne. intermedia (Rothwell) Palpi with four white bands. None of  the hind tarsal segments is white.
?( 37 ) It has been mentioned already that there are some who maintain that a generic grouping based on scale structure is not satisfactory, and it is admitted by all who have studied the subject that the distinctions between some of the genera are very slight and therefore that it is difficult to decide whether a specimen shall be classified for example as an Anopheles or as a Myzomyia or as a Pyretophorus. Not everyone, also, has sufficient perseverance, or sufficient leisure, to study the subject carefully, and for this reason it is fortunate that the number of different species of Anopheline mosquitoes in any particular area, or indeed in any particular country, is not so great that it is difficult, even without the aid of generic grouping, to determine the correct specific name of any specimen; and this, of course, is the main object which the student of tropical medicine has in view. The attempt to ascertain the correct genus of an Anopheline is therefore a task which the student of tropical medicine need not necessarily undertake, and those who decide to neglect the generic grouping of the Anophelin will be able to ascertain the correct specific name of any species which they may find in India by the use of the following table. TABLE OF THE INDIAN SPECIES OF ANOPHELIN. I.-WINGS UNSPOTTED. A.-PALPI UNBANDED. A. aitkenii (James) .... A small dark mosquito.    No flat scales  on head.    Transverse veins of wings  not in one line. S. culiciformis   (James and Liston) . A rather large brown mosquito.  A few  flat scales on the median area of the  head.    Transverse wing veins in one  line. B.-PALPI WITH WHITE BANDS. A. immaculatus (Theobald).
?( 38 ) II.-WINGS SPOTTED. A.-PALPI UNBANDED. A. lindesayii (Giles). The wing has one large white spot  near the apex. Femora of hind legs  with a broad white band. Palpi not  densely scaled. M. barbirostris (Van der wulp) . A very large species with black  densely scaled palpi. One white  spot at distal end of wing. M. gigas (Giles) A very large hill species. Costa of  wing has two black spots. B.-PALPI WITH FOUR WHITE BANDS. M. nigerrimus (Giles) Tarsal joints banded, but none of the  hind tarsal segments pure white. C. pulcherrima (Theobald) Abdomen covered with broad white  scales. Legs speckled. The 3rd,  4th and 5th hind tarsal segments  pure white. C. punctulata (Dnita) Legs banded and speckled, but none  of the hind tarsal segments pure  white. Abdomen with white scales  which form tufts at the sides. Ne. intermedia (Rothwell).  Like punctulata, but the abdominal  scales are less dense and do not form  tufts at the sides. P. elegans  (James) Like punctulata, but no scales on  abdomen. N. karwari (James) .... Legs not speckled, but with bands  at the joints. The 5th tarsal  segment of hind legs pure white. C.-PALPI WITH THREE WHITE BANDS. I.-Tips of palpi black. M. turkhudi (Listen)  None of the hind tarsal segments  white. Thorax with hair-like scales. P. nigrifasciatus (Theobald) Like turkhudi, but the thorax has  narrow curved scales. Ne. indica (Theobald) Only the 5th hind tarsal segment is  pure white. Abdomen with flat  scales.
?( 39 )              C.-PALPI WITH THREE WHITE BANDS-continued. II.-Tips of palpi white.  One or more of the hind tarsal segments are  pure white. N. fuliginosus (Giles) Tarsal   joints  banded;  legs   not speckled. The 3rd, 4th and 5th hind tarsal segments pure white.  N. jamesii (Theobald) As above, but with speckled legs.  N. maculipalpis (Giles) As above, but with  legs  and palpi speckled.  N. theobaldi (Giles) . Only the 4th  and 5th hind tarsal segments are pure white.  N. maculatus (Theobald) . Only the 5th hind tarsal  segment is pure white.  N. willmori (James) Differs  from  maculatus  in having many scales on the abdomen.  N. dudgeonii (Theobald). . Very like willmori. Tarsal joints banded, but none of the hind tarsal segments pure white. Ps. rossii (Giles) The legs are not speckled.  N. Stephensi,  (Liston  and James). The  legs  are  speckled.   Abdomen covered with scales. Legs uniformly coloured without bands or white segments. M. listoni (Liston) . The third longitudinal  vein of wing     white scaled.  Six white patches on wing fringe.          M. jeyporiensis (James)  . Seven white patches on  wing  fringe. Faint white spots at some of the joints of the legs.  M. culicifacies (Giles) Third longitudinal vein of wing black scaled.  Faint white spots at some of the joints of the legs. A few examples will serve to illustrate the method of using this table. Example I.-A female mosquito with palpi as long as the proboscis, i.e., it belongs to the sub-family Anophelin. Wings.-Spotted. Palpi.-With three white bands or rings, one broad ring including the tips (which are therefore white), and two narrower ones.
?(40) It therefore comes among the spotted winged Anophelines under the group C, sub-group II. Legs.-There are white bands at the tarsal joints, but none of the hind tarsal segments are pure white, and there is no speckling of the legs in addition to the bands. Diagnosis.-rossii. Confirm by careful examination of the wing markings.  (See Plate IV, i.) Example 2.-A female Anopheline. Wings.-Spotted. Palpi.-With three white rings, the outermost of which includes the tips. In addition to the three complete rings there are one or two small patches of wmte scales, which do not amount to a complete ring or band, on the upper surrace of each palp, i.e., the palpi are marked with three bands and are speckled in addition. Legs.-The 3rd, 4th, 5th, and the apex of the 2nd tarsal segments of the hind legs are pure white. There are white bands at the other tarsal joints, and the femora and tibi are brilliantly speckled with white scales. Diagnosis.-maculipalpis. Example 3.-A female Anopheline. Wings.-Spotted. Palpi.-With three white rings and the tips white. Legs.- Uniformly coloured without definite bands at the tarsal joints. Diagnosis.-listoni. jeyporiensis or culicifacies. Separate by careful examination of the wing markings. This completes our study of the adult insects, and we  must now learn about the eggs, larv and pup. The eggs of Anopheline mosquitoes. (1) The eggs of Anopheline mosquitoes are laid separately, and when deposited on water they quickly separate from one another and float as isolated eggs scattered irregularly on the surface of the water. They are tiny rod-shaped bodies which cannot be seen plainly except with the aid of a magnifying glass. If one of them is taken up in a spoon or on the edge of a piece of blotting paper and transferred to a drop of water on a glass slide
?(41) it can be examined with a low power of the microscope (?rds inch objective). It will then be seen that along the middle portion of each side of the egg is attached an oval "ribbed" air-containing float, which is a very characteristic structure not present in the eggs of any other kind of mosquito as yet described. (Plate IV, a.) Thus it is easy to distinguish the eggs of an Anopheline from those of any other kind of mosquito. The eggs of other mos- quitoes. The eggs of most mosquitoes in other sub-families are collected together before being deposited by the mosquito, into an elongated boat-shaped mass consisting of several hundred eggs joined to one another by their edges. When this egg-boat or egg-raft has been constructed the insect allows it to drop into the water, where it floats as a small boat-shaped body looking very like a small lump of soot. Mosquito larv. (2) If any one who has not seen a mosquito larva will look in the tins or tubs of water that have remained in his garden unemptied for some days he will very probably find a number of small, very active creatures about 1/16th to 1/4th of an inch long, wriggling about in the water and alternately struggling to the bottom and floating up to the surface to breathe, which they do by means of an air tube (or siphon-tube as it is called) attached near the tail. If some of these little animals are collected in a glass bottle and watched from the side it will be seen that when they come to the surface to breathe they hang obliquely with their heads downwards and with only the tips of their air-tubes at the surface of the water. (Plate IV, b.) How to recog. nise Anophe- line larv. These are the larv of the commoner kinds of mosquitoes often referred to collectively as the group of "culex mosquitoes." On closer examination it will be seen that each larva is divided into three regions, the head, the thorax and the abdomen; also that the abdomen is divided into nine segments and that the long air-tube, by the tip of which the larva seems to hang suspended from the surface of the water, projects upwards from the 8th segment. The attitude adopted by the larv of Anopheline mosquitoes when resting at the surface of the water is quite different from that of the larv of other mos- quitoes and affords an easy way of recognising these larv. An Anopheline larva instead of lying with its head and body sloping downwards beneath the surface in an oblique direction, lies flat at the surface, nearly the whole of its body lying parallel to and touching the surface film (Plate IV, c). There are two
?(42) reasons for this attitude, namely, (1) Anopheline larv do not possess the characteristic external air-tube already mentioned, and (2) on the upper surface of the abdominal segments of Anopheline larv there are little cup-shaped structures called palmate hairs which open at the surface of the water and, acting like floats, keep the body of the larva in contact with the surface. These palmate hairs can be easily seen by examining an Anopheline larv in a drop of water under a low power of the microscope; they are not present in the larv of any other kind of mosquito and together with the absence of the external air-tube render it easy to recognise such larv. (Plate IV, d.) How to collect larv and breed them out.-When going out to collect larv it is best to take a large tin mug with a handle and some wide-mouthed bottles. As Anopheline larv are often difficult to see, we should not leave any pool or stream because we cannot see larv in it, but should stoop down at the edge of the water and scoop the tin quickly through it under the grass at the edge, bringing it out full of water. Then, if the tin is allowed to stand on the ground for a few moments, any larv that have been dipped up in it will rise to the surface and be easily recognised. By fishing in this way at the edges of several parts of a pool or stream we shall either catch a good many larv, or make certain that the pool or stream is free from them. If any are caught they should be transferred with some of the water into one of the wide-mouthed bottles, keeping the larv from different pools in different bottles. The mouths of the bottles should be covered with a piece of coarse muslin, and after a few days the larv will develop into pup and then into adult mosquitoes, which can be transferred to another bottle, killed, and mounted for examination. In this way we shall learn after a time exactly what species of mosquitoes are found in the different breeding places. The pup of mosquitoes. (3) The pup are small comma-shaped creatures bearing no resemblance to the larv, and they breathe by means of two trumpet-shaped projections attached to the head, so that they lie with their heads at the surface and their tails downwards. It is not always easy to distinguish the pup of Anopheline from those of other kinds of mosquitoes, but as the matter is not of much importance we need not consider it here. A drawing of an Anopheline pupa is given in Plate IV, e.
?(43) Different species are found in different kinds of collections of water. The breeding places of Anopheline mosquitoes. In localities where mosquitoes are abundant, larv can usually be found in collections of water of every kind. Thus they may be found in the few drops of water which collect at the base of a leaf of a tree, or in broken earthenware pots, or in bottles or tins; in fire buckets, rain-water tubs or iron tanks; in clean and dirty puddles by the roadside or in large ponds and irrigated rice fields; in the foul water of a cesspool; in the eddies and backwaters of a mountain stream. In particular instances this statement will be found to be true as regards the larv of Anopheline as well as of other kinds of mosquitoes, and it teaches us that when searching for Anopheline larv we must not neglect to examine every collection of water. A very interesting and important observation has been made, however, regarding Anopheline mosquitoes, namely that under favourable conditions they select, to a great extent, the kind of collection of water in which to deposit their eggs. Thus in a place surrounded by many different kinds of collections of water the larv of one species of Anopheline will be found in shallow muddy pools only, the larv of another species in deep ponds only, and the larv of a third species in irrig- ation watercourses or running streams only. It is possible to arrange the species of Anopheline mosquitoes met with in India in groups, each group containing the species which are alike in their choice of breeding places. The chief and most distinct of these groups are as follow:- Group I.- Species breeding in open water with much aquatic  vegetation, at some distance from houses, such as deep ponds, swamps, marshes and deep pools under trees or in a wood. barbirostris. nigerrimus. The adult insects of this group are very rarely found in houses; they are essentially "wild" mosquitoes. Group II.-Stream breeding species. The larv of these species are almost always found in more or less swiftly running streams. Irrigation watercourses form the chief breeding places in the Punjab for one of the members of this group (culicifacies). listoni. jeyporiensis. culicifacies.
?(44) In places where such breeding places are common the adult insects of this group are abundant in the houses. Group III.-Pool breeding species. The most important of these species is rossii, which is almost always found breeding in shallow muddy pools in the vici- nity of houses. As would be expected from the nature of its breeding grounds, this species is the most widely distributed in India and after the rains may be found in enormous numbers in houses. It is essentially a "domestic" species. With these remarks as a guide it should not be difficult for anyone to find out the favourite breeding places of the different species of Anopheline mosquitoes in his district. Other habits of Anopheline mosquitoes. We know very little about the habits of mosquitoes. Although many observers have studied Anopheline mosquitoes we know comparatively little about their habits, and we know almost nothing about the habits of individual species. The subject is not difficult, and it would be of great service if students and others would observe throughout the year the habits of each species of Anopheline present in their districts. In addition to breeding grounds we require observations on seasonal prevalence, on the relative abundance of different species, on distance of flight, on the food supply of different species, on methods by which different species tide over the winter and on many other problems. At present our knowledge regarding habits has to be summed up in a general way somewhat as follows. (1) Anopheline mosquitoes are essentially nocturnal in habit; during the daytime they rest in dark corners of rooms, outhouses and sheds. (2) The food of female Anophelines is the blood of man or of animals. Information is much needed regarding the habitual food of different species. Do the females of all species feed always on the blood of man only or do they sometimes or always feed on that of animals ? If it were proved that rossii, for example, feeds habitually on the blood of animals instead of on that of man* it would explain why this species has not been found to be a malaria- carrier in nature. (3) The seasonal prevalence of different species differs consi- derably. Upon what factors does this depend ? In one place in the Punjab it has been found, for example, that the malaria-carrying species culicifacies * This would be a profitable line of investigation for those interested in the  biologi- cal tests for the blood of different mammals.
?(45) becomes prevalent before the rains begin because its eggs are laid in the irrigation canals and not in rain-formed pools. Rossii, on the other hand, does not become prevalent until after the rains because its eggs are laid chiefly in such pools, not in the canals. (4) Anopheline mosquitoes do not habitually fly very far. This is a general statement to which many exceptions may be found, and it is very important to ascertain the usual limit of flight of Anophelines in one's district. (5) Some species tide over the winter by the hybernation of adults, others by the hybernation of larv, others perhaps migrate to warmer places at the onset of the cold weather. How is it that in very cold places where it is probable that all adult Anophelines and larv are killed by the cold of winter they appear again abundantly in the spring ? The cold of winter is probably a more efficient method of killing off all Anophelines in a place than any which man can devise yet in India, even in places where the winter is as cold as it is in Simla, Anophelines become plentiful every summer. (6) The length of life of Anophelines is not known with certainty, but it is known that some species can live for many months. We may conclude this account of the practical work with which a student of the malarial fevers should be acquainted, with a summary of the method of finding out whether a place is malarious or not, the degree to which it is so, and the factors on which it depends. 6.-How to determine whether a place is malarious. There are three ways of ascertaining the prevalence of malaria in a place or district:- (1)   By examining the statistics in hospitals and dispensaries. (2)   By ascertaining the proportion of people suffering from enlargement of the spleen. (3)   By examining the blood of a number of  people to ascertain how many are infected with malaria parasites. The splenic index. The first of these methods is of very little value. The second method is useful in places where kala azar and other diseases which, in addition to malaria, cause enlargement of the spleen do not occur. In making the count only those people should be examined who are between two years and ten years of age (Stephens and Christophers). The percentage of people between these ages who have enlarged spleens is called "the splenic index of malaria."
?(46) The endemic index. The third method is the only one which can be completely relied upon. In carrying it out it is best to examine only infants and children under ten years of age. For this method it is necessary to take blood films from 30 or 40 infants and young children up to 10 years of age and after staining the films to examine them for the presence or absence of malaria parasites. The percentage of children of ages up to ten years who have malaria parasites in their blood is called "the endemic index of malaria." When the blood of a sufficiently large number of children has been examined the figure affords a true index of the degree to which malaria prevails in a place and affords the most satisfactory means of comparing the amount of malaria in different localities. 7.-How to investigate the factors upon which the prevalence of malaria depends. How to carry out  a "malarial survey." We will assume that we have visited a village and have found by an examination of the blood of 30 or 40 children that the endemic index of malaria in the village is, let us say, 80. We have now to investigate the conditions in which this high endemic index occurs. The first thing to be done is to obtain a map of the village on a large scale and to set down on it all the pools, streams, and other collections of water within a quarter of a mile from the houses of the village. Having done this we should proceed systematically to find out what species of Anopheline mosquitoes are breeding in each collec- tion of water. To do so we must carry with us each day bottles or test tubes labelled with numbers or letters similar to those by which the different collections of water marked on our map are known. We shall put the larv caught in the different collections of water in the labelled tubes in order that when they have developed into adults and can be identified we shall know exactly what species are breeding in the different pools and streams. The distances of the various breeding places from the houses will be shown in the map. The next thing to do is to search for adult Anopheline mosquitoes in the houses, outhouses, and stables of the village, and we must attempt to form an estimate of the abundance of these insects as a whole and of the relative abundance of different species. One way of estimating this is to keep a record each day of the number of specimens caught in a given time, say two hours. The number of specimens caught depends entirely, of course, on the skill of the worker, but when a worker is well skilled his daily records are quite fairly comparable with each other and with his records
(47) The Indian malaria- carrying species. of work in any other village. The observer will usually find that some species are much more abundant in houses than others, and such an observation is of great importance. This work of catching adult Anophelines would occupy perhaps two or three hours each morning, and the expert malari- ologist would spend the remainder of the day in identifying the specimens caught and in dissecting them to ascertain which of the species is carrying malaria at the time. But, on account of the time required, the dissection of mosquitoes with the object of finding sporozoites in the salivary glands and zygotes in the stomach wall is beyond the scope of practical work which can be done by medical practitioners in India unless other duties are neglected, and the methods of dissection and examination will not be described here. It must suffice to say that by the dissection of large numbers of different species of Anophelines in malarious places in India it has been proved that not all species are equally good carriers of malaria in nature, so it is obvious that the particular species of Anopheline which is present in the houses of a village is a very important factor in the prevalence of malaria. Up to the present time only four species, namely, Myzomyia listoni, Myzomyia culicifacies, Nyssorhynchus fuliginosus and Nyssorhynchus stephensi* have been proved by dissection to be malaria-carriers in nature in India, and it has been shown also that one species, namely Pseudomyzomyia rossii, very probably does not act as a carrier of malaria in nature. For this reason it will be seen that in making our "malarial survey" great attention must be paid to the presence or absence in the houses of listoni, culicifacies, fuliginosus or stephensi and to the character and distance of the breeding places of those species. In this way we shall have investigated the two chief factors that influence the prevalence of malaria in any place, namely, (1) the prevalence of the "source of infection," which means, practically speaking, the abundance of native children with malaria parasites in their blood (because it has been proved that such native children form always the chief source of infection); and (2) the prevalence of the "carrier of infection," which means the prevalence of the particular species of Anopheline which carries the zygote and sporozoite stages of the parasite. * The proof that N. stephensi is a malaria carrier in nature in India has been fur- nished very recently by Captain Liston, I.M.S., in Bombay.
?(48) Some pro- blems for solution. It might be hoped that by such an investigation we should be able to explain satisfactorily the reasons for the prevalence of malaria in every place, and the reasons for its great prevalence in some places and its absence in others. Unfortunately this is not so, and it has to be admitted that all the factors upon which the prevalence of malaria depends are not yet known. There are places in India, for example, where a malaria-carrying species of Anopheline is abundant, where people suffering from malarial fever are con- stantly arriving, and where the climatic conditions are favourable for the development of the parasite in the mosquito, but yet where the disease has not become endemic. The reason of this is one of the many problems in malaria which await solution. Another factor about which little or nothing is known is the influence of the abundance of Anophelines. There are places in India, for example, where the endemic index of malaria is as high as 60 or 70, yet where the malaria-carrying species of Anopheline is so rare that an experienced searcher may occupy an hour or more before finding a specimen. There are other places where the malaria-carrying species is so common that 20 or 30 specimens can easily be caught in an hour, but where the endemic index is not more than 12 or 15. We know also that even a very marked reduction in the number of Anophelines in a place might not necessarily affect the prevalence of malaria if it were to happen, for example, that by the importa- tion of infected people or by some other means the prevalence of the source of infection were increased; we must always remember that the prevalence of the source of infection is a factor of equal and sometimes perhaps of greater importance than the prevalence of Anophelines. Another factor of very great importance in the prevalence of malaria in a district where the disease is already endemic is the constant importation of susceptible persons. Recent work by Captain Christophers and Dr. Bentley goes to show that where such importation is constantly occurring everyone becomes infected with malaria in a very short time, no matter how few Anophelines there may be-provided, of course, there are any Anophelines at all. We see, then, that if we wish to ascertain all the factors which determine the prevalence of majaria in a place and to gain an accurate notion of the relative importance of each, the subject of Anophelines, though among the most important, is by no means the only subject that must be investigated.
(   49   ) CHAPTER III. Symptomatology and diagnosis of the malarial fevers. Avoid the danger of regarding every case of fever as malaria. WE are now in a position to return more particularly to the subject of the malarial fevers, and in this chapter we shall consider their symptomatology and diagnosis. It is well known that the most prominent symptom caused by an infection with malaria parasites is fever of a very definite and peculiar character. This character may be summed up in the words Intermittency and Periodicity. By Intermittency is meant the fact that the fever ceases at intervals; the temperature alternately falls to normal or below, and rises again. On this account the name " Intermittent fevers " is well applied to malarial fevers. By Periodicity is meant the habitual tendency of the fever to recur at stated intervals of time. Thus the fever may recur at intervals of 24 hours (Quoti- dian Periodicity) or at intervals of 48 hours (Tertian Periodicity) or at inter- vals of 72 hours (Quartan Periodicity). It may be said that, almost without exception, all cases of fever due to the presence of malaria parasites in the blood will, if left untreated, sooner or later exhibit these two characteristics of intermittency and periodicity. Unfortunately the terms "malaria" and " ague " are often applied in a loose manner to many continued and irregular fevers, the nature of which is not wholly clear, and at the outset I would strongly urge you to guard against making a hasty diagnosis in any continued or irregular fever; and would advise you to err on the side of those who do not consider any case of fever as malarial, until the character of the tem- perature chart, or an examination of the blood, plainly proves it to be so, rather than on the side of those who regard every case of fever as " malaria " until, after several weeks of ineffectual treatment, this diagnosis is proved to be wrong. Before describing the clinical types of malarial fevers we must say a few words regarding the process by which the malaria parasite produces fever. I have already described how the parasites in the red blood corpuscles gradually grow larger and larger until they attain their full size and divide up into a number of segments or spores, which burst through the thin remnant of the corpuscle and become free in the blood plasma, ready to E
?(   50   ) enter other corpuscles. It has been found-and the observation may be verified by any one who examines the blood of a typical case of malarial fever-that the onset of the attacks of fever from which the patient suffers, always corresponds in point of time with the stage of sporulation or segmentation of the parasites. During the period of apyrexia, only young and medium-sized parasites, enclosed within the red blood corpuscles, can be found, and it is only when the parasites are in the segmenting stage and escaping from the corpuscles that the attack of fever begins. There is thus a very intimate connection between the sporulation of the parasite and the attack of fever, and it is possible that during the growth of the parasite in the red blood cell it produces a pyrogenetic or fever-producing chemical substance, which, when the parasite bursts from the red cell in the act of sporulation, is liberated into the plasma and so becomes able to exert its influence and cause fever. As long as the parasite remains inside the envelope of the corpuscle the pyrogenetic substance cannot escape, so that during the time the parasite takes to grow to its full size the patient does not suffer from fever. As soon as the parasite divides and bursts from the corpuscle the pyrogenetic substance escapes and causes fever. From this you will readily understand that a parasite which sporulates every 24 hours will produce Quotidian fever, one which sporulates every 48 hours will produce Tertian fever, and one which sporulates every 72 hours will produce Quartan fever. It will be apparent that if a parasite should, for some reason or other, complete its asexual cycle in a less period than 24, 28, or 72 hours, a different clinical type of fever will result, and also that a different clinical type may be produced by the presence in the blood of two or more groups of parasites which sporulate at different times or at the same time on different days. If, for example, a patient were infected with two groups of Benign Tertian parasites, one group being due to sporulate about 10 A.M. on the 1st, 3rd, 5th, etc., of August and the other group being due to sporulate at the same time on the 2nd, 4th, 6th, etc., the patient would have a paroxysm of fever every morning, and his temperature chart would be said to be of the "double Tertian type. "
?(    51    ) I shall describe first the results of an infection with Benign Tertian parasites, because this is the species most commonly met with in India, and afterwards note the differences which result from infections with the other two forms. Symptoms of Benign Tertian fever. Relapses. 1. Benign Tertian infection.-Supposing a man to have been bitten by a mosquito infected with the sporozoites of the Benign Tertian parasite, he will probably not feel any ill effects until about twelve or fourteen days afterwards. This is the incubation period during which the parasites have been gradually multiplying in his blood, but have not been present in sufficient numbers to cause symptoms. Towards the end of the period he may feel some aching of the bones, headache, or other premonitory symptoms, and his temperature may be somewhat raised. After these indefinite symptoms have gone on for a day or two the regular attacks of "ague" begin. The attacks of fever recur, in infections with the Simple or Benign Tertian parasite, at definite intervals of 48 hours. Each attack is represented clinically by a "cold" stage, a "hot" stage, and a " sweating" stage. At the beginning of the cold stage the patient feels chilly; after a short time the feeling of cold spreads all over his body and becomes so intense that his teeth chatter, and he shakes from head to foot. His temperature, however, in spite of the feeling of cold, begins to rise. After a time the shivering stops and the patient begins to feel hot, the skin becomes dry and burning, and the temperature rapidly rises to 103F. or 104F. or more. After an hour or so the hot stage passes off, the patient begins to perspire profusely, the fever quickly declines, and in a short time all the acute symptoms have disappeared, and the patient feels almost well. As a rule he is able to get up and go about his occupation until the next day but one, when he will again have another attack of fever similar to the first one. If untreated, these attacks may recur every other day for many weeks, gradually de- clining in severity as time goes on. In the meantime the patient's spleen has become enlarged, and he has become pale and anmic. After the fever has left him apparently for good it may return at irregular intervals for many months (Relapses). These relapses of fever may be brought on by almost any exciting cause such as chill, over-fatigue, over-anxiety exposure to the E 2
?(   52   ) sun, etc., and have no connection whatever with mosquitoes. One explanation of their cause is that all the asexual parasites of the first infection have not died out, and when the patient's resisting power is lessened by any of the conditions just mentioned, the parasites are able to develop rapidly again and produce their ill effects. Another explanation has already been mentioned under the heading parthenogenesis. (Page 3.) In this view it is assumed that all the asexual parasites have died out, but that some of the sexual (female) forms, which are very resistant even to the action of large doses of quinine, persist and that under influences similar to those just men- tioned a crop of asexual forms can be produced from these female parasites. The relation of the parasites to the different clinical stages.-If the patient's blood be examined at the onset of fever, that is a little time before the cold or rigor stage, it will always be found that (as we have already noted) the majority of the parasites are in the stage of division or sporulation. The onset of fever and the rigor correspond in point of time to the sporulation of the asexual forms of the parasite. From the point of view of treatment this is an important point to remember. By the time the hot stage approaches all the parasites have divided up and are entering, or have already entered, fresh corpuscles. During the last part of the hot stage, during the sweating stage, and during the period of apyrexia, the parasites are enclosed in the red blood corpuscles, growing and developing pigment. Between any two similar stages of the parasite an interval of 48 hours elapses, i.e., the Benign Tertian parasite takes 48 hours to complete its asexual cycle. These points and the clinical characters of Benign Tertian malarial fever are-illustrated in Chart. I. This chart shows three typical paroxysms of ague occurring at the same time on alternate days. Each attack lasted from about 11 A.M. until about 8 P.M. At 12 noon, during the shivering stage, sporulating forms were found in the blood, and at 7 P.M. very young forms, which had lately entered the corpuscles, were present. The sudden rise of the fever and its quick fall are characteristic of Benign Tertian infections. The administration of thirty grains of quinine at 7 A.M. on the 26th, though it did not prevent the onset of the attack on that day, stopped all future paroxysms and practically cured the case. (See page 72.)
(53) CHART NO. I. Malarial fever.    Renign Teitian infection.        Name.-Gunner T,    Age.-25 years.
?(   54   ) After the attacks of fever have gone on for some time, sexual forms of the parasite which, in the case of the Benign Tertian parasite, are spherical in shape, will be seen in the blood as well as the asexual sporulating forms. These sexual forms, however, do not cause fever except in the circumstances when parthenogenesis occurs. 2. Quartan infection.-The symptoms produced by an infection with the Quartan form of the malaria parasite are similar to those produced by the Benign Tertian form, except that the interval between the onset of the attacks of fever is one of 72 hours instead of 48 hours. The reason of this is that the Quartan parasite takes 72 hours to complete its asexual cycle instead of only 48 hours as is the case with the Tertian parasite. Chart II illustrates the result of an infection with Quartan parasites. CHART No. II. Malarial fever.    Quartan infection.                Name.-Chetty.    Age.-10 years.
?(   55   ) On the 10th young Quartan parasites were found in the blood of this patient; on the 11th medium-sized forms, and on the 12th at 5 P.M. pre- segmenting and segmenting forms. Symptoms of Malignant Tertian fever. Malignant Tertian infection.- There are marked differences between infec- tions with the Malignant Tertian form of the malaria parasite and those with  Benign Tertian or Quartan parasites, and the term " malignant " has been applied to this species of parasite in opposition to the term " benign," which is applied to the parasites of Benign Tertian and Quartan fevers, because dangerous symptoms, such as hyperpyrexia, coma, delirium, etc., are much more liable to arise in the course of an infection with this form of parasite than with the others. The Malignant Tertian parasite, like the simple or Benign Tertian, as a rule takes 48 hours to complete its asexual cycle, and for the first few days of a case this fact is often apparent from the temperature chart (see Chart III). With this form of parasite, however, there is a great tendency for the parasites to complete their cycle in a shorter time than 48 hours, often indeed in as short a time as 24 hours, so that after a day or two the patient usually has an attack of fever every day (Quotidian fever). Again there is a tendency for the individual parasites to complete their cycles in different periods of time instead of all doing so at the same time as in the case of Benign Tertian and Quartan infections. As a result of this it not infrequently happens that the temperature does not fall quite to normal for several days together, and the chart may be remittent in character. In untreated cases the fever continues in this way for about a week or ten days and then ceases, leaving the patient weak and anmic but otherwise apparently well. After an interval of apyrexia varying from six days to a week or more, a second series of attacks of fever, exhibiting a Tertian or Quotidian periodicity exactly similar to the first attacks, occurs. These relapses may be repeated at more or less constant intervals of a week or more for two or three months, gradually getting shorter and less severe until they die out altogether, leaving the patient very anmic and with an enlarged spleen. These points are well illustrated in Chart III, which is from a case of Malignant Tertian fever in a child. For the first four days this chart shows a definite Tertian periodicity. Then follow daily paroxysms until the 9th, after which an interval of six days' apyrexia occurs. This is followed by a series of relapses occurring at
CHART NO. III. Malarial fever.    Malignant Tertian infection. Name.- Rangu.   Age. 11/2 years.
( 57 ) varying intervals, and in this case the relapses were still occurring at fairly definite intervals four months after the primary attack. The temperature is intermittent throughout. It should be noted that as the temperatures in this case were taken only twice daily, they are not by any means a record of the highest temperature reached on any particular day. In order to obtain a correct temperature chart it is necessary for the temperature to be recorded at least every four hours and preferably every two hours. If in a case of Malignant Tertian fever the temperature is carefully recorded at fre- quent intervals it will be found that the chart presents very characteristic features which in the absence of a microscopic examination of the blood are of service in diagnosis. They are shown in Chart IV. In each febrile paroxysm there is, as was first described by Marchiafava and Bignami, an initial rise of temperature, then a pseudo crisis, then a second rise of tempera- ture (called the precritical elevation ) and finally a true crisis. CHART No. IV. Malarial fever. Malignant Tertian infection.
?( 58 ) The Malignant Tertian parasites are much smaller than those of the Benign group of fevers. Their amboid movements are very active, and it is very common to see several parasites in one corpuscle. Only the young forms of the parasite are seen in the peripheral blood, segmentation occurring for the most part in the deeper viscera, such as the spleen and bone-marrow. To- wards the end of the first series of attacks of fever, that is, about a week after the commencement of the disease, sexual forms (crescents) appear in the blood. Their number gradually increases, and they are very abundant after the fever has quite left the patient. Mixed infections.*-Combined infections, with different species of the malaria parasite, occur not infrequently in India, and may produce irregular charts. A combined infection of Benign and Malignant Tertian parasites is perhaps most commonly met with, but combinations of Benign Tertian and Quartan parasites are also seen. Chart V illustrates a mixed infection of this nature in a child. CHART NO. V. Malarial fever.    Combined infection with Benign Tertian and Quartan parasites. Name.-Uligammah.    Age.-4 years. * " Mixed" infections must not be confused with "double " or "triple" infections. The latter terms are used to define infections with two or three groups of the same species of parasite. (See page 50.)
?( 59 ) Fatality of malarial fevers. Pernicious symptoms and causes of death.- Malarial fevers cause much ill-health and weakness and therefore interfere greatly with the industrial success of people afflicted with them but, even when untreated, they are by no means very fatal, and among patients who receive more or less adequate treatment a death is a rare event. The following table shows the fatality of all kinds of malarial fevers among European soldiers, Native soldiers, and Native prisoners treated in Indian hospitals * during the five-year period from 1903 to 1907:- Years. Number of Class of patients. in hospital. cases treated  Number of deaths. Case mortality. 1903 to 1907 European soldiers    63,597 99 16 per cent.   or 1   death  in  642 cases.  Native soldiers 144,728 612 42 per  cent,  or  1   death  in 236 cases.  Native prisoners 189,534 681 36   per  cent.   or  1   death in 278 cases. The fatality of malarial fevers is higher among Native soldiers than among Native prisoners because pernicious symptoms (which are the dangerous ones) are more common in cases of malarial fever among the former class than among the latter. For example during the five-year period ending with 1907 the admission rate from malarial fevers of a remittent type (in which it is well known that pernicious symptoms are common) among Indian prisoners was only 1.8 per thousand as compared with a rate of 6.7 per thousand among Native soldiers. Some reasons for the relative infrequency of pernicious symptoms among prisoners as compared with soldiers are (1) when a prisoner feels ill he reports the fact at once, and if it is found that he has fever he is immediately admitted into hospital and treated; among * A large number of cases of malarial fever in India are so mild that they can be treated out of hospital; if the figures of these cases were added the case mortality figures would, of course, be lower than those shown in the table. Among European troops during the years 1906 and 1907 alone not many fewer than 10,000 cases of ague were treated out of hospital, that is "in barracks." The practice has been objected to on the ground that many of these patients are parasite-carriers and infect anopheline mosquitoes in the barracks.
( 60 ) Native soldiers, as among European, the practice of trying to carry on their duties as long as possible without reporting sick is very common, and this practice, of course, increases very much the liability that pernicious symptoms will develop. (2) Quinine prophylaxis is very carefully and thoroughly carried out among prisoners, and although it does not always prevent infection it lessens the severity of the attack. If these factors were not in operation we should expect the fatality of malarial fevers to be much higher among prisoners than among Native troops because among the former class there are large numbers of old and infirm men and women in whom an attack of malaria is a much more serious matter than in the younger and more robust European or Native soldier. As regards the fatality of the disease among other classes of people in India we can add that among 3,402 cases which occurred among the wives of European soldiers, and were treated in hospital during the ten-year period ending with 1907, there were 37 deaths, a case mortality of about 1 per cent., and that among 5,128 cases occurring in the children of European soldiers during the same period there were 86 deaths, a case mortality of 1.68 per cent. There are no Indian statistics which can be relied upon for calculating the fatality of malarial fevers in patients who are untreated, but anyone who has to study malaria in Indian villages cannot fail to observe that at any rate a very large number of infants and young children pass through many attacks of malarial fever without, apparently, being greatly affected by the disease, and that such children gain an immunity to malaria which is of service to them throughout their lives. The statistics dealt with above include, of course, all forms of malarial fever, but it is important to remember that serious symptoms and death occur, as a rule, only in cases of infection with the Malignant Tertian parasites. If the statistics of the ordinary intermittent fevers which are produced usually by the Benign Tertian and Quartan parasites were considered alone we should find that among European soldiers treated in hospitals in India not more than 1 patient in every 850 dies, and among Native soldiers not more than 1 in every 520. It is fortunate therefore
(61) that the Benign Tertian parasite is by far the commonest in most parts of India. Pernicious symptoms. The chief "pernicious" symptoms which may be met with in cases of acute malarial fever in India are:- Referable to the abdominal viscera and Referable to the nervous system. alimentary system. Severe headache. Severe epigastric pain. Irritability. Severe hepatic pain. Delirium. Severe splenic pain. Convulsions. Simple vomiting. Epileptiform seizures. Bilious vomiting. Unconsciousness. Hmatemesis. Coma. Pronounced constipation. Collapse. Simple diarrha. Uncontrollable sweating. Choleraic diarrha. Urmia. Dysenteric diarrha. Hyperpyrexia. Melna. Referable to the urinary system. Jaundice. Albuminuria. Rupture of spleen. Nephritis. Referable to the circulatory system. Incontinence of urine. Fainting attacks. Suppression of urine. Sudden heart failure. Hmoglobinuria. Progressive anmia.  Referable to the respiratory system.  Dyspna.   Although all these symptoms are highly important it is not possible in our limited space to do more than refer very briefly to a few of them, and it will be more profitable, I think, to give extracts from notes on actual cases which have occurred recently in India than to deal with the subject in a general way. 1. A European soldier was admitted into hospital on the evening of the 9th November 1907 with a temperature of 103 F. He complained of intense headache. The next morning his temperature was normal. The spleen was palpable and tender. A blood examination showed the presence of numerous Malignant Tertian ring parasites. At 10 P.M. the same evening his temperature rose to 105 F., and he became uncon- scious. Shortly afterwards he became comatose, fces and urine being passed involun- tarily. The coma became more profound and ended in death. (Cerebral type with coma.)
(62) 2. A Native soldier suddenly became ill while on parade. He was taken to hospital, and his temperature was found to be 106F. Severe vomiting set in, and after profuse sweating the temperature fell to 103. Malignant Tertian parasites were found in his blood. Quinine was given per rectum; by sponging, etc., the temperature was reduced to 1006, but low muttering delirium began. Next day the temperature was 104F. The delirium persisted, and he became very violent. He died suddenly from heart failure. (Cerebral type with hyperpyrexia, delirium, and heart failure.) 3. A Native soldier was under treatment in hospital for an ordinary attack of ague. He progressed favourably for some days when the temperature suddenly rose one evening to 105F. Quinine was injected intramuscularly, but two hours afterwards the temperature had risen to 1074. Cold sponging brought it down to 105. Next day the temperature was normal, and it remained so, but severe diarrha set in, and the patient died. (Hyperpyrexia and diarrha.) 4. A European soldier was admitted into hospital with Malignant Tertian fever. The next day he had an epileptiform attack followed by semi-coma associated with choreiform movements of the arms and legs. He recovered. (Cerebral type with epilep- tiform seizure.) 5. A Native soldier was admitted into hospital on the 13th September 1907 with a temperature of 103. Benign Tertian parasites were found in his blood. He progressed favourably until the 22nd when signs of heart weakness developed. On the morning of the 23rd he had a sudden syncopal attack and died. (Syncopal type.) 6. A Native soldier was admitted into hospital on the 13th October 1907 complaining of intense headache, giddiness and fever. Temperature 102F. He had vomited three times, the vomit being bilious in character. The temperature fell to subnormal with very profuse perspiration. The next day he began to have bilious diarrha as well as vomiting, and in the evening he became unconscious. For the next three days the patient was conscious in the morning, but unconscious in the evening when the tempera- ture rose to 102 or 103F. The vomiting ceased, but bilious diarrha continued. On the 7th morning of his illness he had low muttering delirium with twitching and jerking of the limbs, and his pulse became thready and intermittent. He gradually fell into a state of coma and died. (Bilious type with cerebral symptoms.) 7. A Native soldier was admitted on the 29th August 1907 with a temperature of 101F. He was drowsy and complained of much pain in the splenic region. He passed two hmorrhagic stools during the night. Next day he was only semi-conscious. He vomited several times, the vomit containing blood, and passed a number of hmorrhagic stools. On the 31st he was quite unconscious, and both legs and the left arm were rigid. He died the same day. (Hmorrhagic type.) 8. A Native soldier was brought into hospital in a collapsed condition and with a subnormal temperature. He had persistent vomiting and profuse diarrha, the stools being watery with small white flakes (cholera like). Nothing resembling the cholera vibrio was found on microscopic examination of the fces, but when the blood was examined numerous crescents were immediately found. Quinine in doses of 10 grains was given hypodermically, and the next day the patient's condition was much improved
(63) On the second day after admission the vomiting and diarrha stopped. (Choleraic type.) 9. A European soldier was admitted complaining of dysentery. He had ten loose motions containing pure blood mixed with black blood and mucus during the day. There was no fever. Numerous crescents were found in a film of peripheral blood. Quinine was injected intramuscularly, and he quickly recovered. (Dysenteric type.) 10. A Native soldier was admitted complaining of attacks of diarrha which had come on regularly every week or ten days for a month. The motions were grass green in colour. His temperature was 1024F. Many Malignant Tertian rings and crescents were found in his blood. The fever and diarrha yielded readily to quinine given intramuscularly. (Diarrhic type.) 11. A Native soldier was admitted into hospital at Mauritius on 9th March 1906 with fever and a palpable spleen. He had typical attacks of ague daily, the chart being of the double tertian type. Quinine was given hypodermically, but it had little or no effect on the fever. On the 21st he had some dema of the ankles and feet, and his urine contained albumen. Quinine in various forms was tried, but he continued to become more and more anmic, and low fever continued. On 1st April 1907 he was profoundly anmic and extremely weak, and had some paralysis of the legs. A few days afterwards he died from heart failure. (Type of chronic malignant fever with progressive anmia.) 12. A European soldier complained of colicky pains in the abdomen and fainting fits. He was extremely anmic and in a condition of collapse. Benign Tertian parasites were found in his blood. There was abdominal distension and suppression of urine. Urmic symptoms developed, and he died in a state of coma. At the post-mortem examination it was found that the spleen had ruptured. (Spontaneous \ill\upture of the spleen.) 13. A European soldier was admitted into hospital at Ferozepore on 26th November 1907 suffering from fever of an irregular type and Jaundice. He had severe epigastric pain, bilious vomiting, the vomit containing blood, loose hsmorrhagic stools and port wine coloured urine. Blood examinations for malarial parasites were negative. Later he had severe lumbar pains and passed blood-coloured urine. He got better, but had a sudden attack of dyspna and died. (Hmoglobinuric or Blackwater fever.) 14. A Native soldier was admitted into hospital at Mauritius on 21st September 1906 suffering from fever and hmoglobinuria. Quartan parasites were found in his blood. Thirty grains of quinine were given daily for a week, but had no effect on the temperature (which was typically of the quartan type) and aggravated the patient's general condition. He developed intense anmia and dematous swelling of the legs, but ultimately recovered. (Hmoglobinuric or Blackwater fever.) 15. A Native soldier was under treatment in hospital suffering from intermittent malarial fever, the temperature ranging between subnormal and 104 to 105F. He had intense headache and diarrha, the motions being grass green in colour. Cerebral
(64) symptoms set in with the occurrence daily of an epileptiform convulsion which lasted for some minutes. Malignant Tertian parasites were found in his blood. Quinine was given hypodermically, but the disease was fatal. (Cerebral type with epileptiform convulsions.) The effects of long continued malarial infection.* After a succession of attacks of untreated or insufficiently treated malarial fever patients develop the condition which for many years has been called in India "malarial cachexia." Until recently the disease named kala azar was almost invariably diagnosed as malarial cachexia, with the result that signs and symptoms characteristic of that disease have been recorded in reports and text-books as characteristic of malarial cachexia. It now appears that at any rate as regards natives of India the true signs and symptoms of "malarial cachexia" are somewhat as follows:- (1) Enlargement of the spleen and anmia are the obvious physical signs. (2) Serious symptoms are absent unless the patient is suffering from some other disease in addition to malaria. (3) The illness is not a continuous one; periods of fever and illness alternate with periods of apyrexia and partial recovery. (4) Chronic irregular "low" fever is not present; during the pyrexial periods the temperature chart, if the temperature has been recorded every two or four hours, shows the intermittency and periodicity characteristic of malarial fever. (5) Patients suffering from this condition are not, as a rule, emaciated, and unless another disease supervenes they do not go from bad to worse, but after many relapses of fever slowly recover. * By long continued infection one means that the patient has had new attacks and relapses for at least two years The comparatively rare cases of chronic malignant fever with progressive anmia, an example of which is recorded on page 63, are not included in the class of cases usually diagnosed in India as "malarial cachexia" because as a rule they are fatal within a few months or less.
(65) The diagnosis of malarial fevers. The wrong method. When a patient complains of "fever we may attempt to arrive at a correct diagnosis of his disease by one of two methods; it is scarcely neces- sary to say that one of these methods is wrong and the other right. The  wrong method can be disposed of in a few words. It exemplifies the com- mon observation that in India and other tropical countries most patients who complain of "fever" express the opinion that the fever from which they are suffering is "malarial," and that in these countries many medical men all too frequently acquiesce in this diagnosis without taking pains to ascertain its correctness. In such an instance the medical man, having allowed the patient to make the diagnosis, proceeds to treat him more or less vigorously with quinine. If, under this treatment, the fever disappears in a few days the medical man regards the diagnosis as having been con- firmed; he has applied what is called the "therapeutic test." If the fever does not decline within a few days the results of having adopted a wrong method of diagnosis become apparent, and often several weeks elapse before a correct diagnosis is arrived at. The right method. The right method of setting about the diagnosis is the following. It is necessary to give this method in some detail, but it will readily be under- stood that it is not possible in all cases to carry it out in its entirety. It is seldom necessary to do so because if the principle of the method is followed a correct diagnosis is usually made very quickly. Assistant Surgeons and Hospital Assistants in charge of dispensaries in India have a very large number of patients to attend to, and speedy diagnosis is important; in such cases, of course, and in cases where the requisite apparatus has not been provided, all the details of the method cannot be carried out; the procedure must be modified, and accuracy of diagnosis and, therefore, efficient treatment must be sacrificed. The first note to be made regarding this method is that when in reply to our question "Of what do you complain" the patient answers "fever" we must endeavour to banish the thought of "ague" from our minds and try instead to recall the various diseases which, not infrequently, have been diagnosed under that heading. The list of these diseases is a long one, but
(66) its remembrance (or even the remembrance that such a list exists) will often prevent mistakes in diagnosis. The list is as follows:- Diseases relating to the respiratory system. Diseases relating to the circulatory Pulmonary tuberculosis. system. Pneumonia. Ulcerative endocarditis. Pleurisy. Splenic leukmia. Bronchitis. Lymphangitis. Influenza.  Diseases relating to the genito-urinary  system. Other diseases. Pyelitis. Rheumatic fever. Chronic Bright's disease. The initial fever of small-pox and other Syphilitic fever. exanthemata. Gonorrhal and urethral fever. Heatstroke. Diseases relating to the alimentary system. Dengue fever. Tonsillitis.  Gastro-enteritis. Malta fever. Appendicitis. Typhoid fever. Hepatitis. Relapsing fever. Abscess of the liver. Filarial fever. Affections of the gall bladder and bile Cerebro-spinal fever. ducts. Simple continued fever. Fever due to infection with intestinal Septic conditions. worms. Kala azar.  It will be obvious that the first thing to be done in order to exclude the majority of these diseases is to make a thorough search for a sufficient cause of the fever in some local infection in the respiratory, alimentary, circulatory, genito-urinary, or other system. Those who make this their first diagnostic rule will be surprised how frequently it happens that a sufficient cause of the fever is found in the respiratory system or, failing this, in the alimentary system. It is ten years since Professor Thayer wrote that "the one process above all others which is confounded with malarial intermittent fever is pulmonary tuberculosis " and, despite the lapse of time, it is safe to say that this is still true. If any sign of tuberculous disease is found a specimen of the sputum should be taken for microscopic examination. (See page 22.) If there are no facilities locally for the examination the film must be sent to the nearest laboratory.* When the respiratory system has been examined carefully * This applies also to films of blood, to specimens for the serum reaction test and to any other material which must be examined for diagnostic purposes.
(67) without result, attention will be directed to the alimentary system and an endeavour made to find or to exclude a local infection there. In this case the search will be begun in the mouth (including the teeth, gums, and tongue), and the pharynx and fauces will be examined. A general examination of the abdomen by inspection, palpation and percussion will then be made and afterwards a special examination, by palpation and percussion, of the stomach, the liver and gall-bladder, the spleen and the intestines. A specimen of the fces should be examined microscopically for the eggs of intestinal worms. (See page 22.) The physical examination of the genito-urinary system will be concerned chiefly with the palpation of the kidneys, with the physical, chemical, and microscopical examination of the urine and with a search for signs of gonorrha or syphilis. The examination of the nervous system will be conducted with the object chiefly of excluding heat stroke and cerebro-spinal meningitis. By a careful examination of each system in this manner-and it is necessary to mention that the examination of the ear, the throat, and the nose (especially for septic conditions) must not be omitted-we shall have narrowed down considerably the limits of our enquiry. Hitherto we shall have been occupied in attempting to arrive at a correct diagnosis of the cause of the fever by a process of exclusion; we shall have found that the cause does not lie in a local infection in any of the systems examined. We have excluded, let us say, all except the following diseases:- The initial fever of small pox  Malta fever. and other exanthemata.  Typhoid fever. Dengue fever.  Relasping fever. Heat stroke.  Filarial fever. Simple continued fever.  Malarial fever. Cerebro-spinal fever.  Splenic leukmia.  Kala azar.  Malarial cachexia. We may now allow ourselves to proceed by the alternative method and to think of the possibilities of the fever being due to one or other of these diseases. Assuming that our patient is suffering from only one disease-we cannot, of course, deal in this small book with complicated cases -it will be seen that the diseases just enumerated can be divided into two classes, namely, (1) those in which the spleen may be very greatly enlarged (splenic F 2
(68) leukmia, kala azar, and malarial cachexia), and (2) those in which the spleen may be not at all or only slightly enlarged (the remainder of the diseases in the list). Let us deal first with the second class, which is the largest. There are in this class ten diseases, but some of them, such as heat stroke, dengue fever, cerebro-spinal fever, and typhoid fever, are not very frequently met with among natives of India, and the diagnosis of others such as small-pox can seldom be difficult, so that without doubt at this stage of our diagnostic procedure it is justifiable to think first of malarial fever and to see if by questioning the patient we can confirm this diagnosis. If we are convinced from the answers of the patient that the fever from which he suffers show definitely a Quartan or Tertian periodicity we may regard our provisional diagnosis of malarial fever as being confirmed, and we are justified in commencing suitable treatment at once. If, however, the patient's answers show that his fever is of a continuous type or presents a Quotidian periodicity or if it began only a short time before he has sought our advice the difficulties of diagnosis may be very great. We will suppose that our patient is being examined on the second day of his illness, that his temper- ature is 102 F., that his spleen is not at all or only very slightly enlarged, and that we have been able to find no other signs which will aid us mate- rially in our diagnosis. In such a case the correct course to pursue is as follows: (1) the patient should be admitted into hospital; (2) he should be given a milk diet; (3) his temperature should be taken every four hours; (4) two specimens of his blood should be taken-one on a slide for the exami- nation for malaria and other parasites, the other in a blood capsule for the serum reaction tests with cultures of the Malta fever and typhoid fever bacilli (see pages 10 and 21); (5) if thought desirable a diaphoretic mixture, not containing quinine, and a mild purgative may be prescribed, but this is the only medicinal treatment permissible. On no account should quinine be given. Our course of procedure is now an expectant one; we must wait and watch for positive symptoms and signs which will afford a clue to the correct diagnosis. As soon as possible we shall examine carefully the specimens of blood taken. If it happens that we find the parasites of malaria or of relapsing fever or of filarial fever in the blood film our task of diagnosis is ended, and we can proceed at once to treat the patient appropriately. But such a fortunate event by no means always happens, and it may be several days or a week or even more
(    69   ) before, as the result of a positive microscopical examination of the blood or a positive serum re-action test or the appearance of characteristic signs and symptoms, a sure diagnosis can be made.* During this period, however, the patient can come to no harm, for he is being treated as though suffering from the most serious of the diseases mentioned, namely, typhoid fever. Every day until the diagnosis has been made we shall take a specimen of blood to be examined for malaria and other parasites, and every week a specimen for the serum re-action tests. We shall invariably adopt the rule not to give quinine until the diagnosis is established. If this definite plan is pursued it will be found that- (1) after a day or two the temperature chart shows definitely the charac- ters of intermittency and periodicity, and malaria parasites are found in the patient's blood; or (2) The temperature chart does not present features of definite diagnostic significance, but malaria parasites or filaria embryos or the spirochete organ- isms of relapsing fever are found in the blood; in both these events the diagnosis is established by the results of the blood examination; or (3) The temperature is irregular, but shows a tendency to fall from the first or second day. It has fallen to normal, and the patient has recovered in five or six days or less. No malaria or other parasites are found in the blood, and the serum tests are negative; In this event the diagnosis of the true cause of the fever is doubtful, and in the present state of knowledge we shall return such cases under the heading "simple continued fever" or under the heading "pyrexia of uncertain * In many cases the period occupied in diagnosis can be reduced greatly by employ. ing the method of blood culture described on page 22. In cases of typhoid fever the diagnosis can be made by this method on the first or second day of the disease, and it may be said also that in cases with symptoms simulating typhoid but in which the results of this method of diagnosis with a specimen of blood taken during the first three days of the fever have been negative typhoid fever may be excluded.  The teaching that, having obtained specimens of blood, we should begin at once to treat the patient with quinine "on the chance" that he may be suffering from malaria is wrong. A patient with malarial fever is not in danger until the parasites become so numerous that they can be found almost immediately the eye is applied to the microscope, and for the patient's sake the advantages of waiting until an accurate diagnosis can be made far outweigh any which could be brought forward in favour of giving quinine at an earlier stage.
(    70    ) origin " because we have found no local infection, because the results of the diagnostic methods employed have been negative, and because the patient has recovered under expectant treatment only; or (4) The temperature chart shows a more or less high temperature each day with or without remissions. The fever continues day after day, and no malaria or other parasites are found in the blood. After a week or perhaps two weeks the serum test for Malta fever or for typhoid fever is positive, and other characteristic symptoms of one of these diseases appear; In this event we must be guided until the result of the serum test is positive by the symptoms and by the negative results of the blood examina- tions for malaria and other parasites. After a very few days we can definitely exclude malaria because we know that as the patient has received no quinine he could not continue to have high fever for more than two or three days without our being able to find parasites in his blood, and we know also that the temperature charts of cases of malaria in which quinine has not been administered always show in a few days the intermittency and periodicity characteristic of that disease; or (5) The temperature chart is continuous or remittent or intermittent and may show a quotidian periodicity, but no malaria or other parasites are found in the peripheral blood, and the serum tests are negative. The fever continues day after day, and repeated examinations for tuberculosis, liver abscess and other septic conditions have been negative. In this event we shall think of the possibilities of the imperfectly known continued fevers such as those of the paratyphoid group, and finally of kala azar. Fevers of the paratyphoid group can be diagnosed, as a rule, only by the results of serum test with cultures of the different paratyphoid bacilli or better by the method of blood culture (see page 22). If the case is one of kala azar we shall note rapid and progressive enlargement of the spleen until it attains a size never reached in cases of typhoid or Malta fevers. This brings us to the consideration of the class of diseases already enumer- ated in which enlargement of the spleen may be very great. It often happens in India that patients come to us for the first time with fever and with a spleen so large that it extends to or beyond the level of the umbilicus. In such cases the diagnosis, when chronic Bright's disease, cirrhosis of the liver and syphilis have been excluded, usually rests between splenic leukmia (which is
(    71     ) rare), malarial cachexia, and kala azar. Splenic leukmia, of course, is very easily differentiated by a microscopical examination of the peripheral blood- every field is crowded with leucocytes-but the differential diagnosis between malarial cachexia and kala azar is not always easy, and as a rule we must admit the patient into hospital if we wish to make the diagnosis accurately. The chief differences between these two diseases may be tabulated thus:- Malarial cachexia.  Kala azar. There are definite pyrexial and apyrexial  periods; the pyrexial periods are of short  duration, and if a careful record of the  temperature is taken every four hours  chart presents definitely the characters of a malarial chart. Quinine stops the fever. Fever is present for long periods; it is sometimes intermittent, but it presents great irregularity. Quinine does not stop the  fever. Progressive emaciation is absent, and  between the pyrexial attacks the patient  is able to do his work. Great weakness and progressive emaciation are always present. The spleen is greatly enlarged; the liver  slightly or not at all enlarged. The spleen and liver are greatly enlarged. In order to confirm the diagnosis it may be necessary in a few cases to puncture the liver or the spleen by the method already described. The diagnosis of the pernicious attacks of malaria is sufficiently dealt with in the descriptions on pages 61 to 63. In such cases it is seldom possible to save the patient's life unless we are able to make an immediate examination of the blood because until this is done the diagnosis is often obscure and the treatment incorrect.
(   72     ) CHAPTER IV. Treatment and prevention. Treatment before the diagnosis has been made. IN all diseases associated with fever an accurate diagnosis is essential for successful treatment. During the period which sometimes elapses before accurate diagnosis of the cause of the fever in a patient who complains of this symptom can be made the following line of treatment should be adopted. The patient should be admitted into hospital, sent to bed and given a milk-diet. His temperature should be taken every four hours. Medicinal treatment should be directed to the relief of symptoms; a diaphoretic mixture and a mild purge may be given if indicated, but during this period quinine must on no account be used. Routine treat- ment for adults. This line of treatment will be continued  until the diagnosis is assured when, if necessary, it will be changed to one more likely to cure the disease which has been recognised as the cause of the fever.    In these notes we have to consider the treatment of those patients only in whose cases a diagnosis of malarial fever has been made.     It is well known that quinine is a  true specific, that is,  an infallible remedy, for this  fever.    Its   administration should be begun immediately the diagnosis is assured, irrespective of the stage of the attack or the height of the fever.    A  good routine practice in the treatment of adult patients is to give a dose of 15 grains of the sulphate dissolved in two or three  ounces  of  water  (with the aid  of a  sufficient quantity of  dilute hydrochloric acid) just before the morning meal and a similar dose before the evening meal, and to continue these doses daily for five days.    It is a good practice to give a purgative  on  the  day   that  the treatment is  begun.    If it has been possible  during the first stage, that is during the days  before  the diagnosis has been made, to ascertain the time of the day or night at which the paroxysm is to be expected, the times of giving the doses of quinine should be altered, one dose being given about four hours before the expected paroxysm and the  other  about  12  hours  later.    Expe- rience  has shown   that,   provided  the  doses   of quinine   are not vomited or are not passed through the intestine without being absorbed, there is hardly any form of true malarial fever  which fails to yield to this treatment within a few days and if at  the  end   of  five   days, the patient's fever  continues as
(    73    ) before, we may be almost sure that our diagnosis is wrong, and that the fever is not due to malaria. In the great majority of cases the parasites will disappear from the blood, and the fever cease in from 24 to 72 hours, after the beginning of the administration of the regular doses of quinine, and in these cases the patient may be allowed to be up and about before the end of the five days, although, of course, the daily doses will be continued for that period. Routine treat- ment for children. The treatment of children should be carried out in the same manner as that of adults, but the doses of quinine should be regulated according to the ages of the children, and as the doses are less the treatment may have to be carried out over a longer period before the parasites are eradicated. The dose should be to the amount of one grain twice a day for each year of age up to 5 years of age. From 5 to 10 years of age a dose of 5 grains twice a day is sufficient, and from 10 to 15 years a dose of 10 grains twice a day. After 15 years of age the same doses as for adults may be given. Euquinine which has only a slight taste can be easily given to children. It is weaker than quinine, and the doses given should be half as much again as those of the sulphate. It must be given in the form of the powder, as, if dissolved with the aid of acids, its bitter taste returns. These routine methods of treatment, which are the best for all ordinary cases of intermittent fever, can be improved upon in certain cases. The most important point to remember in connexion with the administration of quinine is to give it at such a time that it will be in the blood and organs when the parasites are sporulating so that it can act on and kill the merozo- ites before they have entered the blood corpuscles. In ordinary Benign Tertian and Quartan fevers it is easy to find out the time of sporulation of the parasites and, as we have just mentioned, the doses in such cases should be given about four hours before the febrile attack, but in some " pernicious " fevers the parasites sporulate so irregularly that we cannot fix a definite time for giving the doses of quinine. In such cases the best plan to follow is to give small doses of quinine at frequent intervals. A dose of four grains of quinine should be given every two hours throughout the daytime and at such times (but not more frequently than every two hours) during the night as the patient is awake. As a rule not more than three grammes
( 74 ) of quinine (45 grains approximately) should be given during the 24 hours to any patient suffering from malaria. The plan of administration just described is sometimes called the fractional method of Nocht, and very good results have been obtained by it in the treatment of ordinary intermittent fevers as well as in the remittent types. Again, there are certain cases of malarial fever-those, for example, in which vomiting is a symptom and some obstinate cases of frequent relapse-in which it is preferable to administer the drug by intramuscular injection. For this method of treatment the following articles are necessary-(1) an all glass hypodermic syringe; (2) a spirit lamp, a tripod stand and a porcelain dish; (3) tablets of a salt of quinine which is soluble in water; quinine bi-hydrochlorate (Burroughs, Wellcome & Co.) or the bichlorate of quinine and urea (Parke Davis & Co.) are suitable salts; (4) alcohol and lint; (5) a pair of forceps. Eight grains of the soluble salt given once a day is generally an effectual dose in this method of treatment, but since the dose is given only once a day it is especially necessary that it should be given at the proper time-about four hours before the febrile attack. It sometimes happens that intramuscular injections given in the evening have little or no effect upon the fever, but immediately become effectual when the time of administration is changed to early morning. If the infection is very severe we should, of course, give two or three or even more injections of eight grains during the day. The dose should be injected into the muscle of the buttock, the place selected being first thoroughly cleansed with alcohol. It is scarcely necessary to say that the operation must be carried out with strictly aseptic precautions; the syringe and needle must be thoroughly boiled, the needle must be fitted to the syringe with the aid of the sterilized forceps-not with the fingers-and the tablets must be dissolved in boiled water. The stab should be made deeply into the gluteal muscle, and the little wound made by the needle should be covered with collodion. It is the experience of most medical officers in India that injec- tions given intramuscularly are preferable to those given subcutaneously. A point of practical importance in connexion with intramuscular injections is that it is not necessary to attempt to dissolve the salt of quinine in the least possible quantity of water; it is far better that the amount of
?(    75    ) liquid injected should be unnecessarily large  than   that   the   salt   should crystallize out while the injection is being made. Another method of administering quinine which is sometimes of advan- tage in the treatment of children is to administer the drug per rectum. For this method the rectum should first be cleared out by giving a simple enema and then 15 or 20 grains of quinine in mucilage of gum arabic with 10 or 12 drops of Tincture of opium should be injected as high as possible. "After  treat- ment." The next subject to which attention must be directed is the so-called "after treatment" of the patient. This is very important and must on no account be neglected. We will suppose that the patient has undergone during five days the routine treatment by doses of 15 grains of quinine twice daily, and that he has recovered and is doing his work again. He may now be left for eight days without any quinine. At the end of this period he should receive a dose of 15 grains of quinine each morning on an empty stomach during three successive days. Then should follow another interval of eight days during which no quinine is given. Then treatment during three days followed by a third interval of eight days, and this by a third period of treat- ment; and so on, treatment for three days alternating with freedom from treatment for eight days, during a period of three months. It is unlikely that during these three months the patient will suffer from a relapse or from a fresh attack, but if he does he will be re-admitted into hospital, and the whole course of treatment will be carried out again from the beginning. Hints. Finally, we may deal briefly with the treatment of some of the pernicious attacks already described, but before doing so a few remarks which I regard as being of some importance may be made. (1) In reading over the methods of treatment adopted in Indian hospitals one cannot fail to notice the great frequency with which phenacetin is used, especially in hospitals for Native troops, as a diaphoretic in malarial fever. I cannot but think that this drug, which in many cases exerts so depressing an effect upon the heart and has no action upon malaria parasites, should be used very rarely, if ever, in the treatment of malarial fevers. (2) Every hospital should be provided with a good syringe and with tablets of a suitable salt of quinine for the administration of quinine intramuscularly. The syringe should be kept for this purpose alone, and the requisite apparatus, etc., should be ready always. (3) Records show that the administration of quinine subcutaneously
?(   76    ) is largely used. Experience has now shown that better results would be obtained if this method of administration were given up in favour  of administration intramuscularly into the gluteal muscle. (4) Quinine when given intramuscularly is not absorbed so rapidly as when given by the mouth, but its absorption extends over a longer period; therefore intramuscular doses do not act so quickly as those given by the mouth, but their action is more prolonged. It is this prolongation of action that makes the method so valuable in chronic relapsing cases. (5) The intensity of action of quinine when given intramuscularly is probably less than when given by the mouth, so that, theoretically, intramuscular doses should be larger than doses given by the mouth. But in practice it is often difficult to give a larger dose than eight grains intramuscularly, and experience teaches that this dose is usually effectual. (6) It will be inferred from what has just been said that it is not always better to give quinine intramuscularly than by the mouth; it is seldom better to do so. (7) To patients who do not remain in bed during treatment larger doses of quinine must be given than to those who do so. (8) Quinine when taken in powder or in the form of compressed tablets should be followed by a wine-glass of water acidified with three or four drops of hydrochloric acid. Pernicious attacks. As regards the treatment of pernicious attacks it is not necessary to add much to what has already been said in the foregoing pages. In cerebral attacks a smart purge should be given along with the first dose of quinine, and a dose of at least 10 grains of a soluble salt of quinine should be given intramuscularly in addition to that which is given by the mouth. Hyper- pyrexia should be treated by cold baths, rectal injections of iced water and ice bags to the head-never by the administration of powerful diaphoretic or depressing drugs, which are very likely to cause profound collapse when the temperature falls with profuse sweating. In cases when there is no time to be lost quinine should be administered intravenously. If the solution of quinine is at the correct temperature [100F.), if the quinine is thoroughly dissolved, and if complete aseptic precautions are taken, there is no danger in this operation. Fifteen grains of quinine bi-hydrochlorate should be dissolved in 30 or 40 minims of normal saline solution. The skin over the bend of the elbow should be rendered aseptic. A rubber tube is wound round the arm on the proximal
?(    77    ) side of the median basilic vein. An incision is made through the skin along the course of the vein, and the vein is carefully dissected free until it is well exposed. Care being taken that the needle of the syringe is completely filled with the quinine solution, the anterior wall of the vein is picked up with a fine forceps and pierced by the needle. The solution is injected slowly, the needle withdrawn and the wound closed. The dose may be repeated twice during the first 24 hours if it seems necessary.* In attacks where there is much restlessness or violent delirium 1/4th grain of morphia should be given hypodermically. If a patient with a choleraic attack is seen at the beginning of the attack twenty grains of quinine injected intramuscularly is the correct treatment. The vomiting usually prevents any drug being given by the mouth. If the patient gets worse an injection of two pints of normal saline solution should be made into the loose subcutaneous tissue of the axilla. If the patient is not seen until collapse has set in intravenous infusion of two or three pints of normal saline solution in which has been dissolved 20 grains of quinine bi-hydrochlorate should be resorted to. The method of carrying out this treatment is des- cribed in books on operative surgery. An intramuscular injection of eight grains of quinine daily is the best treatment for chronically relapsing attacks and for chronic cases with enlargement of the spleen. Good food, tonics and often a sea voyage or change of climate are essential for recovery. In the treatment of all cases of fever it is important to remember above all that it is quite wrong to continue giving large doses of quinine daily for many days if the drug is obviously not doing good. Quinine is essentially a drug which if it is going to do good at all does so very quickly. There are records of many patients in India having received 30 or 40 grains of quinine daily for a month without any apparent effect on the temperature having been produced; in all probability such patients were not suffering from malaria at all, and at any rate it is certain that whether they were suffering from this * The details are given in this manner for the sake of those who have never attempted to administer quinine intravenously; those who have practised the simple operation of withdrawing a few cubic centimetres of blood from a vein will know, of course, that the preliminary dissecting out of the vein is not often necessary.
?(    78    ) disease or not the quinine should have been stopped after the first week and the effect observed. The prevention and extirpation of malarial fevers. The different methods which have been recommended with the object of preventing or extirpating malaria may be divided into two classes, namely:- (I)    Methods in which quinine is used. (II)  Methods in which quinine is not used. I. The methods of class (I) comprise firstly Dr. Robert Koch's plan for the eradication of malarial fevers by the use of quinine, and secondly the different plans for the prevention of malarial fevers by the use of quinine. The eradica- tion of malaria by the use of quinine. A.-The eradication of malarial fevers by the use of quinine. Dr. Robert Koch's scheme is for the extermination of all malaria parasites by the systematic treatment of all infected individuals with quinine. He compares the campaign against malaria to that which is carried out against cholera. Just as in cholera it is necessary to search out all the sick, the convalescent, and the healthy who harbour the cholera vibrio and to isolate and disinfect them, so in a campaign against malaria it is neces- sary to search out and disinfect all people who harbour the malaria parasite. The method is carried out in the following way. The blood of all the inhabitants of the district which it is desired to free from malaria is system- atically examined, and all those in whom infection with malaria is found are treated by the following plan for " the disinfection of the infected." A dose of 15 grains of quinine is administered on each of two or three successive days and repeated at intervals of eight days throughout a period of three months. If during the course of the treatment the individual gets a relapse of fever, or if, even without a relapse, malaria parasites are found in his blood, he receives five consecutive days' treatment with quinine given in the following doses:-On each of the first and second days 30 grains of quinine (15 grains in the morning and 15 grains in the evening), and on each of the third, fourth and fifth days 15 grains. The after-treatment is then continued in the same way as before, viz., 15 grains on two or three successive days every eight days for three months.
?(79) By this method Dr. Koch and his assistants have obtained successful results in a number of malarious districts under different conditions, but in order to carry out the method a staff of trained observers is necessary, and for this and other reasons it has not been widely adopted in India. It is important however that the principles of the method should be known if only that the differences may be clear between it and the subject of the prevention of malarial fevers by the use of quinine. The plan is applicable only in isolated areas in which the inhabitants are under control, and in describing in more detail the procedure to be adopted we may assume that the scheme is being attempted in a small jail situated at least half a mile from the nearest inhabited area. In such a case the following steps would be taken:- (1) an accurate name roll of the inhabitants (men, women and children) in the jail and within its precincts would be obtained; (2) a sample of the peripheral blood of each of these persons would be taken; (3) these specimens would be examined by the special staff of observers, either locally or at a central laboratory, and a list of all persons in whose blood malaria parasites had been found would be sent to the medical officer of the jail; (4) the medical officer would segregate all these people (who would be called " malaria-carriers ") and would subject them to the course of treatment with quinine just detailed. The course for each person would last three months, and during this period specimens of their blood would be taken frequently. If at any time one of the malaria-carriers got an attack of fever, or if, even in the absence of a rise of temperature, malaria parasites were found in his blood, he would be subjected to the five days' course of treatment and to the course of " after-treatment." If from any cause the treatment of one of the " malaria-carriers" was interrupted for more than 10 days the whole three months' course would have to be recommenced from the date the patient again came under treatment
?(80) (5) the examination of the blood of every one in the jail community and the segregation and institution of treatment of all those in whose blood malaria parasites were found would be carried out monthly. By these means an attempt would be made to kill off the malaria parasites in the blood of all human malaria-carriers within and in the vicinity of the jail, so that Anopheline mosquitoes could no longer become infected and the disease would die out. B.-The prevention of malarial fevers by the use of quinine. One difference between the plan for the eradication of malaria by the use of quinine and that for the prevention of malaria by the use of quinine is that in the former only a few of the inhabitants (namely, those in whose blood malaria parasites are found) are treated with quinine, while in the latter every one must take quinine. Another difference is that blood examinations must be carried out in the former, but are not necessary in the latter. The taking of quinine is an empirical method of preventing malarial fevers which was known to be of great service long before the discovery of the way in which the disease is spread, and in places where more scientific measures cannot be applied or have not been successful it is still largely used. The three chief plans of using quinine as a prophylactic are:- The preven- tion of malaria by the use of quinine. (1) A dose of 15 grains of quinine is given on each of two successive days every eight days throughout the epidemic period. This is sometimes called the method of Dr. Koch. (2) A dose of 4 grains of quinine is given daily throughout the epidemic period. This is sometimes called the method of Dr. Celli. (3) A dose of 15 grains is given once a week. Those who advocate Dr. Celli's method state that by daily administra- tion there is produced an accumulation of the alkaloid in the blood, that the phenomena of cinchonism are obviated, and that the curative effect of large doses does not suffer diminution from the system being habituated to smaller ones. But the small doses have no notable effect upon relapses, which doubtless comprise a considerable proportion of the cases of malarial fever met with in Indian hospitals and jails.
?(81) The plan of giving only one dose of 15 grains once a week merits further trial, as it is obvious that the best plan of dosage is that which effects the desired result with the least expenditure of quinine and at the least cost of time and trouble. Good results have been reported from the use of each of the methods, and it is the duty of the officer in charge of the persons who are to be treated prophylactically to choose one of the plans, having regard to local circum stances and to the degree of control which can be exercised during the prepara- tion and administration of the prophylactic doses, and to abide by it. The decision having been made, the next consideration will be the administrative details connected with the proper carrying out of the measure. The dates between which the method will be undertaken will be decided and then the details of the procedure to be followed. Printed forms may be used in which these details can be entered each time the prophylactic doses are given. The forms might contain the following headings:- Name of Jail or Institution. Date of administration of the prophylactic. Number of persons to whom the prophylactic was administered. Drug and dose in grains. Form in which the drug was administered. Name of the person who made up the prescription. What precautions were taken to ensure that it was correctly dispensed ? Name of the person who administered the prophylactic. What precautions were taken to ensure that it was correctly administered to all for whom it was intended ? General remarks. It must always be borne in mind that the results obtained in the preven- tion of malarial fevers by the use of quinine are dependent entirely upon the degree of supervision exercised during the preparation and during the adminis- tration of the doses, and that in institutions where this method of prophylaxis is adopted the prevalence of malarial fevers among the inmates is one measure of the care and capacity with which the duties of management are performed. In order to illustrate the minute attention to details which is essential for obtaining successful results in prophylaxis by the use of quinine the G
( 82 ) following account may be given of the procedure adopted in a jail where this measure was attended with excellent results.* The dose selected was 15 grains to be given in a single dose every Monday morning at the time when the prisoners were drawn up for the weekly parade. The articles used in con- nexion with the measure were (1) quinine sulphate in powder; (2) dilute sulphuric acid; (3) water; (4) a pair of scales and weights; (5) a large vessel or jar having a wide mouth provided with a lid which could be sealed up; (6) a long-handled wooden ladle holding exactly one ounce; (7) small glass tumblers, one for each person who was to take the prophylactic dose. These tumblers were obtained in the local bazaar and were of different colours; plain white ones were used for Hindus, green ones for Mahomedans, and brown ones for others. Every Monday morning at the time when the office work of the jail was being done the compounder was required to bring the quinine, the acid, the water, the scales and the large jar into the office. The calculation of the amount of quinine which would be necessary for the number of prisoners on parade, the weighing out of the quinine, the addition of water and acid in such amount that one ounce of the mixture would be a dose, and the transference of the mixture to the large jar were then carried out under the Medical Officer's supervision. Then the lid of the jar was sealed. At the parade, which was held just before the morning meal, the tumblers were distributed and the jar opened. The prisoners were divided into small parties or squads, and at a word of command each prisoner in the squad held his tumbler at arm's length in front of him. The vessel containing the mixture being carried by one man and the long handled ladle by another, the Medical Officer and these men then passed down the line, a dose of the mixture being ladled out into each man's glass on the way. Each prisoner in the squad was required to keep his tumbler at arm's length, until the distribu- tion of the doses to all men in the squad was completed. Then at a word of com- mand all drank the dose, and immediately afterwards the Medical Officer passed along the line again for the purpose of examining each man's teeth and gums (for signs of scurvy, etc.) and of ascertaining that the dose had been swallowed. * The procedure was devised by Major R. Heard, I.M.S.
?(83) A dose of 15 grains of quinine dissolved in only one ounce of water is an extremely bitter draught, and it has been recommended by Lieute- nant-Colonel Buchanan, I.M.S., Inspector General of Prisons in Bengal, that the dose should be dissolved in three or four ounces of water. The dilution of the quinine in this way not only makes the draught less unplea- sant and less liable to be vomited, but is said to prevent to a considerable extent the symptoms of cinchonism which are brought on in some people by the comparatively large dose of the drug. Medical officers in India whose experience of this method of preventing malaria is very extensive have found also that although in institutions a large number of cases of cinchonism occur when the measure is commenced, if it is persevered with the number of cases quickly becomes extremely few. Finally it must not be supposed that the method of carrying out the measure which has been described above is the only good one; different, but equally good, methods are in use in many Indian jails. II.-Methods in which quinine is not used. These methods are based on the knowledge that Anopheline mosquitoes are the carriers of malaria and that people with malaria parasites in their blood are the source from which Anopheline mosquitoes become infected and able to carry the disease The methods are- (1) The extermination of Anopheline mosquitoes. (2) The protection of every one from the bites of Anopheline mos- quitoes. (3) "Segregation." The plan of attempting to exterminate or to reduce the number of Ano- pheline mosquitoes in malarious districts was initiated by Major Ronald Ross, I.M.S., the discoverer of the facts upon which all modern systems of pro- phylaxis are based. This method may, therefore, be called the method of Ross. The plan of attempting to protect every one from the bites of infected Anopheline mosquitoes, by covering in the doors and windows of houses with G 2
?(84) mosquito-proof netting has been chiefly advocated by Professor Celli in Italy, and it may, therefore, be appropriately called the method of Celli. The third plan, that of segregation, differs from segregation measures usually carried out in the case of other contagious diseases, in that it has for its object not the segregation of the sick but of the healthy. It has been chiefly advocated for the protection of Europeans who are obliged to live in malarious districts, and it has its foundation in the fact that natives, and especially native children, in malarious countries form the chief source of infection of Anopheline mosquitoes. It assumes also that such mosquitoes do not habitually fly more than half a mile, and that they bite at night-time only. On these grounds it is advocated that no European house should be built within half a mile of a malarious town or village, and that no native servants or their children should be allowed to sleep at night in the com- pounds of European bungalows, but that their quarters should be placed as far as possible from the bungalow. This method of prophylaxis goes by the name of " The segregation of Europeans," and was initiated by Drs. Stephens and Christophers, who con- sider it to be the most efficient way of protecting Europeans from malaria in certain parts of Africa and India. Having thus briefly summarised the different methods of prophylaxis recommended, we may now apply our knowledge to the following particular cases:- (1) Prophylaxis as applied to the individual. (2) Prophylaxis as applied to any particular body of individuals such as a regiment of soldiers or the inmates of a jail. (3) Prophylaxis as applied to communities. 1. Prophylaxis for the individual.-In considering the prevention of malarial fevers from the point of view of the individual it is necessary to distinguish carefully between two points which are frequently confused, viz.: (1) the prevention of first or new infections; and (2) the prevention of relapses of former attacks. There is no doubt that any individual, who wishes to do so, may effec- tually protect himself from a first or a new infection, wherever he may be
?(85) living, by taking measures to prevent himself from being bitten by mosquitoes. This has been proved, and at the present time is not doubted by any one who is capable of forming an impartial opinion on the matter. The chief precautions to be taken are:- (1) Never go to sleep except under a good mosquito curtain. (2) Never go out in the evening or sit in the house or verandah without wearing sufficient clothes to protect the whole body from mosquito bites. Especial care should be taken to protect the feet and ankles by wearing high boots or putties. The reason for this precaution will be obvious to anyone who has lived in the tropics. Theoretically it would also be necessary to protect the hands by wearing gloves and the face and head by wearing a gauze net covering; but in actual practice it is un- necessary to take these extreme precautions, because most people, except during sleep, take care to prevent mosquitoes from biting their face or hands. In houses in tropical countries the beds should be broad and long so as to leave a good space between the sleeper and the mosquito net. The net should be hung inside the poles and the sides and ends should not trail on the ground, but be tucked under the mattress. In houses where mosquito curtain poles have rot been provided it is easy (if one has plenty of striag) to arrange one's curtain properly over the bed by hanging it from nails in the wall at each corner of the room. If a bed is so small that the sleeper's feet or parts of his body come against the net a strip of cloth about a foot wide should be sewn round the net just above the level of the mattress so that mosquitoes resting on the outside of the net cannot bite the sleeper through the meshes. The net should be stretched tightly so that air may pass freely through it. After getting into bed one should examine the inside of the net carefully and kill any mosquito found. Anyone who carries out the principle of always protecting himself from mosquito bites by the simple methods outlined above, can live in the most malarious country with impunity. There are, however, certain additional safeguards for the individual which no wise man would neglect. The chief of these is an application of the prophylactic method known as the "segregation of the European" which has already been referred to, and of course is equally applicable to any individual native who chooses to make use of it. Remembering that this method has its origin in the obser- vations that natives in malarious districts are the chief source of danger,
?(86) and that Anopheline mosquitoes seldom fly more than half a mile, care should be taken when camping out never to pitch one's tent within half a mile of a native village. Travellers in Africa, as a rule, disregard this precaution entirely, with the result that they suffer a great deal from malaria. In India also the dk bungalow is sometimes badly situated in the centre of a village, and a night spent in it very frequently results in a bad attack of malaria, unless the strictest precautions have been taken to guard against mosquito bites. If, for some reason or other, an individual is not able to carry out the directions given above, he must fall back upon the plan of attempting to ward off malarial fevers by taking prophylactic doses of quinine, according to one of the methods already described. For an individual who can be sure that he will not forget to take the small dose of four grains daily this plan is probably the least inconvenient and perhaps the best for warding off new infections. The prevention of relapses of former attacks.-Relapses occur only in cases in which a former infection with malaria parasites has not been completely cured. They have no connection whatever with mosquitoes and may be brought on by almost any exciting cause such as a chill, overfatigue, exposure to the sun, etc. The best way to avoid these relapses is to go through a course of quinine treatment similar to that which has been described under the heading of the " disinfection of infected individuals." (Page 78.) It is almost useless to take a dose or two of quinine occasionally, in an irregular manner. 2. Prophylaxis for a particular body of individuals.-A person who has learnt how to protect himself from getting an attack of malaria is quite safe even in the most malarious surroundings ; it is of no consequence to him whether the inhabitants of the place where he is are entirely ignorant of prophylactic methods; he need not attempt to exterminate Anophelines, or to treat anyone with quinine, or to carry out any method which involves the co-operation of other people. In many places where particular bodies of in- dividuals such as a regiment of soldiers or the inmates of an institution, have to live it is necessary to adopt similar methods for the prevention of malaria among them; we must disregard entirely th inhabitants of the place and think
(87) only of the protection of the body of men under our charge. It will be obvious, for example, that such a plan is necessary when a regiment of soldiers is marching through a strange country, and it is equally necessary, though perhaps less obvious, in many cantonments and stations in India. Let us consider, for example, the case of a regiment or company of soldiers living in one or more barracks surrounded on all sides by native bazaars and by breeding places of Anopheline mosquitoes. Such a condition, which is commonly met with in Indian cantonments, is illustrated below. A. B. Barracks of the men. C. Hospital and Prison. D. Syce lines. Infection of children 35 per cent. E. Syce lines. Infection of children 56 per cent. F. Hospital Followers. Infection of children 60 per cent. G. Regimental bazaar. Infection of children 40 per cent. H. H. H. Irrigation watercourse. Breeding place of Anopheline mosquitoes. A. and B. are the barracks of the European troops. C. is the hospital and military prison. D. and E. are syce lines containing perhaps 200 native children, from 40 to 60 per cent. of whom have malaria parasites in their blood.
(    88    ) F. is the hospital followers' quarters, containing perhaps 40 or 50 children, 60 per cent. of whom have malaria parasites in their blood. G. is the regimental bazaar containing numerous children, the majority of whom are infected with malaria parasites. All these children form a constant and abundant source from which the numerous Anopheline mosquitoes which breed in the irrigation watercourse (H.) and in many other watercourses near become infected. It will be readily seen that under these conditions the men in the barracks must suffer severely from malaria. They are, in fact, in the midst of an area of infected Anopheline mosquitoes, and it is difficult to understand how, under the circumstances, any of them can escape getting malarial fever. Assuming that in this case our prime object is to protect only the soldiers from malaria, it is very probable that we shall attain this end more efficiently and cheaply, and with less inconvenience to all concerned, by adopting the principles already indicated for the individual than by any other plan. Which of the three methods for the individual shall we adopt ? If we decide to adopt the method of Celli we must either render the barracks where the men sleep mosquito-proof with wire netting or we must give each man a mosquito curtain and see that he uses it correctly. Perhaps in some Indian stations this plan would be impracticable on account of the great heat during the summer nights.* If so, it would be best to adopt in a modified form the method of segregation; that is to remove the barracks or to remove the native lines and bazaar so that the men may be at least a quarter of a mile, and preferably half a mile, from any source of infection. It is to be noted that as regards many cantonments in India such an expensive method as the removal of barracks or native lines and bazaars is not essential. In the Punjab, for example, the malarious season lasts for three or four months only, * The malarious months of the year are not, in India, by any means the hottest months; as a rule the nights are cool and mosquito curtains can be used without discomfort. It is very probable that there are very few, if any stations in India where soldiers (European or Native) would object, to use mosquito curtains during the malarious months if the curtains were issued free. At the present time many European soldiers in India provide themselves with curtains at their own expense (aided in some cases by grants from regimental or insti- tute funds) and use them regularly with great care. Punkahs, of course, are in general use in the barracks of European troops during the hot weather, and they have the reputation of keeping away mosquitoes to a slight extent, but the protection afforded by them is quite inade- quate, and it must be remembered that in many malarious stations like Rawalpindi and Peshawar their use has to be discontinued before the malarious season is over on account of the cold nights.
?(89) and during those months the heat is not very intense, so that it would be quite practicable for the soldiers to camp out in tents on a place which, while being sufficiently near their area of duty, would be sufficiently far from all sources of infection as to ensure their freedom from malaria. This plan has been adopted recently with great success in one or two stations in India.* If none of the above methods could be adopted we should have to fall back as a last resort upon prophylactic doses of quinine. A second example of a particular body of individuals is that of the inmates of a jail or other institution. Inmost cases such institutions are so situated that it is not possible to deal with any conditions or with any people outside the institution. It is usually very easy to prevent the breed- ing of Anopheline mosquitoes within these institutions, but very difficult or impossible to prevent the constant importation of adult Anophelines from outside. Important difficulties also are the constant admission into the institution of people who are infected with malaria parasites, the fact that the population of jails is ever changing, and that many cases of malarial fever are relapses of former infections. We must remember also that although the methods of supervision and control of prisoners in Indian jails are such that it would not be difficult entirely to prevent new infections by the use of mosquito nets, the ventilation in many barracks is not good, the floor space per prisoner is limited, and overcrowding is by no means uncom- mon, so that in the majority of jails it would not be wise, unless ventilation by artificial means were introduced, to use mosquito curtains. For these reasons it may be said that as a general rule we must employ methods in which quinine is used if we wish to reduce materially the number of cases of malaria in jails in India. An adequate method would include in the first place the curing of all persons who had previously suffered from malaria and would therefore be liable to relapses, and in the second the treatment of all inmates with prophylatic doses of quinine during the malarious season. * For some years it has been a matter of surprise to many people that for the prevention of malaria among European troops in India the simple measures mentioned here have not been widely adopted. Considering the large sums of money allotted annually for expenditure on the care and comfort of the European soldier in this country it is especially surprising that he has not yet been provided with a mosquito curtain and a sleeping-suit.
?(90) Enlargement of the spleen might be regarded as a rough test in ascertaining the people who had previously suffered from malaria, and all such people would be treated by the method already described under the term "disin- fection of the infected." In addition these people and all other inmates would receive during the malarious season prophylactic doses in the manner already described. 3. Prophylaxis for communities.-No system of prophylaxis can be con- sidered entirely satisfactory which aims at the protection of only a few, however important those few may be, while it leaves the great mass of the inhabitants of a place in the same condition The object of a good malarial prophylaxis should be to render everyone less liable to contract malaria, to transform, in fact, a malarious place into a healthy one. How can we set about this problem ? We know that if we can exterminate all malaria-carrying mosquitoes from the place or if we can eradicate all malaria parasites in infected individuals we shall entirely get rid of malaria there, and one or both of these methods must be attempted. The suppression of Anopheline mosquitoes.-At the outset of our neces- sarily very brief and inadequate account of the measures necessary for the suppression of Anopheline mosquitoes it must be stated that in places which can justly be called malarious the task of reducing the number of these insects to an extent sufficient to lessen materially the prevalence of malaria is always very difficult. When the suppression of Anopheline mosquitoes was first recommended as a means of getting rid of malaria it was thought that in nearly all malarious places the task would be comparatively easy and inexpensive, and on this assumption many campaigns were begun. As the campaigns proceeded it was found that little or no effect on the number of Anophelines can be produced by small and comparatively inexpensive measures such, for example, as can be accomplished by the unaided efforts of what are called "mosquito brigades." When this was realized it became obvious that the suppression of Anophelines is not a method of reducing malaria which can be adopted everywhere, and that before deciding to adopt it in a place we must ascertain whether, as Major Ross has said, " the game is worth the candle." Unfortunately in the limits of this small book we cannot discuss the factors by which we must be guided in coming to a
?(91) decision upon this important matter, but it may be said that, as a general rule, in every place which is entitled, or hopes to be entitled, to be called a "town" measures for the suppression of mosquitoes should be begun and carried on from year to year regardless of any difficulties that may be met with. As a general rule also it may be said that in villages we should not attempt the measure unless the conditions which cause the prevalence of mosquitoes are obviously very easily remedied-in which case the village would not, in all probability, be malarious-and as regards Indian canton- ments we may say (again as a general rule) that the number of soldiers present in them during the malarious season of the year is usually so small and the area of ground covered by the cantonment is usually so large that simpler and in the circumstances more efficacious measures are indicated in preference to the attempt to suppress Anopheline mosquitoes.* Turning now to the measures required for the suppression of these insects we know that Anopheline and other kinds of mosquitoes are much more easily dealt with in their larval condition in water than in their adult state. The main object of all efforts directed to the suppression of mosquitoes is therefore to get rid of all places where they can breed. This is comprised in the words " effective drainage." From the earliest times it has been recognised that malaria may be diminished, and in some places banished, by drainage and drying of the soil. It is probably by these means chiefly that large tracts of country in England, Holland, France, and many other places which formerly were very malarious have been rendered healthy and productive. It is also for this reason that large towns such as Rome in Italy, Calcutta, Bombay and Madras in India, are far less malarious than the outlying villages which sur- round them, though in the latter cities a great deal in the way of effective drainage still remains to be done. In our towns in India, in proportion as we effectively prevent the formation of stagnant pools of water, and in proportion as we carry out measures for drying the soil and lowering the level of the sub-soil water, so will the number of malaria-bearing mosquitoes and in consequence the prevalence of malarial fevers, diminish. * In Mian Mir, for example, about 800 European and 1,700 Native soldiers are distributed over an area of 8,661 acres or 131/2 square miles.
?(92) In many parts of India irrigation by means of canals is the chief cause of the prevalence of malaria. We have already seen that the chief malaria- carrying species of Anopheline mosquitoes breed almost entirely in the running water of irrigation watercourses, and apart from this the effect of bringing in large supplies of water to a district which already is improperly drained, is further to increase the water-logging of the soil and the formation of numerous pools where mosquitoes can breed. The same result is produced by bringing in a drinking water supply to a town from outside without first providing for the efficient drainage of all superfluous water. Permanent works of surface drainage of a radical and comprehensive nature and such other measures as are hinted at above are doubtless the most important and effective means of rendering places less malarious which we know of at present. They should form a prominent feature of the general sanitary campaign in every newly opened town and should be carried on steadily from year to year according to a definite scheme previously decided upon. It may be noted as regards the scheme that the plans for surface drainage should be devised during the rains, and that, if possible, they should be made out with the assistance of an expert malar ologist. The provision of a piped water-supply for all the inhabitants, the satisfactory disposal of sewage, of sullage water, and of storm water, and the making of good roads and the proper paving of streets are among the more important matters to be considered in the scheme. In carrying out the scheme the endeavour should be not to obtain immediate results by ill-considered and hurried works of an imperfect and temporary nature, but to carry out thoroughly each year such portions of the comprehensive scheme as the funds of the town allow. While the scheme is being carried out and for some years after its com- pletion the radical works of permanent benefit must be supplemented by the following measures: (1) the covering of all wells, water reservoirs, rain water tanks, cesspools, etc., with mosquito-proof netting; (2) the passing of a bye- law prohibiting the inhabitants from storing water in any receptacle which has not been rendered mosquito-proof; (3) the employment of "mosquito- brigades." A mosquito-brigade consists of from 10 to 20 or more workers under the direction of a skilled superintendent, the duties of the workers being (1) to visit regularly once a week the compound of every house and destroy
?(93) every pool of water which can harbour mosquito larv; (2) to cover with a layer of kerosine oil every collection of water which is too large to be destroyed; (3) to remove all broken tins, pots, bottles, etc., which can contain water and harbour larv; (4) to instruct the inhabitants in the recognition of mosquito larv and in the methods of destroying them; (5) to see that the bye-law, requiring that all fixed receptacles of water, cesspools, etc., should be made mosquito-proof is carried out, and to bring to the notice of the superinten- dent any house-holder in whose premises mosquito larv are frequently found; (6) during the rains to drain off quickly all superficial collections of water which can last sufficiently long to become breeding grounds of mos- quitoes; (7) to endeavour to kill adult mosquitoes in houses, out-houses, and stables by fumigation with sulphur or by other means; (8) to make observa- tions on the seasonal prevalence of mosquitoes, on their habits, and on every matter regarding which increased knowledge might aid in the extermination of these insects. In towns which extend over a wide area it is necessary, of course, to employ a number of brigades, the town being sub-divided into areas of such size that every house and every possible breeding place of mosquitoes can be visited once a week by a member of the brigades. The eradication of all malaria parasites.-Dr. Koch's method, which has already been described, is applicable to small communities in isolated places. A staff of trained observers is necessary, and the inhabitants must be willing to adopt the treatment by quinine. The free distribution and cheap sale of quinine are important measures in a campaign of this nature and are widely practised in Italy and India. We have now considered briefly all the methods which have been recom- mended for the prevention or extirpation of malarial fevers and have attempted to do so in such a way that those whose duty takes them to malarious places will be in a position to reason out for themselves what measures should be undertaken there. It has, I hope, been made plain that it is impossible to lay down hard-and-fast rules for a campaign against malaria that will be applicable to every place or to every class of people and that before undertaking measures in a place it is essential (1) to have a good knowledge of the prevalence of malaria in the place, of its exact seasonal incidence and of all the conditions on which the prevalence depends; (2) to
?(94) decide definitely whether the aim of the measures shall be to render the place as a whole less malarious or to protect from malaria only a certain class of people in the community; and (3) before beginning the operations to consider thoroughly the practicability of the measures which one proposes to carry out. If these essentials were always kept in mind much money would be saved, and much disappointment prevented.
CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
