THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES FOR THE CITY OF MADRAS. (Revised up to 1st June 1902.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 4 annas.] 1902. [6 pence.]
THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES FOR THE CITY OF MADRAS. (Revised up to 1st June 1902.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1902
?CONTENTS. CHAPTER I.  PAGE (1) Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 5 (2) Government of India, Home Department Notification, No. 302, dated 4th February 1897, conferring powers on Local Governments 7 (3) Regulations for the City of Madras 8 CHAPTER II. Instructions with regard to the carrying out of plague measures and with regard to other matters connected with plague- General remarks 24 Agency for working plague regulations 25 Discovery of plague 27 Removal of plague patients to hospital 28 Segregation of contacts 29 Evacuation 30 Inoculation 31 Disinfection 33 House searches 36 Inspection and burial of corpses 36 Plague hospitals and camps 38 Surveillance or passport rules 39 Railway Inspection 41 Fairs, festivals and pilgrimages 43 Destruction of rats 44 Plague reports and returns 45 Plague correspondence 45 Plague regulations 46 Plague appointments and plague allowances 47 Plague expenditure and accounts 48 APPENDICES. APPENDIX A.-Plague passport 50  B.-General pass 51  C.-Subsidiary pass 52  D.-Special pass 52  E.-Plague inoculation certificate 53  F.- Plague report 54  G.-Part I-Allowances of officers deputed to plague duty 55  G.-Part II-Salaries of officers temporarily entertained for plague duty 57
?THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES FOR THE CITY OF MADRAS. CHAPTER I. (1)-EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897). An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Short title, extent and commencement. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897; (2) It extends to the whole of the British India (inclusive of Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti); and (3) It shall come into force at once. Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2. (1) When at any time the Governor-General in Council is satisfied that India or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the Governor-General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary Regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of persons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including compensation if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene- rality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in Council may take measures and prescribe Regulations for- (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such
6 [Epidemic Diseases Act. detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary; and     (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway  or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of  being infected with any such disease. (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred by this Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories administered by it. Penalty XLVof 1860.  3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. Protection to persons acting under Act. 4. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for anything done or in good faith intended to be done under this Act.
?7 (2)-GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME DEPARTMENT NOTIFICA- TION CONFERRING POWERS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (No. 302, DATED 4TH FEBRUARY 1897). WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, is pleased to direct that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised by Local Governments with regard to their respective terri- tories as follows:- (a) All the said powers by the Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal and Chief Commissioner of Burma.
?8 (3)-PLAGUE REGULATIONS FOR THE CITY OF MADRAS. (Notification No. 172 published on pages 53-68 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th February 1901.) WHEREAS certain parts of the presidency of Madras are visited by, and the city of Madras is threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force in the city are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease: In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub- section (1) of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897), and delegated to him under sub-section (3) of the same section by the notification of the Government of India in the Home Department, No. 302, of the 4th February 1897, the Governor of Fort St. George in Council is pleased to prescribe under the said Epidemic Diseases Act, and in super- session of all regulations previously issued on the subject, the following revised regulations to be observed in the city Part I.-General Precautionary Measures. of Madras:- Surveillance or passport rules. Every arrival from an infected or notified area bound to obtain a passport and place himself under surveillance for ten days. 1. (1) Every person arriving, or suspected of having arrived, from any place declared by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council or by the Collector of a district to be infected with plague, or from any place notified by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of this regulation shall, unless he is exempted from doing so or unless he already holds a passport under any of the regu- lations issued under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or unless he has been detained for the full period of incubation at a road or railway inspection station or in a plague camp, be bound to appear at a place provided for the purpose and obtain from the officer referred to in clause (4) of this regu- lation a passport in the form appended [Appendix A] to these regulations binding him to present himself for inspection daily for the next ten days before the passport-examining officer, and at the time mentioned in the passport; and he shall be bound so to present himself. Provided that, where it appears desirable, the President of the Municipal Commission or the Health officer may, by endorsement on the passport, exempt any person from personal attendance and permit him to be inspected at his residence.
?Part I.-Regulation 1.] 9 Any person refusing to comply with, or attempting to evade, this rule may be detained for ten days at the .nearest inspection station or other place appointed by the President for the purpose in addition to being subjected to the penalty prescribed in No. 43 of these regulations. Incapacitated persons and minors. (2) In the case of incapacitated persons and persons who are under 12 years of age, the obligation to take out passports for them, to present them for daily inspection, to report truly their names and addresses, to intimate any change in their residence, and to comply otherwise with the requirements of this regulation shall vest in their legal guardians or persons in whose charge they travel or who receive them at the railway station of destination or at the harbour. Where passports to be issued. (3) a The passports shall, in the case of those arriving by the Madras Railway, be issued at the platform of the Perambr railway station, in the case of those arriving by the North-East line of the Madras Railway [East Coast Railway] at the platform of the Bitragunta railway station and in the case of those arriving by sea at the Madras Harbour. Appointment of officers to issue pass- ports and to inspect passengers. (4) The President shall appoint suitable persons for the purpose of issuing passports at the places mentioned in the preceding clause (3). The city shall be divided into conveni- ent circles, so that persons required to present themselves for inspection may not have to go a long distance for the purpose, and for each circle, the President shall appoint one or more officers to conduct the ten days' inspection. Duties of passport- holders. (5) Every person required to take out a. passport shall declare truly his name, address, and such other particulars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport. He shall daily present himself with his passport at the appointed time before the passport-examining officer of the place where he may be for the time being and obtain that officer's signa- ture on his passport in token of inspection. If he gets ill or if any sickness occurs in the house in which he has been residing since his arrival from an infected or notified place, he shall give immediate information of the same to the pass- port examiner. He shall report similarly any change in his residence occurring within ten days from the date of his arrival and shall, before departure, get the entries under headings 11 and 12 of his passport altered by the passport examiner. On the expiry of the said period of ten days, he a As amended by notification No. 569, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 27th May 1902, part I-A, page 198. 2
?10 [Part I.-Regulation 1. shall deliver up his passport to the passport examiner of the place where he may then be. Intimation of issue of passports. (6) (i) The issue of a passport shall immediately be com- municated by the officer issuing it to the passport examiner of the circle to which the traveller proceeds by sending him the triplicate copy of the passport. (ii) The following procedure should be followed in respect to passport-holders who change their residence within the city or leave for other places in the presidency within ten days of their arrival:- (a) The passport examiner of the original place of arrival should send the triplicate copy of the passport to the passport examiner of the new place of destination after noting therein the number of days for which the passport- holder has been observed. (b) If the new place of destination is in a district, the change of residence should also be intimated directly to the district medical and sanitary officer of that district. Duties of passport examiner. (7) The passport examiner of the place of destination shall see that, on the arrival of the traveller, he is observed daily for ten days. Any case of illness or death in the house in which such traveller is or has been residing shall be forth- with reported with full details to the nearest officer of the medical or sanitary department. Particular attention should be paid to cases of fever accompanied with acute affection of the lungs, as these symptoms may indicate the existence of pneumonic plague. The appearance of glandular swellings attended by constitutional disturbance so slight as not to prevent the patient moving about, the occurrence of abortion amongst women, of convulsions amongst children and of sudden death in the aged should not be ascribed to ordinary causes without medical advice. After ten days, the duplicate passport shall be recovered from the traveller and sent to the Health officer. Passport examiner's register. (8) A register, which may be kept in manuscript, shall be maintained by each passport examiner in the following form:- (1) Date of receipt of triplicate copy of passport or other intimation. (2) Name of traveller. (3) From what infected or notified area arriving. (4) Date of arrival of traveller. (5) Number, date and place of issue of passport. (6) How long kept under observation. (7) State of health of the traveller and other persons living in the house in which he is or has been residing.
Part I.-Regulation 2.] 11 (8) Date of departure if occurring within ten days. (9) Destination. (10) Date of despatch of triplicate passport to the passport examiner of the place of destination, and of intimation to the district medical and sanitary officer. (11) Date of despatch of the duplicate passport to the Health officer. Information regarding plague cases and arrivals from infected areas. 2. (1) Every house-holder and every medical practitioner who becomes cognizant of the occurrence in his house or in  any other public or private dwelling or place within the  limits of the municipality, of any case of plague or of fever  with glandular swellings, and in the case of persons who live within an area that has been notified as infected or who have been in any way exposed to plague infection, of acute affections of the lung, of convulsions in children, abortion in women and sudden death in the aged, shall be bound to give information of the same, with the least prac- ticable delay, to the Health officer or a sanitary inspector of the municipality. (2) Every house-holder and every keeper or person in charge of an hotel, chuttram or other place of public resort, shall also in the same manner forthwith report the arrival at the house, hotel, chuttram or other place, of any person from any area which has been declared by the Governor in Council or the Collector of a district to be infected or which has been notified by the Governor in Council for the purposes of the preceding regulation 1. (3) When in any hospital a case of plague or a case which presents symptoms suspicious of plague is received, it shall be the duty of the chief medical officer to report the case forthwith for the information of the Health officer, and if the condition of the patient be such that in the opinion of the chief medical officer it would be inadvisable to remove such patient to any place of observation maintained by the municipality, he shall exercise sanitary care to the satisfaction of the Health officer and shall furnish him with the names of all persons who have been in contact with the patient or with possibly infective matter. The Health officer may thereupon require that the chief medical officer shall furnish him daily with a certificate as to the state of health of such of these persons as are employed under the medical officer, for such period as the circumstances of the case may seem to him to require; provided it be not necessary in the judgment of the Health officer to take any other action sanctioned by these regulations.
?12 [Part I. - Regulation 3. Special in- quiries when mortality is excessive or when sns- picious cases of fever occur. 3. Whenever the deaths reported from any locality are found to be more frequent than usual, or when any case of fever with glandular swellings is reported, the Health officer shall at once make inquiries with a view to ascertain whether plague exists in the city. District surgeons shall bring to his notice promptly any circumstances within their pro- fessional knowledge that may in their opinion aid such investigation. Disinfection of railway carriages from infected areas. 4. When any carriage from an infected area is detached from a train at any railway station within the city of Madras, it shall be disinfected and ventilated by the railway author- ities in the following manner as soon as possible and before it is again brought into use, such disinfection and ventilation being effected to the satisfaction of the Health officer or an officer deputed by him for the purpose:- (i) Third and intermediate class carriages- The interior wood-work of the carriages, especially the floors and seats, shall be thoroughly washed with a solution of perchloride of mercury (1 in 1,000) and of hydrochloric acid (2 in 1,000); the doors and windows shall be opened, and the vehicle exposed to the air; the sweepings shall be carefully collected and be burnt. (ii) First and second class carriages- The floors and wood-work shall be treated as above, the cushions being also brushed and thoroughly cleansed and exposed to the sun for not less than four hours. Disinfection of railway carriages in which plague patients have travelled. a 5. (1) Any railway carriage from which a passenger who is suffering from the plague has been removed shall be detached at the nearest convenient station, and shall be disinfected by the railway authorities as follows:- (i) The carriages, after being detached from the train, should be thoroughly washed with soft soap. After an interval of two to three hours, this should be washed off with plain water, and then the following disinfecting solution should be thoroughly sprayed all over the interior as well as the exterior of the carriages by means of a syringe:- Corrosive sublimate ...       1/2 oz. Hydrochloric acid ...  1 " Water    ............ ...     3  gallons. This solution should be allowed to dry on the car- riages. Special care must be taken to direct the solution into all the cracks and crevices and jilmills. a As  amended by notification No. 452 published  at  page 821 of part I-A  of   the Fort  St. George Gazette, dated 4th June 1901.
Part I. - Regulation 6.] 13 (ii) After disinfection, the carriages should be kept out in the open for 48 hours. They can then be brought into use again. (iii) In the case of first and second class carriages, which afford greater facilities than third-class compartments for the harbouring of plague germs, it will be necessary, if the carriages are contaminated, to burn the cushions and to disinfect the wood-work in the manner indicated above, and repaint the interior. (2) If a compartment has been used by a suspicious case of plague, it shall be treated as directed in the preceding regulation 4. If of the third or intermediate class, its use may be permitted as soon as it is thoroughly dry ; but if it be of the first or second class, it shall, after such disinfection, be kept locked and unused until the nature of the case be definitely ascertained, when the question as to whether or not the cushions be destroyed and further disinfection be effected, shall be decided in accordance with the preceding clause (1) (iii) of this regulation. Power to enter any building or place for the purpose of inspecting plague cases and taking necessary measures. 6. The President or any officer authorized by him for this purpose may at any time enter any building or place in which plague is reputed or suspected to exist, and inspect and, if necessary, detain or remove and isolate any person suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague, or to have so lately suffered from plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, or believed to have recently arrived from an infected or notified area. Bringing of susceptible articles from infected areas prohibited. 7. The bringing, taking, sending, or consigning, by sea or land, of soiled linen and used bedding (except when carried as the personal baggage of travellers), rags, and waste paper from a plague-infected place in India into or through any other part of India to which the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897) applies, having been prohibited by the Government of India, the President shall take due steps to make the prohibition known and to enforce it. Articles brought in contravention of this prohibition shall be de- stroyed, and no person shall be entitled to claim compensation on account of such destruction. Destruction of rats. 8. The President shall arrange for the frequent inspec- tion of consignments of grain arriving from plague-infected areas and of landing places, railway goods-sheds, and grain bazaars, and for the killing and subsequent destruction by burning of all rats found therein. When any place is
?14 [Part I. - Regulation 9. infected, steps shall be taken to destroy rats in it and in the surrounding area. Restrictions on. festivals, fairs, &G. 9. (1) When a festival or fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from plague-infected parts is about to take place in an uninfected part of the city, the President shall apply to Government for orders to pro- hibit their attendance and to enforce the prohibition by stopping temporarily the issue of railway tickets to such persons or by other means. A similar course shall be adopted when a festival or fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from healthy parts is about to take place in a plague-infected part of the city. (2) Should any inhabitant of the city be ascertained to have attended fairs or festivals beyond the municipal limits which Government has notified as in danger of plague infection and has therefore directed shall be attended solely by local inhabitants, the President may require that he shall take out a passport and undergo surveillance for a period of ten days. Part II.-Measures to be adopted when the city is imminently threatened with Plague. Declaring- the city to be under observation and authoriz- ing the President to adopt certain measures. 10. Should it appear that plague imminently threatens to attack the city of Madras, Government may declare it to be under observation and may authorize the President to establish frontier inspection stations, to arrange observation circles, to organise sanitary and ambulance staffs, to provide plague hospitals and camps, and to take such other measures as may seem necessary. Duties of the observation staff. 11. The observation circles shall, as far as possible, follow ward divisions so that they may be readily comprehended. They shall be placed in the charge of men who have received a special training for dealing with plague to the satisfaction of the Sanitary Commissioner. The duty of these officers will be to constantly and systematically patrol the circles in order to gain the earliest possible information of a case of plague, so that immediate action may be taken, and to remove with the aid of the ordinary conservancy establishment all defects in sanitation which would favour the propagation of plague, such as accumulations of cowdung, manure or stagnant sewage, absence of perflation of groups of buildings, &c. They should also check the possession of passports or passes in the case of persons arriving from an infected locality. Should any person so arrive without a passport or pass, or
?Part II. - Regulation 12.] 15 having broken its conditions, any member of the observation staff may detain him and cause him to be dealt with in accordance with these regulations. Provision of accommoda- tion for plague purposes. 12. The President, if he has not already done so, shall provide and maintain in such localities, whether within or without the municipal limits, as in the opinion of the Health officer may be proper for the purpose, suitable and sufficient accommodation to the satisfaction of such officer and the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, for the following purposes :- (a)  an hospital camp for  the isolation and treatment of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague ; (b)  a suspect camp for the detention of contacts ; (c) a health camp for the occupation of persons who may be required to vacate any building or ground under these regulations and who may be unable to procure necessary accommodation for themselves. In the places so provided, the President shall furnish such hospital establishments, equipment and supplies as the Health officer and the Sanitary Commissioner may deter- mine, and shall also make arrangements for feeding persons detained under any of these regulations on payment by them of the cost ; but in the case of indigent persons, the President shall supply them with food free of charge : provided that any person so detained shall have full liberty to cater for himself subject to such rules and conditions as the medical officer in charge may prescribe. Acquisition of lands or buildings required for plague. 13. Any building or place, whether within or without the municipal limits, which is required for and is, in the opinion of the Health officer, suitable for the purpose of the accom- modation to be provided under the last preceding regulation, may be entered upon and occupied without  having recourse to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (I of 1894) by the President or a person  deputed  by him in  this behalf (if  unoccupied without any notice whatsoever, and if occupied after twenty- four hours' notice in writing  conspicuously posted on such house or building) and may be used for the purposes of the accommodation under   the  last  preceding  regulation; and the owner or the lessee of such building or place shall not be entitled to anything beyond a reasonable rent as fixed by the President for the period during which the ground or building may remain in the occupation of the Municipal Commissioners: provided that the President shall be bound at the cost of the municipality thoroughly to cleanse and disinfect the ground
?16 [Part II. Regulation 14. and, if a building, to cleanse, disinfect and, if desired by the owner, whitewash it internally and externally after vacating it. Arrange- ments for organizing ambulance staff. 14. The President shall make all arrangements for being able to concentrate immediately when desirable one or more ambulance staffs together with such equipment as may be prescribed by Government from time to time. Concentra- tion of ambu- lance staff. 15. When he sees fit, the President may concentrate and hold in readiness the ambulance staff or staffs. Conveyances for the carriage of the sick and of infected articles. 16. The President shall provide suitable conveyances for the free carriage to a place provided under No. 12 of these regulations, or other place, of persons suffering, or suspected to be suffering, from the plague, and for the transport of any clothing, bedding or other articles which have been exposed to infection. Training the establish- ment. 17. He shall see that the whole establishment under him knows its duties, both while the city is under observation and also on the outbreak of plague. He shall especially bring Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7 and 18 of these regulations to the notice of his subordinates and the inhabitants. Part III.-Measures to be adopted on the occurrence of Plague. Report by local officers of occurrence of plague and isolation of patient and contacts. a 18. On the occurrence of a suspected or actual case of plague, it shall be the duty of the sanitary inspector or other local officer to send intelligence by express to the Presi- dent and Health officer and if plague inspectors have been appointed to the nearest plague inspector ; and meanwhile to isolate the patient and all who have been or suspected to have been in attendance upon him or in contact with him, in a place provided under No. 12 of these regulations, or in their own houses provided they are not plague-infected or some other suitable places if they can there be segregated with no greater risk of spreading the infection, or in a hut or shed to be immediately constructed remote from inhabited houses. Report by President and the action to be taken by him. 19. (1) (a) The President, on receiving information, shall inform Government, the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioner. (b)  He shall enforce the measures mentioned in the preceding regulation. (c)  He   shall see that the hospital,  the  suspect camp   and   the  health   camp   are   properly   organized   and cordoned. a As amended by  notification No. 1019 published at page 586  of part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 3rd December 1901.
?Part III.-Regulation 20.] 17 (d)  He shall see that the patrols and guards round the infected area completely isolate it, or such part of it as he deems fit, so as to prevent the return of the inhabitants without his written permission. (e)  He may order the evacuation and disinfection of infected houses and houses in their neighbourhood, and prohibit their re-occupation without permission. (f) He may require the evicted people to reside in any place which he may appoint, under such restrictions as he may deem necessary, provided proper shelter is available. (2) When for the purpose of facilitating disinfection, ventilation, perflation or access to any building or area, the removal of any building, part of a building, wall or other obstruction seems to the President desirable, on giving 24 hours' warning of his intention to the owner, agent or tenant by means of a notice, placed in a conspicuous position and offering due compensation, he may demolish and remove the building, part of building, wall or other obstruction. Inoculation. 20. The President shall arrange with the Sanitary Com- missioner to place an ample supply of Haffkine's vaccine within the reach of the inhabitants and shall afford them every facility for being inoculated. Certificates of cause of death. 21. (1) When he has a sufficient medical staff at his dis- posal to secure immediate inspection, so that there may be no chance of funerals being delayed, the President may with the previous sanction of Government order in respect of any particular area that the certificate of a medical officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death. (2) After the issue of such an order, if a burial or cremation takes place without such a certificate having been obtained, the death may be presumed to have been due to plague, and the rules regarding the segregation of the contacts and the disinfection of tlie house may be applied. House search. 22. With the previous sanction of Government, the President may organize search parties to visit houses for the purpose of detecting cases of plague, when there is reason to believe that the residents are attempting to conceal them. Sanitary restrictions with regard to funeral processions and burials. 23. (1) The President, when and to  the  extent he may deem necessary, may make rules- (a) for prescribing the route which shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the grave-yard, burning ground or other 3
18 [Part III. - Regulation 24. place for final disposal of the corpse, and the places, if any, at which such procession may halt on its way for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes; (b)  for enforcing burial   in certain places or  at a certain depth; (c)  for requiring that the bathing of persons attend- ing the funeral shall be conducted at a place prescribed by him. (2) He may also prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than ground specially assigned by him for such purpose. (3) When a person dies of the plague elsewhere than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it for the funeral. Such persons shall disinfect themselves according to the orders which may be issued by the Health officer in this behalf. Persons leaving for an uninfectecl place should obtain pass- ports. 24. (1) The President may require that all persons desiring to leave an infected quarter of the city to reside in a quarter, town or village not infected shall, before doing so, apply to and obtain from such officer as may be appointed for the purpose passports in the form appended [Appendix A] to these regulations provided that no passports be issued to persons suffering, or suspected to be suffering from plague, or to have so lately suffered from plague as to be in an infectious state or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, and the said officer may always require, before a passport is given, the disinfection in a prescribed manner of all clothes and other articles to be taken away. Persons leaving as infected place to at- tend to their profession or to reside temporarily in the immediate neighbour- hood should obtain passes. (2)   Other  persons   desiring to  leave   the  infected quarter   of the   city   may  be   required   to   obtain,   before departure,   passes, which may  be  of two  kinds,  either (1) general [Appendices B and C] or (2) special.    [Appendix D.] (3)  General passes may  be  given  to  artisans and others having occasion to make daily or frequent journeys by road, rail or boat from an infected area, and may be given for an indefinite period; but they will not cover residence outside of the infected area, and will not cover journeys by rail unless that is expressly stated on them.    In the case of agricul-
Part III.-Regulation 25.] 19 turists, where the officer granting the pass is satisfied that it is necessary for the whole family to go and work in the fields, a single pass may be given for the family, but there must be a separate pass for each person making a railway journey under a general pass. (4)  Special passes shall be passes permitting persons to leave the infected quarter and reside on sites approved by an officer appointed for this purpose beyond them, and may be  granted  for   households,   provided  that  the   name  and description  of each person covered by the pass is entered therein.    The officer issuing  the pass may  always require, before the pass is given, the disinfection in the prescribed manner of all clothes and other articles to be taken away. Persons holding these passes shall not be allowed to return to the inhabited area otherwise than under such sanitary restric- tions as the said officer may, from time to time, require or until the pass shall have been cancelled by him and disinfection of clothing  and  articles to be taken  back  with  them be effected should he consider such disinfection necessary. (5)  At convenient spots within, or in the proximity of, the inhabited area of the infected quarter, the President shall establish one or more offices for the issue of passports and passes and shall notify by tom-tom the locality of such office or offices at such intervals as shall ensure the inhabitants being aware of their purpose and position. Exemption from rules requiring passports and passes. 25. (1) The President may at his discretion exempt from the necessity of taking out passports persons who are merely returning from an infected area to their own village after bringing to market in such area articles of food or fuel; provided that such return be within eight hours after arrival and not after sunset, and that such exemption shall not apply to any such person who may have entered a dwelling house within the infected area. (2) The President may also exempt from the necessity of taking out passports or passes any person with regard to whom there are no reasonable grounds for suspicion of infection. Infected houses not to be let until disinfected. 26. No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know, that a person has suffered or is suffering from the plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected
20 [Part III.- Regulation 27. to the satisfaction  of the medical officer appointed by the President in this behalf. Destruction of infected huts or sheds. 27. If the Health officer is of opinion that the destruction of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of the plague, the President or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and the materials of which it is constructed. Disuse of buildings unfit for human habitation. 28. If it appears to the Health officer that, in view of the prevalence of the plague within his jurisdiction, any building within such jurisdiction, intended or used as a dwelling, is in so insanitary a condition as to be unfit for human habitation, the President or officer authorized as aforesaid may summarily cause the same to be vacated, and prohibit, by a written order, the further use of such building as a dwelling. After such prohibition no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives written permission in this behalf. Abatement of overcrowd- ing. 29. When any building or place is, in the opinion of the Health officer so overcrowded as to make the inmates or occupiers specially liable to an attack of plague, the President or officer authorized as aforesaid may, by a notice posted on some conspicuous part of the building or place, require the owner or occupier, if actually residing in the building or place, or the tenants or the actual occupants thereof, to abate, as prescribed in the notice, the overcrowding within twenty- four hours by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or other occupants of the said building or place, and, in default of compliance with the requisition in the said notice, may summarily eject all the inmates or occupants, or reduce the number of the same in such manner and to such extent as may appear necessary. Abatement of nuisances. 30. The President or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may, when he considers necessary, enter upon any premises, at any time during daylight and summarily execute any work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in, sections 313, 314, 321, 322, 326 or 327 of the City of Madras Municipal Act, 1884. Closing places used for supply, preparation, &c., of articles of food and drink. 31. The Health officer is empowered to close sheds used for accommodation of animals whose milk or milk products are sold by the owner or his agent, and places used for the supply, preparation or storage of articles of food and drink in infected localities or in the immediate neighbourhood of
Part III.-Regulation 32.] 21 infected houses, and to direct the removal and if necessary, the destruction of all articles of food and drink found in such places. Restrictions on the wash- ing of clothes, 32. The President may prescribe that no person under- taking for hire the cleansing of clothing or other laundry process within an infected area to which he may extend this regulation shall store or wash or otherwise prepare clothing except at such places within or without municipal limits and under such conditions as he may direct. Dissolution of plague hospitals and camps. 33. No hospital or suspect camp or observation camp shall be closed without the special orders of the Health officer, and until the receipt of such orders the municipality shall maintain such places in efficient repair. Provided there have been no actual or suspected case of plague therein, the Health officer may, in his discretion, allow a health camp to be closed after ten days, and the town or an infected quarter of the town in which no death or fresh case of plague has taken place for ten days after the recovery or death of the last case to be re-inhabited as soon as it has been thoroughly disinfected. Menial staff entitled to, and bound to give, one month's notice. a 34. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, scavenger or other menial servant employed to do duty in connection with plague or general sanitation shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge, or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and discharged at the end of it. (2) No such maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, sca- venger or other menial servant in the absence of a written contract authorizing him so to do, and without reasonable cause, shall resign his employment, or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice or neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. Mode of disinfection, 35. Whenever disinfection is prescribed by any of these regulations, it shall be carried out in accordance with the general principles laid down by Government and such subsi- diary instructions as may be issued by the Sanitary Com- missioner or, in respect to management of hospitals, by the Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras. Compensa- tion. 36. When in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these regulations, any damage or loss is caused, no person shall be entitled as a matter of right to claim any a As amended by notification No. 335, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 9th April 1901, part I-A, page 156.
?22 [Part III.-Regulation 37. compensation, but the President or any person authorized by him may, in his discretion, award compensation at the cost of municipal funds and shall do so when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circumstances, to whom it would be a great hardship to bear it, or he may, in such cases, arrange for providing other necessary articles in the place of those destroyed or damaged. Contents of certificates, passes, &c. Their im- proper use prohibited. 37. Any certificate or passport or pass granted under these regulations shall contain an accurate description of the person named in it to prevent, so far as possible, its being used by another person ; nor shall such a certificate or pass- port or pass given to any person to enable him to go from one place to another or for any purpose shall be used by any other person or for any other purpose. Segregated or detained persons bound to obey directions given to them. 38. Every person segregated or detained under any of these regulations shall obey the directions issued to him by the officer in charge of the place of segregation or detention and shall not leave such place except with the written per- mission of the said officer, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition. Canal boats, subject to same regulations as buildings. 39. (1) A canal boat shall be subject to all the regula- tions applicable to buildings ; and passengers by a canal boat shall be subject to interrogation, inspection and detention in the same manner as passengers by railway. (2) In order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague either by or to a canal boat, the President or any officer generally or specially empowered by him in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspicuous position of the boat. Privileges granted to inoculated persons. 40. (1) Persons who hold certificates that they have been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process shall be entitled to the following privileges, provided such certificates bear a date not earlier than six months but not later than ten days previously :- (a) Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffer- ing from, plague, they shall not be liable to detention at any railway or road observation camp when travelling, except for such period as may be required to disinfect their baggage and clothes, if those are considered suspicious. (b) They shall not be liable to take out passports and present themselves daily for observation for ten days after
Part III.-Regulation 41.] 23 arrival from a plague-infected place, or from any place noti- fied by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of No. 1 of these regulations ; but they may be observed at their own residence and shall, with this view, be bound when required by any plague officer to give their names and addresses for the next ten days. (c) Inoculated persons who have been living in an infected house or have otherwise been exposed to plague infection shall not be liable to be segregated, but may be required to evacuate the infected house and to have their clothes and personal effects disinfected. When, however, all the occupants of a house have been inoculated, neither the patients nor the other inmates of the house shall be required to be segregated, provided arrangements are made to the satisfaction of a plague authority for the disinfection of the house and its contents, and for the prevention of the spread of plague to the neighbouring dwellings. (2) The inoculation certificate shall be in the form appended [Appendix E]. But when in a certificate issued under authority, the thumb impression has not been taken, other satisfactory evidence of identification may be accepted. Inoculated persons bound to produce their inocu- lation, certifi- cates and make an impression of thumb- marks. 41. Every inoculated person (who is exempted from segre- gation, detention and observation under the preceding regu- lation 40) shall be bound, when called upon to do so by the officer mentioned in clause (4) of No. 1 of these regulations, to produce the certificate showing that he has been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, and also to make an impression of his thumb-mark for the purpose of identification. 42. The whole of the city of Madras is hereby declared to be subject to the provisions of section 309 of the City of Madras Municipal Act, 1884. Penalty for breach of regulations. 43. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such regulation, has been required or empowered to take under any such regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both.
?24 CHAPTER II. * INSTRUCTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE CARRYING OUT OF PLAGUE MEASURES AND WITH REGARD TO OTHER MATTERS CONNECTED WITH PLAGUE. General Remarks. A combination of the following measures is likely to produce the maximum of good :- (a) The prompt discovery and isolation of every case of plague. (b) The thorough disinfection of the personal effects, clothes, and houses of patients. (c)  The segregation and inoculation of contacts. (d)  The removal and destruction by burning of plague- infected rats,  and the disinfection of the houses in  which they are found. Every endeavour should be made by the officers respons- ible to apply the first stated measure by sufficiently early organization of observation staffs . . . and by frequent insistence as to care and promptitude in effecting plague regulations by all authorities concerned, so as to secure that the first imported cases are rapidly and effectually dealt with ; for it is only at the commencement of the outbreak that the remaining three measures can be carried out with success and within reasonable expenditure, and can therefore be expected to stamp out the disease before much harm is done. But when once the plague has been allowed to obtain a footing . . . it will be found very difficult to apply the above  measures. 2. In the City of Madras the measures that will be found applicable are disinfection, inoculation, the evacuation of specially infected quarters, and (so long as infection has not spread through the town) the isolation of the sick. . . . Evacuation . . . should be conjoined with an opening up of houses sufficient for the admission of sunlight and air whenever this is required. . . . * The regulations contained in Chapter I should be worked subject to the explana- tions and conditions stated in this chapter. The portions omitted in this reprint, which are indicated by dots (...) relate to matters not concerning the city of Madras.
Plague Agency.] 25 3.  Experience has shown that it is hopeless to carry out effectively any system of plague administration which is not supported by the people, and in a wide-spread epidemic, the resources of Government in the matter of funds and establish- ment being limited, much  must necessarily be left to  the people themselves.    Steps should therefore be taken to inform them beforehand of the measures  they will be required to submit to, and to convince them of the  utility of the parti- cular methods selected, so that they may be induced to carry them out not by force but by the exercise of their own free- will and as a consequence of their appreciating and under- standing  the   benefits  to   be  anticipated  therefrom.     The measures are new to the people, particularly in fresh areas of infection, and if injudiciously or overzealously pressed, must defeat themselves by exciting opposition instead of gradually winning the co-operation of the people.    On the other hand, if the services of the leading inhabitants are secured to assist the Government officials in carrying out measures which are clearly beneficial, it may often be possible, by reason of their example and attitude, to carry out with good results measures which would be ineffectual or injurious if enforced by definite orders upon a population ignorant of their advantages and suspicious of the objects with which they are adopted. Agency for Working Plague Regulations. 4.  Special attention should be directed to the restriction, so far as possible, of the employment of subordinate Govern- ment  officials of the medical  and   police departments and in   especial to the   advisability  of   enlisting  to   the   utmost possible   extent volunteer agency to assist  in  carrying out plague measures.   Whenever practicable private hospitals and camps   may be placed   in   charge  of   native   practitioners. Police officers should hold no inquiry into suspicious cases   of plague.    Small representative committees of the inhabitants may be appointed in various parts of Madras to co-operate with the authorities  and   to   bring   to their  notice   matters requiring attention or inquiry. 5.  As   far as   circumstances  permit,  Hindus  should  be employed in those parts    .    .    .    where Hindus predominate, and Muhammadans where Muhammadans are in a majority. Officers of all grades should use the greatest courtesy and consideration to the people, and should interfere as little as possible with their habits, feelings and religious prejudices. 4
?26 [Plague Agency. 6. Where subordinate native agency is used, it is abso- lutely necessary that Europeans should be appointed as supervisors over small and convenient units. 7. The following procedure should be adopted in obtain- ing the services of military officers for plague duty:- I. A Local Government or Administration requiring an officer or officers for plague duty will apply to the Govern- ment of India, in the Home department, detailing the number of officers required, and where and when they should be -ordered to join. Such applications shall always be accom- panied. by an intimation whether the officer should bring horses with him. II.  The Government   of   India   will   then   address   the Adjutant-General in India, who will issue instructions under the orders of the Commander-in-Chief to one or more Com- mands to supply the officers wanted, the Government of India being at the same time informed of the instructions issued. III.  On learning from the   Adjutant-General's depart- ment from what Command the  officers   asked  for   will   be supplied,   the   Government of  India will  inform the Local Government   or   Administration   concerned,   and all further correspondence in reference to the individual officers detailed by Commands,   or  their  replacement,  should they for  any reason revert to military duty, will be conducted between the Local   Government   or   Administration and the Lieutenant- General Commanding, IV.  When the officers selected have joined their appoint- ments, the Lieutenant-General Commanding will communicate their  names to the Adjutant-General's department, and their services will then be placed at the disposal of the Govern- ment of India. IV-A. It is not considered desirable that a military  officer should remain absent from his regiment on plague duty for more than a year at a time. The Lieutenant- General Commanding has therefore instructions to arrange with the Local Government for the relief by a substitute of any such officer who has been employed on plague work for over a year. V.  When an officer's services are no longer required, he should be directed by the Local Government or Administra- tion   to  rejoin his regiment, the Lieutenant-General   Com- manding and the Government of India being at the same time informed, and the latter will then replace the officer at the Commander-in-Chief's disposal.
Discovery of Plague.] 27 8.  No officers of the Indian Medical Service or the Royal Army Medical Corps lent for plague duty should be permitted to revert to military duty without the previous sanction of the Government of India. 9.  The use   of   troops  for   plague  purposes   should  be avoided  as  far as possible and their employment should be confined to disinfection  when local labour is not available. Before  engaging on   plague  duty,   the   sepoys   should  be inoculated  and each of them  should  be supplied with two suits of white drill, one pair of boots, and two white turbans; they should not wear military uniform or carry arms while so employed.    The sanction of Government should be obtained before requisitioning them, and where the employment of troops has once been sanctioned,  the men may be changed without reference to Government.    Arrangements should be made for the relieving detachment to  be inoculated before arrival. 10.    ... Discovery of Plague. 11.  The most important and the most difficult matter in all operations against  plague is to obtain early  information regarding the cases that occur.    The prompt discovery of an imported case of plague may enable the local authorities to prevent a local outbreak, and  even where a few indigenous cases have occurred,  early information regarding each new case may  make  it possible to   prevent the outbreak  from spreading beyond a. confined area.     Every endeavour should therefore be made to obtain information of each case of plague that occurs,  as soon  as possible after the  patient has been attacked, or where this is not possible, soon after death. 12.   For   this   purpose, the surveillance   system as   de- scribed in regulation 1 should  be mainly  relied upon, and the   co-operation   of the people   in working   it   should   be secured by pointing out to them the advantage of protect- ing themselves   by not mixing with   persons  coming from infected areas and by giving the authorities prompt notice of their  arrival, and of any cases of plague   or suspicious fever among them.    .    .    .    One or more volunteers of each caste should be  invited to assist the circle officers in prosecuting enquiries and discovering plague cases.    The risk of conceal- ment of cases is lessened where people see that their leaders have ranged themselves on the side of the authorities.
?28 [Isolation of Patients. 13. Besides carrying out the other measures prescribed in part I of the 'regulations, attention should be paid to the improvement of the existing system of registering deaths. . . . Special daily returns of mortality may be called for and checked with the aid of trustworthy subordi- nates posted at burning and burial grounds. 14. The employment of paid spies or informers as well as the grant of rewards for information regarding plague cases is prohibited. Removal of Plague Patients to Hospital. 15.  Plague patients who are left without any one to look after them or who have no home should in all cases be removed to  hospital, and   there   can be no  question that  in dealing with  imported  cases    .    .    .    the  first  measure to adopt is the compulsory removal of the sick to hospital.    In dealing with early indigenous cases the same policy may be advisable. But if this policy prove  unsuccessful     .    .    .    a point may soon be reached  where the authorities  will  not succeed in getting the bulk of the cases. - When  this point is reached, the fact must be faced that the evils of leaving the sick in their houses are being  incurred   and   that  the  attempt to remove them to hospital may be super-adding to these the evils that result from carrying about sick persons from house to house.    At this stage the less the sick are interfered with the better.    All that can then be done is to endeavour to palliate the evils that result from leaving people  in their houses by arranging for continual visitation of the sick at home,   the frequent disinfection   of  the  infected  room, and the encouragement  of inoculation  among persons left in the houses with the sick. 16.  Except in the cases mentioned above, the removal of patients to hospital  should not be made compulsory.     Every effort  should,  however,  be made  to induce patients to  go voluntarily to hospital and to lessen  the aversion to hospital by the following  means-(1) by  encouraging the establish- ment of private and easte hospitals ;  (2) by locating hospitals near to infected quarters ; (3) by limiting the size of hospitals so that patients  may receive  more individual attention, and accommodation may be more readily made available for their immediate   families   and friends ;  (4) by  arranging for  the provision   of  an   adequate   number   of   medical    attendants and, nurses and of ample and comfortable accommodation for
?Segregation of Contacts.]            29 patients; (5) by permitting at least two friends to be in attendance on each patient so that the patient may never be left alone; (6) by allowing the patients to have their own food and medicines and to receive visits from their relations, friends and religious instructors; (7) by taking care that all arrangements for observance of caste customs and for the comfort and convenience of patients and their attendants are completed before inviting admission to hospitals. 17.  Moribund patients should never be removed to hospital except at the express wish of the friends or relations of the patients.    The risk  of leaving in his  house a patient whose case is so serious that the medical officer thinks he has not a fair chance of recovery is not great since, as the existence of the case will have become known, there will be no difficulty in carrying out measures of disinfection during the progress of sickness (if necessary), or after death. 18.  The pneumonic variety of plague being the most con- tagious, persons suffering from this type of the disease should not be removed to the general wards of plague hospitals, but should be isolated in separate wards of the greatest possible air space.    It is further advisable that such cases should not be treated in private houses, unless in the opinion of the medical officer, the room  occupied by  the patient is suited for his complete isolation, and proper control over the number of attendants and enforcement of disinfection could be had. Segregation of Contacts. 19.  Persons who have been in immediate  contact with plague patients are known as contacts.    By segregating them, persons who are likely to develop plague are isolated and cease to be a danger to other people; the plague-infected houses are emptied for the process of disinfection, and the   contacts themselves are protected from further risk of infection from those houses.    To render segregation effective, the following measures are necessary:- (1)  All contacts should be diligently searched for and be detained for the maximum period of incubation, and pre- vented from mixing with healthy people; (2)  Those in contact with each successive case of plague that occurs in the segregation camp must be similarly dealt with; (3)  All clothing must be effectually disinfected on entry into the camp and if plague cases have occurred in the camp since the date of entry, at the time of departure also; and
30                              [Evacuation. (4) The staff employed must be very strong relatively to the number of cases that occur and must be trustworthy. 20.  These measures are not always practicable and the Indian Plague    Commission are  of opinion   that the facts investigated by them do not justify the conclusion that in an outbreak the contacts from a house in which a case of plague has occurred must be regarded from the point of view of the protection of the rest of the  community as so dangerous that they ought to be   compulsorily   removed to a   segregation camp.    The Government of India have accordingly ordered that the compulsory segregation of contacts should be aban- doned as ineffective and  harassing except when dealing with imported cases or when  the infection is  confined  to so small an area that contacts can be accurately known and establish- ments can be  provided  sufficient to  secure the  detention of every contact.    Where these conditions do not  exist,  it is better to subject the contacts to mere surveillance at their houses, as any attempt to segregate them will not only lead to the general concealment of cases but also  tend to  scatter the people and thus spread  the infection to distant places. While under surveillance, the  contacts may be  allowed  to pursue their daily avocations. 21.   An officer who, not being on leave, is unable to perform his official duties   owing to a short period  of  segregation on account of plague may be treated as on duty on full pay.    In the   case,   however,   of   officers   who   are   segregated   while returning from  leave   and  thus  overstay   their  leave,   the period of detention may be treated as duty on half-pay, if it is considered that   some  concession is required,  but officers  who are suffering from  plague should  be treated  in accord ance with the ordinary rules. 22.  Officers in charge of plague camps should give deten- tion certificates to all persons  who  were detained by them, on their discharge from the camps. Evacuation. 23.  By evacuation is meant the  emptying of all or  some of the houses in an infected town    .    .    .    with the idea that they should not  be  occupied  is  dwelling houses until it is believed that they can again be occupied without risk of infec- tion,  the people thus  removed being lodged  in  temporary camps in the open country.    To make it thoroughly effective, the following conditions are required:  (1)  the people  should
?Inoculation.]                            31 all be got out promptly ; (2) their effects should all be dis- infected ; (3) each new case should be immediately isolated ; (4) suitable accommodation should be available ; (5) the people should be effectually prevented from visiting, or sleep- ing in, the infected houses until either the houses shall have been disinfected or until sufficient time shall have elapsed for the infection to disappear; (6) and lastly they should not be permitted to scatter and spread the infection in the neighbourhood. 24.  Evacuation   provides   the   most   effective   safeguard against the spread of plague which has  yet been discovered. Its advantages are  self-evident and it should be resorted to wherever practicable     .     .    .    The extent  to which it can be carried out in Madras  will  depend on the  willingness of the people, the season of the year.    .    .    .    the facilities for providing  camp   accommodation,   and   the   strength   of  the available staff.    It will be found to be of the greatest value at the very commencement of the outbreak, for the removal of the  small   number of people   affected will  not  present any great   difficulties,   and  prompt   evacuation   of  the  infected quarter may save the rest of the town. 25.  Evacuation is, however, likely to do more harm than good in the following  cases: (a) During the rainy season, when it is impossible to keep the people, after they have once been removed from their houses, from going back to them. In such circum- stances, the evacuated people are exposed to great incon- venience and misery without deriving any countervailing advantages from evacuation. (b) When the infection is widely distributed among the inhabitants, . . . it is then advisable to agitate the people as little as possible, especially when there are among them a considerable number of artisans and traders who may lose their occupation by being removed from the town and are therefore likely to run away and infect other places. Inoculation. 26. The exhaustive inquiries made by the Indian Plague Commission have established the fact that inoculation with haffkinine lessens the liability to plague and greatly in- creases the chance of recovery from an attack of the disease, and disproved the statement that serious ill-consequences have resulted from such inoculation. The maximum period for which protection is afforded by inoculation has not yet been
?32 [Inoculation. determined. For practical purposes, it has been fixed, for the present, at six months, but it should be noted that inocu- lation does not confer any great degree of protection within the first few days. Recently inoculated persons therefore incur risk of infection by remaining in infected places. 27. Inoculation should be encouraged wherever possible and in particular among disinfecting staffs and the attendants of plague hospitals. . . . No effort should be spared to explain to the people in quarters threatened with a visitation of the disease the advantage of being inoculated before the disease is among them and to secure the co-operation of the more enlightened members of the communities. At the same time, no compulsion of any sort, direct or indirect, should be used. An awkward attempt at persuasion is liable to create opposition, resistance, and occasionally, unfounded apprehension, and great circumspection is necessary in introducing inoculation in places where there is no demand for it. . . . The people should be distinctly warned that inoculation is not by any means a certain prophylactic, but that it considerably reduces the chances of the inoculated getting plague, that an inoculated person when attacked has increased chances of recovery, and that the process, if properly conducted, is harmless. 28. Only trained and reliable persons should be entrusted with the actual operation of inoculation, and supervision should be exercised over them to ensure that they use only sterilized implements. To remove any possible ground for distrust as to the conveyance of disease from one person to another, the inoculation syringe should be sterilized in the presence of the person about to be inoculated. The steriliza- tion should be effected by immersion in carbolic acid, or preferably carbolized oil kept hot by the flame of a spirit lamp underneath. After a bottle has once been opened and only a portion of its contents used, the remainder should invariably be thrown away. 29. Inoculated persons should be furnished with certifi- cates in the prescribed form. The certificate should bear the left thumb mark of the person inoculated and should be issued immediately after one full dose has been given, but the recipient should be recommended to return for a, second inoculation after ten days. The full dose should always be given at one time, unless for medical reasons it is considered advisable to divide it. If it is necessary to do this, a certifi- cate should not be given until the equivalent of two full doses has been given. If, however, no undue reaction ensues
Disinfection,] 33 after the first fractional dose has been taken, it is advisable- to give the full dose at once on the second occasion, after which a certificate may be given.  30. The privileges attached to inoculation are mentioned in regulation 40. They are not admissible in cases of persons who have recovered from plague. As a further encouragement the Government has authorized the grant of three days' extra casual leave on full pay to all public servants for the purpose of being inoculated. Students attending Government and aided schools, who undergo in- oculation, will be marked in the registers for not more than three consecutive days as "under inoculation," and such an entry will be regarded as equivalent to attendance. No subsistence allowance can be granted to inoculated persons for the period during which they are incapacitated for work owing to the operation. 31. The Sanitary Commissioner is in charge of all measures connected with inoculation and he will issue the necessary rules as to the conduct of the operation, supply of haffkinine and inoculation syringes, &c. He should submit to Govern- ment a weekly return showing the progress of inoculation in the presidency. Disinfection. 32. Chemical disinfection ought to be resorted to wher- ever possible. Of all measures of disinfection, it is the only one which, when effectively carried out, immediately destroys the infective material present in a room and renders the room at once practically safe for re-occupation. It is, however, essential that it should be carried out by a trained agency, and experience shows that where such an agency cannot be employed, it is better to rely on gradual desiccation rather than on a process of disinfection which is likely to be in complete and ineffective. Imperfect disinfection involves waste of energy and material, brings discredit on the system by exhibiting unsuccessful results, and engenders a false sense of security with regard to localities which have been incompletely disinfected and still contain the living germs of plague. 33. According to present knowledge, perchloride of mer- cury is the most effective chemical disinfectant. It should be used in a strength of 1 in 1,000, to which 2 per thousand of hydrochloric acid and a little aniline blue should be added. If the owners have no objection, interiors of infected houses should, as a rule, be treated with Wilkinson's coloured 5
34 [Disinfection, Solution which contains the perchloride in the strength stated above. To ensure that the perchloride is free from impurities, it should be obtained from the Madras medical store depot . . . The perchloride should be issued in the form of a concentrated solution in acid and clear instructions should be forwarded with each consignment as to the amount of water to be added. With a view to securing that the dilutions prescribed should be the solutions in which the disinfectant shall actually be employed, the capacity of the vessels used for measuring out the concentrated solution shall be accurately adjusted to that of the wooden buckets in which that solution is diluted for use. Further, the buckets employed should be of such capacity as to hold just the quantity of water sufficient to dilute the measure of con- centrated solution to the desired effect. The perchloride may also be issued in the solid form in packets, the contents of which are accurately adjusted to the size of the vessels in which they are to be dissolved for use. 34. Steam-sterilisers, unless their working is committed to skilled and trustworthy operators, are found in practice to be quite ineffective, and are therefore not suitable for general application. Their use is limited to ports for the disinfection of the effects of native crews and native ship passengers bound for ports out of India. Full instructions as to the mode of working them should be supplied with each machine. 35. In cases, where it is not possible to carry out chemical disinfection, the disinfecting agency of desiccation should be relied upon. For this purpose, the house ought to be thoroughly cleaned out; the removal from the house of cowdung and other moist accumulations should be particu- larly insisted upon, and the inmates of the house should be induced to remain away for a period of at least two months until the process of desiccation is complete. Disinfection by desiccation cannot, however, be relied upon during the rains. 36. The breaking of holes in the roof or walls and the partial untiling will not accelerate the process of desiccation to such a degree as to counterbalance the damage done to the house. This measure should not therefore be adopted in the case of masonry houses with concrete roofs. As a rule, such houses can be disinfected without great difficulty and are to a certain extent open to light and air. . . . 37. Owing to the risk of infection from the blowing about of the floor dust and owing to the fact that it is practically
?Disinfection.] 35 impossible to secure that the whole material shall be carried away, the digging up of floors with a view to kiln burning them ought not to be resorted to. 38. The actual burning down of houses should not be resorted to except in the case of temporary structures which are of little or no value or in the case of houses which are unfit for human habitation. 39. With a view to encourage people to produce their goods for disinfection and to prevent them from secreting them, nothing which could by any possibility have any value for its owner should be broken up or destroyed by fire. Liberal compensation should be promptly paid for any articles that may be necessary to destroy, when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circumstances to whom it would be a great hardship to bear it. 40. Disinfection of personal effects should not be attempted in the case of travellers by road or railway but should be carried out in the case of- (a) native crews, third class or deck passengers and native servants proceeding to ports out of India. This should be done on shore; (b) plague patients and contacts removed from infected houses, ships or railway carriages; (c) plague patients discharged from hospitals and persons returning to their houses from health or suspect camps. 41. That the disinfection of the person is effective is indubitable as is proved by the practice of washing the hands with disinfectants in bacteriological laboratories and in surgical operations. The measure, however, is extremely unpopular, and has been ordered to be abandoned in the case of travellers as very little is to be gained by disinfect- ing them. It will be found useful in the case of persons taken out from plague-infected houses into health camps and in the case of plague convalescents leaving hospital. 42. Laboratory experiments and practical experience alike tend to show that little danger is to be apprehended by the spread of plague by ordinary articles of merchandise, and it is neither advisable nor necessary to take any steps towards their disinfection. The only restriction found neces- sary is the prohibition against the importation from infected localities or rags, waste paper and soiled linen which cannot be classed with ordinary merchandise inasmuch as they are
?36 [House-searches. very likely to carry infection. Any articles brought in contravention of this prohibition should be destroyed. Old newspapers in bales and paper (whether newspapers or not) used for packing purposes are not included within the prohi- bition, but washed linen articles which, such as washed dhotis, are considered possibly dangerous, might, when they come to notice, not unreasonably be held to come under the prohibition expressed in the term " soiled," although they have not been worn since they were last washed. Persons who send parcels by railway or post from plague-infected areas are required to declare in writing that the parcels do not contain any soiled linen and bedding, rags or waste paper. 43. Detailed instructions as to the mode of disinfection to be adopted in each case will be issued by the Sanitary Commissioner and, in respect to the management of hospitals, by the Surgeon-General. House-searches. 44. The system of house-visitation and house-search will be permitted only- (a) when plague exists in small and well defined areas, such for instance as an isolated quarter or ward . and (b) it is clear that it will be effectual in saving the people from disaster. When this mode of discovering plague is adopted, care should be taken that a sufficient number of European officers are employed to render the powers of search effective and at the same time prevent the subordinate establishments from abusing their authority. Failing officers of the civil establish- ments, young officers of the Staff Corps should be deputed for this duty. Respectable inhabitants who volunteer for the service should be employed to assist in searching for concealed cases of plague; as far as possible houses should be allowed to be entered only by persons of caste or of the same religion as the occupants; and subject to the same limitation, women should be utilized in examining women and in searching any room or place exclusively occupied by them. Inspection and Burial of Corpses. 45. Regulation 23 deals with the mode of disposal of plague corpses. It in no way interferes with the religious customs of the people, but merely authorises the local
?Corpse inspection.] 37 authorities to insist on certain necessary precautions as to the routes to be taken by funeral processions and as to the place and manner of burial. Any rules which the President may find necessary to frame under clause 1 (b) of this regulation should provide that when the burial of a person who has died of plague takes place in proximity to habitations or sources of water-supply, the corpse shall be buried six feet deep. By clause (3) it is not intended that public undertakers should alone touch the corpses. The dead may be dressed for the grave by their own relations or in whatever manner may be customary among the class to which the deceased belonged. 46. Under the first clause of regulation 21 the Presi- dent may require in respect of any particular area that the certificate of a medical officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death. But it must be understood that medical examination of a corpse is entirely optional on the part of the relations, and that no one will be compelled to allow the inspection of the corpse of a deceased relative. In the event, however, of a certificate not being produced or inspection invited, it may be presumed that any death, the cause of which cannot be determined not to be plague, has been caused by plague and the rules regarding the segregation of the contacts and the disinfection of the house may be enforced. The examination of the corpses of women by men should never be required. The orders of the Government should be obtained before this regulation is acted upon in any area, and in applying for sanction, the President should report fully on the following points:- (1) What classes of officers will be authorized to issue certificates under the regulation. (2) Whether any fee will be required for the grant of this certificate. (3) Whether there is such a number of Government medical officers, male and female, at the station as will be sufficient to carry out inspection promptly so as not to cause any delay in burials. (4) Whether there has been any increase in the rate of mortality. (5) Whether there is any reason to believe that deaths are concealed or that causes of death are not correctly reported.
?38 Plague Hospitals and Camps. 47. The Government will, whenever necessary, construct either itself or through the municipality temporary segregation and health camps and plague hospitals and will also by grants of money help private persons or bodies to construct them on sites shown to them or selected by them and approved by the authorities. It is also prepared to place private plague hospitals and camps in charge of native practitioners so far as the public can find suitable men who will under- take the responsibilities and can be trusted to carry out the prescribed rules. The hospitals and camps will, however, be under the general supervision of Government officials, but these officials will have nothing to do with the treatment of the sick except at their request, and their duties will be confined to preserving order, preventing theft and keeping guard, and attending to sanitation. Detailed instructions with regard to the construction, equipment and management of plague camps will be issued by the Sanitary Commissioner and of plague hospitals, by the Surgeon-General. 48. The Government has sanctioned the following rates of contribution towards the cost of the construction and maintenance of private plague hospitals and segregation camps in places which are or may be threatened with plague:- (a) For construction, half the cost will be paid by Government provided the charges are considered reasonable. In any case of doubt or dispute the Government will have the right to estimate by means of the Public Works depart- ment the value of the work done. The buildings shall be erected on sites approved by the sanitary authorities. (b) For maintenance, grants not exceeding half the actual expenses will be sanctioned by Government on the following conditions:- (1) The arrangements for the sanitation and supply of food must meet with the approval of the local medical officers and . . . the Pre- sident, Municipal Commission, Madras . . . (2) The amounts will be paid, month by month, in arrears to the manager or managers approved by . . . the President. These grants will be met from provincial funds. The sale-proceeds of private hospitals to which Govern- ment has made a contribution should be equally divided between Government and the Plague Committee concerned.
?Surveillanee.] 39 49. ... 50. It may become necessary at any moment for . . . plague authorities to occupy buildings belonging to other departments, than the Revenue department, for plague pur- poses. In such cases the earliest possible intimation of such occupation should be given to the authorities in charge of such buildings. Before occupying them, any moveable articles in the building at all likely to retain infection should be first carefully removed and placed under proper custody. Surveillance or Passport Rules. 51. Regulation 1.-Copies of this regulation should be hung up at railway stations. The regulations do not apply to passengers from a non-infected area, who pass through an infected station without breaking journey at that station. 51-A. Under this regulation and mufassal regulation 1, the Government or the Collector of a district may declare any place to be infected with plague. As a rule only the places actually infected with plague should be declared as such. The execution of precautions against the spread of plague is rendered more difficult when they are directed against an unnecessarily wide area. 52. Passport-issuing officers should not suppose that they have merely to issue passports to those who come and apply for them. The main object of declaring persons from in- fected parts to be bound to take out passports is to punish cases of wilful evasion of the rules, and it was never the in- tention to relieve the passport-issuing officers of their duty of tracing out such passengers and not allowing them to go away without passports. Passengers who fail to take out passports should be prosecuted at the discretion of the President, but whether prosecuted or not, they must be required to present themselves for inspection for ten days as soon as their arrival has been detected. 53. Passport-issuing officers should note that every person who holds a ticket marked in the manner indicated in rule 82 should be given a passport. To ensure that none escapes taking a passport, the passport-issuing officer should ques- tion passengers where they come from in cases where they do not hold specially marked tickets. In cases where a passport has been wrongly issued owing to erroneous plague- marking of the railway ticket, or otherwise, the President or
?40 [Surveillance. the Health Officer of the municipality . . . is authorized to cancel the passport on satisfactory proof that it was wrongly issued. 54. It is the duty of railway authorities assisted by the platform police to see that passengers alighting at a railway station do not leave the premises except by the proper exit, and to afford every facility for the working of the plague regulations. Ticket collectors should be required to stop all passengers holding tickets issued at infected or notified stations until their names and addresses are taken down, and passports issued to them either by the plague official appointed for the purpose, or . . . by the station staff. 55. ... 56. When a large body of troops or police or coolies engaged in plague operations are returning to a healthy district, previous intimation of their departure should be given to the local authorities of the place of destination. Before starting, they should be carefully examined and disinfected, and on arrival at their destination, they should be given passports according to the rules. With regard to troops and their families and followers leaving infected areas, the orders issued by the military authorities require (a) that they should be inspected and disinfected before departure, (b) that they should also be disinfected on arrival at their military stations, and (c) that where possible regimental arrangements should be made to house them separately for from ten to twelve days. 57. ... 58. As long as the disease is confined to narrow limits, an infected place must be regarded as requiring as much protection as any other place against fresh importations of infection, and all persons who may come from a second centre of contamination, or from a railway station which in conse- quence of its proximity to such a second centre has been notified by the local Government, should be furnished with passports and be kept under surveillance. But a person who comes to an infected place from a railway station which has been notified in consequence of its proximity to that place does not require a passport. On the other hand, a person who proceeds to such a railway station from the place which is infected must take out a passport though if he returns to the infected place within ten days the passport may be given up on his return and further inspection is unnecessary.
?Railway Inspection.] 41 59. With a view to facilitate the working of the passport rules, railway employs holding periodical railway passes and Government officials holding standing passes should be required to provide themselves before departure with cer- tificates signed by the stationmasters concerned showing the places from which they start. 60. ... 60-A. The passport rules should be worked in such a manner as to cause the minimum of inconvenience to gosha women, and persons belonging to that class should, whenever it is possible to do so, be exempted from attendance on the local authority at the hospital or elsewhere and be inspected at their own houses. The examination of gosha women should always be conducted by females, who, when not trained or duly qualified, should work under the instructions of medical officer. 61. ... 62. ... 63. ... 64. ... 65. ... 66. ... 67. ... 68. Regulation No. 2 should be strictly carried out as a check on the working of city and mufassal regulations 1 and prosecution should be resorted to in places where the duty of reporting arrivals from plague-infected parts is neglected in spite of repeated warnings. If . . . the exist- ing sanitary staff is unequal to the task of properly carrying out the system of observation, it should be strengthened. Railway Inspection. 69. . . . Plague officers . . . employed at . . . Perambur, should always carry with them a note-book of a special conspicuous colour with the words "Government of Madras Plague officials' note-book" printed on the back. A copy of the appointment order should be attached to the note- book. Copies of the book may be obtained from the Superin- tendent, Government Press, through the Surgeon-General. 70. Railway Administrations are requested to instruct their staff to give every assistance to the medical officers conducting the inspection in order to minimise the detention of the trains, and to detain the trains until the medical 6
?42 [Railway Inspection. inspection is over. Railway ticket collectors may be allowed to accompany the plague inspecting officers, if this course is found to economize time. . . . 71. ... 72. ... 73. ... 74. ... 75. ...  76. If a detained person has plague when removed from the train, all who have travelled with him in the same compartment are "contacts" and must also be detained unless they have been inoculated. 77. . . . 78. . . . 79. ... 80. Any expenditure incurred in providing inspection sheds on railway platforms in cases where there are no proper facilities in the railway station for the examination of pass- engers in accordance with the plague regulations or in the supply of punches or scissors for marking railway tickets should be borne by the civil department and not by the railway administrations. 81. ... 82. The mark used at inspection stations is a hole four- tenths of an inch square punched in the long side of railway tickets. It should be made only on the tickets of those pass- engers who come, or are suspected to come, from plague- infected areas or from places notified by Government for the purposes of the passport rules. The special mark should be made at the first inspection station at which the passenger arrives. It is not necessary to punch his ticket again at any subsequent inspection station through which he may pass, but he must be medically examined nevertheless. Tickets of persons who come from an uninfected area, or who, though coming from an infected area, have been detained for ten days at one of the observation camps established in the Madras presidency, need not be so marked. 83. . . . 84. ... 84-A. ... 85. ... 86. ...
?43 Fairs, Festivals and Pilgrimages. 86-A. When a festival or fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from plague-infected parts is about to take place . . . the President may apply to Government for orders to prohibit their attendance and to enforce the prohibition by stopping temporarily the issue of railway tickets to such persons or by other means. If there is plague in the city a similar course should be adopted when a festival or fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from healthy parts is about to take place . . . 87.  Proposals submitted under the preceding rule should be forwarded through the Sanitary Commissioner so as to reach Government a month and-a-half previous to the holding of the fairs and festivals.    Proposals submitted at later dates do not allow proper measures being taken to enforce them. ... 88.    ... 89.    ... 90.    ... 91.    ... 92.  As regards pilgrimage to the Hedjaz, the Government of India annually issue orders either prohibiting it altogether or allowing it under certain conditions from uninfected parts only.    In the latter case, the intending pilgrims are collected at convenient observation camps, they are not allowed to purchase  passage  tickets  to  the  Hedjaz   except  at   those observation camps, and after they  have been detained for the prescribed period and certified to be free from infection, they are sent in special trains or carriages to the selected ports for embarkation.    Pilgrims returning from the Hedjaz in healthy vessels are, after disinfection of their clothing and baggage,  sent  at once  to  their  destination without  being allowed to mix with the population of the port of landing. Those returning in a plague-infected vessel are subjected to ten days' observation in a camp before being. sent to their homes.    The authorities of the port of landing are required to send nominal rolls of the pilgrims to the officers concerned, and to give previous intimation of their departure, in order that they may be watched for a few days after arrival at their destination.
?44 Destruction of Rats. 93. Regulation 8.-There is a general belief, supported by medical opinion, that rats are peculiarly susceptible to the infection of the bubonic plague and are active agents in its dissemination. Granaries are the favourite haunts of rats, and grain bags arriving from any place suspected to be affected by the plague should be very carefully examined, and any rats found with them at once destroyed and their bodies consumed by fire. Infection once brought into a granary spreads rapidly among the healthy rats, and thence in time to human beings living in the neighbourhood . . . Attention . . . is therefore drawn to the necessity of taking special precautions to prevent the danger of infection from this source. Arrangements should be made for the constant inspection of granaries and grain bazaars and care taken to keep them clean and disinfected and to have the rats destroyed. In inspecting these granaries particular inquiries should be made whether any dead or sick rats have been observed. Rats sick with the plague seem careless in the presence of men and run about in a dazed way with a peculiar limping gait in the hind legs owing to painful glands in the groin. The port and sea customs authorities should be instructed to see that no rats are landed with goods . and that rats found in ships are destroyed forthwith. 94.  The  Traffic  Manager,   South  Indian Railway,   has issued the following circular to his subordinates:-" Station- masters and their staff should carefully inspect consignments of grain from plague-infected areas to see that any rats that may arrive concealed in the grain are destroyed; should also destroy bandicoots, rats and mice where grain is deposited on railway premises in case they may have eaten of the grain and so become infected.    This vermin should be tracked and exterminated by all possible methods, the dead bodies being consumed by fire at once.    Stationmasters and others of the staff concerned with these instructions should make a special report to this office, if they destroy 20  or more of these rodents in any one week,  and if a rat trap is wanted they should send an indent for one." Other Railway Adminis- trations have been requested to issue similar instructions to their staff. . . . 95.  It has been ruled that ordinarily the destruction of rats should be confined to- (a) infected places and the surrounding area within a radius of ten miles round it;
Plague reports.] 45 (b) landing places and railway goods-sheds, where rats from infected places are likely to be imported with goods brought by sea or railway. In the case of (a), rewards may be necessary but the maximum rate should not exceed three pies. In other cases, the port or railway authorities are expected to do all that is required without the reward system. 96. The charges incurred in the destruction of rats should be debited to ... municipal funds . Plague Reports and Returns. 97. When a case of plague, genuine or suspected, is first discovered the President . . . should immediately intimate the fact to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal department, to the Sanitary Commissioner and to the Surgeon-General, stating how the case was discovered, whether it was indigenous or imported, and in the latter case, whence it was imported, and such further particulars with dates as may be thought necessary. Cases of plague among 'contacts' who have not within a fortnight been in an infected place should be treated as indigenous and not imported. Further details should be furnished . . . if possible within 48 hours. This report should be in the form prescribed [Appendix F]. 98. All attacks and deaths should be intimated daily to Government the Sanitary Commissioner and the Surgeon-General. . . The President should also send daily telegraphic reports of plague to the medical officer of the Ceylon Government stationed at Tuticorin whenever plague cases occur in Madras. The cost of these telegrams will be debited to the Ceylon Government by the Accountant-General. 99. ... 100. ... 100-A. ... 101. ... Plague Correspondence. 102. All correspondence about plague should be addressed to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal depart- ment, and should be marked with the word 'Plague' in red ink on the outside covers and on the left-hand corner of the
?46 [Plague regulations. papers. Telegrams should be addressed to " Madras, Plague." All communications, except reports or returns on printed forms, should be forwarded with a docket sheet, copies of which are supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press. 103. All references regarding account matters should be addressed to, or forwarded through, the Accountant-General. 104. . . . 105. . . . 106. Copies of all important orders passed by the Govern- ment in regard to the prevention and suppression of plague will be supplied from the Government office to the Deputy Adjutant-General, Madras Command, and the General officers Commanding Districts, who should also be furnished by . the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, with similar orders issued by himself. 107. . . . Plague Regulations. 108. . . .  109. 110. The regulations apply to all alike without distinction of class or rank but should be enforced only against persons with regard to whom there are reasonable grounds of suspi- cion. Due notice will be given by Government as soon as it is considered safe to relax any of the restrictions now imposed on trade and on the movement of passengers. Until then, they should be carefully observed. 111. ... 112. By Command Order, No. 687, dated 18th November 1898, all ranks in the Madras Command are directed to obey the plague regulations, and any infringement of them is punishable as a military offence. Military pensioners have been warned (Superintendent's circular No. II, dated 14th December 1898) that any disobedience or wilful neglect of the regulations or obstruction to any official on plague duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required by Gov- ernment as a condition of the continuation of their pensions, and that any pensioner being guilty thereof will be liable to have his pension stopped forthwith, and the same reduced or permanently withdrawn. 113. The plague regulations being orders promulgated, i.e., formally made and issued, by Government under the Epi- demic Diseases Act and not by any public servant, no sanction
?Appointments and allowances.] 47 is required as a condition precedent to prosecution for disobey- ing them (Judgment of the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 551 of 1899). 114. If the Police are informed that a person is evading the plague regulations by giving a false name or a wrong address, they can act under section 57 of the Criminal Procedure Code, and detain the person until satisfied that they have got his true name and address. Failing information as to true name and address or the execution of a bond, the Police can forward the person to a magistrate. Plague Appointments and Plague Allowances. 114-A. .... 114-B. 115. All appointments on account of plague require the sanction of Government. . . . Appointments sanctioned without reference to limit of time require renewal of sanction every six months. 116. 117. ...  The President, Municipal Commission, Madras, should prepare every month printed list of officers of all classes, including troops, employed on plague duty, in accordance with the instructions contained in Plague Com- missioner's Proceedings, No. 762, dated 22nd November 1898, No. 1047, dated 28th December 1898, and G.O., No. 1504-P., dated 17th October 1899, and No. 656, dated 7th March 1899. The . . . Commissioner of Police, Madras, should prepare similar lists of all police engaged in plague work, and the Surgeon-General should also submit a return showing all medical officers on plague duty and all temporary doctors obtained from England, with their stations, pay and allow- ances. The lists should be submitted not later than the 5th of each month and should be distributed as follows:- Three copies to the Chief Secretary to Government, Financial department. Four copies to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal department. Two copies to the Accountant-General. 118. The charge of plague operations in an infected district must be regarded as part of the general duty of an executive officer. No encouragement should be given to an impression that duty connected with the plague involves greater risks or is deserving of more favourable treatment
?48 [Plague Expenditure and Accounts. than attendance in the infectious wards of a hospital or in a camp afflicted with cholera, which is accepted as part of the officer's ordinary duty. Save in exceptional cases no recom- mendation should be made for the grant of special salary allowance or pension for plague duty. The Government of India has, however, authorised the grant of special allowances to medical officers for plague duty performed in addition to their ordinary work in cases where it is sufficiently arduous to deserve special remuneration. The Local Government may also sanction local allowances under article 187 of the Civil Service Regulations to officers of other classes provided their plague duty lies entirely outside the ordinary and legitimate duties of their offices. The Secretary of State has also sanctioned the grant of extraordinary pension to the families of police men who die of plague contracted in the execution of their duties in plague-stricken localities, provided such duties entail imminent risk from plague. 119. The special allowances given to certain classes of officers for plague duty and the salaries attached to special temporary appointments created on account of the plague are given in Appendix G. All questions relating to the grant of such allowances should be referred for the orders of Government. Plague Expenditure and Accounts. 120. ... 121. The President, Municipal Commission, Madras, is required to submit quarterly estimates of plague expenditure. These estimates should be forwarded direct to the Financial department, so as to reach their destination not later than the fifth of the first month of each quarter. The estimate submitted by the Surgeon-General includes provision for all medical officers, nurses, &c., who have been sent out by the Secretary of State and are temporarily attached to hospitals, &c., in Madras prior to their being posted to duties in connec- tion with plague work. 122. ... The estimate for the third quarter shall be submitted so as to reach its destination on the 5th November instead of the 5th October and shall show (1) actual expendi- ture up to the 31st October, (2) estimate for November and December, (3) estimate for the last quarter of the official year, and (4) total estimate for the year. This estimate shall be accompanied by an estimate for the ensuing official year based
Plague Expenditure and Accounts.] 49 on the conditions existing at the time of framing the estimate. This latter estimate need not provide for each quarter of the year separately. 123. . . . 124. . . . 125. . . . 126. Forms of the estimates will be printed and supplied by the Accountant-General. No changes shall be made in the form without the approval of the Financial department. ... 127. . . . 128. . . . 128-A. The clothing specified in rule 9 will be supplied to the troops regimentally ; and as soon as it has been issued, and the bill countersigned by . . . the President, Muni- cipal Commission, Madras, . . . the military department will debit the cost to the civil department in the exchange account rendered by the Controller of Military Accounts to the Accountant-General, who will make the necessary adjustments and recover the amount from the municipality. 129. ... 130. . . . 131. Fines recovered in prosecutions under the plague regulations should be credited to fines under Law and Justice. 132. . . .
?50 APPENDIX A. PLAGUE PASSPORT. [See regulation 1 on page 8.] (To be printed in diglott.) 1. No. of passport. 2. District.  3. Station of issue. 4. Date of arrival.  5. Name of person (in full).   6. Father's name.*   7 Caste and occupation. 8. Age. 9. Sex.* 10. Whence coming (give district, taluq and village). 11. Destination and residence during the next ten days (give district, taluq, village street and number or name of the owner of the house). 12. To whom the triplicate copy of the passport sent and when. I declare the information set forth above under headings 5 to 11 to be correct, and I do hereby bind myself (a) to appear/present the above mentioned person for inspection, daily, between the hours of _______ for the next ten days, before the passport-examining officer of the place where I may be for the time being, (b) to report to the said officer before departure any change in my residence/the residence of the above mentioned person within the said period of ten days, and (c) to deliver to the said officer this passport on the expiry of the said period. Date Signature or mark of the traveller or person in change of him. Declared and signed before me. Date Signature and designation of officer issuing the passport. * May be omitted when clearly not required for identification.  For village in Malabar, give the names of amsam and desam. Date. Signature. INSTRUCTIONS. 1st day 1. This passport should be prepared in triplicate.  The original should be retained for record, the duplicate 2nd  delivered to the traveller, and the triplicate sent  without delay to the officer who has to examine him 3rd  for ten days. The full designation and address of this  officer should be entered under heading 12. One pass- 4th  port form should not be used for more than one  individual. Only persons coming from infected or 5th  notified places can be required to take out passports.  2. The passport-issuing officer should explain to the 6th  traveller or his guardian the terms of the passport and  warn him that any breach of its terms will entail 7th  prosecution and punishment with imprisonment for  a term which may extend to six months or fine which 8th  may extend to Us. 1,000 or both.  3. The passport-holder should, unless exempted by 9th  a written order endorsed on the passport, appear daily  for ten days with his passport before the passport- 10th  examining officer and obtain that officer's signature on  the margin of his passport in token of inspection.  4. The passport-holder is not obliged to remain at a  place for ten days by reason of his passport, but should  he desire to change his residence within that period, he  Forwarded to the Health officer should give due intimation to the passport-examining the traveller having been duly observed.  officer and get the entries under headings 11 and 12  altered before departure. On the tenth day he  should deliver his passport to the passport-examining  officer.  5. The passport-examining officer should satisfy  himself that the person presenting the passport is the  person described therein. He should ascertain from Signature and Designation of the traveller whether there is any sickness or death in Passport-examining officer. his house. If the traveller exhibits any symptoms of  plague or if any sickness or death is reported in his  house or if he fails to appear for inspection, the said  officer should take immediate steps for detaining him  or for making the necessary inquiries as to the cause of  sickness, death or absence. Date 6. For further particulars, see city plague regula-  tions when residing in Madras or mufassal plague Station. regulations when residing elsewhere.
51 APPENDIX B. GENERAL PASS. [See regulation 24 (3) on page 18.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by road or boat from an infected area.) No. District, Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. This pass protects the person named above and the members of his family mentioned on the reverse, but it does not authorize journey by rail, for which a separate pass shall be obtained by each individual requiring it, nor does it cover residence outside It will be in force until revoked. Signature. Designation. Date. (Reverse of Form.) Name  How related to pass-holder Signature. Designation. Date.
?52 APPENDIX C. GENERAL PASS. Subsidiary pass for railway journey only. [See regulation 24 (3) on page 18.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by rail from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. Signature. Designation. Date. APPENDIX D. SPECIAL PASS. [See regulation 24 (4) on page 19.] (To be issued to persons leaving an inhabited infected area to reside in its neighbourhood.) No. District, Station of issue. Number of office of issue.* Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Occupation. Age. Ordinary residence. The above-named person (and his family consisting of males and females as per reverse) is/are permitted to reside temporarily at (name of site or number of field) on his producing this pass, with the accompanying certificate  duly filled in by the officer responsible for disinfection. Date Signature and designation. * To be entered when there is more than one office of issue in the town.  If the family leaves a healthy area of the town or a house that has not been infected, this part of the certificate may be dispensed with at the discretion of the issuing officer.
Appendix E.]                               53 (Reverse of Form.) Name.     How related to pass-holder.    Signature.    Designation.    Date. Disinfection Certificate. I hereby certify that having satisfied myself that arrangements for residence at the site named by the above described person (and his family) were complete, I immediately before his/their  departure  carefully disinfected all clothing and property removed by him/them                                 Date                                         Signature of officer in charge of disinfection. APPENDIX  E. [See Regulation 40 (2) on page 23.] [COUNTERFOIL.] No. Name Father's name Street/ Village Town/ Taluq District Date Initials of operator.  Plague Inoculation Certificate. No. CERTIFIED that                 ,son of  , resident of         , street/ village town/ ' taluq                     ' district , has been inoculated by me, and that his thumb-mark was at the time impressed before me. Space for left thumb-mark.    Signature and  designation.      Dated NOTE.                                                                   Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, plague, the holder of the certificate is exempted from                                                                      segregation, from detention when travelling, and from ten days observation under the passport rules. It does not, however, exempt him from liability to evacuate an infected house, except in the case where all the occupants of the house have been inoculated, or to have his clothes disinfected when travelling. The certificate is valid for a period of six months.     8
?54 APPENDIX F. Plague Report. [See Rule 97 on page 45.] Plague Report Date No. 1. Name of division -. 2. Population-. Imported. Indigenous.    3. Plague cases up to date of last report Number of seizures - .  Number of deaths - .  Date of last report - .  4. Date of present attack-. 5. When reported by telegram-? 6. Imported or indigenous- ? 7. Brief history of case-. 8. If imported, had patient a passport on arrival? If not, was he supplied with one and kept under surveillance? 9. Steps taken to isolate and treat the patient-. 10. Steps taken towards the segregation of contacts-. 11. Steps taken towards the evacuation and disinfection of the infected house. 12. Was there any opposition on the part of the inmates of the infected house or of the people to the plague measures? 13. Remarks.
?55 APPENDIX. G. PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty. [See Rule 119 on page 48.] Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. A. Military officers (a) When employed on Nil. and troops. guard duty.*   (b) When employed on sani-   tary duty, such as search-   ing,  disinfecting, superin-   tending, scavengering,   &c. -   (i) Combatant    Bri- Rs. 300 a month.  tish       Commis-   sioned officers of   over     5    years'   service.   (ii) Combatant.Bri- Rs. 200 a month.  tish       Commis-   sioned      officers   under    5   years'   service.   (iii) British non-com- Rs.   1 + annas   6   extra  ration  missioned     offi- money per diem.  cers.   (iv) British privates. Annas 12 + annas 6  extra ration   money per diem.  (v) Native officers  Rs. 1-8-0 a day.  (vi) Native   non-com- Annas 12 a day.  missioned     offi-   cers.   (vii)   Sepoys    Annas 8 a day. I  +    +    B. Medical (i) Commissioned     officers Same  as in. the case of   British officers -wholly transferred from regi- commissioned military officers. employed   on mental or purely mili-  plague duty. tary duty.   (ii) Commissioned    officers Rs. 5 a day.  in civil employ.   (iii) Senior   military  assist- Rs. 5 a day.  ant  surgeons with the   honorary rank of Cap-   tain or Lieutenant.  * When the troops employed on plague duty have been performing guard and sanitary duties in the same place together, that is to say, when some of the party have been employed on sanitary duties while others have been doing guard duty, the duties being interchangeable, all the troops should be paid allowances. On the other hand, where the duties assigned to any one body of troops have been exclusively of the nature of guard duties no allowances should be granted. The allowances shall be paid only for the days on which the troops are actually employed on plague duty. All doubtful cases should be referred for the special orders of Government.  Medical officers whose sole duty is the inspection of ships for plague purposes are not entitled to any special fee for conducting inspection in bad weather.  Port health officers who inspect vessels from plague-infected ports on Sundays and closed holidays will be granted a special fee of Rs. 16 for each inspection, but not more than double fee in respect to the same vessel inspected more than once on the same day. No port health officer shall in any one month receive fees aggregating more than, one-fifth of his salary.
?56 [Appendix G. PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed, to Plague Duty-cont.  Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. B. Medical officers  (iv) Military assistant sur-  Rs. 3 a day.     In addition to any acting, charge or house allowance they may have been drawing at the time of their deputation to plague duty and which they would have continued todraw draw but for such deputation. wholly em- geons in civil or   ployed on military employ, on   plague duty- pay exceeding Rs.   cont. 150            (v) Military assistant sur- Rs. 2 a day.        geons in civil or     military employ, on     pay not exceeding     Rs. 150     (vi) Civil assistant surgeons.  Rs. 2 a day.     (vii) Civil apothecaries Rs. 25 a month, or in the case of men, who, at the time of their deputation, were in independent charge, the full charge allowance of their grades.                       (viii) Hospital assistants  Annas 8 a day.  In addition to hous-rent or free quarters, but in lien of charge allowance.       engaged on plague duty     involving personal     risk, such as attend-     ing on plague pa-     tients.     (ix) Hospital assistants en- Rs. 10 a month.    gaged on light     plague duty, such as     inspection of passen-     gers.   C. Medical officers,  (1) *  Commissioned   Such local allowance, not exceeding one-fifth of the salary, as may be fixed in each case by Government. The allowance should be given only to officers whose additional plague work, such as that of medical inspection of passengers by road or railway, is entirely separate from, and outside the sphere of, their ordinary duties and not to officers whose ordinary and legitimate work, such as that of attending on the sick in hospital, has been increased owing to the occurrence of plague. doing plague officers.  work in addi-    tion to their    ordinary    duties.                               (2) *  Medical subordinates.                             (3) Nurses or midwives     * A special fee of Rs. 15 will be paid for every inspection of vessels conducted in bad weather when it involves extraordinary risk.  See note  on the previous page.  When the out-door plague work of a medical subordinate is so heavy as to necessitate the use of a conveyance, carts or jutkas may be provided for him by the local body concerned. The actual charges incurred in the payment of hire should be debited to 'Contingencies.'
?57 Appendix G.] PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-cont. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. D. Plague supervisors    Allowance of 25 per cent, of     belonging to the Salt,  the salary + Rs. 15 horse allowance, Abkri and other   provided the permanent pay + 25 departments.  per cent, thereof does not fall   below Rs. 80. E.      PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty. Designation. Salary. Remarks. A. Retired  commissioned  medical officers. Rs. 500 a month (in addition   to their pensions which will continue to be a military charge). The officer must have retired           before the 1st April 1898, and his re-employment must be either on plague duty or in a post which cannot be filled in the ordinary way by reason of the officers, who would, in ordinary course, be available for it being required for plague duty. The appointment re- quires the previous sanction of the Government of India. * B. Temporary   English doctors. Rs. 500 a month or such    salary as may be fixed in their agreements with the Secretary of State.  C. Retired   military  assistant surgeons, Pay of their grade at the             time of retirement + Rs. 100 allowance subject to  a maximum of Rs. 350 a mouth. In special cases the Local Government may raise the limit to Rs. 500. A retired hono- rary commissioned officer of the Indian Subordinate Medical Department is entitled to double first- class travelling allowance by rail, and eight annas a mile by road. The officers should bo required    to produce certificates of phy- sical fitness, and their appoint- ments should, in the first instance, be made for periods not exceeding six months. * The Secretary of State has . . . laid stress on the need for showing consider- ation towards doctors and nurses sent from England for plague duty in this country, and the Government of India have decided that some liberality should be exercised in the grant of allowances to nurses to defray such expenses as they may be called upon to incur in the discharge of their duties, and that they should not be expected to defray the cost of carriage from their salary.
58 [Appendix G. PART II.- Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation.  Salary.  Remarks.  D. Uncovenanted  medical officers.                    Such pay not exceeding Rs.  350 a month as the Sur-  geon-General may find  necessary, with travelling  allowances to and from  the places to which they  are posted at the rates of  double second-class fares  for journeys by rail and  annas 4 a mile for journeys  by road.  The term of employment may,  subject to their good conduct  and efficiency, be for a period  of three months ; the engage-  ment being terminable after  the expiry of the first two  months by a written notice  given by either the Government  or the officer.      E. Temporary civil  assistant sur-  geons.      Pay Rs. 100 a month +  allowance of Rs. 2 a day,  with travelling allowance  to and from the place to  which they are appointed.  ......          F. Private hospital  assistants.          Pay assigned to the corre-  sponding grades of hospital  assistants in Government  service + 50 per cent.  thereof with compensation  for quarters.  ......            F1. Retired hospital  assistants.    Pay of their grade at the  time of retirement (in  addition to their pension).            * G. Lady nurses  obtained from  England.                      (a) Rs. 175 a month in  addition to free quar-  ters, fuel, lights and  punkahpullers, com-  mencing from date of  embarkation to India ;  If free quarters are not provided,  an allowance of Rs. 3 a day  should be paid.                                      (b) double first-class fare by  rail when travelling  on duty;          (c) first-class passage when  proceeding by steamer  from one part of India  to another on duty.            H. Qualified Euro-  pean, Eurasian  or Native nurses  locally recruit-  ed.                                Such pay not ordinarily  exceeding Rs. 75 a month  with free quarters or Rs.  10 for house rent.                                  When the nurses attend on  plague patients, a boarding  allowance of Rs. 1-8-0 a day  in the case of Europeans and  Eurasians, or one rupee in the  case of natives should be paid.  When employed on duties en-  tailing a considerable amount of  moving about within a limited  area and necessitating the  frequent hiring of vehicles,  they may be paid actual con-  veyance allowances irrespective  of the five miles limit pres-  cribed in article 1157 of the  Civil Service Regulations. For  terms on which caste native  nurses may be trained, see  G.O., No. 1835-P., dated 23rd  December 1899.  * See note * on the previous page.
?59 Appendix G-.] PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation. Salary. Remarks. J. private persons  appointed as  plague supervisors Rs. 2 a day + Rs. 15, horse allowance. Such supervisors should usually  be  Europeans    or    Eurasians.  They   need  not  be  appointed  unless the outbreak of  plague  requires a special organization  to deal with it. K ...... ...... L. ...... ...... M ...... ...... N. Other temporary  subordinates including   menial servants. Such    rates    as   would   be  sufficient to induce persons to  take  up  the appointments.       Menial servants are not eligible  for any allowances, and should   be    conveyed   from    place   to     place at the cost of  Government.
