?Memorandum on the precautions to be taken against Cholera. It is not improbable that Cholera, which last year caused such great mortality in certain  districts of the Central Provinces, will again show itself in different parts of the country, as the season in which it .more commonly  prevails approaches; and, as it is to be  feared that this year a scanty water-supply and scarcity of food will arise,-evils which   will render the mass of the population more than usually liable to the effects of epidemic influences,-it is the more neces- sary that increased efforts should be made for the removal of those circumstances which are  known to favour the  spread  of choleraic influence and to increase its virulence. 2.    The experience of the recent epidemic in these Provinces confirms the opinions  formed on observations  of former  epidemics,  that   the two principal dangers against which especial vigilance ought to be used are:-First, the danger of drinking water which is in any (even the slightest) degree tainted by human excrement, or other matters in a state of decomposition, as water from rivers and streams, the banks of which are used as ordure fields,-from tanks which are used for washing the person or clothes, or from open wells liable to pollution by the.  use of foul vessels for drawing water, or by the reflux of water from persons washing on the brink; and, secondly, the danger of breathing air which is made foul with effluvia from the same sort of impurity. That the air and water-supply of nearly all towns and villages in this country are most liable to this kind of pollution, is only too evident.     In these Provinces great efforts have  been made     to obviate this evil, and indeed it is to the application of conservancy rules, and the general cleanliness insisted in all the larger towns, that the marked degree in which they experienced comparative immunity from Cholera in the late epidemic,  is, in all probability, to be attributed. 3.    The great object of all sanitary precautions  is to prevent,   if possible, those unwholesome conditions which favour the spread of Cholera from arising; and the following suggestions are  offered as to the best means by which  this object may be attained. 4.    In the first place, care must be taken that the soil within the "Abadee" or in the immediate vicinity, is not defiled with excrement, and that refuse matter is nowhere allowed to accumulate. 5. The free circulation of fresh air through streets and houses tend greatly to check the spread of epidemic disease and mitigate its violence; and Cholera is found to be most destructive where the houses are thickly crowded together and the free admission of fresh air is obstructed. Unfortunately, this is the case in the greater proportion of towns and villages of this part of the country. This is a great evil, bat it is aggravated ten-fold by the practice commonly followed of stalling cattle within the villages. The number of cattle belonging to a village frequently exceeds the population, and these are all confined at night, not only within the village, but often within the houses-men, women, children and cattle all sharing the same hut. By this practice the air is rendered very impure, and people living in it are rendered more liable to the attacks of epidemic disease. It ought not to-be difficult for the owners of cattle to enter into some common arrangement for stalling and guarding them outside the "Abadees." 6.    To guard against the danger of drinking  impure water,  extreme vigi- lance is called for. Where wells exist, water from them should be used for drinking
?2 in preference to water from tanks and rivers. As, however, wells in this country are always uncovered, they are by no means free from liability to pollution, impure matters find their way into the water from the surface; and water flowing back into a village well from a person washing on the brink might terribly infect the sole water-supply available for the whole community. Drawing water from a well with a gurrah or other vessel which has previously contained foul water, would produce the same result; and instances are not wanting in which the diffusion of Cholera of extreme violence over a village has been apparently due to the pollution of the well in some such way. 7.    All wells, the water of which is used for drinking, should, if possible, be cleaned out every hot weather.  This is especially necessary when the water-supply of a well is scanty.    Jhiryahs, or small shallow wells, are extremely dangerous as permanent sources of water-supply ; they are  very liable to pollution, and in the hot   weather  the supply of water  commonly becomes  very scanty.    When a Jhiryah is  the sole source of water-supply   available, efforts should be made to lessen the danger arising from it by  deepening it  to the greatest extent possible, and by carefully preserving the ground around from  being fouled. 8.    The greatest vigilance should be used in preventing the banks of rivers and streams, or the ravines intersecting them,  from being defiled by excrement. The great prevalence of Cholera in villages situated on the banks of rivers and streams is no doubt due to pollution of the water from this cause.    The practice of bathing and washing clothes in the same part of the stream  from which any part of the population draws  water, is in a high degree dangerous, and should be prevented.    There is, however, a custom commonly resorted to-and, as it appears, especially during the prevalence of Cholera-which most horribly pollutes the water-supply, on which a large proportion  of the  population depends.     I allude to the custom of throwing dead bodies into the large  streams.     During the late epidemic Cholera raged   with extreme violence along the  Nerbudda, the Hiron, and other large streams, and there can be little doubt that this extreme severity was in a measure due to this disgusting pollution of the water.    The inhabitants of all places situated on such streams should co-operate in putting a stop to so, revolting a practice. 9.    Where a river or stream is the source of water supply for a community water for drinking should always be drawn above the village, and when the stream is running rapidly, where the nature of the ground renders it practicable  a tem- porary well may be sunk in the bank or bed several feet from the stream.  Water filtering into this, if carefully protected from surface pollution, will   be less dan- gerous than water from the stream itself.    A well  of this kind,  however,  must not be continued in use for any long time;   it is chiefly serviceable  towards the end of the hot weather when the streams are lowest, and in the early part of the rains when the water contains the greatest amount of impurities. 10.    All tanks near towns or villages are liable to pollution, and are more or less dangerous as sources of water-supply; but a deep tank with steep sides faced with masonry is very much safer than a tank with shallow shelving sides.    Where the latter condition exists, the measure of sinking a well some feet from the edge of the water should be resorted to. 11.    The same precautions against fouling the borders and polluting  the water, as above recommended in the case of rivers, are, of course, quite as urgently called for as regards tanks from which drinking water is drawn.    It is necessary here to refer to a custom which prevails in some places of not allowing persons of the lowest caste to draw water from wells resorted to by the higher castes. From this it sometimes happens, where there is but one well in a village, that persons of low caste
3 are compelled to drink water from the nearest dirty tank or stagnant nullah. It is well that all should bear in mind that the personal safety of each individual is dependent on the safety of the whole community; that a Chumar, a Dher, or a Gond attacked with Cholera brings the infection home to the doors of all. The influential classes of a community will, therefore, best ensure their own safety and that of their families by using their utmost influence to preserve untainted the air that is common to all, and that all alike have access to the purest water attainable. 12. When Cholera is prevalent, it is a safe precaution not to drink any water that has not been previously boiled. Fresh water ought to be boiled every morning, and what remains of it should be thrown away at night. The water ought not to stand where dirt of any kind can get into it, and great care should be taken to see that vessels in which water is drawn from wells, or in which the water for daily use is kept, are thoroughly clean. 13. When Cholera threatens to appear, or when it has broken out in a dis- trict, people should avoid attending fairs, marriages, or large assemblies of any kind. During the late epidemic the spread of Cholera was very greatly promoted by marriage processions; it frequently happened that Cholera broke out in a " Burath," causing great mortality among the "Burrathees," and becoming diffused over a wide circle of villages that had been previously uninfected. A person joining a "Burath" or fair when Cholera prevails, runs the greatest risk of catching the disease; and, by bringing home the infection, he places the lives of his relatives and neighbours in most imminent danger. All such assemblies should be post- poned till the epidemic has passed over. Long journeys, from, the long fasting, fatigue, and increased exposure to the sun or to wet, which they occasion, render persons undertaking them more liable to the disease, and should be avoided. In fact, those persons act best for their own personal safety and for the safety of the community to which they belong, who, while Cholera prevails, remain quietly at home, not even visiting a weekly bazaar, unless required to do so by urgent necessity. 14. When Cholera is prevalent, Government endeavours to place remedies for the disease as far as possible within the reach of all. At all Government Dispensaries, Thanahs, and Police Outposts, medicines are deposited which will be distributed to all attacked, or to Malgoozars and other influential persons who may be willing to undertake to distribute them to the sick in their own villages. The first sign of Cholera is commonly a slight purging. If proper medicines are taken to check this, the worst effects of the disease will often be averted. When, therefore, during the prevalence of Cholera any person is attacked with the slightest diarrha, the medicines provided by Government should be immediately resorted to. 15.     It is of the greatest importance that persons attending on the sick should be extremely careful in disposing of the discharges from the stomach and bowels.    They should be covered immediately with a large quantity of dry earth or ashes, removed at once, and buried deeply in the ground at a distance from, any well, tank or stream. 16.     Dead bodies must also be buried at a distance from any water-supply, and on no account be thrown into a stream. S. C. TOWNSEND, Sanitary Commissioner, Dated 9th March 1869. Central Provinces and Berars.
