ii PAGE MADRAS.FINDINGS OF THE COMMISSION ON EXAMINATION OF THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. (1) Dallunda. (p. 22-39.) I.2 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Case No. 17FINDINGS OF THE COMMISSION ON EXAMINATION OF THE ALLEGED 3 HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. in the family; and the man's insanity is attributed "to fright in a dream." In this case we have an illustration of an entry of cause being based on information given by a village chaukidar. Case No. 444 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Extract from the evidence of Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Bovill, regarding the Patna Asylum hemp drug cases for 1892. Taking the cases in the same order as the Commission: (1) Salick Patick. I stated this is a doubtful case, as there is insanity in the family. Hemp drugs may have been the exciting cause. The report of a full enquiry conducted by Babu Bhawani Prasad Neogi and the Civil Surgeon of Saran, states "that the witnesses who were examined, including the mother, uncle, and the next-door neighbours of the lunatic, agree in saying that Salik Patick never consumed ganja, bhang, alcohol, opium, dhatura, or any intoxicating drug whatever. They all attribute the lunacy to fright in a dream." The Deputy Magistrate supposes that Lakhu Dusadh, the chaukidar who brought the lunatic to the authorities, is responsible for the statement that the lunacy was due to bhang. He has been unable to find Lakhu Dusadh and to take his statement. This is, therefore, a very doubtful case and de- pends on the Descriptive Roll, which gives bhang as the cause, and the state- ment of the lunatic, which gives ganja as the drug he used. The first entry in the case book is as follows:FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 45 resist the temptation, and thought he was out of danger of a relapse. He again took to smoking ganja. He had smoked for 4 or 5 days only very moderately, when the relapse came on." He was admitted to the asylum, and recovered after 7 months. The asylum history does not agree with this report. The man, no doubt, took ganja. On his first admission it is stated that he had taken it for 11 or 12 years that is, from boy hood, he being then about twenty-six. The report says he only smoked it for 10 or 12 days. The report says he remained sane for 5 years after he was discharged. He was back in the asylum within three years and five months of his discharge. I consider this a real case of insanity produced by ganja. (4) Siba Thakur. I thought that this was a case of insanity in which hemp drugs formed merely the exciting cause. The report submitted by the Joint Magistrate of Dharbanga and the Civil Sur- geon stated that "He took to thieving at the early age of twelve; was convicted when about 18 years old. He used to smoke ganja in small quantities; but he was particularly addicted to women. He never showed signs of madness before he went to Jail the last time; on the contrary he was a very cunning thief. He must have become mad in Jail." This man appears to have always been of a wandering, dishonest, and lazy habit and to have lost control of his temper. He was often under re- straint in Bhagalpur and Darbhanga Jails, and assaulted a warder in the Darbhanga Jail in November 1891 before his last conviction. The Descriptive Roll states that probably he was insane when formerly in Jail. He is still dangerous, violent, destructive, and filthy after 18 months' treatment. I still doubt that this case was entirely caused by hemp. From an early age he seems to have been vicious and uncontrollable. (5) Maghan Gir. I stated that the history of this case points to temporary insanity from ganja. The further report on the case by the Magistrate of Muzaffarpur, which was received on 11th January 1894, quite bears out this opinion. There is no hereditary and no other known cause of insanity. Maghun Gir is a fakir, but has abstained from sexual intercourse all his life. He began to smoke ganja about a month before he became insane. He tried to commit sui- cide by lying down in front of a train, and 7 or 8 days later entered a rail- way carriage and broke a pane of glass. For this he was arrested, and, being insane, was sent to the asylum. Report states: "He consumed about the same quantity of ganja, i.e., two or three chillums daily for about a month. He took bhang regularly." Maghan Gir himself says he used to smoke ganja regularly for ten years, sometimes 10 chillums a day, and that he also took bhang. The only witness examined is the lunatic's brother, he, Maghan Gir, being absent on a pilgrimage. This appears a case of insanity due to ganja. (6) Bihari Runiar. I stated that there was no proof that this case was caused by hemp drugs. The report conducted by the Joint Magistrate and Civil Surgeon of Dur- bhanga states that "He was addicted to ganja and to drink, but not in ex- cessive quantities. He went to the Sonepore Fair in the best of health. He returned after a stay of 7 to 10 days completely mad, and after staying a few days at home he disappeared. He was a wrestler." This is most likely a case of insanity caused by ganja. 12
46 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. He, being already a ganja smoker, probably indulged in the vice to-excess while at the fair. I hear that wrestlers often take ganja and bhang. (7) Ram Sarup Das alias Ramcheriter Thakur. An enquiry was held by Deputy Magistrate, Moulvi Syed Karim, in consultation with the Civil Surgeon of Champaran. I thought that the insanity was due to ganja, because it is said that the man took ganja and because the symptoms disappeared rapidly. I had no evi- dence that the man took ganja except the Descriptive Roll. The report states that there is no family history of insanity, and that "he was not addicted to ganja-smoking before or during the time that he was insane or to any other intoxicants, such as alcohol, opium, etc. Owing to certain reverses of fortune, he fell into great pecuniary difficulties and was obliged to sell his trees and mortgage his lands." "These difficulties exercised a very injurious influence on his mind, and he be- came seriously ill with fever a year before he turned insane. It is difficult to say why the insanity in the above case was ascribed to ganja-smoking, the result of the enquiries conclusively proving that it had no connection whatever with the use of that drug." This case appears to have been due to misfortune. (8) Adit Misr. I stated that insanity may have been caused by ganja-smoking, but there is no proof whatever that this is the case. He was recorded to have admitted ganja-smoking, and he was a religious beggar. The report made by the same officers as in the last case (No. 6) states that "None of the relatives of Adit Misr could be traced, and consequently no further enquiries could be made in the case." The result of the more careful enquiry, therefore, is that the cases of Salik Patick and Siba Thakur are very doubtful; that of Ram Sarup Das is alto- gether contradicted. The cases of Kali Singh, Gajadhur Ahir, Bihari Runiar, and Maghan Gir appear to be really due to hemp drugs; and that of Adit Misr has no further light thrown on it by the enquiry, and stands on his own admission and the fact of his being a religious beggar or devotee.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 47, DACCA LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. COBB.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity. (Statement VII.) Type of insanity. (Statement VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from enquiry from Superintendent. 1. Charan Das; Hin- du; Cultivator; Dacca; 66; No. K 117. Ganja Dementia Good This man was first admitted to the asylum in September 1857 at the age of 31 and discharged in June 1864. Re-admitted on 1st October 1864. In the re- gister for 1864 it is entered: "Stated in his Descriptive Roll to have been insane for last nine years; has not had any of his relatives insane; is addicted to ganja, which is the assigned cause of his insanity. During insanity he has been intractable, violent, destructive, at times irascible, talkative and incoherent at times, silent and generally melancholic." He escaped in 1867, 1868, and 1871, and then again on the 10th December 1891. He was recaptured and sent back into the Asylum by the Police on 8th January 1892, and so appears as an admission of that year. None of the papers in this case are now forthcoming. Since admission to the asylum in 1857 he has been reported to be intractable talkative, and in- coherent, and filthy in his habits. Is always watching an opportu- nity of escaping. In October 1872 Dr. Wise reports that he is a stu- pid fellow who brightens up when ganja is mentioned. In May 1883 he was excited for four or five days, was restless and destructive, and was so violent that he had to be kept under restraint. In Nov- ember 1887 he is reported to have been occasionally excited and vio- lent. As a rule he was quiet and harmless. He died of dysentery on 22nd July 1893. The post-mortem examination show- ed (inter, alia)48 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 49 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189250 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 51 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189252. REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. NOTE ON CASES OF INSANITY ATTRIBUTED TO THE USE OF HEMP DRUGS ADMITTED INTO THE DACCA LUNATIC ASYLUM DURING 1892. (Submitted by Surgeon-Major Cobb to the Commission when orally examined.) 1. Charan Dass.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 53 Report of Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Russell, Superintendent of the Dacca Lunatic Asylum, submitting further information regarding the Hemp Drug cases of 1892. 1. Charan Das.54 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. BERHAMPORE LUNATIC ASYLUM (BENGAL). (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. MEADOWS.) Hemp Drug eases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity. (Statement VII.) Type of in- sanity. (State- ment VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from Inquiry from the Superintendent, etc. I. Surat Chandra Ghose; Kyasth; Zemindar,* Khul- na; 17; No. 146. * Son of muharrir (further inquiry). Ganja Toxic insanity. Indiffer- ent. The medical certificate says that he is violent and dangerous and has lucid intervals. The Descrip- tive Roll shows that the insanity had lasted three months, that the patient was "addicted to ganja- smoking formerly and can smoke now if he gets it," that "ganja- smoking" is assigned as the cause, and that there is no his- tory of epilepsy or heredity. Admitted, 6th January 1892. Discharged, 31st January 1893. The case book shows that the luna- tic says "that the cause of his be- coming insane was that he took to religion and counting beads, and his beads were stolen." He improves from the time of ad- mission, and is declared sane on 7th June 1892 and discharged on 31st January 1893. 2. Pitambar Singh; Rajput; Cultivator Bhagalpur; 40; No. 150. Ganja Mania Bad The medical certificate shows that "he never answers any questions though he sometimes makes sounds with his lips closed," and is filthy in his habits. The Descriptive Roll shows that he had been insane since October 1891, that he was "addicted to ganja-smoking previously," that the insanity was "possibly due to ganja-smoking," that there was no history of heredity, and that it was not known whether he had epilepsy. "It appears that he became insane and did not eat properly, and one day after sunrise, while his wife was seated in the verandah of the house, he came from behind and cut her in the right ear." He was "melan- cholic." Admitted, 17th March 1892. Died, 16th July 1892. "Since admission he has been very filthy. * * Keeps on moaning, does not sleep at night, eats badly, * * refuses to answer any questions." He required forcible feeding by the nose in May and had suicidal tendency. He was admitted to hospital for diarrhoea on 28th June and died 15th July. The post-mortem showed death to be due to dy- sentery with infarctions in the lungs. The type is shown as "Mania." 3. Karanu Shaha; Hin- du; Shopkeeper; Rangpur; 21; No. 151. Ganja. Toxic insanity. Fair The medical certificate shows that he "talked excitedly and irrele- vantly, tore his clothes, threaten- ed to strike others, dirty in his habits, voiding solid excreta in his clothes from 20th to 23rd Feb- ruary 1892. Has been quiet, ra- tional, and even courteous since." The Descriptive Roll shows that he had been mischievous and vio- lent, that he "is reported to have been insane for the last four years," that he was "apparently not" addicted to any intoxicant, and that "no cause is assigned except bayu (vertigo?). "There is no history, heredity or epilep- sy. His age is "20 or 21 years." Admitted, 19th March 1892. The case book shows that he was admitted to the Asylum on 4th September 1889, "aged 17 years." He had been insane about eight months, and had been insane once before, but cured after five or six months; "violent and dangerous and not addicted to drugs." "The medical certificate says that he is suffering from acute mania with perfect inter- missions of sanity. On 24th March 1891 he "appears sane; says that his sister said he had been made mad by jadu." In June 1891 he was discharged sane. He was re-admitted on 19th March 1892 "in fair health and phy- sique, and appearing quiet and harmless." There was no im- provement until 18th December 1893, when he is considered sane, but unfit for release.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 55 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189256 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 57 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189258 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Report of the Superintendent regarding the Hemp Drug cases admitted into the Berhampore Lunatic Asylum during the year 1892. 1 2 3 4 5 Serial number. Name, race, occupa- tion, and age. Special enquiry is now requested to be made in each case as to whether the alleged cause of insanity was really due to hemp drugs as reported. Remarks.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 59 Report of the Superintendent regarding the Hemp Drug cases admitted into the Berhampore Lunatic Asylum during the year 1892. 1 2 3 4 5 Serial number. Name, race, occupa- tion, and age. Special enquiry is now requested to be made in each case as to whether the alleged cause of insanity was really due to hemp drugs as reported. Remarks.60 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Report of the Superintendent regarding the Hemp Drug cases admitted into the Berhampore Lunatic Asylum during the year 1892. 1 2 3 4 5 Serial number. Name, race, occupa- tion, and age. Special enquiry is now requested to be made in each case as to whether the alleged cause of insanity was really due to hemp drugs as reported. Remarks.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 61 CASE NO. 7. Copy of a letter No. 208 Crl., dated Nawadah, the 21st May 1894, from the Sub- Divisional Officer, Nawadah, to the Magistrate of Gya. WITH reference to your Memo. No. 1051, dated the 4th May 1894, directing an en- quiry to be made in regard to the cause of insanity of one Hari Das, lunatic, I have the honour to submit the following result of my enquiry about the matter. 1. Sardari Koiri, aged 35 years. 2. Somer Koiri, aged 40 years. 3. Gango Sonar, aged 45 years. 2. I had sent for the relatives of the alleged lunatic at first, but it was reported that there were none alive among them in the village, so I had to send for a few of his next-door neighbours who appeared before me to-day and gave the following accounts of his habits. Their names are noted in the margin. They appear to be intelligent and reliable. 3. They say that the lunatic Hari Das was formerly called Dhamri Dhanook and was by caste a Dhanook. His parents had died long before he became insane. He first became insane about 15 years ago and was sent to the lunatic asylum by name of Damri. He returned from the asylum on his recovery after two years' confinement, and lived at his native village for about 7 years in sound health and mind. During these seven years he passed for a sadhu and designated himself as Hari Das. It is also alleged that when residing at his village during this period of seven years, he once committed theft and was imprisoned for two years. On his return from the jail he returned to his house and again passed for a sadhu and lived on begging. It is about six years that they saw that he went with his younger son, Sheo Charn, to Sahibganj, Kajrote, in Bhagalpur, where the latter was married and that they heard nothing of him since then. 4. They state further that before Hari Das went mad, he used to smoke ganja only once a day, but on his return from the lunatic asylum he began to smoke twice a day, and that he never used bhang. They further state that the alleged lunatic Hari Das was not insane in reality, but that he pretended to be so in order to cover his misdoings. According to them, the use of hemp drugs was not the real cause of his insanity as he used them very moderately, neither was he subjected to any sad affliction, which might have been the cause of his insanity. 5. As stated above, his father died some 25 years ago; his mother died two years later, and his wife died some ten years ago; his first son, named Shankar Dhanook, was punished for theft, and it is not known where he is at present. It appears that Hari Das has been confined in the Lunatic Asylum for a second time and was sent there by the Magistrate of Bhagalpur. 6. The form annexed with your letter under reply is returned herewith. Case No. 11. The record in the Sessions case, Empress vs. Purna Chandra Rishi, has been perused. Seven witnesses speak to the madness of the prisoner since Asar; but not one mentions ganja or bhang. The prisoner's mother (whom he had wounded) said: "Purna's two sons had died before the occurrence. He also lost his son-in-law. Since Asar Purna had become like a mad man." His cousin (son of the woman he killed) said: "I cannot say why he became mad. He had two sons, one of whom died. He never had any son-in-law." No other witness was asked about the cause of insanity, and the Judge does not refer to it. The Civil Surgeon of Jessore said: "I had the prisoner under observation for some time, and observed his mental condition during the time, and I came to the conclusion that he was a weak-minded and somewhat demented individual. He seemed perfectly harm- less. But on hearing that he had committed such great crimes, I am of opinion that he is not harmless, and that he has probably temporary fits of mania." He said nothing about the cause of insanity. 16
62 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. CUTTACK LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT DR. ZORAB). Hemp Drug case admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity. (Statement VII.) Type of insa- nity. (State- ment VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from the registers and by inquiry from the Superintendent, etc Bira Das; Hindu; Peon; Balasore; 41; No. 351. Ganja Mania This is a criminal lunatic. The case book shows that this man was admitted in March 1879. In April of that year there is this entry: "States that a Bairagi gave him ganja to drink and that he called him a second time, but because he did not go he made him insane." For years there are entries showing "irritability," "disposition un- certain," "sullen," and that the man has delusions of visions of Jaganath and visits of evil spirits. He was declared fit to take his trial in the beginning of 1892 and re-admitted after trial on 6th May 1892. The Civil Surgeon of Balasore (Dr. Zorab) was examined before the Court on 10th February 1879. He said he had had Bira Das under observation and consider- ed him of unsound mind and incapable of making his defence. The Descriptive Roll shows the duration of the attack as "about five months;" that "one of the ancestors of the lunatic was in- sane;" that the lunatic is not addicted to ganja or any intoxi- cant; that the cause is "heredi- tary;" and that he had "kill- ed his mistress Hira by repeated blows on the head with a heavy salwood faggot." He had no history of epilepsy. His state remained much the same until 14th December 1893, when the visitors declared that he was "recovered" and must be "brought under provisions of paragraph 3 of Rules 'A, Re- covered Criminal Lunatics,' i.e., a period of four years should be spent in an Asylum before action is taken." It may be remarked that this rule only applies to cases where "the alleged cause is not ganja or other intoxicant." The man was admitted into the asylum in March 1879 accord- ingly. He was discharged to stand his trial on 12th February 1892, and re-admitted on 6th May 1892. The papers then re- ceived with him include the judgment of Mr. Cornish, "Assistant Superintendent, Tri- butary Mahals." The judg- ment says: "In January last he (the prisoner) was "declared capable of making his defence. Proceedings against him were therefore resumed. Such evid- ence as was procurable has been recorded; and a formal charge of murder has been drawn up. The accused pleads insanity and oblivion of what occurred. The act itself was scarcely that of a sane man. There is evidence to show that he has previously been obliged to leave the Raja's ser- vice on account of insanity. One at least of the witnesses who saw him a few hours after the murder considered him then insane. He has been detained in a Lunatic Asylum for some thirteen years. The presumption therefore is almost irresistible that when kill- ing Hira he was incapable of knowing the nature of the act." There is nothing in the judgment as to the cause of insanity. There is no reference to ganja. The registers show that the type was shown as "mania" from 1879 to 1887, as "toxic insanity" in 1888 and 1889, and again as "mania" from 1890 to 1894; and that the cause is blank from 1879 to 1886 and shown as gania from 1887 to 1894. There is nothing to show why ganja was entered in 1887. The man, who is now sane, depos- ed before us as follows: "My father was not insane, but my grandfather was. I received ganja from a Bairagi and smoked it twice, morning and evening, for three of four days. I had never smoked ganja before. It made me senseless, and I forgot every- thing and killed Hira. I had left the Raja's service before I met the Bairagi. I had left the ser- vice because I was mad. Sun- stroke and other things had de- stroyed my head and made me senseless, so I left. It was after that I met the Bairagi who gave me the ganja. It was a month or fortnight after leaving the Raja through madness that I met the Bairagi. I had not tasted ganja before I became mad first." Dr. Zorab is of opinion that ganja has no connection with the insani- ty in this case. This was his opinion when he first saw the case as Civil Surgeon of Balasore; and he has seen no cause in the subsequent history of the case to change his opinion. NOTE.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 63 TEZPUR (ASSAM) LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. MACNAMARA.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity. (Statement VII.) Type of insa- nity. (State- ment VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from inquiry from Superintendent, etc. 1. Uchit Ram; Hindu; Shopkeeper; Mu- zaffarpur; 35; No: 8. Ganja Toxic insanity. Indiffer- ent. This man was "sent up from the Binduguri Garden as an insane." There is no medical certificate. The Descriptive Roll shows that (9) "the lunatic sometimessmokes ganja and takes liquor;" that (10) "no cause can be ascer- tained" for the insanity; and that he has only delusions on religious subjects and is sometimes violent. There is no history of epilepsy or heredity. Admitted, 9th May 1892. Discharged, 22nd June 1893. His condition did not alter in the Asylum; but, being harmless, the man was made over to his brother on 22nd June 1893. There is no mention of ganja as the cause by the Superintendent in the case book; but the Jamadar has entered ganja in the general register and case book heading. 2. Akhilananda Vish- navite; Beggar, Purulia; 33; No. 12. Ganja Toxic insanity. Good Dr. Mullane's medical certificate shows that this man "mutilated himself, cut off his penis. His manner is strange and wild, his answers incoherent. Refuses to do any work. He has lucid intervals." The Descriptive Roll shows that nothing is known of the cause of insanity or of the habits and previous history of the insane. Admitted, 24th June 1892. There is no improvement until 1st March 1893. This improvement is continued up to date, but he is still insane. The Jamadar entered cause of insanity as "ganja-smoking" in the general register. 3. Jalim Ghatwai; Tea cooly; unknown; 20; No. 14. Ganja Toxic insanity. Good The medical certificate shows that "he talks nonsense. He climb- ed to the roof of the cell saying that he is in fear of people eat- ing him. He says that the gods want to bite him." The Descriptive Roll shows: (7) the duration as about two months; that (8) "his father is a great ganja-smoker and some- times shows signs of insanity"; that (9) "Jalim took to the use of ganja about two years ago, and I attribute his insanity great- ly to this"; that (10) "I think the cause is ganja"; and (14) that "the change has been gradual." This is signed "Alek Campbell." Admitted, 15th July 1892. Discharged, 28th October 1892. This man " has not shown any signs of insanity since admission"; and was made over to his mother's care. Nothwithstanding the above, the disease was entered as "me- lancholia" in the case book. 4. Saheb Ram Gowala; Tea cooly; Ranchi; 35; No. 15. Ganja Toxic insanity. Good Dr. Mullane's medical certificate shows that "he suffers from de- lusions of a dangerous character. His manner is wild and excited. His speech is quick and incoher- ent. His actions are aimless and purposeless." The Descriptive Roll shows that the man is "an agreement coolie"; that (9) he "smokes ganja," and that (10) his insanity is caused by "reading religiousbooks." There is no history of epilepsy or heredity.Admitted, 7th August 1892. Escaped, 29th September 1892. There was no improvement while in the Asylum. The case book shows the case as one of "acute mania." The Jamadar had entered the cause as ganja-smoking.
64 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 65 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189266 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 67 Telegram, dated 20th May 1894. From68 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. BENARES LUNATIC ASYLUM (NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES). (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. O'BRIEN.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation,district, age, and registernumber of lunatic. Allegedcause ofInsanity.(StatementVII.) Type of Insa- nity. (State- ment VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained fromregisters and from enquiries fromSuperintendent. CRIMINAL. MAGISTRATE'S I. A. 1 Bhawanidin, son of Lachman; Hindu; Mali; Benares; 20. Ganja Toxic insanity. Bad 1. In good health. 2. Toxic insanity, said to be dueto ganja-smoking. Is harm- less. 3. Duration of insanity, un-known, continuous since under observation. EVIDENCE, I. C. Has fits of insanity. Goes away from home and wanders about, throwing away his clothes, but not harming any one. When fit is over returns home. Mutters to himself at times. Stole a she-goat and a hooka while in a state of insanity. CIVIL SURGEON, I. B. Vacant, unintelligent expression, answers questions with difficulty and stupidly, neglects his person, and is very filthy. No information to be got as to the grounds on which the Magistrate pronounced the insanity to be due to ganja-smoking. A jama- dar at the Asylum speaks to the lunatic's ganja habit. The lunatic was admitted in Novem- ber 1891, in anticipation of orders, and discharged in June 1892. The register records that he was dull and stupid, but at times excited, had fever after admission, quieted down and became sane, though liable to fits of excitement. This case was entered as one of toxic insanity on strength of Magistrate's summary. The papers connected with the lunatic's trial were obtained from the Magistrate's Court. They include depositions by lunatic's father and two neighbours. All three stated that he was not ad- dicted to any intoxicating drug. There is nothing in the English papers to show why the Magis- trate attributed insanity to ganja. The Commissioner, Mr. Finlay, informed us that the Magistrate, Barbudu Singh, was not very efficient. CRIMINAL. MAGISTRATE'S I. A. 2. Ramdas; Hindu; Thakor; Cultivator, Benares (no fixed residence); 20. Ganja Toxic insanity. Good 1. In good health. 2. Toxic insanity, dangerous toothers, caused by ganja- smoking. 3. Duration unknown, continuoussince admission. EVIDENCE, I. C. Snatched a "dhusa" (shawl) from a person, was pursued and arrested. CIVIL SURGEON, I. B. Has unsettled, excited expression, talks perpetually in an excited manner, and is full of delusions and confused ideas, neglects his person, does not sleep, and is very noisy at all times. He was in the Asylum from Janu- ary 1892, though formally ad- mitted in April and discharged in August 1893. For the first 3 months was excited then quieted down and became to all intents and purposes sane. He was always complaining that he had taken an overdose of ganja when he was unaccustomed to it, and had suffered many months' de- tention in consequence. The type of insanity was given on the Magistrate's summary, and not on Superintendent's observation. NON-CRIMINAL. MAGISTRATE'S ORDER. 3. Bhagwoti Pershad; Hindu; Kayasth; Mirzapur; 25. Ganja Toxic insanity. Fairly good. Threw himself into a well to have a bath. Not dangerous. Exces- sive ganja-smoking. No other cause known. Admitted in April 1892 and still in the Asylum. Has improved in health and decency and clean- liness, and is now apathetic. Type of insanity based on Civil
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 69 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189270 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 71 Report by Surgeon-Major Sweeney, Superintendent, Benares Asylum on the Hemp Drug cases of 1892. I have the honour now to enclose the result of the local enquiries held by the Magis- trates and Civil Surgeons into the cases of the six lunatics selected from the asylum for enquiry, and whose insanity was attributed to the use of Indian hemp in one or other of its forms. No. 3, Bhagwoti Pershad. Of the six no trace could be found of Nos. 1 and 2, by name Bhawanidin and Ram Das, and consequently no enquiries could be made regarding them; but the remaining four cases have been duly enquired into and the results are forwarded herewith. As regards No. 3, by name Bhasrwoti Pershad. In this case there is no reason to doubt that ganja and bhang are responsible for the insanity. The evidence of the uncle, Madho Pershad, and of Josodanund, showed that Bhagwoti Pershad was addicted to the excessive use of ganja and bhang, and in the absence of all trace of heredity or of any other probable exciting cause, it is reasonable to assume that his malady was caused as stated. No. 4, Ramlal. No. 4, by name Ramlal.72 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. not to be found. His mother states that he was kidnapped by a recruiter of emigrants. She denies that he ever consumed drugs at all, and I cannot find out on what ground the Magistrate stated that insanity was caused by ganja-smoking. Perhaps the Superintend- ent of the Asylum can obtain some information on this point. 3. Local enquiry as to the cause of insanity of Bhagwoti Pershad. Madhopershad, son of Sunder Lal, caste Kayast, present resident of Welleslyganj, occupation service, aged 28 years, on oath, states that Bhagwoti Pershad, the insane, is my nephew. Since he attained the age of 14 or 15 years he used to smoke 4 or 5 pice worth ganja every day, and often he was also in the habit of taking bhang and black pepper. It is about two years past he has turned insane. No member of our family or anybody in the family of Bhagwoti Pershad's mother's side had ever insanity. I know not how Bhagwoti Pershad turned insane. When he was attacked with the malady I was not with him, and so I can't say what signs of insanity he had then. Jasodanand, son of Daljit Pershad, caste Kayast, at present residing at Welleslyganj former resident of Akorhi, occupation service, aged about 45 years, on oath, states that, Bhagwoti Pershad is my son. It is over two years Bhagwoti Pershad has turned insane; he was in the habit of smoking ganja 5 or 6 chilams, 4 or 5 pice worth, daily, and used often bhang as well. Since he attained the age of 14 or 15 years he used to smoke ganja.Some four or five months prior to his insanity his mind was not well, his appetite and memory was also becoming loose gradually, and then all of a sudden he turned mad. Now he is in the Benares Lunatic Asylum. I hear that he is recovering. None of my or my father-in-law's family had insanity. It appears that, owing to his excessive use of ganjaand bhang, his memory turned unsound, and there is no other reason of his insanity. Shadi Lal, chowkidar, son of Bipat, caste Pasi, inhabitant of Mouza Akorhi, occupa- tion service, aged about 32 years, on oath, states that it is over two years Bhagwoti Pershad turned insane. I do not know the cause of his insanity, but I know that he was addicted to ganja and used often bhang as well. None in the family of Bhagwoti Pershad had ever insanity. Bhagwoti Pershad was not in the habit of taking liquor. OPINION. Bhagwoti Pershad is in the Lunatic Asylum. I sent Madho Pershad, his uncle, to the Assistant Surgeon in charge of Sadar, and both of us had a consultation regarding the cause of insanity of Bhagwoti Pershad. After that I proceeded on to the spot and had a local enquiry in the matter. Depositions of a few witnesses who are acquainted with the matter recorded, which are herewith submitted. From the enquiry I am of opinion that the cause of Bhagwoti Pershad's insanity is owing to his excessive use of ganja and bhang.The opinion of the Assistant Surgeon is also herewith annexed. CAMP AKORHI; GANGA NARAIN, Dated the 20th November 1893. Deputy Magistrate, Mirzapur. Statement made by Lalla Madho Ram, late Girdawal of His Highness the Maharajah of Benares at Kachowa. Name.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 73 nephew when he was insane, so he cannot give the full particulars and symptoms of his nephew's illness. His nephew has been sent to the Lunatic Asylum at Benares about 18 months ago and where he is still at present. He has been told that his nephew is almost cured now, and he will soon go to Benares to get his release from the Asylum. He can- not remember that any other member of his family had the same or allied disease before or at present. Remarks.74 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Bharos, son of Ram Dihal, caste Chamar, of Ahrora, age 27 years, occupation service, on oath, states that Ramlal lives in my beat. I do not know how Ramlal became insane. All of a sudden he turned insane. Ramlal did not smoke ganja or charas, but used to take one tola bhang every day in the evening time. I saw his father, Sheo Narain, who never used to take bhang or turned insane. GANGA NARAIN. OPINION. I sent Ramtal to the Civil Surgeon and had a consultation with him as well regarding the cause of insanity of Ramlal. After that I proceeded on to the spot and had a local enquiry in the matter. Depositions of Ramlal and a few witnesses acquainted with the cause of insanity of Ramlal recorded, which are also herewith submitted. From the enquiry I am of opinion that cause of Ramlal's insanity is owing to his excessive use of bhang. The opinion of the Civil Surgeon is herewith annexed. CAMP AHRORA; GANGA NARAIN, The 16th January 1894. Deputy Magistrate, Mirzapur. Ramlal, aged 22. Father's name.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 75 pepper twice daily. When he became 14 years old for four or five months he turned insane, and recovered from the malady through the treatment of country physicians. I too used to take bhang about one kori in measure every day for 40 years, and have discontinued now. Neither I myself, anybody in my family, nor any member in my father-in-law's family ever turned insane. When in the last time Hingan turned insane, he was also then in the habit of using bhang. One or one and a half months previous to his insanity his mind was not well. I do not know how Hingan turned insane. GANGA NARAIN. Abdul Majid Khan, son of Shukulla Khan, caste Pathan, of Bindhiachal, aged 28 years, occupation service (municipal chowkidar), on oath, states that I do not know how Hingan- lal became insane. He turned insane all of a sudden. Hinganlal was in the habit of taking one tola bhang daily. Neither Hingan's father nor any of his relatives ever had insanity. GANGA NARAIN. OPINION. I sent Hinganlal to the Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Sadar to find out the cause of his insanity, and had also a consultation with him. After that I proceeded on to the spot and had a local enquiry in the matter. Depositions of Hinganlal and a few wit- nesses who are acquainted with the cause of his insanity recorded, which are also here- with submitted. From the enquiry I am of opinion that the cause of Hingan's insanity is owing to his excessive use of bhang. The opinion of the Assistant Surgeon is also here- with enclosed. CAMP BINDIACHAL; GANGA NARAIN, The 15th November 1893. Deputy Magistrate, Mirzapur. Statement of Hingan, Brahman, a discharge inmate of Benares Lunatic Asylum. Name.76 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. 6. Ram Samair. Ram Smair I succeeded in finding. He is now in his right senses. I append state- ments made by him and also by other persons likely to have an intimate knowledge of him. From these statements it appears that Ram Smair never indulged in ganja, but that he occasionally took bhang in moderate quantities. It does not appear that this was really the cause of his becoming insane, though possibly insanity may have been hastened by an overdose of the drug. Ram Smair states:FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 77 AGRA LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL WILLCOCKS.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity. (Statement VII.) Type of insa- nity. (State- ment VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from inquiry from Superintendent, &c. 1. Ram Lal; Brah-man; Cultivator;Etah; 30; No. 168. Charas Mania Good The papers show that the insanityis "attributed to indulgence incharas and bhang," that thepatient is not subject to epi-lepsy, and that no member of hisfamily is insane. He is suicidal and dangerous. This is his firstattack, duration two months.He is described as incoherentand of filthy habits and laughsand grins, hums and makesnoises to himself. Admitted,28th January 1892. Dischargedcured, 12th September 1892. The register shows the cause as"not known." This entry ismade in Dr. O'Brien's hand-writting (then officiating Super-intendent). On 1st February he"answers questions quite ration-ally, no tendency to wander."On 10th August he is "so muchimproved as to be now fit fordischarge." These are the onlytwo entries. Apparently Dr.O'Brien did not regard this as ahemp drugs case. 2. Motilal; Hindu; Ironmonger; Faraka- bad; 28; No. 176. Bhang Mania Good This is a second attack and haslasted three months. It is attri-buted to the "use of bhang anddhatura." "Twenty or twenty-two years ago the lunatic's fatherand uncle were affected with in-sanity." He is dangerous, butnot suicidal. There is no entryabout epilepsy. The medicalcertificate shows "constant excite-ment, talking incessantly and in-coherently, tearing up his gar-ments, singing, wild and excitedappearance, and sleeplessnessand filthy habits." Admitted,29th April 1892. Dischargedcured, 12th September 1892. The register omits all reference todhatura. The entry was madeby a Deputy Superintendent,now pensioned. The omissionof dhatura is apparently a slip.On 10th August he "appearsto be much improved. Slightlyexcited when speaking." Onlooking up the papers for 1889we find that Motilal was admit-ted on 15th June 1889 for maniaattributed to "ganja" (thoughthe magisterial papers said"bhang"). He was discharg-ed on 10th November 1889.The family history of insanity isclearly brought out in the Magis-trate's papers, but is not referredto in the Asylum register. Thereis no heading for such an entry. 3. Gopal; Brahman;Labourer; Jhansi;25; No. 178. Ganja Toxicinsanity. Good This man "has been subject toinsanity for the last ten years."He "has been addicted to smok-ing ganja for the last ten years."There is no history of epilepsyor of insanity in the family. Heis suicidal, but not dangerous toothers except members of his ownfamily. He is "subject to hal-lucinations, especially on religi-ous matters." Admitted, 22ndMay 1892. In the register the cause is shownas "intoxicants (ganja)?" On11th August he is "very passion-ate and quarrelsome, beat awarder when much excited on14th June. Also excited on 20thJune; he tore his clothes andbeat his head against the ground.""On 3rd December he was ex-cited for three days and againfor two days in January. He isvery easily angered, passionate,quarrelsome, and excited. Ex-cited especially on 3rd March forthree days, talks nonsense andis very independent. Never sen-sible, works in cleaning party."This entry was made on 21stNovember 1893. 4. Jugla; Brahman; Labourer; Aligarh;25; No. 179. Charas Toxicinsanity. Bad This is his third attack and haslasted five months. His insanityis "attributed to over-indulgencein charas." He is not subjectto epilepsy and has no history ofinsanity in his family. He issuicidal and dangerous. "Heis quite incapable of lookingafter himself. He sings andmutters incoherently. Filthyhabits. He has the appearanceand habits of a poor harmlessand infirm lunatic. He wandersabout aimlessly, harmlessly, mut-tering." Admitted, 5th June 1892.Discharged cured, 13th February1893. The man has not been in thisAsylum before. On 11th Augusthe "talks nonsense. Habitsdirty, excited on 21st July."The next entry is 10th February1893, "He has steadily improv-ed and is reported to be quitesane since the beginning of Decem-ber. He has been quite harm-less from the first, and as hisinsanity was due to charas, hemay safely be released "cured." 20
78 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 79 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189280 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [ APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 81 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189282 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Opinion of the Officiating Superintendent, Agra Lunatic Asylum, on the hemp drug cases admitted into the Agra Lunatic Asylum in 1892. No. Name. Cause of insanity. Type of insanity. 1. Ram Lall, Brahman, Etah Charas and ganja Mania. 2 Motilal, Ironmonger, Far- akabad. Heredity and pecuniary losses. Mania. 3 Gopal, Brahman, Labourer, Jhansi. Ganja, bhang, and charas Mania. 4 Jugla, Brahman, Labourer, Ali- garh. Charas Mania. 5 Deoki Das, Brahman, Arrah The personal and family his- tories cannot be ascertained. 6 Krishna Pershad, Brahman, Beggar, Muttra. The personal and family his- tories cannot be ascertained. 7 Gulab, Mussalman, not known, Aligarh. The personal and family his- tories cannot be ascertained. 8 Narain, Khatri, not known, Cawnpore. Unknown. (There is no evi- dence to show that hemp drugs were cause of his insa- nity, but indulgence in them appears to have intensified it.) 9 Nemur, Passi, Service, Fyzabad The personal and family his- tories cannot be ascertained. 10 Murli Singh, Thakur, Aligarh Alcoholic excess and pecuniary losses. Mania. 11 Bhowani, Teli, Unao The personal and family his- tories cannot be ascertained. 12 Kundan Lall, Bania, Aligarh Cause unknown: possibly syphi- lis. Mania. 13 Jhalkha, Rachhi, Jalaun Cause unknown (no evidence to justify us in attributing it to ganja). Mania. 14 Tulsi, Bania Cause unknown (no hereditary tendencies or proof of indul- gence in hemp drugs). Mania.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 83 Opinion of the Officiating Superintendent, Agra Lunatic Asylum, on the hemp drug cases admitted into the Agra Lunatic Asylum in 189284 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Note by Civil Surgeon on case of Motilal, lunatic. The investigation into past family history of Motilal shows clearly that his insanity was probably hereditary. His mother and his mother's father are both known to have suffered from insanity. The deaths of his father and brother together with money losses probably acted on an already weak intellect and produced insanity on himself. There is no history of Moti- lal having been excessively addicted to bhang or to dhatura at all, and there is nothing to show that his insanity was due to these drugs. The 2nd March 1894. W. A. D. FASKEN, Civil Surgeon. In accordance with your order of the 11th February we have made a joint enquiry into the circumstances attending the insanity of the two lunatics, Gopal and Tulsi who were admitted into the Asylum at Agra, and whose insanity was attributed to indul- gence in hemp drugs, and have the honour to report as followsFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 85 now made before us this appears to have been a hallucination on his part. His father declares that to his knowledge he never indulged in them at all. H. O. W. ROBARTS, Joint Magistrate, Jhansi. G. M. NIXON, M.B., Civil Surgeon. RPORT ON FOUR AGRA LUNATICS. (4) Case of Jugla, Brahman. The family of the lunatic is poor. He has never suffered any shock, nor has he suffer- ed from any severe illness. No other member of the family has ever been mad, nor is any trace of hereditary weakness or disease to be found. The lunatic has for many years been addicted to the excessive use of charas. He has remained in the Bareilly Asylum once, and is now again a lunatic. He still smokes charas. [Note.86 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [ APP. prone to put down every case of insanity to the consumption of drugs, in order to save themselves the trouble of making a proper inquiry. The 29th March 1894. W. TUDBALL, I.C.S., Joint Magistrate. There is nothing for me to add to Mr. Tudball's remarks, save that throughout the en- quiry the point aimed at was to distinguish between immediate and ultimate causes inducing lunacy in each case, and, so far as such nice distinctions were possible, between the ultimate exciting, and the determining cause. That is to say, very briefly, that the fact of the lunatic having taken some form of hemp, at some time, in greater or less quantity, habitually or occasionally or rarely was of course noted, and then the bearing of that fact upon his general condition, physical and mental, was elucidated, e.g., were the charas-smoking and the "lunacy" both results of an antecedent ultimate cause, the charas being merely an ex- citing or determining cause ? The appeal to hemp might indicate a want of mental control suggesting some antecedent mental disease or instability. In the two cases here set down to hemp we think it fairly established that the hemp was a true "cause," ultimate and ex- citing. I only add this note to show that we were aware of the less direct terms of the problem. ERNEST ROBERTS, M.B., Civil Surgeon, Aligarh. The 29th March 1894. 5. Deoki Das.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 87 Ganja had a bad effect on him. Ram Charan has seven sons and three daughters. All are healthy and sane, except Gokal, two and a half years younger than Narain. Gokal went mad about the same time as Narain, and has been mad ever since. He too was violent, and up to eight months ago was chained up. After being mad for two years he began to indulge in ganja: after two months of this his father tied him up and has not given him ganja since. Ram Charan appears to be telling the truth as far as he knows. 4. Narain himself denies having indulged in hemp drugs before he became "ill," denies having been immoral. His statements are not worth much. 5. I have also conversed about Narain with a respectable merchant of Cawnpore, who knows the family well and is distantly related to it. He corroborated what Narain's father told me. Both these men appeared to me to be speaking the truth, and I was un- able to find out anything more than they had disclosed. The 16th February 1894. H. WARBURTON, Joint Magistrate. 9. Nemur Passi.88 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. The perusal of the papers has suggested to me that possibly the man was not really insane and that on that account the Superintendent and visitors discharged him a few days after his admission. The statement of Nathu and the report of the Extra Assistant Commission- er are enclosed. Copy of report made by Pundit Hari Kishen, Extra Assistant Commissioner, dated the 14th April 1894, to the Civil Surgeon, Jullunder. With reference to correspondence in regard to Ralla Singh, Sepoy, I have the honour to report that after issuing verbal orders to the police as to whereabouts of the man, it was found from the report of the Police Deputy Inspector at Adampur that Ralla Singh origi- nally belonged to Mauza Chukhiara in the Jullunder Tahsil, and was now in Meerut in the Police Department. His father, Nathu, was then sent for from his village and examin- ed by me in your presence. I beg to submit his statement for your perusal. This state- ment, or rather Ralla Singh's past family history, does not throw any light on the cause of his insanity. It will, however, be observed from the statement that Ralla Singh, while in the 45th Infantry at Jhansi, was subject to insanity and sent to the Agra Lunatic Asylum. Under these circumstances an enquiry into the personal character of the man during his employment in the Jhansi 45th Infantry might be of some use, if made through the medical officer in charge of the Infantry. Statement of Nathu, son of Charat Singh, caste Mahton, age 50 years, of Mauza Chuk- hiara, in the Jullunder District. Ralla Singh, Sepoy, is my son. He is now employed as bugler in the Meerut Police. He is of strong constitution and healthy; is now of about 22 years of age. I have always enjoyed a good health. I have never taken any liquor, bhang, charas, poppy-heads or opium during the whole of my life, nor has my wife (mother of Ralla Singh) ever used these articles. My father even did not use these articles, nor was he or myself ever subject to insanity. My son, Ralla Singh, to the best of my knowledge, did not take any bhang, charas, or any other intoxicating drug or liquor. He was employed as bugler in the 45th Infantry at Jhansi for four years. He came on 31/2 months' leave about the Bysakhi time two years ago (this corresponds with April 1892), and worked with me as an agriculturist in good health and returned to his Infantry after the expiry of his leave. After two months I heard that he became lunatic, and was sent from Jhansi to the Agra Lunatic Asylum. After a month or so he was discharged from the Asylum and came to me at my village and lived with me in good health for two months and then proceeded to Meerut, where he is now employed in the Police Department as a bugler. I don't know what was the cause of his insanity at Jhansi. Jullunder; The 10th April 1894. Magistrate, PUNDIT HARI KISHEN, 1st class. (17) Notes on the previous history of Ganga Lohar, of Agra, age 26, No. 220 in the Asylum register. Ganga, lunatic, is quite insane and can give no information about himself. The follow- ing notes have been gathered from his mother and brother. His father died when Ganga was only a few years old. The only history of madness in the family is that his father's elder brother once became insane for a few days. He dug up the floor of his house, was violent, and talked nonsense. They took him away to a neighbouring village in a cart, where some religious ceremony was performed, and he completely recovered and lived well for five years afterwards. None of the members of his family were ever addicted to the use of hemp drugs. Ganga began the habit when he was about 15 years old, and took bhang regularly every day and also charas and ganja whenever he could get them. He
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 89 acquired the habit through bad associates, with whom he used to smoke at his shop, which was some little distance from his house. Three years ago, at the time of the Dewali, his wife, to whom he had been married four years, developed symptoms of madness, and after 21/2 months "transferred her mad- ness to her husband, and has ever since been sane herself." His mother and wife kept him at home for nearly two years, during the whole of which time he continued the use of the hemp drugs whenever he could get them, and the two women had very little power of restraint over him. He improved slightly now and again, but never had any real lucid interval. The symptoms of his madness were the following, viz., he talked nonsense, was very destructive, threw away his clothes and tools, and refused to do any work. The fact that his uncle was once insane (his father having died while Ganga was yet an infant) admits the possibility of heredity being factor in the causation of his insanity. The exciting and immediate cause was probably the abuse of hemp in all its forms. AGRA; The 14th February 1894. A. J. WILLCOCKS, M.D., Civil Surgeon. The above inquiry was made in my presence, and I quite agree with the Civil Sur- geon as regards his opinion as to the cause of insanity. No. 18. Hari Kishor.90 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. BAREILLY LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. EMERSON.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity. (Statement VII.) Type of insanity. (Statement VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from inquiry from the Superintendent. 1. Nathu; Hindu;Bhandari; Rajput;Tekri, GarhwalState; 34; Book 8,38. Profession not known. Strongdrinkandcharas. Toxic Fair Committed arson and was conse-quently arrested. The PoliceSurgeon certified that he talkedincoherently and laboured underdelusions, such as, that he can,and does consume from 12 to 20seers of atta daily. No other in-formation recorded. Form B shows:FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 91 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189292 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 93 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 189294 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Report of the Superintendent, Bareilly Asylum, on the Hemp Drug cases of 1892. No. 1.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 95 No. 6.96 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. recorded the statements of his brother and mother. The only reason they are able to suggest for his going mad is that he smoked some charas at the Holi festival. He never smoked before or since, or used any intoxicant'". No. 8.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 97 LUNATIC ASYLUM, LUCKNOW. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. HOOPER.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity. (Statement VII.) Type of in- sanity. (State- ment VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. 1. Jaffir Ali; Musal- man; Servant; Har- doi; 37; 13.3. Charas Melan- cholia. Good The statement received from the Magistrate with this man shows that the cause is not known, and that (8b) the insanity is not attri- butable to over-indulgence in ardent spirits or in bhang, ganja, or similar drugs. (9) The man had gone into the Government school at Bilgram and damaged a door and broken panes of glass. Admitted, 11th January 1892. This man was under confinement from melancholia from December 1889 to September 1890. On that occasion there is an entry showing that his brother attended in May 1890 and stated that Jaffir smoked charas. On this the cause "unknown" was altered to "charas." On the pre- sent occasion the cause formerly shown is repeated. There are no symptoms of anything but melancholia; and in Statement VI that is the type adopted. 2. Mithu; Musalman; Labourer; Unao; 30; 13.9. Ganja Toxic insanity. Good The papers show that this man uses ganja. The Civil Surgeon of Unao certified on 3rd Febru- ary 1892: "This man was in the lunatic asylum about one year ago. He has developed insanity again by over-indulgence in ganja smoking. For the past month his neighbours have noticed signs of an impending attack, which show- ed itself suddenly by his furiously attacking a dafadar. Since his admission into hospital he is suffering from acute mental de- rangement and had to be ironed for safety." Admitted, 10th February 1892. Made over to his father, 8th April 1892. This man had been in an Asylum before but not in Lucknow. He was quiet from the time of his admission and made over to his father within two months. The violence before admission and the speedy recovery point to toxic insanity. 3. Madan Lall; Brah- man; Servant; Bans Bareilly; 28; 13.15. Intoxi- cating drugs. Toxic insanity. Indiffer- ent. The statement attributes the in- sanity to the use of intoxicating drugs. It shows that he "smokes ganja and charas and takes bhang." The medical certificate of 10th March 1892 says that he "speaks incoherently, is very filthy in habits, and is regardless of personal wants and comforts." He has a brother Ramsahai, Clerk in the Cantonment Office, Dikusha. Admitted, 17th March 1892. Made over to his friends, 10th November 1892. This man was only 94 lbs. weight on admission. He gained 24 lbs. in the Asylum in eight months and was made over to his friends "much improved." 4. Lalta; Hindu, Bhat; Servant; Lucknow; 25; 13.18. Ganja Mania Fair The statement shows that this man "smokes ganja and charas." The Civil Surgeon of Unao certi- fied on 3rd April 1892 that "Lalta Bhat was taken under observa- tion on 17th March 1892. On admission was suffering from acute mental derangement, vio- lent, abusive, noisy and trouble- some, assaulted the warders every time the cell door was opened to give him food or water. In the end he had to be kept hand-cuffed to have control over him. Talks incoherently, shouts day and nighty, and very destruc- tive. Sleeps little, and refused food for several days. Lalta is This man had a ganja corn on his right thumb. He was thin, but in fair health when admitted. He was dangerous, destructive, noisy, filthy, and maniacal. In June he is entered as "much improved since admission: behaves sanely." He increased eleven pounds in the Asylum and was discharged cured in about three months. This seems a case of temporary mania from ganja and charas; but the Superintendent has not included it under "Toxic insanity," but under "Mania." 25
98 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 99 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892100 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 101 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892102 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Statement compiled by the Superintendent, Lucknow Lunatic Asylum, giving the result of local enquiries into the fast, personal, and family history of the 17 lunatics confined dur- ing 1892, whose insanity was attributed to hemp drugs. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity. (Statement VII.) Type of in- sanity. (State- ment VI.) Facts ascertained from local enquiries. Asylum Superintendent's final report. 1. Jaffir Ali; Musal- man, Servant; Har- doi; 37; No. 13 3. Charas Melan- cholia. Friends cannot attribute any cause for this man's insanity; they never heard of his being a ganja smoker or ad- dicted to the use of intoxicants. No history of insanity in the family. The brothers were not examined. [NOTE.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 103 Statement compiled by the Superintendent, Lucknow Lunatic Asylum, giving the result of local enquiries into the past, personal, and family history of the 17 lunatics confined during 1892 whose insanity was attributed to hemp drugs104 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Statement compiled by the Superintendent, Lucknow Lunatic Asylum, giving the result of local enquiries into the past, personal, and family history of the 17 lunatics confined during 1892 whose insanity was attributed to hemp drugsFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 105 11.106 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. DELHI LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. DENNYS, ON LEAVE.) (Assistant Surgeon Mul Chand in temporary charge.) Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII.) Type of in- sanity (State- ment VI.) State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. 1. Daya Lall; Hindu; Beggar; Hissar; 50; 207. Charas Toxic insanity. Good The papers in this case are not forthcoming. The register shows that he was admitted 12th Janu- ary 1892, and discharged on 12th July "cured." No case book is maintained of any history of the patients in the asylum. 2. Nath; Hindu; Beg- gar; Jullunder; 25; 209. Ganja Toxic insanity. Very bad. This man's Descriptive Roll shows that he "has been seen in an in- sane state for a year" that he "has been addicted to ganja," and that the cause of insanity is "possibly ganja-smoking." He is of "filthy habits, talks in- coherently, sings and weeps, does not answer questions, exposes his person indecently. Epilepsy or hereditary taint "not known." Admitted, 26th January 1892. Died, 3rd August 1893. No asylum history was maintained. There was no post-mortem ex- amination. The man died of heart disease. 3. Hari Ram; Hindu; Servant; Patiala; 18; 211. Ganja Toxic insanity. Good The papers in this case are not forthcoming. The man was ad- mitted on 2nd March 1892, he was discharged "cured" on 18th October 1892. In the register this man's case is shown as "dementia"; this was entered by the Superintendent; and the Deputy Superintendent cannot explain how the case is shown as "Toxic insanity" in Statement VI. 4. Narain Singh; Hin- du; Constable; Um- balla; 30; 221. Bhang Toxic insanity. Fair This man's papers are not forth- coming. He was admitted on 20th April 1892 and died on 29th April 1892. The register shows "mania " and the entry in Statement VI cannot be explained. There was no post- mortem. He died of remittent fever. 5. Charata; Hindu; Cultivator; Umballa, 27; 229. Bhang Toxic insanity. Bad This man's papers are not forth- coming. He was admitted on 11th June 1892 and discharged "improved" on 20th July 1892. There is no asylum history. The register shows the type as "mania," and the entry in State- ment VI is apparently due to the cause alleged in Statement VII, but Deputy Superintendent is not sure. 6. Sheri; Musalman; Mason, Hissar; 24, 236. Ganja Toxic insanity. Indiffe- rent. This man's "Descriptive Roll" shows that this is a second attack, the first attack being two months before. This attack had lasted twelve days. The supposed cause is smoking ganja. No hereditary history of insanity. "Incoherent talk, using violence towards others, remaining filthy, indecent exposure of person, restlessness and want of sleep, maniacal look, giving wrong names of his relatives," are the facts given in the medical certi- ficate. Also abuse and mischief. There is no asylum history. The register shows the type as "mania." The entry in State- ment VI is not explained. He was admitted, 26th July 1892, and dis- charged "cured," 28th Decem- ber 1892. 7. Joseph Lalchand; Native Christian; Shoemaker, Delhi; 35; 240. Charas Toxic insanity. Bad The man was charged under section 380, Indian Penal Code, and as he talked, incoherently, he was sent to the Asylum by the Deputy Commissioner. No facts are shown as known regarding his case, but the medical certi- ficate says: "Is very noisy and violent at times, especially at night, and incoherent; at other times he appears quite rational. Is given to going about naked." Admitted, 18th August 1892; escaped, 12th September 1892; and re-admitted (vide No. 11 be- low) on 1st October 1892, and dis- charged "cured" on 27th June 1893. The register shows charas as the alleged cause, the Deputy Super- intendent says, because a Native Baptist Missionary said the man smoked charas. On the same ground the previous duration of the attack was entered as one month. The type is entered as "mania" in the register. There is no Asylum history.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 107 Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892108 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Report of the Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Delhi, on the hemp drug cases of 1892. In reply to your No. 149, dated 16th October last, forwarding a copy of your No. 148, dated 16th October, to the Revenue Secretary to the Punjab Government, together with two copies of its enclosures, I have the honour to inform you that I have instituted very careful enquiries into the past and present history of each of the ten patients admitted into this asylum during the year 1892, whose insanity was attributed to hemp drugs, and I beg to give herewith the result of my enquiries. For facility of reference I am returning one copy of the list of patients forwarded with your letter under reply. Full and satisfactory information has been obtained in cases 1, 9, and 10, and a copy of the reports in each of these cases is herewith forwarded for your information. I think there can be no doubt from a perusal of these reports that these three patients were typical and unmistakeable cases of toxic insanity due to the use of hemp drugs. Case No. 1 used to drink bhang in addition to smoking charas, while cases 9 and 10 only smoked charas. The last man, viz., Nand Lall, was sent to me by the Deputy Commissioner for examination in November last, i.e., about 5 months after his second discharge from the Asy- lum, and I had, therefore, the opportunity of cross-examining him very carefully myself. He was in the full possession all his faculties and was, in fact, a man of more than usual intelligence for a villager. His evidence, therefore, is particularly interesting. I remember this man very well on his first admission, to the Asylum. He was extremely noisy and abusive, absolutely incoherent in his speech, and could not be made to speak a single word of sense, tore up his clothes and insisted on going about absolutely naked, would not sleep, and was incessantly on the move. This was, as far as I am able to form an opinion, a typical case of toxic insanity due to charas-smoking and all the cases I have seen of insanity due to charas have been very similar to this one, though I cannot say that there are any symptoms peculiar to this form of toxic insanity. The man became rapidly better daily after his admission into the Asylum and was released 21 days afterwards apparently per- fectly sane. He returned to his usual avocation of grazing cattle and again fell in with the fakir, who, in the first place, induced him to smoke charas. He again took to smoking charas, and within a month was as insane as ever and was brought back to the Asylum. On his second admission his recovery to his senses was not quite so rapid, but he was practi- cally sane again 10 weeks afterwards, but as his too early release on the first occasion was attended with such disastrous consequences it was thought advisable to detain him in the Asylum for some months. On his second release I particulary warned him against having anything to do with the fakir and he promised me he would never smoke charas again, and the result has been that the man has remained perfectly sane ever since. Cases Nos. 1 and 9 were both, as far as one can say, undoubtedly types of toxic in- sanity due to hemp drugs. Their symptoms were very similar to those of Nand Lall and they were both discharged quite cured from the Asylum, but from the enquiries made by the District Magistrates of Mozuffarnagar and Karnal, it appears that they have both taken to smoking charas again since their discharge and both were apparently more or less of unsound mind when last seen. The chances are that both these men, if they con- tinue to smoke charas, will sooner or later become insane again, their mental condition depending, I fancy, a good deal on the quantity of charas they can afford to smoke daily. Case No. 2, 'Nath,' died in the Asylum of mitral disease of the heart 19 months after his admission. This man's previous history has been very carefully enquired into by the Deputy Commissioner of Jalandhar, and from the information obtainable, there seems to be no doubt that he was a confirmed smoker of both charas and ganja. He had been in- sane for 4 months on a previous occasion and was admitted into the Jalandhar Civil Hos- pital, where he was treated and cured. Six months afterwards he again became insane and was sent to this Asylum. The man's symptoms on first admission here were very like those of toxic insanity, but latterly the case became more like dementia. He used to sit apart from the other lunatics, seldom spoke and then only incoherently, had lost all sense
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 109 of decency and for many months before his death his health was failing steadily as a result of heart disease. I think this was undoubtedly in the first place a case of toxic insanity due to charas and ganja-smoking, but, as is not uncommon in such cases, the man latterly became demented and had none of his original symptoms of toxic insanity. Case No. 3, 'Hari Ram,' who was sent to the Asylum by the Deputy Commissioner of Karnal, cannot now be found anywhere, nor can any of his relations be traced either in Karnal or in Patiala State, where he was supposed to reside. Case No. 4, 'Narain Singh,' who was a police constable, and was sent to the Asylum by the Deputy Commissioner, Delhi, was really a resident of Ludhiana. The Deputy Commissioner of the latter district, after careful enquiries, ascertained that the man, when at home, had never been in the habit of using hemp drugs in any form, and had never before been insane. This man, whom I remember well, was undoubtedly suffering from acute mania, and there was never any suspicion that the case was one of toxic insanity, but in the register the alleged cause was entered as 'bhang' by the Deputy Superintendent, for reasons I cannot explain. Case No. 5, 'Charata,' has been seen and cross-examined since his discharge from the Asylum by the Assistant Commissioner of Rupar, and it has been ascertained both from him and from his brother-in-law that he had never used hemp in any form. It was, there- fore, correctly entered in the register of this Asylum as 'Mania,' though in the column of alleged cause bhang was entered by the Deputy Superintendent, because this was said to be the cause in the papers sent with the man to the Asylum. Case No. 6 has been enquired into by the Deputy Commissioner of Hissar, who has ascertained that this man, 'Sheri,' had never used hemp or intoxicating drugs of any kind, and that the cause of insanity entered in his papers by the Hissar Police was an error. Ganja was entered in the register as the alleged cause, but the case was correctly entered after diagnosis as 'Mania.' Case No. 7, 'Joseph Lalchand,' was, I think, undoubtedly one of toxic insanity due to the use of charas, and the entry made by the Deputy Superintendent of 'Mania' in the register was wrong. This man not only admitted having regularly smoked charas, but there was corroborative evidence of the fact from some Baptist Missionaries who knew the man well. The symptoms too were those of toxic insanity. I regret to say no trace of this man can now be found. Case No. 8 is still in the Asylum, but as he is unable to answer questions rationally, there is no use in cross-examining him. The Deputy Commissioner of Karnal has been trying to gather information about him from his relations, but up to date nothing has been ascertained. This case, I think, was correctly entered in the Asylum register as one of mania, and the case was erroneously included in Statement VI as toxic insanity. His symptoms are not those of toxic insanity, and the fact of the man having made no improve- ment whatever since he came into the Asylum more than a year ago is strong evidence against hemp having anything to do with his insanity. Cases Nos. 9 and 10 have already been referred to. It is as well for me to explain here that the Hemp Drug Commissioners, when they visited my Asylum in the hot weather during my absence on privilege leave were misin- formed when they reported that no histories were kept up of any of the lunatics in this Asylum. It so happened that during the year 1892 several changes had taken place among the Deputy Superintendents of this Asylum and the man who took over charge from Mr. Bernard, the late Deputy Superintendent, had not been keeping up the histories properly and had also made several foolish mistakes in regard to the diagnosis of the cases by filling them up himself instead of consulting the Superintendent first. It was during this man's short tenure of office that all the mistakes and discrepancies found by the Commis- sioners occurred, but since his transfer the histories, &c.; are all kept up properly as they are done in other Asylums. It is most unfortunate, of course, that these mistakes should have 28
110 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP.occurred in those particular few cases about which the Commissioners were enquiring, and I am extremely sorry that they were overlooked by me till they were brought to my notice by the Commissioners. This Deputy Superintendent had been in the habit of re- turning the papers of all lunatics who were discharged or who died to the Magistrates who ordered their detention in the Asylum, hence the reason of there being no papers forth- coming in regard to several of the cases about which the Commissioners wanted inform- ation. Case No. I.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 111 Case No. 9.112 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP- 4. How many times had he been insane previous to the occasion of his admission into the Asylum? 4. States that he had never been insane before taking to using charas. 5. What form did his mania assume be- fore admission in the Asylum. 5. He was in a state of acute violent mania when admitted into the Asylum, was very noisy and abusive, refused to wear any clothing, and destroyed it when given to him, and it was impossible to get any rational answers out of him on any subject. He was twice admitted into the Asylum. On first oc- casion he was only about a month in the Asylum and was then released cured. 6. Has the patient used hemp in any form since his discharge from the Asylum, and has he shown any signs of mania again? 6. He says he returned to his usual avo- cation of grazing cattle and began smoking charas again, and in 20 days he was brought back with acute mania. He says there was a fakir whom he used to meet at a tank, where he was in the habit of watering his cattle, and it was this fakir who first persuad- ed him to smoke charas. On his release the first time he again met this fakir and was persuaded by him to resume the habit. The second time he came into the Asylum he was equally violent and remained more or less insane for about 10 weeks. It was not thought advisable, however, to release him for some time after he had regained his sen- ses, so he was kept in the Asylum for 10 months and then discharged quite cured. 7. What is the mental and physical con- dition of the patient at this moment? 7. On appearing before me to-day (No- vember 25th, 1893, having been sent by the Deputy Commissioner) he is perfectly ration- al and as sane as a man can be, and gives a full account of himself without hesitation. He is in good bodily health and is a well-made powerful man. Since the second release he has never been near the fakir again and has never smoked charas. He met the fakir once and told him of the injury he had done him by inducing him to smoke charas, and the fakir advised him to keep away from him in future, which he has done. He has given up his former occupation of grazing cattle, and now follows the plough. 8. Had the patient ever shown any signs of insanity or mental weakness before using hemp in some form? 8. No. 9. With what object did the patient first commence to use the drug, for the pleasure of it or for the medicinal effects produced? If the latter, for what ailment was the drug used? 9. He says he only took to smoking charas, because the fakir and others did so, i.e., for society's sake and not because of any pleasur- able effects it produced. 10. Did the patient find the moderate use of the drug act as an aphrodisiac or the reverse? Does he consider the habi- tual use of hemp tends to cause impo- tency? 10. He found the use of charas act as an aphrodisiac, and when he was using it he became almost impotent. His sexual pas- sions have now fully returned.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 113 LAHORE LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. W. COATES, ON PRIVILEGE LEAVE). Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of In. sanity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from the registers and by inquiry from the Superintendent, & c. 1. Kadir Baksh; Mus- salman, Beggar; Gujranwala; 25. Ganja. Toxic insanity. Bad This is a first attack. It is of two months' duration. The cause is said to be "religious ideas;" not epileptic, not uicidal. The medical officer observes that "he has a delusion that a woman is present before him, and he talks to her, becomes violent and abu- sive without any cause. Talk, incoherent. Habits filthy. Goes naked and supposed to set fire to property and to strike people. Addicted to ganja." Admitted, 7th February 1892. Made over to friends, 14th January 1893. On admission he was filthy in habits and incoherent. He con- tinued "mad as before" until 6th November 1892, when he "speaks more sensibly than be- fore, sings songs, and has play- ful habits." On 6th December he "is getting better, sings songs, and answers questions more sensibly." He is made over "to his father who is anxious to take him on security" on 14th January 1893. He was "improv- ed," but not quite sane when dis- charged. 2. Mana Singh; Sikh; Cultivator; Amrit- sar; 32. Bhang. Toxic insanity. Good This is a second attack. "First attack 12 years ago, after six months got all right, and last attack came on three years ago, and has continued with lucid intervals ever since." No here- ditary history. Not epileptic; not suicidal; dangerous to others The cause is shown as "contract- ed disease when on service in Afghanistan in 1878." Has received injury to the head. "He was stopped by a constable when attempting to make his way into the Court of the Sessions Judge, Amritsar, armed with a sharp and heavy gandasa with the deliberate intention of inflict- ing a serious injury on that officer." The medical officer observes that he "is morose and melancholic, at times inclined to be violent. Refuses food for days together; indifferent to personal cleanliness; at times dresses fan- cifully. Discharged from the army 12 years ago for unsound- ness of mind." Admitted, 16th February 1892. On admission he talked "pretty sensibly on simple subjects, but said that all people will become Khalsas and fight. Habits clean." On 15th March 1892, he was "quite quiet," but on 11th April "very mad." He con- tinued excitable and subject to delusions up to 11th October 1892. He "is of excitable temper;" cannot be trusted. His type of in- sarity is religious. He was previously addicted to bhang. The later entries show that he thought his deceased father still alive and inciting the Asylum authorities to trouble him." On 21st March 1893 he "speaks rationally" and continues in that state until 2Sth July 1893, when he "speaks in a loud voice." Next month he is very talkative, and wishes to have a house built for him in the Asylum. In Septem- ber 1893 he is "better and com- ing to his senses." This man was examined by us. He said "Sikhs do not smoke. They drink therefore; they take no charas, ganja, or tobacco. But they take bhang; took it occasionally, but never to excess or habitually. I have no wound on the head, but I had sunstroke. I used to get bhang at the temples or rest- houses, as I passed, to relieve me." This man is now considered sane and fit to make his defence. 3. Mahtab Din; Mus- salman; Lahore. Charas. Toxic insanity. This man was arrested on his father's petition and the repre- sentation of his neighbours as to his insanity that he was danger- ous and could not be brought to court without help. "The lunatic talks pretty rationally; but as he tried to kill a child, as stated by his father, he must be kept under observation for medi- cal opinion. The friends state that the man occasionally gets excited and dangerous. Is sub- ject to fits of violence and uses bhang and charas." Admitted, 20th April 1892. Discharged, 29th idem. On 25th April 1892 "this man has a peculiar depressed melancholic appearance, sits with his head bent forward, sings songs at the lop of his voice, and suspects that other lunatics poke him." On the 27th April, he said "that his habit of drinking bhang and smoking charas is the cause of his present slate. Has no fixed delusions and occasionally talks to himself of his luck." He was discharged on 29th April. 29
114 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 115 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892116 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 117 Report of the Superintendent, Lahore Lunatic Asylum, on the hemp drug cases of 1892. I have the honour to forward copy of the inquiries made by the Magistrates, etc., into the previous history of each of the patients admitted to the Lahore Lunatic Asylum in 1892, whose insanity was ascribed to hemp drugs, with my brief notes thereupon, as called for in your No. 149 of 16th October 1893. 1.118 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. The man is still in the Asylum, and his case is one of mania pure and simple. I regard him as a patient that is most unlikely to recover. I am inclined to call the case one of heredity. LAHORE; W. COATES, M,D., The 31st January 1894. Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum. From enquiries the following facts relating to past history of Mana Singh, son of Golab Singh, of village Dhotian, Thana Sirhali, were obtained from Sunder Singh, son of Khuta Singh, and Lal Singh, son of Buta Singh, and Sarup Singh, son of Ram Singh. Lal Singh's father and Mana Singh's father were cousins from the father's side, and Sarup Singh is head Lambardar of Mana Singh's village. The latter also is distantly related to Mana Singh and has known Mana Singh from infancy. Sunder Singh's father was brother to Mana Singh's father, and his mother was sister to Mana Singh's mother. He and the others affirm that none of his relatives, as far as his recollection carries him back, were ever of unsound mind or touched in the head in any way. He and the others affirm that they were children together with Mana Singh, and grew up together to manhood in the same village. They did not notice any pecu- liarity in Mana Singh's manner during boyhood, nor was he excitable or given to out- bursts of temper. He was noticed particularly to be of a mild quiet and timid disposition. His mind up to enlisting in the 29th Punjab Infantry, 15 years ago, was perfectly sound. His father was Subadar in the 29th Punjab Infantry. He went with his regiment under his father to the Afghan War in 1878 and returned to Agra in 1880. While in service he became insane and was treated regimentally. A short while after he recovered his sanity and continued well till his return to Agra, when he obtained leave for three months. A few days after his return to his home he became raving mad, for which he was treated by a hakim. Three weeks after he broke loose from confinement and joined a fakir's establish- ment at Tallagung. It seems his regiment was stationed at Tallagung before going on service in 1878, where Mana Singh became acquainted with this fakir, and at that time his father, who was a Subadar in the regiment, noticed that Mana Singh was going to the bad, and had taken to bhang drinking at the fakir's place. The father always ascribed his son's altered manner and attacks of temporary un- soundness of mind to indulgence in bhang drinking. He was two years in service, where he could not indulge so freely or so often in bhang, and only suffered once from unsound- ness of mind. On his return to India in 1880 he took to bhang drinking again, and on his return to his village on leave in 1880 he indulged in it pretty freely, and was a con- stant visitor at the different fakir's houses in his own village and in the villages round about, where he freely indulged in bhang drinking. A month after his return home he became insane, and has remained so ever since. Neither his father nor any of his relatives have ever indulged in Cannabis indica (bhang). BHUGWAN DAS, Magistrate, 1st class, Amritsar District. T. R. MULRONEY, Surgeon-Major, Civil Surgeon, Amritsar. 3.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 119 There is no history of madness in the man's family. The attack was a short one; he was only 14 days in the Asylum, but ever since his discharge he has been seen from time to time and is decidedly melancholic. The history, cause, and duration of the case are all very indefinite, and I think no deductions can be drawn from it for the purposes of this inquiry. The form of insanity remains doubtful. LAHORE; W. COATES, M.D., 31st January 1894. Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum. Abdus Suttar, a relative of Mahtab Din, who has been an inmate of the Lunatic Asylum in 1892, states that the man used to take sharab and charas two or three months before the attack of lunacy. One day he took a large quantity of sharab and also smoked charas more than usual. The charas affected his brain, and he became lunatic. He used force in order to go out. He liked solitude. His father or mother never had an attack of lunacy. His parents had to put him in chains for one day. He did no injury to any- body nor abused any one; occasionally used to talk at random: never committed nor attempted to commit incendiarism. He liked to remain silent. Deponent cannot say whether he had a melancholic temper; never refused eating and drinking. Never remained naked nor ever been subject to epilepsy; never received any injury to his head; only once had an attack of lunacy; never had it afterwards. He is now in the habit of keeping his head and eyes downward; has given up the habit of inhaling charas. He per- forms his household work as usual. His father never took opium or any kind of intoxicat- ing things. The man (lunatic) still keeps his eyes fixed downward, and he does not lift his eyes until required to do so specially. LAHORE; F. S. JAMALDIN, KHAN BAHADUR, 18th December 1893. Magistrate, 1st class, Lahore District. 4.120 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. He was admitted in August 1892 and discharged cured in March 1893FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 121 The man has remained sane since his discharge in May 1893: probably a case of toxic insanity, the poisons being opium and Indian hemp. LAHORE; W. COATES, M.D., 31st January 1894. Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum. Narain Das, a resident of Khem Karan, states that Tehl Shah, a resident of Phagwara, Jullunder district, came to Khem Karan some time ago, and used to drink bhang and smoke charas profusely. He became subject to a boil on leg and was admitted in the hospital at Kasur, where he became insane and was sent to the Lunatic Asylum; that ever since his return from Lahore he is all right in every respect. Tehl Shah himself admits that he used to drink bhang, smoke charas, and take opium profusely, and one and a half years ago he became insane, as an effect of these, and that ever since his return from the Asylum he is in perfect senses. None of his parents had ever had an attack of insanity. F. S. JAMALDIN, 18th December 1893. Magistrate, 1st class, Lahore District. 8.122 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Nobody here knows anything about her past family history or even her past personal history before she came to Shujabad, as she does not originally belong to this place. In my opinion it is necessary to ascertain her past family history from the place to which she originally belongs. Originally this could have been done through some official of the Ba- hawalpur State; but as from the facts disclosed it appears that she belongs to Dadpotra race, it is possible that the people of that place may consider it as a disgrace even to own her as a resident of that place, so I think the enquiry might be best made through the Tahsildar of Shujabad, who could quietly make it in a couple of days. 3. I saw the woman; she talks incoherently. All that I could elicit from her was that her mother's name was Rahmat Khatun, her father's name was Kaim Khan, and her parents were landed proprietors in Mouza Giddarwala, in the Bahawalpur State, which is 2 or 3 miles from Allahabad, and that she was enticed away by one Sabban Jhakhar and brought to Adamwahan by him when Adamwahan bridge was under construction, and from thence she came to Shujabad. Her ancestors were sane and lived in prosperity. She says that two daughters and one son were born to her when she was in her husband's house, and one son was born here. All of them died. Most of the above replies were rational and are corroborated by other evidence. 9.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 123 been made over to him when discharged, and it is likely he would have considered himself culpable if he had allowed him to use bhang or charas. There is no family history of in- sanity. I do not think there is evidence enough to show what the cause of this case was. LAHORE; W. COATES, M.D., 31st January 1894. Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum. Statement of Gufara Kashmiri.124 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. the forms of charas and bhang since he was 18 years of age, i.e., six or seven years. There is no family history of any such habit nor of any nervous disease. The case is one in which the insanity is clearly traced to the use of hemp. LAHORE; W. COATES, M.D., 31st January 1894. Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum. In the Court of Rai Banarsi Das, Magistrate, 1st class, Dera Ismail Khan District. Enquiry into the cause of insanity of one Jinda Shah, deceased. Statement of Imam Shah, brother of Jinda Shah, deceased, on solemn affirmation. Jinda Shah, deceased, was my own brother. We were three brothers, Jinda Shah being the youngest. Our elder brother, father, and mother died long ago, so there is no other near relative of Jinda Shah now living. My father, mother, myself, and my elder brother never took any intoxicating drugs. We did not even smoke tobacco. Jinda Shah too up to the age of 18 years was not in the habit of taking any intoxicating drugs. He then associated himself with a fakir called Nur Shah, who was in the habit of using hemp drugs (bhang and charas), and who had been once sent to the Lunatic asylum at Lahore as a lunatic, but had been brought back by his brother after giving security for taking care of him. This Nur Shah is still alive, but is not in a fit state to answer any questions. We used to prevent Jinda Shah from going to Nur Shah, but he disobeyed us and went to him. After some time Jinda Shah fell into the habit of drinking the infusion of bhang as well as of smoking tobacco with Nur Shah. Soon after he left drinking the infusion of bhang and began to eat up the dregs of the bhang thrown away by men after taking out the infusion. He used to go about the streets, and wherever he found such dregs or refuse lying he used to take them up and to eat them without any regard to their quantity. After passing about 16 months in this state with Nur Shah, Jinda Shah became mad, and went about the streets naked, sometimes also assaulting people. He used to keep a wooden sword in his hand. In 1892 he assaulted a constable and was sent up before the Magistrate for trial. Then as he was found to be a lunatic he was sent to the Lunatic Asylum, Lahore. Before going to Nur Shah, Jinda Shah was perfectly sane, and we therefore infer that his insanity was caused by eating up the dregs of the bhang in large quantities. Neither our father nor our mother nor any one else in our family was ever a lunatic. IMAM SHAH. Examined by me. BANARSI DAS, Dated 21st November 1893. Magistrate, 1st class. Statement of Ghulam Hyder, lambardar of the Mohalla, on solemn affirmation. I live in the same street in which the house of Jinda Shah, lunatic, and of his family is situated. My statement is the same as that of Imam Shah, brother of the deceased lunatic. GHULAM HYDER, Witness.Examined by me. BANARSI DAS, The 21st November 1893. Magistrate, 1st class, Dera Ismail Khan. Copy of a letter No. 435 of 24th November 1893, from the Civil Surgeon, Dera Ismail Khan, to Rai Banarsi Das, Magistrate, 1st class, at Dera Ismail Khan. I beg to return you original letter No. 1652 with enclosures. It appears to me to be clear that Jinda Shah, lunatic, became insane from the excessive use of bhang and charas. I do not desire to further examine the witnesses Imam Shah and Ghulam Hyder, not expect- ing to elicit any further information.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 125 JUBBULPORE LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. GAFFNEY.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of insanity (Statement VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from inquiry from the Superintendent. 1. Rathi Ram Singh; Hindu; Cultivator; Jubbulpore; 20; 189. Ganja. Toxic insanity. The "memorandum" received with the order for reception shows that "he was apprehend- ed in the Sihora Tahsil when he was entering houses and beating the women and chil- dren" The cause of insanity is "not known." Dr. Franklin (Civil Surgeon) certified that he "is noisy and talkative, does not sleep at night, but walks up and down the room throughout the night, destroys his clothing, ha bits dirty." (25th January 1892.) Admitted, 28th January 1892. On 23rd February the register says that "for the last fortnight the man has been quiet and ra- tional, works in the enclosure, is obedient to the warders, but quar- relsome with the patients." The next entry is dated October 20th and says that he "continues quiet and rational and gives no trouble." His friends are to be communicated with. His brother was written to on 13th Decem- ber, but did not come in. The lunatic escaped on 25th July 1893, was to have been recommended for discharge at the visitor's meet- ing of 31st idem. There is an entry in the register of all the details of the statement with the words "addicted to the use of ganja" added, but no explana- tion of these words or authority for them. 2. Dallhaman Singh; Hindu; Police Constable; Jubbul- pore; 32; 190. Ganja. Toxic insanity. The "memorandum" states that he "was found wandering about the railway station and is said to have thrown his property out of the railway carriage in which he was travelling." The cause is not known. The medical cer- tificate, dated 25th January 1892, says that he "will not answer questions, but rolls about on the ground crying; very dirty in his habits, sleepless, does not observe the customs of his caste, has to be fed by an attendant." Admitted, 28th January 1892. Discharged "cured," 12th April 1892. On 10th February the register shows that he "was in a separate room until today, but as he is now quite rational, he is taken out and placed in association with other patients." On 23rd February it is stated that he "answers ques- tions rationally, and says he was addicted to the use of ganja and bhang for eight or ten years." On 18th March the Superintend- ent says that as "the insanity was due to the abuse of ganja and bhang he may be made over to the care of his brother." He was released accordingly "cured." His statement above recorded is the sole ground for attributing the case to ganja; but it seems a rea- sonable explanation of the symp- toms. 3. Umrao, Gond; Cul- tivator; Chhindwa- ra; 32; 198. Ganja. Mania The memorandum shows that this is a second attack and attributes it to "measles or ganja." But the statement of the case by the Deputy Commissioner of Chhind- wara shows that the man was a prisoner in the Jail when he mur- dered a warder without provoca- tion. He was committed for trial on 16th September 1891, but acquitted on the ground of insanity. Evidence was given at the trial that there had been in- sanity in his family. Admitted, 23rd March 1892. On 23rd March his condition is as follows: "Does not answer ques- tions put to him, but takes his food; to be carefully watched and kept in a separate room." On 10th August he attacked the warder while his cell was being cleaned out and seized him by the throat. Up to June 1893 there is "no improvement. He has not spoken a word since he came to the Asylum." Is dangerous and two men always enter together when he has to be attended to. He eats, sleeps, smokes, and makes no disturbance." 4. Udai Ram; Hindu; Tahsil Jamadar; Ni- mar; 50; 199. Bhang. Mania The statement shows that this is a second attack. The first attack was a year ago and treated at Khandwa. "Used to be addict- ed to majum eating and ganja smoking." The medical certi- ficate, dated 15th March 1892, On 12th April it is recorded that he "sleeps during the day, but at night is violent, pacing his cell and shaking the chains of the door, continually singing and dancing, spits and throws dirt at the attendants." 32
126 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hump Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1894. 127 Review of the further enquiries by Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel J. B. Gaffney, Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum Jubbulpore, dated 22nd March 1894. Case No. 1.128 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. From the evidence of Surgeon-Major Quayle (C.P. witness No. 37). "Udai Ram, age 47, Tahsil Jamadar, Burhanpur, in which place he has lived for 20 years; caste, Chhipa. History.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 129 NAGPUR LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. MCKAY.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of insa- nity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. 1. Atmaram; Hindu; Sowar; Nagpur; 35; 863. Ganja Mania The statement shows that this man was "insane for the last seven years." "It appears that he was sane till he was sent to Jail when he was 20 years old. He got mad while he was in Jail for seven years. He was re- leased from 10 or 11 years ago, and he has since been out of mind." "Supposed cause, per- haps the use of Ganja drug." The medical certificate of 23rd May 1892 says that he "talks great nonsense, has an idea he is a clever Railway Engineer. Is quiet; answers questions sensi- bly." Admitted, 28th June 1892. The Asylum register shows that on admission the man was quiet and answered questions rationally. "7th July, weight 102 lbs. No mental change. August 15th, weight 102 lbs. Quiet, no change, destroyed a coat last week. September 19th, weight 102 lbs. Has had fever, quiet, occasionally talks nonsense. Oc- tober 10th, weight 101. Talks nonsense; has still the same illu- sions. November 12th, weight 103 lbs. Still talks nonsense. December 22nd, weight 106 lbs. Complains of not having received his Jewellery or the pay for mak- ing the new mills or the Railway, his contract was for 5 feet of line a day. 1893, January 26th, weight 105. No improvement, is always mak- ing trains. Is very afraid that there will be an accident as he is not present at the station. De- mentia. February 13th, weight 105 lbs. No mental improve- ment 13th March, weight 103 lbs No improvement. 27th April, weight 104 lbs. Quiet but no mental change 15th May, weight 103 lbs. The same delusions. 8th June, weight 100 lbs. Quiet. Hospital orderly. 13th July, weight 102 lbs. Quiet, no mental change. 10th August, 101 lbs. Became very excited and abusive on the 8th August." This man said to us that he smoked three chillums a day two pice worth), which with tobacco came to Rs. 2 per mensem. He also took bhang in the hot weather. He says he took bhang about Rs. 3 (1-8 bhang and 1-8 sugar) in four months. He also drank liquor he says. He talked utter nonsense about his imprison- ment. It is the routine (the Deputy Superintendent says) to copy at once the supposed cause from the papers received from D. C, and to enter the type after some time has elapsed and the case been diagnosed. 2. Tajodin; Mussal- man; Sepoy; Nag- pur; 30; 867. Ganja Dementia The statement shows that the man was about five years ago under treatment in the regimental hos- pital, and that the cause of his insanity is "unknown." The medical certificate of 25th Au- gust 1892 shows that he had "vacant, wandering expression of face, rambling, incoherent talk, habits filthy. I am informed that Tajodin is a confirmed smoker of ganja." Admitted, 26th August 1892. The Asylum register shows that when admitted in the end of Au- gust this man weighed 113 lbs. "September 19th, weight 115 lbs. Talks nonsense, refuses to take food, is very depressed. October 10th, weight 115 lbs. Mutters to himself. November 12th, weight 114 lbs. Is improving, but still very dirty in his habits. Decem- ber 22nd, weight 118 lbs. Slight improvement, still dirty. January 26th, 1893, weight 114 lbs. Suffers from fever, no mental im- 33
130 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 131 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892132 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 133 Report of the Superintendent, Nagpur Asylum, on the hemp drug cases of 1892. IN reply to your No. 2236 of 9th instant asking me for an expression of my own views with regard to the history of the cases of insanty admitted into the Asylum during the year 1892, and in which cases the alleged cause of the insanity was the immoderate use of ganja or other preparation of Indian hemp, I may be permitted to draw your attention to the concluding paragraph of my letter No. 21 of 27th January 1894, in which I express- ly stated that I had not been able at the time of writing to formulate any decided opinion as to the mental condition and causation of the insanity of the cases admitted during 1892-93. 2. Since writing the above I have endeavoured to study the mental condition of the six insanes admitted during 1892 and still in the Asylum, in which the cause of the insani- ty is alleged to have been the excessive use of ganja taken in some form or other. I beg to submit a few brief notes and comments on these cases. 3. I may note that, although acute ganja intoxication and its detection, symptoms, &c., &c., are abundantly treated of in various medical works, I am not myself acquainted with any recent medical work which specifically treats of types of insanity which are espe- cially attributable to the habitual use of ganja or any of the various preparations of Cannabis indica or sativa and the differentiation of the symptoms of these cases from other cases of toxic insanity (alcoholic, opium, &c.), and, therefore, when discussing the causation of the mental aberration in any given case in which a history, which may be true or may be ex- aggerated, of having taken some preparation of Cannabis at some previous period of their lives is obtainable or suspected, it is necessary to avoid being led away by the post hoc ergo propter hoc fallacy134 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. His main delusion throughout has been that he is a successful Railway Engineer and has performed wonderful engineering feats (building railways and digging tunnels, &c.). Makes his own silver from "gitti" by heating it. Says that his pay was Rs. 1,006 per mensem and that he now has over Rs. 18,000 saved up. Calculates 32 days to the month and 15 months in the year. His physical health is fairly, good; he usually is contented and cheerful. Patellar reflexy completely absent. Pupils somewhat contracted, and respond sluggishly to the stimulus of light and for purposes of accommodation; no marked tremor of tongue on protrusion; no distinct paralysis, but he is inclined to totter when he stands with his eyes shut and walks backwards very slowly. His left hand shows a central thickening and discoloration of the palmar surface, somewhat towards the inner side, but no corn or callosity. Here we have an instance of a condition of mental unsoundness owning, in my opinion, a very complex causality. Assuming that the facts of the family history and personal history obtained are trustworthy, we note first a history of alcoholic indulgence in both parents and in one uncle and a further history of ganja indulgence on the part of the father: and taking into consideration these facts, we are not surprised that his relative Dajiba states that Atmaram was given up to vicious habits from an early age. It has been frequently observed that the offsprings of alcoholic parents show sooner or later some signs of mental instability, with not uncommonly some indications of a liking for narcotics and stimulants and the excitement they produce. We have evidence that early in his life Atmaram was a ganja-smoker, a wine-bibber, and a thief. There is no history of sexual excess and he himself denies it; but as ganja is a supposed aphrodisiac, his denial may be taken for what it is worth. With this history I think it not improbable that the habit of ganja-smoking was not only not the sole or chief cause of his mental aberration, but more probably one of its remoter consequences. In the same way his drinking propensities may probably be attributable to the same cause. Setting aside heredity for the moment and seeking for another cause, I can find nothing either in his mental condition and behaviour during his past life in the Asylum or in his present symp- toms to justify the expression as to causation in the certificateFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 135 The special enquiry reports that his wife's brother states that he has been made for five years, that he has never shown signs of violence, that he has never drunk liquor or has been addicted to any intoxicant. The supposed cause of insanity was disappointment in some love affair. He was in love with some chamar woman, whose husband is supposed to have given Tajodin some drug to smoke, and after smoking this he became insane. He has never been violent since his admission. Incoherence of speech has been constantly present. He often refuses his food, and is mostly in a melancholic state. He became excited in January 1893. Is of a very suspicious disposition. Knee-jerks completely absent; pupil reflex doubtful; no marked tremor of tongue, or signs of parlaysis of any part; is generally depressed and melancholic; has no sense of decency or cleanliness; rambles off incoherently when spoken to, and cannot keep to the point; there is a thickening of the skin of the inner side of the left palm. In this case the history is contradictory and gives us very little help in coming to a distinct conclusion as to the cause of the mental aberration. There is a history of ganja-smoking. 136 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. 10 or 12 years old, and that "from his youth he was wild." He used to smoke ganja and go about begging, was turned out of Hamadpur for being a bad character; "he was a ter- rible smoker of ganja." Another religious mendicant or gosain, by name Harigir, also testified to the fact that Itwargir was a habitual ganja-smoker and that his moral character was bad, &c., &c. In this case there are no details of the family history to help us, and we are driven to frame an hypothesis as to the supposed sequence of events which led up to the insanity. We have not improbably an instance of wild, dissipated, and misspent youth, coupled with a highly excitable temperament, and an ill-balanced mind, rendered more so by religious excitement, and the life of a gosain. Assuming the probable truth of this history, and the existence of this excitable temperament, it is not difficult to further conjecture that the free and habitual use of ganja completed the mental unrest, and was sufficient to over- throw the scanty remains of reason, and set up a condition of melancholia with excitement (the active melancholia of Dr. Savage). Although in the absence of any particulars about his family history I am not prepared to state positively that the insanity in this case is clearly traceable to ganja-smoking and nothing else, neverthless I think that ganja mate- rially aided, if it did not actually set up, the mental disease. Subsequent to my return he became daily quieter and showed signs of mental improve- ment, and on the 20th April 1894 was sufficiently recovered to be released by order of the official visitors of the Asylum. If he returns to his ganja-smoking propensities it is not unlikely that we shall have him back in the Asylum before long. 4. Akbar Khan.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 137 He would not talk to the members of the Ganja Commission. The special magisterial enquiry states that no relatives can be found. He told me that he had never taken any narcotic or stimulant (alcohol, ganja, or tobacco). He was disinclined to answer any questions, or to pay much attention to what was said to him. Alleged cause of insanity ganja, but no definite or trustworthy evidence on this point. N.B.138 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. ganja I cannot say. Only in the case of Rudraya does it appear to me that ganja was probably the main cause of the insanity. I regret the delay in submitting the report on these cases, but I did not thoroughly understand that a report was called from me after having had the cases such a short time under observation. Extract from the evidence of Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel McKay (Superintendent, Nagpur Asylum, 1892). (1) Atmaram.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 139 LUNATIC ASYLUM, MADRAS, (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. THORNHILL.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity Statement VII). Type of insanity (Statement VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained iron) registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. 1. Kamal Sahib: Mu- salman; Cultivator; Cuddapah; 40; 32.519. Ganja. Mania Bad The papers show that nothing was known of this man's history or of the cause of his insanity. His incoherence, excitability, and sleeplessness are the principal signs of his insanity. Admitted, 10th February 1892. On admission he was "incoherent and noisy. Repeats questions put to him. Bad health, spongy gums." He died of pneumonia on January 18th, 1893. There are no post-mortem notes except that there was consolidation of the low- er lobe of the left lung. In the Asylum there was no improvement in mental condition, while his physical health became daily worse. 2. Mustan Saheb; Mu- salman; Cultivator; Anantapur; 34; 32.520. Ganja. Mania Fair The papers show this man to have been five years insane. The cause is "unknown." The man was under the delusion that he was Emperor of Delhi, that he had unlimited wives, and that the whole world belonged to him. He was sleepless also and refus- ed food. Admttted, 10th February 1892. On admission this man was "vo- luble and rather noisy, but on the whole fairly rational." On 21st July he is stated to have "much improved," but still suffers from delusions. The insanity is as- cribed to ganja, because the man admits that he used that drug. He informed us that he had smoked ganja for twelve years, that he never used datura seeds, but that he frequently smoked the dried leaves of the datura which produced a pleasant intoxication and was more easily obtainable than ganja. He said he thought the seeds much stronger than the dried leaves. 3. Tanikachellum; Hindu; occupa- tion unknown; Madras; 36; 32.525. Ganja. Mania Fair The papers show that the cause of this man's insanity is "un- known," that he "speaks irra- tionally and is very dirty in his habits and sometimes noisy." "His chin is swollen where he knocked it against the wall a few days ago." The Presidency Magistrate's inquiry does not attempt to reach the cause of insanity. Admitted, 18th February 1892. On admission this man was found to have a fractured jaw, which would have to be cured before his mental condition was inquired into. On 21st July he was re- ported to be "quite rational and much improved and nearly fit to go." He was released on 22nd March 1893. The Asylum case book contains no reference to the cause of insanity, nor is there any- thing to show how the cause was determined. The Deputy Super- intendent (Mr. Judge) explains that the cause is entered in the appropriate column of the annual register at any time when it is dis- covered by the Asylum authori- ties, for the Government presses to have every effort made to as- certain the cause in all cases. 4. Sheikh Hussain; Musalman; Peon; Anantapur; 41; 31.179. Bhang. Mania Good The papers show that this man had borne a good character to the end of 1890. "At I o'clock of the 1st December 1890 the prisoner, in a state of intoxi- cation, voluntarily caused by eating ganja, beat to death bru- tally with a heavy stick on the head an old man." He was sen- tenced to transportation for life, which Government reduced to 10 years' imprisonment. The High Court found on 16th July 1891 that "the evidence of the Dis- trict Surgeon shows clearly that the abnormal state of mind of the prisoner was merely the tempo- rary effect of the intoxicant which he had taken and could not pro- On admission Dr. Dobie entered the type as mania, adding "re- ported to be bhang, i.e., ganja." The man was "quite melancho- ly, says he has been a year in Jail. Says he is accustomed to ganja and asks for it." He has not improved in the Asylum. He still remains "violent at times." Before us he admits taking ganja.
140 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 141 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892142 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 143 Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892144 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Report by Surgeon-Major F. W Evans, Acting Superintendent, Government Lunatic Asylum, Madras, on the Hemp Drugs cases of 1892 (No. 343, dated 8th May 1894). I have the honour, in reply to your letter No. 264, dated 21st January 1894, to for- ward herewith the further information obtained and the papers sent by the various Magis- trates. 2. Out of 17 cases replies have been received in 12 up to date. 3. Of these 12, as regards cases Nos. 5, 8, 9, 10, 14, and 15 no further information could be obtained as relatives could not be found or aquaintances who could speak to the men's habits. Cases 3, 11, 12, and 13 seem to have been men who used ganja. Cases 6 and 7 appear to have been entered as caused by ganja without much enquiry, and evidence collected points strongly against their insanity having been caused by ganja. 4. I regret the delay, but one of the cases was only received yesterday, and in all the others there has been much delay. Report of the further inquiry in the Madras Asylum cases of 1892. 1. Kamal Sahib.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 145 The result of my enquiry is as follows:146 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. As directed in your reference No. 100, Magisterial, dated 9th February 1894, I have held an enquiry into the case of the lunatic Pappa, and arrived at the conclusion that his insanity has no connection whatever with hemp drugs. The important living relatives of the lunatic have been examined by me in the presence of Surgeon-Captain W. C. Wickers, the present Civil Surgeon of Coconada, and not one of them says he ever used ganja; the warders of the Jail in which he was detained, as also a constable who was on duty at the Jail, were examined, and they too deny that Pappa has ever even asked for ganja; of course the use of the same during his detention in the Jail was out of the question as being against the rules; the depositions given by these witnesses, nine in number, are enclosed. It seems to me that the only ground for classing his insanity as "toxic" is the entry by Dr. Patch of the following sentence against item No. 8 in Appendix II relating to Pappa's case:FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 147 though he was the strongest man in the world and had no equal to him in strength on the face of the earth; he was the winner in two to three very famous wrestling matches arranged by the late Raja of Pittapur, whose samstanum wrestler he was for some years. It is a pity that Dr. Patch did not say where from he got his information about his being a ganja smoker and bhang eater, but, from what I have been able to gather in regard to this man, it seems to me that Dr. Patch was misinformed and misled.] 8. Ramaswami.148 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. the use of ganja or bhang. It is stated by the lunatic's wife that he was occasionally using liquor. 5. On the 27th February 1894 Ramatanie Pillay, Abkari Contractor, who knew the lunatic for the last 15 years, was examined. He states that in his opinion the cause of Mahadil's lunacy is his misfortune and contracted circumstances rather than to ganja smoking, as he was not addicted to that habit to the best of his knowledge and belief. 6. Gopala Tunei Nayudu, Head Clerk of the District Jail, speaks to an admission made by the lunatic when he was in Jail to the effect that he used ganja freely, and says that he learnt from his neighbours at Canel Bazar that he was addicted to that drug. His evidence is hearsay, and the lunatic's admission cannot be relied upon as it is sup- posed to have been made when he was an insane in the Jail. 7. Five more persons who personally knew the lunatic were examined by me at Canel Bazar, whose evidence goes for the most part in corroboration of that recorded from the relatives of the lunatic. It seems to be clear that Mahadil Saheb was not addicted to ganja smoking and that the cause of his insanity has not been clearly established.] 13. Coopen.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 149 Even commissioned medical officers, not to mention apothecaries and medical sub- ordinates, who send many cases, know little of insanity, and seldom realize how often mere privation is a cause. As to Toxic insanity, my view, founded on a good deal of practical experience at home and in Madras, is that you might just as well talk of Financial or of Hungry insanity. A man or woman has mania, melancholia (a form of mania), or dementia, the result of the puerperal state, pecuniary losses, fright, alcohol, ganja, epilepsy, privation, etc. I don't mean that chronic dementia is the direct result; mania or melancholia as a rule intervening between the cause and the demand state. I presume that the idea is that toxic insanity has features peculiar to itself, just as puerperal mania has, in pervert- ed affection, homicidal or suicidal tendency and obscenity. But, after all, even this latter (puerperal mania) is not sufficiently different from ordinary mania to deserve a separate place. It may be somewhat curable; so are lots of cases of acute mania. It may recur with the puerperal state; so do lots of cases of mania on recurrence of the cause. As for the symptoms, perverted affection, suicidal and homicidal tendencies are common enough in cases of mania; and the obscenity, common enough in mania in both sexes, is only remarkable as often occurring in the case of refined or religious women, who then use language one can hardly believe they have ever heard. Yours sincerely, S. L. DOBIE. 6. Madula Sooryanarain did not die of cholera, but was discharged cured, July 21st, 1893. S. L. DOBIE. Dated Camp, Madras, 20th October 1893. From150 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. VIZAGAPATAM LUNATIC ASYLUM (MADRAS). (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. LEAPINGWELL.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of insa- nity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and from inquiry from Superintendent, etc. Pasupaleti Narasin- ham; Vishnava; Petition-writer; Go- davari; 19; No. 58. Ganja Toxic insanity. Indiffer- ent. Form C shows that the cause of insanity is "moral," that it is "unknown" whether it is hereditary, whether a first attack and of how long duration, and that the man is dangerous to others. Dr. Carruthers says: "His condition appeared to me at first mainly due to the abuse of ganja, an enforced abstinence from which greatly improved his state and left him calm and coherent. At the close of the time of observation, however, he again became excited and noisy. This alternating with periods of sullen silence and others of foolishness, the disease is evident- ly recurrent." "He has shown no signs of improvement, but has become decidedly worse. I re- commend his removal to a lunatic asylum." Admitted, 18th June 1892. Discharged cured, 24th November 1892. There is no case book entry in this case after 1st July 1892. There is a pencil entry on two of the papers "grandfather was insane." The Superintendent says that the patient's mother or grandmother visited the Asylum and told him that the lunatic's grandfather had been insane. No entry was, how- ever, made in the register. The cause had already been entered. NOTE.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 151 Report of Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel A. H. Leapingwell, Superintendent, Vizagapatam Lunatic Asylum, on the case ascribed to hemp drugs in 1892 (No. 83, dated 5th May 1894). In reply to your letter No. 264, dated 21st January 1894, I have the honour to report that I have not been able to obtain any further information regarding the lad Pasapaleti Narasinham from the Joint Magistrate, Godavari, or the Civil Surgeon, Rajahmundry, as will be seen from the letters herewith forwarded (not printed). I have, however, succeeded in tracing the lad and find that he is now employed on the East Coast Railway as a peon. He came to me yesterday with his mother, and from them I learn as follows. The attack of insanity for which he was treated here was the first. He had been smoking and eating ganja occasionally for six months prior to admission. He could not tell me how much he smoked at a time, as he said he never bought any, but smoked what was given him by his companion, whom he joined in smoking. He did not smoke every day, but about once a week. The effects produced were "giddiness" and "lazi- ness." He also drank arrack, and appears to have led a somewhat loose life generally. His mother says that it was not the lad's grandfather, but her grandfather, who was insane, and that she knows of no other relations who were insane. When admitted into the Rajahmundry Jail he was suffering from insanity with excite- ment, and his mental disorder was consequently described as "mania." After admission into this Asylum he was never at any time excited, but greatly depressed, crying and refusing food, so that it was necessary for the first two months to frequently feed him with the stomach tube. His condition then could only be classed as "melancholia." His weight on admission was 75 lbs. and he gained 18 lbs. in weight while under treatment. His mental condition at once improved when he began to gain weight, or, in other words, as soon as his general health improved. With reference to the last paragraph of your letter, in which I am required to give a clear opinion as to the type of insanity and the cause, I can only say that in this case we have an instance of a lad with a history of insanity in the family whose health from some cause completely broke down, and, as a result, insanity supervened, at first with excite- ment and subsequently with depression, and that as soon as his physical condition improv- ed his insanity disappeared. Such cases are seen every day in Asylums. To what extent the smoking of ganja may have contributed to his debilitated condition, which in my opinion was the immediate cause of his mental disorder, I am unable to say, and I do not think it is possible for any one to give a more definite opinion in this case.
152 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. CALICUT LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. CARRUTHERS.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of in- sanity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from registers and by inquiry from the Superintendent. Jacob, Christian, Ma- layalam, Cooly, Ma- labar, 40, No. 494. Ganja Toxic insanity. Bad The Form C shows the type of in- sanity as "Melancholia." This, as the first attack, duration un- known. "Said to have been caused by intoxicating drugs, probably ganja." Not hereditary and no injury from violence. The Civil Sur- geon on 26th August 1892 certi- fies the man's state of health as "good " He says "his mind is very much affected. He scarcely understands the simplest ques- tion, and if he does, gives irra- tional or irrelevant answers. Is very dirty and apathetic, sitting alone in a corner. Evidently sees imaginary objects. Dirties his cell." Admitted 9th Sep- tember 1892. Died 19th Octo- ber 1893. The first entry in the Asylum Register is 1st October 1892. "Health bad. Constantly cries. Answers no questions. No sleep at nights. Does not take his food. Has to be fed. Totters about while walking and falls down and hurts himself. Very dirty. Howls at night. Admit- ted into hospital." 10th NovemberFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 153 REPORT OF SURGEON-MAJOR H. ST. C. CARRUTHERS, SUPERINTENDENT, CALICUT ASY- LUM, ON THE CASE ATTRIBUTED TO HEMP DRUGS IN 1892 (NO. 114, DATED 12TH MAY 1894). With reference to your letter No. 264 of 21st January 1894, forwarding to me, for further enquiry and report, the case of deceased insane Jacob, I have the honour to enclose herein, in original, a report from the Police Inspector of Kottayam about the past personal and family history of the man submitted through the Joint Magistrate of Malabar. 2. The only source of information to me of the lunatics in general is the certificate Form C, forwarded with the warrant in each case, and in this particular instance the cause of insanity was attributed to "intoxicating drugs, probably ganja," which was duly en- tered in the Admission Register. But, as you will see from the enclosed report, Jacob's insanity is now asserted to be due to hard drinking, and not to the use of ganja or other drugs. Case of deceased insane Jacob. Kali, alias Ipeca, wife of Jacob, stated : "Jacob was my husband. In 1891 I with the above Jacob and four children converted to Christianity, and changed residence from Anjerakandy to Illikumm. Jacob was wholly given up to drinking of toddy and arrack when in Anjerakandy. He was not taking ganja or other hemp drugs. He once showed signs of insanity when in Anjerakandy some 41/2 years back. Insanity is not hereditary in his family. He was all right after he came to Illikumm. He was not drinking toddy also after he came to Illikumm. On local enquiry made with the comrades and others of Jacob in Nither, I find that he was not given up to the use of hemp drugs at all, and that the insanity is due, in my opinion, to the after-effects of drinking toddy and arrack. 39
154 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. COLABA LUNATIC ASYLUM (BOMBAY). (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. BOYD.) Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of in- anity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from Asylum registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. 1. Nama; Hindu; La- babourer; Bombay;25; 1-bFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 155 Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892156 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 157 Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892158 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892f FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 159 Report of the Superintendent, Colaba Lunatic Asylum, Bombay, on the Hemp Drug Cases of 1892. With reference to letter No. 149, dated 16th October 1893, paragraph 2, from the Secretary, Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, and G. R./G. D. No. 4107 of the 16th November 1893, I have the honour to submit a further report on the 13 cases admitted during the year 1892 as follows:160 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. CASE NO. 6.FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 161 CASE NO. 11.162 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. POONA LUNATIC ASYLUM. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. McCONAGHY.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of in- sanity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from Asylum register and from inquiry from Superintendend. 1. Guljarsha Gula- bsha; Mussalman; Fakir; Bombay; 75-97. Ganja smoking Acute mania. FORM C SHOWSFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 163 Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892164 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 165 Report of the Superintendent, Poona Lunatic Asylum, on the Hemp Drug cases of 1892. With reference to your letter No. 149, dated Simla, 16th October 1893, and accom- paniments, I have the honour to state I have communicated by letter with the different Magistrates under whose warrants lunatics suffering from the effects of hemp drugs were admitted into this Asylum in 1892 and up to 16th September 1893, the date of inspection of Asylum by two members of your Committee. Information regarding the previous history of all the lunatics has not yet been furnished, if any facts of importance are subsequently received they will be communicated. 2. The discrepancy referred to in notes appended to "Hemp drug cases admitted in 1892" is explained as follows:166 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. AHMEDABAD LUNATIC ASYLUM BOMBAY). [SUPERINTENDENT (TEMPORARILY), DR. McCLOGHRY.] Hemp Drugs cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of in- sanity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Ayslum history and facts ascertained by inquiry from Superintendent and from the Asylum registers. 1. Shariz Hamid Gul; Musalman; trader; Surat, 35, No. 101. Ganja. Toxic insanity. Fairly good. This man is shown in the papers as "intemperate, given to indul- gence in liquor, toddy and gan- ja." He is said to suffer from 'mania.' The cause is not men- tioned; but it is merely stated that he "never suffered from concus- sion, &c." " His elder brother is given to drink and is some- what eccentric." He "talks in- coherently, speaks in whispers, does not answer questions ration- ally, does not take his food pro- periy, sometimes mutters words without any meaning. He was sent up for examination as to the state of his mind in 1888 to the civil hospital as he was found violent and making mischief in Rander. He was kept under ob- servation for about a month, and his mother having undertaken to look after him, he was handed over to her by the 1st class Magistrate of Surat. From the police report it appears that he is charged with committing sex- ual intercourse with a a she-goat. He is married but does not live with his wife. Indulges in ganja, liquor and toddy." He was ad- mitted into the Asylum on 1st July 1891, released as cured on 27th June 1892, and re-admitted on 1st October 1892 under Rule 2 of Appendix I to Government Resolution No. 1803, dated 3rd April 1889, which requires a crimi- nal lunatic charged with a crime against the person (the cause of insanity being ganja or other in- toxicant) to be confined for three years after all signs of insanity have disappeared. This man was first admitted on 1st July 1891. The first entry in his Asylum history is 16th December 1891. "This patient has shown some improvement in his mental state, but has not been sufficiently long in the Ayslum and is not fit to appear for his trial, June 21st, 1892. Has been steadily improving since last re- port and is now fit to make his defence." He was released accordingly but re-admitted from Jail under the orders of Govern- ment. He has never since then shown any sign of insanity what- soever. He denies the use of gan- ja and also the crime with which he was charged. He went to Mauritius in 1873 and returned in 1885. He talks much. 2. Chhotu Singh; Hin- du; no occupation Surat; 22 No. 91. Ganja. Toxic insanity. Strong. This man's character is "sober. At present sometimes smokes ganja." The supposed cause of of his insanity is "constant headache." The attack was "sudden" and had lasted for "six years." He talks incohe- rently, wanders about all day. Has illusions and delusions. Talk- ing to himself at times. Cons- tantly singing. Goes about naked at times. Threatens to beat mem- bers of his family, though has not done so. Habits clean and takes his food well. Admitted, 1st January 1892. The Ayslum case book shows that this man "continues unchanged since admission." This man is not rational, but he says he used to smoke ganja regularly. The Deputy Superintendent (H. A. Joseph Solomon) says that his father states that he has smoked since boyhood in bad company of Ghosains, &c.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. l67 Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892168 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [ APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 169 Report of the Superintendent, Ahmedabad Lunatic Asylum, on the Hemp Drug cases of 1892. Case No. 1.170 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Case No. 2.-Chhotu Singh Shibram Singh (dementia).FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 171 RATNAGIRI LUNATIC ASYLUM (BOMBAY). (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. JENNINGS.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of in- sanity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from Asylum registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. I. Sidram bin Rama; Hindu; Beggar; Bel- gaum; 30, No. 142. Ganja Toxic insanity. Good Form C shows that this man is "said to have been addicted to ganja smoking and drinking." He suffers from "mania" of "about ten years' duration." It was preceded by "Fever of four months' duration." The cause is "unknown." History of con- cussion, sunstroke or injury to the head cannot be traced." No heredity and no epilepsy. Form A (medical certificate) men- tions "constant muttering to him- self, answers questions incoher- ently, sometimes restless, occas- sionally violent, throws stones at passers-by. Is dirty in his per- son and habits. Wanders about the streets without any settled place of abode. His mother states that he has been insane for about ten years." Admitted 1st March 1892. The Hospital Assistant entered the word "ganja" under "cause" (with mark of interrogation) be- cause the use of ganja was admit- ted. There has been as far as the case book shows "no improve- ment" in this case. The man is sad and melancholic in appearance with puckered fore- head and shifty expression. 2. Gobind Wasadeo Paik; Brahman; Shopkeeper; Karwar 32, No. 146. Ganja Toxic insanity. Fair Form C shows that the man was "addicted to smoking ganja to a great extent." He had suffered from "mania" for "two months," which was alleged to be "due to smoking ganja to a great extent." No hereditary predisposition and no epilepsy. Form A shows "noisy, quarrel- some, tears his clothes, does not sleep well at nights, filthy in his habits." Admitted, 27th March 1892. Dis- charged cured, 30th October 1893. This man was "dirty and destruc- tive and required separate con- finement, incoherent and discon- nected in his talk" on 14th July 1892. There seems to have been no change until 10th February 1893, when he "seems rapidly improving and speaks coherently and rationally." On 27th July 1893 he "is free from signs of insanity and is fit to be dis- charged. He will be observed for one or two months further." 3. Dinkar Gopal Saul Brahman; Cultivator; Ratnagiri; 22, No. 148. Ganja Toxic insanity. Good Form C shows that this man's re- latives all live in Kapre. He has been "addicted to the use of to- bacco these two years and to that of ganja these six months, since which time he is insane." The duration of the attack is put down as "about six months." It was "sudden." It is ascribed to the "use of ganja." There is no heredity and no epilep- sy. Form A records, "Has delusions. Imagines he has seen persons who have died long ago. Is not dirty nor dangerous to himself or others, but is desirous of obtain. ing treatment for his mental con- dition. Said by the Police Patel of his village to be abusive and destructive." Admitted, 4th April 1892. The first entry in the Case Book 15 on 15th July 1892. "Since his admission he has been quiet and well conducted. He is coherent and rational in his conversation. Gives no trouble. Occasionally reserved in his manner and habits." January 11th, 1893, "is improving but occasionally gets excited. Has frequent seminal emissions at night. 27th July 1893 answers rationally. Occa- sionally gets excited. Emissions much less frequent." 13th De- cember 1893 "has improved much. Does not complain of frequent emissions." This man has naturally a somewhat imbe- cile appearance.
172 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 173 The case book is also written up at the same time; and all the entries (except those from Form A) contained in the papers received with the Magistrate's order are made at that time as a rule, wholly by the Hospital Assistant in the casebook the same day or the morning after (if the man is received in the afternoon). Only in cases where the Hospital Assistant has doubt are any blanks left for the Superintendent to fill up. In the case of Rama Pillai Shindu referred to above, Dr. McCal- man saw the patient's brother. The Hospital Assistant says he had copied all the entries except the two as to 'Cause' and 'Form of insanity.' These are found alone to be in Dr. McCalman's handwriting. The Hospital Assistant does not think that he read the vernacular papers to Dr. McCalman, but told him that the brother said the man had used ganja and drink; and Dr. McCalman asked the brother and then made the entry. The Hospital Assistant says he did not draw Dr. McCalman's attention to the vernacular entry of cause, because he himself thought it a less reasonable explanation of the insanity than 'ganja and liquor'; and also because he did not know whether Dr. McCalman might not have seen the entry when the man was under observation in the Civil Hospital. If the cause is given clearly in the Magistrate's papers (e g., 'ganja'), the Hospital Assistant says he would never keep the friends for the Superintendent to see. He would send them away. Neither would he keep them if the cause were shown as 'ganja and drink,' nor ganja with any other cause. The total admissions for 1892 were174 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Report of Surgeon-Major Lyons, Superintendent, Ratnagiri Lunatic Asylum, on the Hemp Drug cases of 1892. Name. Cause of insanity from recent inquiry. 1. Sidram bin Rama The Civil Surgeon, Belgaum, states that he smoked ganja for many years. 2. Gobind Wasadeo The Civil Surgeon, Karwar, states that the cause was ganja. 3. Dinkar Gopal Lunatic's uncle, Jairam Bhikaji, states that he does not know the cause of insanity of his nephew. The 1st class Magistrate, Ratnagiri, states that the information given in Form C may be pre- sumed to be correct. 4. Nanachandra Dudhan The Civil Surgeon, Thana, states that the case was clearly the result of ganja smoking. 5. Rama Pillai Lunatic's relatives do not give the cause of insanity. The cause given by the Civil Surgeon and Super- intendent of the Asylum should be taken. The 1st May 1894.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 175 DHARWAR LUNATIC ASYLUM (BOMBAY). (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. McCALMAN.) One Hemp Drug case admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of in- sanity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from Asylum registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. Dariappa; Hindu; Cultivator; Bijapur; 25. Smok- ing ganja. Mania Good This man was arrested for damag- ing telegraph posts. Form C under "character" says "Tem- perate. Previous to this illness he took to ganja smoking." He has suffered from "Mania" for three months. The attack was "insidious. Mutters to himself, uses bad language to everyone who comes near. Sometimes violent, dirty in the habit. Gradually becomes worse." The supposed cause is "smoking to excess tobacco and ganja and to some extent drink- ing. No hereditary predisposi- tion. The medical certificate (dated 30th October 1892) shows that he is very violent and has destroyed some of the bolts and fastenings of his cell. He is very dirty in his habits, speaks incoherently, very noisy and has tried to attack his guard, mut- ters to himself and is abusive when spoken to." In a "history" of the lunatic, drawn up by the Deputy Collec- tor and forwarded by the Magis- trate on 25th January 1893, the above facts are recapitulated; but under "character," it is written "Intemperate. Smokes ganja and bhang, drinks country liquor and sindi (toddy) to into- xication, is not however an habi- tual offender." Admitted, 11th November 1892. The Asylum registers show that on admission "he is dirty and extremely destructive. He has pulled down the masonry moorah of his cell and with the stones threatened to attack the warders. He will not wear any clothing, gives a great deal of trouble and is very abusive. Takes his food well; is noisy, singing, laughing." 7th December176 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP- Report received through the Superintendent, Dharwar Asylum, on the Hemp Drug case of 1892. RETURNED to the District Magistrate, with a statement of one Laxumi, mother of lunatic Dariappa, in original as required. The wife of Dariappa was present, but she could not give any information on the points required to be cleared, and consequently her statement was not taken down. Evidence by Laxumi. MY name is Laxumi. My husband's name is Shidda. My age is about 45 years. My caste is Uppur. I reside at Mhasali, Taluka Indi of Bijapur District. I support myself on manual labour. I am mother of the lunatic Dariappa bin Shidappa. He is my only son. I have got a daughter, who is married and who now lives with her husband. My husband died in or about 1876. My husband died a natural death. He was not addicated to "ganja." He never took any intoxicantFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 177 LUNATIC ASYLUM, HYDERABAD (SIND). (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. KEITH.) Hemp Drug Cases admitted during 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age, and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type 0f in- sanity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from Asylum registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. 1. Mulchand Waliram; Hindu; Nil; Hyder- abad; 30178 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [ APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 179 Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892180 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Hemp Drug cases admitted during 1892FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 181 Hemp Drug cases admitted During 1892182 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. Final Report of Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Keith, Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Hyderabad (Sind), on the Hemp Drug cases of 1892 (submitted on 4th February 1894). I have the honour to forward herewith the reports on previous histories of patients admitted in 1892, and to request you to be good enough to substitute them for the previous ones, as I am not pleased with them. NO. 1. MULCHAND WALIRAMFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 183 NO. 7. DHOLU walad JETHMAL184 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. First Report of the Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Hyderabad (Sind), on the Hemp Drug cases of 1892 (submitted on 1st December 1893). CASE NO. 1 OF MULCHAND. I state that my name is Waliram, my father's name Sangatram, my age about 55 years, my religion Hindu, my caste Lohano, my calling Hawker, my residence Hyderabad town. Mulchand (in Asylum register the name is put down as Bulchand), who is now in the Asylum for the last two years, is my son. I have five sons besides Mulchand. One of them is dead. So two are employed and two are in school. None of them is addicted to narcotics; so far as I remember none in our family has become insane. My father used to drink bhang every evening at a Dharamsala in a moderate quantity. I drink bhang, but oc- casionally, when I go out in the Bazar. I take a small quantity of bhang as a cooling stuff. My son, who is now in the Asylum, went to Bombay ten years ago and got mad. The insanity continued for nearly six months. I don't know what was the cause, but he himself told me that he used to go out in the sun to sell cloth and his head was affected by intense heat. Before he went to Bombay, he did not drink bhang or smoke charas or ganja. He was brought to Hyderabad and was all right for about five years; then all of a sudden he complained of pain in his head, and became insane. So far as I know he never took narcotics; but he might have done so in my absence. He was confined in the Asylum for six months and then discharged as all right. He fell in bad company, and commenced drinking bhang daily and smoking charas and ganja at Kali on every Tuesday for nearly five years (Temple of Goddess near Hyderabad town). I don't know what quantity of narcotics he indulged in, because he never used these things in my presence. He became gradually insane, and he was getting troublesome; he was confined in the Asylum. So far as I knew he was not dangerous to society, nor did he beat any one. He, however, used to beat me and his mother sometimes when excited. This is the third time that he has be- come insane in his lifetime. The insanity appears to be due to constant use of narcotics, such as bhang, ganja and charas. It is not hereditary. I had two brothers. They never indulged in bhang, etc. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad THATTUMAL, The 22nd November 1893. Magistrate, Second Class. NOTE. The result of the local inquiry made in the neighbourhood of the lunatic is that he was always seen smoking ganja and charas and drinking bhang for the last ten or twelve years. The insanity is ascribed to use of narcotics. It is self-acquired and not hereditary. He was not epileptic, but was dangerous to society. He talked nonsense and spoke in- coherently. He has become insane on three occasions. There was and is no insane person in his family. His grandfather drank a small quantity of bhang. His father also drinks bhang in a small quantity. No ganja or charas has been used by any of his family members except the lunatic. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad. THATTMAL, The 22nd November 1893. Magistrate, Second Class.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 185 CASE NO. 2.186 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. 5. Did Metho indulge in any kind of intoxicating drug; if so, of what kind? 5. I have never seen him drink bhang or indulge in any kind of intoxicating drug, such as ganja or charas, and not even liquor. 6. Can you assign any reason for his insanity; was he in any financial or other difficulties? 6. I cannot assign any reason. He had had no difficulties. 7. Can you tell me whether there were any cases of insanity either in your father's or mother's family? 7. No; none. 8. How long after his first return from the Asylum that he kept well ? 8. For a few days he was perfectly well and calm; then he began to give trouble; committed mischief; abused people. These things went on for two or two and a half months, when he was made over to the police. 9. Are you or any member of your family in the habit of taking intoxicating drug? 9. No. Statement of Durrian, son of Detaram, aged 24 years, Hindu Lohana, residing at Karachi. 1. Do you know Metho Detaram, who is now an inmate in the Lunatic Asylum at Hyderabad, and what is he to you? 1. Yes, I know Metho, he is my younger brother. 2. When did he first show symptoms of insanity, and what was this age then? 2. He first showed symptoms of insanity little over three years ago, he was then about 17 years old. 3. How many times has he been sent to the Asylum? 3. Twice. 4. What symptoms of insanity did he first exhibit? 4. He was talking nonsense, used to eat much, commit mischief, break things, use violence. At first we put him under the treatment of native hakims, then under European doctors, but without any good re- sult. The first time he was sent to the asylum by the Divisional Magistrate, Hyderabad, he remained there for a year and was then re- leased; soon afterwards he again showed signs of insanity and was worse than before; we were then obliged to hand him over to the police, who sent him to the Civil Surgeon and then again to the asylum. 5. Can you tell me whether your brother Metho indulged in any kind of hemp drug, which form of the drug? 5. Metho, to the best of my knowledge, never indulged in any kind of intoxicating drug. He very seldom used to take a little liquor. 6. Can you tell me whether the medicine prescribed to him contained any hemp drug? 6. No; I cannot say that. 7. What occupation did your brother Metho follow when he first became insane, and what did he do the second time? 7. He was employed by one Chello Mul- chand, coffee shopkeeper at Ghizri, and the second time he did nothing. He was with Chello for two or two and a half years.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 187 8. Can you say whether during the two or two and a half years that he was em- ployed at Chello's he took to intoxicating drug. Had you any means of knowing that? 8. He used very often to come to us, and I have never seen him using any kind of hemp drug, nor have I ever seen him intoxicated. 9. Was he married or unmarried when he became insane? 9. He was unmarried and has not married as yet. 10. Has there been any insanity in your father's or your mother's family? 10. No; not that I am aware of. 11. To what cause do you then assign Metho's insanity? 11. I cannot say. 12. Had he any difficulties? 12. Not that I am aware of. Statement of Tevo, son of Jetho, aged 54 years, Hindu Lohana, residing at Karachi. 1. Do yo know Metho, son of Detaram. and where he is now? 1. I know Metho. He is now in the Lun- atic Asylum at Hyderabad. 2. How many times has he been sent to the Asylum and when? 2. He was first sent to the Asylum some 31/2 years ago and remained there for 12 or 14 months, got all right and came to Karachi, where he did well for two or three months, and then again showed symptoms of insanity. He was therefore sent back to the Asylum. 3. To what cause do you assign his in- sanity. Did he indulge in any kind of hemp drug or any other intoxicating drug? 3. No; he did not. I am married to his sister this last 12 years, and I know the boy ever since. I cannot assign any cause for his insanity. 4. What occupation Metho followed when he became insane? 4. He was employed as a servant at one Chello Mulchand's at Ghizri, where he had a coffee shop; he became insane there and came to live with us. He was very troublesome, given to acts of violence, was very abusive, used to eat much, go about naked and talk nonsense. He was first placed under the treatment of a native hakim, then that of a European doctor, and finding no change he was sent to the Asylum. 5. Can you tell me what medicine the native hakim gave Metho and whether there was any hemp drug in it? 5. I can't say what medicine the native hakim gave him. It was for drinking, but I can't say whether it contained any hemp drug or whether it caused any intoxication. 6. Has there been any insanity in his father's or mother's family? 6. Not to my knowledge. 7. Was Metho in any difficulties? 7. No. 8. Is he married or unmarried? 8. Unmarried. Statement of Chello, son of Mulchand, aged 43 years, Hindu Lohana, shopkeeper, Ghirzi Sanitarium, Karachi. 1. Do you know Metho, son of Detaram, and how have you become acquainted with him? I. I know Metho Detaram. He was my ser- vant. I used to pay him Rs. 3 a month and food.
188 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. 2. How long did he serve with you, and why did he leave your service? 2. He was with me for about two and a half or three years and left my service as subsequently his mind was little unhinged. He left my service of his own accord. 3. When did he leave your service? 3. About three years ago. 4. Can you tell me whether Metho was in the habit of taking hemp or other intoxi- cating drug during the time he was in your service? 4. No; 1 have never seen him take hemp drug of any kind, nor any other intoxicating drug. Very seldom he used to take a little liquor and only when I offered him. 5. Can you tell me whether he took bhang even in the hot weather? 5. No; I have never seen him. 6. Was he in any financial or other 6. No; not to the best of my knowledge. difficulties? 7. Can you assign any cause for his insanity? 7. No; I cannot. G. BAINBRIDGE, M.D., Civil Surgeon, Karachi. Illegible, Magistrate, F. C., Karachi. Metho has always denied the use of bhang, but knew how it was prepared and smok- ed. I tried an experiment one afternoon and got bhang, ganja and charas; and Sarandas (who is now discharged cured) acted as host. All the Mawalees (Sobo, Heeramona, Luxi- mon, Gulazim, Metho and others) were attracted; and Metho, in his quiet sensible way was the most eager to join and help in their preparation and to assist in their consump- tion. He is now almost well, and he confesses to having used 1 pice bhang, 2 pice ganja and 2 pice charas every day, and he says moreover that his brothers and employer, Chello, knew all about it. J. KEITH, Superintendent, Hyderabad Asylum. CASE OF DHOLU, SON OF JETHANAND. No. 7. Statement of Jethanand, son of Lahorimal, aged 50 years. Hindu Lohana, trader, resident of Manjhond in the Karachi district. 1. Do you know Dholu, and what is he to you? 1. Yes, I know him; he is my son. 2. Did he become insane; and, if so, when and what were the symptoms; what was his age when he first showed symptoms of insanity? 2. My son Dholu showed symptoms of insanity 16 months ago; he was then 16 years old. At first he became abusive, speaking incoherently and nonsense; used to quarrel with members of the family and used to eat much. For a few days we confined him in a room; there he one day tore his clothes and became naked; he also became dirty in his habits. After three weeks of this state I took him to the Civil Surgeon of Hyderabad for treatment, and he advised me to send him to the lunatic Asylum there. I did so; he was kept in the Asylum for three months and was then released perfectly cured. He is now nearly 18 years of age.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 189 3. Was this his first time in the Asylum, or has he been sent before ? 3. This was his first time. 4. Can you say whether your son Dholu indulged in any intoxicating drug; if so, of what kind ? 4. To the best of my knowledge, my son did not indulge in or make use of any kind of intoxicating drag before or after his insanity. During the summer when the weather was very hot he used, on very rare occasions, to drink bhang, but in a very moderate form and in a very small quantity. 5. To what cause do you then assign his insanity ? 5. Before becoming insane Dholu was suffering from piles and passed good deal of blood; he was consequently placed under the treatment of a native hakim (quack), who al- most cured him of his piles. A month after that he showed symptoms of insanity. 6. Can you tell me what was the medi- cine given by the native hakim; was it for external or internal use ? If used inter- nally, can you say whether it contained any intoxicating or narcotic ingredients ? 6. To the best of my recollection the medi- cine given was for external use; he may prob- ably have given something to drink, but I am not positive of that. 7. Has there been any kind of insanity in your or your wife's family ? 7. No. None. 8. Did your son again show symptoms of insanity after he was brought from the Asylum, and did he ever afterwards be- come troublesome ? 8. No. Nor did he become troublesome; on the contrary for two or three months after his release from the Asylum he did not go out of the house through shame. 9. Had he any financial or other diffi- culties ? 9. None whatever. 10. Is he married; if so, before or after the insanity? 10. He is married and was married before the insanity. 11. What was he doing before he be- came insane ? 11. He was employed in the shop of his maternal uncle at Sehwan. 12. Did you tell the Superintendent of the Asylum at Gidu Bundar that your son indulged in bhang? 12. No. I don't recollect having said so. If I have told him, I must have said that he occasionally took bhang in the hot weather. EVIDENCE OF DHOLU, SON OF JETHANAND. No. 7, Lunatic Dholu, son of Jethanand. 1. Were you admitted into the Asylum at Gidu Bundar ? 1. Yes, I was. 2. Did you ever indulge in bhang or any intoxicating drug ? 2. No, I did not indulge in any intoxicat- ing drugs; occasionally in the summer when it was very hot I used to take a little bhang IN a liquid state and in a very mild form. I did not take any other drug but that occasionally I used to take a little liquor, but that was on very rare occasions. 3. What is your age now and what was your age when you became insane ? 3. I am now 18 years old. I was little over 16 years when I became insane. 48
190 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. 4. Can you assign any reason for your 4. I was suffering from piles and I lost insanity? good deal of blood for three or four months and was in very great pain. I was under the treatment of a native hakim (quack) who cured me. He gave me both medicines to drink as well as to apply externally. I am not entirely cured of the disease, but I don't lose any blood now. I took the internal medicine for one or two days. I think he gave me some opening medicines. I can't say whether there was any intoxicating drug in them, but I did not get any intoxication. Hiranand, son of Gyanchand, aged 35 years, Hindu, Lobana, Merchant, resident of Manjhand, and now of Karachi States. 1. Do you know Dholu, son of Jetha- 1. Yes, I know Dholu; his father Jethanand nand? is a partner of ours. 2. Do you know them intimately? 2. Yes, I know the whole family intimately. They are all residents of our village Man- jhand. 3. Do you know that Dholu had be- 3. Yes, I know that. come insane and was sent to the Lunatic Asylum at Hyderabad? 4. Do you know whether Dholu in- 4. To the best of my knowledge I have dulged in any kind of intoxicating drug? never seen him indulge in any kind of drugs, such as bhang, charas or ganja. He used occasionally to take bhang in the hot weather in a very mild form. On rare occasions he used to take a little liquor. I have never seen him intoxicated. 5. Can you then assign any reason for 5. No, I cannot. his insanity? 6. Can you tell me whether Dholu's 6. To the best of my knowledge I have father or his relatives are in the habit of never seen any member of his family indulg- indulging in bhang or any other intoxicat- ing in intoxicating drugs. I know his father ing drug? used to drink a little bhang now and then during the hot weather. 7. Can you tell me whether any mem- 7. No, none. ber of Dholu's family or any relatives of his mother were or are affected with in- sanity? G. BAINBRIDGE, M.D., Civil Surgeon, Karachi. Illegible, Magistrate, F.C., Karachi. Dholu, when he was in the Asylum, confessed all along to the use of hemp drugs. J. KEITH, Superintendent, Hyderabad Asylum.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 191 CASE NO. 8. Statement of Matadin. I state that my name is Matadin, my father's name is Minbi, my age is 30 years, my religion is Hindu, my caste Kahir, my calling Mali, my residence now Hyderabad, but in- habitant of village Gadeya, Zilla Nawab Ganj, Bara Banki, North-Western Provinces. NOTE. One pice worth. Charas 1/24th of a tola. Ganja 1/8th do. Bhang 3/4th do. One pice worth. Charas 1/24th of a tola. Ganja 1/8th do. Bhang 3/4th do. I have been in Hyderabad since five years. Before that I was in my native place. Since coming to Hyderabad I have been employed in the Municipal garden as a chota Mali. For a short time I was Dewan Chandasing's servant. I was confined in the Lunatic Asylum for six months and seven days after I became insane. It is now nearly eight months since I have been discharged from the Asylum. The cause of insanity is that I smoke ganja and charas daily. I contracted this habit since my infancy. I know my father used to smoke ganja and charas twice a day, each time one pice worth. My father never became insane. He had four brothers who did not smoke ganja and charasor drink bhang. So far as I know none of my family members have become insane, but smoking of ganja and charas is a common thing among our caste people. While I was at home I used to smoke charas and ganja twice a day, about one pice worth at a time (morning and evening). One tola of ganja is to be had for 1 anna and 3 pies and one tola charas for 61/2 annas. After my coming to Hyder- abad I began to smoke ganja and charas three times a day, morning, mid-day and evening, each time one pice worth. One day I purchased one tola of charas, and smoked it in company of ten persons and be- came insane at once because my head was affected by it. The effect of charas is stronger than that of ganja. It produces intoxication at once and lasts for about 2 or 3 hours, while ganja produces intoxication after 2 or 3 minutes and remains for about an hour and and a half. I do not drink bhang often, but only on big religious days, say three or four times in a year. Since I have been discharged from the Asylum, I never had any fits of insanity. The reason is that I keep away from drinking narcotics. I have no relations here, but Maju, Head Mali in the Municipal Garden, is my countryman and knows me since I have come here. It is he who found me lying near the Fuleli Bridge and took me to the Police Chowki, whence I was sent to the Asylum. This is the first time that I have become insane. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad, THATTUMAL. The 22nd November 1893. Magistrate, Second Class. Statement of Maju. I state that my name is Maju, my father's name is Sahibdin, my age is 40, my religion is Hindu, my caste is Mali, my calling Gardener, my residence Jeypore, Zilla Nawab Gunj Bara Banki, North-Western Provinces. I know Matadin since he has come to Hyderabad, say about five years. He was em- ployed as a chota mali for about two years, and after that for a short time as a servant to Dewan Chandasing; while in his service he became insane. I know Matadin used to smoke ganja and charas three times a day, one pice worth each time. One day I found him lying near the Fuieli Bridge near the town. I took him to the Police Chowki with a view to his being sent to the Lunatic Asylum for treatment. He appeared dangerous
192 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. then and talked nonsense and spoke incoherently. I am not acquainted with his family,but my village is at a distance of five miles from that of his. He is now again employed in the Municipal Garden. I take particular care of him. He has not smoked charas and ganja since his discharge from the Asylum. The result is that he is all right and has had no fits of insanity. So far as I know this was the first time that he became insane. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad. THATTUMAL, The 22nd November 1893. Magistrate, Second Class. NOTE. Matadin has no relations here. He belongs to North-Western Provinces. Maju knows him for about five years, and states that Matadin was in the habit of smoking charas and ganja, and his insanity is ascribed to the use of narcotics. It cannot be ascer- tained whether it is hereditary or not; but the statement of Matadin shows that it is not. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad. THATTUMAL, The 22nd November 1893. Magistrate, Second Class. CASE NO. 9 OF SHIKRO. I state that my name is Mahomed, my father's name Gahno, my age about 30 years, my religion Mahomedan, my caste Chano, my calling Labourer, my residence Gote Lall- eno Nunari, Taluka Hyderabad. Shikro, fakir, was my only brother. He was in the Lunatic Asylum for about two months, and died at our village about ten months ago. Before he became insane, he used to drink bhang daily, once in the evening, worth one pice. This habit he contracted since infancy. He did not smoke charas or ganja. My father was also a fakir, and used to drink bhang every morning and evening. That was also about one pice worth, and sometimes a little more. My father died about 29 years ago. Shikro was my elder brother by two or three years. No one was and is insane in our family and was and is addicted to using narcotics excepting my father and brother. My uncle is alive, and does not use narcotics. My brother became mad once before he was sent to the Asylum. The duration was about two years. When he became mad the second time, he was caught by the Police and sent to the Asylum for treatment. He was discharged, and died at home after seventeen or eighteen days. I live at a distance of six miles from Hyderabad town. He was not epileptic, but was considered dangerous to others. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad.THATTUMAL, The 22nd November 1893. Magistrate, Second Class. CASE NO. 10, BAXALI. I state that my name is Baxali, my father's name Imambux, my age about 25 years, my religion Mahomedan, my caste Babar, my calling Blacksmith, my residence Hyder- abad town.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 193 I was about five months in the Lunatic Asylum. It is about eleven months since I have been discharged from it. I drink bhang now daily in the evening, about one pice worth, since my discharge from the Asylum. I have not lost my senses. Before I became insane, I used to smoke charas occasionally in company with others; sometimes I purchas- ed charas with my own money, worth one pice (note one twenty-fourth part of a tola), and smoked alone. But I was not a daily smoker of charas. I also drank bhang (morning and evening), worth one pice at a time (viz., 3/4ths of a tola). My father and uncle are dead. I have no relatives in the house excepting my wife. My father used to drink bhangdaily twice (morning and evening), worth one pice at a time. My uncle also drank bhangtwice, worth one pice at a time. None of my family members used ganja or charas. We work near fire, and therefore some of us to cool ourselves drink bhang. I got into the habit of smoking charas about six years ago. Before I got mad, I had gone out for fifteen days, so I had not tasted bhang or smoked charas during the interval. On the day I re- turned to Hyderabad I drank a cup of bhang, worth one pice, and on the same day I lost my senses. I was taken to the Lunatic Asylum about four months after I became insane. This is the first time that I have become mad; so far as I know and hear there was no insane person in our family. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad. THATTUMAL, Magistrate, Second Class. The 22nd November 1893. I state that my name is Butchal, my father's name Mahomed Hussain, my age about 60 years, my religion Mahomedan, my caste Battu, my calling Blacksmith, my residence Hyderabad town. I know Baxali, son of Imambux. He is not my relative, but a neighbour. His house is near mine. I know him from his infancy. His parents are dead. There is no other relation in his house except his wife. He drinks bhang daily in the evening, worth one pice (note 1lb of bhang is sold for Re 0-6-6) to cool himself after day's work near fire. I know he occasionally smoked charas and drank bhang daily. His father was not insane. He used to drink bhang also both morning and evening, worth one pice at a time. His father had a brother also. He used to drink bhang too. In fact we all Lohars (Black- smiths) indulge in a small quantity of bhang daily in the evening to cool oursleves because we work near fire. Baxali was five months in the Lunatic Asylum. I cannot say why he became mad; but I think smoking of charas is the cause of it. It is now eleven months since he has been discharged from the Asylum. He is all right now, and has had no fit of insanity since then. When he became insane he talked nonsense, and spoke incoherently. He was not epileptic, but was dangerous to society. People were afraid of him. He was confined in his house by his brother-in-law. This is the first time that he got mad. There was no person insane in his family and none smoked charas or ganja. J. KEITH,Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad.THATTUMAL, Magistrate, Second Class. The 22nd November 1893. NOTE. It appears from local inquiry made, besides the above statements, that before Baxali became insane he was in the habit of smoking charas and drinking bhang daily in company 49
194 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. of other persons. There was no insane person in his family, and none smoked charas or ganja. He became mad because he freely indulged in charas-smoking. When he became insane, he was confined in his house, as he was considered dangerous to society. His insanity lasted for about ten months. He was not epileptic, but talked nonsense. The insanity is not hereditary. This is the first time that he has become insane. His male family members used to drink a small quantity of bhang daily. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad. THATTUMAL, Magistrate, Second Class. The 22nd November 1893. CASE NO. 11 OF SEVO. I state that my name is Ailmal, my father's name Tanumal, my age about 30 years, my religion Hindu, my caste Lohano, my calling Curd-seller, my residence Hyderabad town. Sevo, who was in the Lunatic Asylum for about one month and a half, was my only brother. He died fifteen days after his discharge from the Asylum. This occurred about nine months ago. My parents are dead. I have no other relations. So far as I know there was no other insane person in our family. My brother was addicted to drinking bhangand smoking charas and ganja and also eating and smoking opium since his infancy. He was my elder brother, and was 35 years of age when he died. He drank bhangmorning and evening, about one pice worth. He was fond of smoking charas twice a day, worth one pice at a time. Ganja he sometimes smoked. That was also one pice worth. When he ate opium he did not smoke opium (chandul), but when he smoked he did not eat opium. That was also one pice worth. I have been seeing him use these nar- cotics since I have come to maturity. He was a mason, and used to earn about one rupee a day. He became insane soon after the death of my mother. It appears that he took her death to heart, and coupled with the fact of his affected brains caused by constant use of the above drugs he lost his head. He was not dangerous to society, but people were afraid of him. He talked nonsense and spoke incoherently. My father was not in the habit of drinking bhang or smoking charas or ganja. My uncle is also dead. He also did not indulge in narcotics. In fact so far as I know none of our family members was in the habit of drinking bhang or smoking charas or ganja. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad.THATTUMAL, Magistrate, Second Class. The 22nd November 1893. NOTE. The enquiry made on the spot from several persons in the neighbourhood shows that Sevo was addicted to the use of charas, ganja, bhang, and opium from his infancy. He was always seen with a chelum in his hand (pipe), in which ganja, etc.; is smoked. This shows to what extent he was wedded to the habit of using narcotic drugs. There has been no insane person in his family. His head was doubtless affected by constant use of nar- cotics. He was not epileptic, but was dangerous to others. He got insane for the first time. His family members did hot indulge in narcotics. J. KEITH, Civil Surgeon, Hyderabad. THATTUMAL, The 22nd November 1893. Magistrate, Second Class.
FURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 195 CASE NO. 12 GULAZIM. From Lieutenant A. F. Bruce, Assistant Political Agent, Quetta, to the Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Hyderabad (Sind), dated Quetta, the 30th November 1893, No. 1907. In reply to your endorsement No. 126, dated 20th November 1893, I have the honour to inform you that the family of the Lunatic Gulazim, son of Zalmir, resides outside British territory. I am, therefore, unable to conduct the necessary inquiry into his past, personal and family history. From the Superintendent, District Jail, Shikarpur, to the Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Hyderabad, dated Shikarpur, 15th November 1893, No. 1134. With reference to paragraph 2 of the Secretary, Indian Hemp Drugs Commission's No. 149 of 16th October last, conveyed in your endorsement No. 123 of 10th instant, I have the honour to forward herewith true extract from Vital No. 8, which contains observations of the then Medical Officer as to the demeanour, &c., of Gulazim, son of Zalmir, and to state that the information as regards his indulgence in hemp drugs was obtained from the prisoner. 2. As regards his previous history before admission into this Jail, no information can be had locally, as the prisoner belongs to one of the tribes wandering over Yakhistani hills. Register of prisoners, convicted and under-trial, under Medical observation as to mental condition and to be reported on. Register No.196 REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. [APP. LUNATIC ASYLUM, RANGOON. (SUPERINTENDENT, DR. BAKER.) Hemp Drug cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district, age and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (Statement VII). Type of In- sanity (State- ment VI). State of health on admission. Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from Asylum registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. 1. Zinulabdin; Mussul- man; Tailor; Rangoon; 20, No. 262. Ganja- smoking. Toxic. Fair The medical certificate merely refers to the "History" which showsFURTHER ENQUIRIES REGARDING THE ALLEGED HEMP DRUG CASES OF 1892. 197 Hemp Drag cases admitted in 1892. Name, race, occupation, district age and register number of lunatic. Alleged cause of insanity (statement VII). Type of in- Sanity (state- ment VI). State of health on admission Facts ascertained from the papers. Asylum history and facts ascertained from Asylum registers and from inquiry from Superintendent. Narada