LEPROSY AND ITS CONTROL IN THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. Published by the Government of Bombay. February, 1914.
?OFFICIAL AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF INDIAN OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS. In England. Constable & Co.,  10,  Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C., London. Grindlay & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S. W., London. Henry S. King & Co., 65, Cornhill, E. C., London. P. S. King & Son, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, S. W., London. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trbner & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C., London. B. Quaritch, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W., London. W. Thacker & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. Luzac & Co., 46, Great Russel Street, London, W. C. B. H. Blackwell, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Deighton Bell & Co., Cambridge. T. Fisher Unwin, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. On the Continent. Friedlander & Sohn, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. Otto Harrassowitz, Leipzig. Karl W. Hiersemann, Leipzig. Ernest Leroux, 28, Ru Bonaparte, Paris. Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague. In India. Higginbotham & Co., Madras. V. Kalyanarama Iyer & Co., Madras. P. R. Rama Iyar & Co., Madras. Thacker, Spink & Co., Calcutta. W. Newman & Co., Calcutta. S. K. Lahiri & Co., Calcutta. R. Cambray & Co., Calcutta. Thacker & Co. (Ld.), Bombay. A. J. Combridge & Co., Bombay. Superintendent, Government Central Press, Bombay, D. B. Taraporevala, Sons & Co., Bombay. Sunder Pandurang, Bookseller, etc., Bombay. Gopal Narayen & Co., Booksellers, etc., Bombay. N. M. Tripathi & Co., Booksellers, etc.,  Bombay. Mrs. Radhabai Atmaram Sagoon, Bookseller, etc., Bombay. Ramchandra Govind & Son, Booksellers, etc., Bombay. Bombay Tract and Book Society, Bombay. N. B. Mathur, N. K. H. Press, Allahabad. [Price-2a. or 2d.]
LEPROSY AND ITS CONTROL IN THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. For some time past the Government of Bombay has been consider- ing how far the unrestrained freedom of lepers is a danger to the community at large, and how that danger may best be met. The contagiousness of leprosy. It must be premised that although leprosy is everywhere acknow- ledged to be contagious, the precise degree in which it is so remains a question on which opinions differ. Again, the exact mode in which leprosy is conveyed is still undetermined, but expert opinion is agreed that the closeness of association and the sanitary conditions under which this association occurs are important factors in estimating the risk of contagion. In assessing, therefore, the degree of danger to the general public which exists from the presence of lepers among them, considerable value will still attach to the opinion expressed by the Leprosy Commission of 1890-91. It is as follows - "Vagrant and indigent lepers living in villages and scattered about the country are probably sources of little or no danger", and on the other hand, " In cities and large towns they herd together, living under circumstances of extreme poverty and filth, and forming communities, which are not only offensive to public decency but constitute, from many points of view, a menace to public health ". The proper limits of control. Leprosy is thus  not   a highly   contagious   disease.    It   cannot   be compared in contagiousness, prevalence, and disastrous effects upon the health of the community at large with either syphilis or tuberculosis, and until the victims of these diseases are subjected to compulsory segregation, such action with regard to lepers would be unjustifiable even if it were desir- able. At the same time it is essential that lepers should be prevented from forming colonies in towns and cities and also from following trades and occupations that bring them into direct contact with the rest of the community or lead to the production or preparation of commodities capable of carrying contagion. H    1079
2 The Lepers Act. These objects can be attained by putting into force the provisions of the Lepers Act of 1898, which provides for "the segregation and medical treatment of pauper lepers and the control of lepers following certain callings". Under this Act a pauper leper can be arrested by the police and, after due examination before a medical officer, ("An Inspector of Lepers") and a Magistrate, sent to a leper asylum and there detained, unless a friend or relative undertakes to take proper care of him. Further the Local Government may order, by issue of a notification, that no leper shall exercise certain trades and callings, under penalty of a fine in the first instance, or of being bound over or committed to a leper asylum on a second conviction. Application of the Act. Now, this Act cannot come into force until a Local Government has by notification applied it or any part of it to the whole or any part of its territories. This process is not as simple as would appear at first sight, for the reason that it is useless to apply the Act to any area unless there is an asylum capable of receiving and properly caring for such lepers as may be sent to it. Government had therefore first to determine the areas to which the application of the Act was desirable, and then see that proper asylums were available. As considerable progress has now been effected in this work, it may prove interesting to the public to know how the position stands at present. The City of Bombay. The whole Act was applied to the City of Bombay in June, 1911, and the Acworth Leper Asylum at Matunga was notified as the asylum serving that area. The Municipal Corporation agreed to defray the cost of maintaining lepers who had been residents of Bombay for over five years and Govern- ment undertook to pay for all others. Poona. In July, 1911, the Act was extended to the City of Poona and the neighbouring areas, and the asylum notified was the Leper Asylum at Kondhwa Budruk which is under the management of the "Mission to Lepers in India and the East". This notification was made with the consent of the Mission and under an agreement which fully provides for Government inspection and supervision.
?3 Belgaum, Dhrwr and Bijpur. Since September, 1912, the Act has been in force in the municipal and a large number of non-municipal towns in the Belgaum, Dhrwr and Bijpur Dis- tricts. Previous to this, Government had purchased a property known as "Rehoboth", situated at Hindalge near Belgaum, for Rs. 5,000, and it was converted into a Leper Asylum at an additional cost of Rs. 7,000, of which Rs. 1,834 were provided by private subscription. "The Mission to Lepers in India and the East" undertook the management and up-keep of this institution also. This asylum now serves all three districts. Further extensions. Municipalities in the Northern Division. Slsette. Nsik and Sholpur. Ratngiri. As a result of further investigations and arrangements, the Act has recently been extended to the Ahmedbd, Nadid, Dkor, A'nand, Broach, Surat and Bulsr Municipal districts and the Slsette Tluka in the Northern Division, to the Sholpur and Nsik Municipal districts and the Deolli Cantonment in the Central Division, and to the Ratngiri Municipal district in the Southern Division. The part of the Act that prohibits lepers from engaging in certain trades or callings has also been applied to the whole district of Ratngiri. No action has been found necessary in Sind. Lepers from the Northern Division are to. be sent to the Kagrapeth Leper Asylum at Ahmedbd, which is a Govern- ment institution, or, in the case of Slsette Tluka only, to the Albless Leper House at Trombay. Lepers from Nsik City and Deolli will be cared for in the Leper Asylum at Nsik maintained by the "Mission to Lepers in India and the East", from Sholpur in the Asylum there maintained by the American Marathi Mission, and from Ratngiri in the Dinsh Mnekji Petit Leper Asylum, which is a Local Board institution aided largely by Government. Lepers from the Town and Island of Bombay can also be sent to any of these asylums. It should be added that definite proposals regarding the institution of an asylum at Stra are awaited, and the question of applying the Act to Poladpur and Pui in the Kolba District is under consideration. Asylums in the two latter places are already maintained by the Mission to Lepers with the aid of a capitation grant of Rs. 2-12 per mensem from Government, who have also recently made a building grant of Rs. 4,500 to supplement a similar amount provided by the Mission. All the asylums, which are under the management of non-official bodies, are now aided in a similar way, and it may be mentioned that a provision of nearly Rs. 40,000
4 exists in the current year's budget for ordinary grants-in-aid to asylums, for grants for the maintenance of the additional lepers that the Act may be expected to send to them and of lepers' children, and for additional staff. Enlargement and improvement of leper asylums. The conversion of privately managed leper asylums, where attend- ance is voluntary, into asylums under the Act, where lepers are to be detained under a warrant, entailed the enlargement and altera- tion of many of the buildings. A beginning has been made with the construction of walls and fences and of special detention wards for lepers who attempt to escape. The care of the untainted children of leprous parents is to receive special attention. If the consent of the parents can be obtained, the children will, if possible, be handed over to charitable institutions, while, in cases where the parents will not agree to absolute separation, small nurseries are to be provided for them near each asylum. A sum of Rs. 25,000 has been provided in the current year's budget on account of the initial cost of detention wards, nurseries and fences, and further sums will be allotted, if necessary, on this account when detailed proposals are received. The machinery of the Act It is scarcely necessary to describe in any detail the machinery necessary for the working of the Act. It will suffice to say that a Superintendent has been nominated for each asylum, rules framed for their guidance, and a board appointed to supervise the working of each asylum. Certifying "Inspectors" under the Act have been notified, and also the appellate authorities to whom their decisions may be referred. Schedules of trades and callings forbidden to lepers have also been notified; lepers may not, for example, personally prepare for sale or sell any articles of food or drink or minister to the public as domestic servants, washermen, barbers, or in any similar intimate capacity. Finally Government wish to give their assurance that though many of the asylums will be adminis- tered by Missions, full precautions have been taken to ensure that no improper pressure will be brought to bear on any inmate or children to induce them to change their religious faith. The cordial thanks both of Government and the community at large are due to the "Mission to Lepers in India and the East" and to the American Marathi Mission for their most welcome and thorough co-operation in the work of relieving the lepers themselves and removing a danger to the public health. BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS.
