?OUTBREAK OF CHOLERA IN THE VILLAGE OF AKHOREE, IN THE MIRZAPORE DISTRICT. From Commissioner, Benares Division, to Secretary to Government, North-West- ern Provinces (No. 38).-Dated Benares, the 16th March, 1869. SIR,-I have the honour to forward copy of a letter from Dr. Paske, Civil Surgeon of Mirzapore, relating to an outbreak of cholera in a large village about nine miles west of Mirzapore city. 2. Dr. Paske's suggestions are being carried out, but the complete isolation contemplated could not be enforced without causing alarm and discontent. The mea- sure is, however, of such importance that the local authorities will be desired to do all they can, short of compulsion, to secure the object in view. 3. A copy of Dr. Paske's letter has been forwarded direct to the Sanitary Com- missioner, North-Western Provinces, and a further report will be furnished in a week. I have, &c., A. SHAKESPEAR, Commissioner. (COPY.) From Civil Surgeon, Mirzapore, to Magistrate and Collector of Mirzapore.-Dated Mirzapore, the 13th March, 1869. SIR,-With reference to Mr. Anthony's letter No. 117, dated 6th instant, reporting an outbreak of cholera in the village of Akhoree, I have the honour to inform you that in company with that gentleman I paid a visit to the said village yesterday afternoon. Akhoree is situated on the right bank of the river Ganges, on elevated ground, nine miles from the city, in the Bindhachul direction, and contains about 10,000 inha- bitants. The approach from the cast (the way we entered the village) is over broken low ground covered with human and animal excrement in all directions, and stagnant, decomposing, greenish-looking pools of water. The village itself is well built, but the houses too crowded together. Although admirably situated for drainage, anything like conservancy could never have been thought of since its formation. I traversed in company with Mr. Anthony both the main and side streets from cast to west, where the village ends close to a high perpendicular bank, overlooking a tributary stream of the Ganges still containing a little water. Dirty as I know Indian villages to be as a rule, this one baffles description. I find it impossible to convey to you a faint idea of its pollution. In every direction, in every nook and corner, vegetable matter and ordure are scattered broad-cast over the place in every stage of decomposition. The original drains are closed, and the soil is saturated with a black decomposing fluid which oozes out in every direction. Spacious indeed is the possession of dirt here-it reigns supreme. Mr. Anthony's presence was of great use to me. His knowledge of the language and habits of the people enabled me to find out particulars which I might not other- wise have been able to elicit. It appears that cholera first shewed itself about the beginning of the month, and that about 40 have died from it. I visited several cases, and there can be no doubt about its being cholera. The hollow sunken eyes, cold bluish extremities, exhaustion, vomiting and purging, stamp it as a disease of no ordinary severity. From the position of the village, its proximity to the city, its being in the direc- tion of the prevalent wind-viz., to the west of the city-and the long straggling places 4 1
?( 2 ) like Bindhachul, &c., which are still nearer to it, and to which it might easily spread, I have under these circumstances recommended the most vigorous and prompt mea- sures, which Mr. Anthony promised to assist me in having carried out. These mea- sures are as follows:- 1st.-Quarantine. All communication with other places or villages to be put a stop to, as far as practicable, for several days. 2nd.-Large bonfires, of greenish and dry wood mixed, to be set alight all round the village, and to be kept burning for several hours,-fires to the east and west espe- cially. 3rd.-All the sweepers that can be found to be sent to the village, and, with the aid of the inhabitants, every road, lane and compound to be most carefully cleaned. Refuse to be collected in a heap and burnt or buried. 4th.-A Native Doctor or compounder, with the necessary knowledge, will be at once despatched to the village with medicine, brandy, and other Hospital comforts and adjuncts. 5th.-All the disinfecting powder with the Tehseeldar to be sent to the villages. In this way, I hope to stamp out the disease and prevent its spreading towards the city or in any other directions,-cut it off, isolate it, as it were. So long as villages remain in their present unhealthy state, it is useless trying to eradicate the disease; it springs up afresh when circumstances are favourable. When refuse has remained ex- posed for a certain time and arrived at a certain stage of decomposition, the result is cholera or some other epidemic. Akhoree is a village in which the plague would love to dwell and decimate. I request that a copy of this may be forwarded to the Government as well as to the Sanitary Commissioner, North-Western Provinces. I have, &c., (Sd.) C. T. PASKE, Civil Surgeon. From Sanitary Commissioner, to Secretary to Government, North-Western Provinces (No. 44).-Dated Allahabad, the 23rd March, 1869. * Enclosed in Original. SIR,-With reference to the letter,' dated 13th March, 1869, of the Civil Surgeon of Mirzapore, bringing to notice an outbreak of cholera at the village of Akhoree, I beg to inform you, for the information of Government, that I have visited the village in question, and have now the honour to report as follows:- 2. Akhoree is a stone-built village situated on rising ground in the obtuse angle formed by the meeting of the Kumoutee and Ganges rivers. The village stands quite close up to the rocky precipitous bank of the former, and on the margin of the wide khadir of the latter river, and its site is in great part of sandstone rock, covered with earth in places. It is therefore, as regards the rain-fall, very perfectly drained, and might easily be made one of the cleanest villages in the Province. But immediately to the south-east of the village the land lies very low, and I have no doubt water accumulates there in the rains to form a largish shallow muddy pool, which however is now quite dry,-but, from the numerous small holes dug into the ground hereabouts, I think this natural tendency of the water to accumulate has been increased. Good results might attend the levelling of this place and its drainage.
?(3) The village is estimated to contain (the information being taken from the Put-waree's papers) 4,787 inhabitants and 1034 houses, not 10,000 inhabitants as reported by the Civil Surgeon, who was misinformed on this point. It has ten stone-built wells, large and small; but from one of these, a remarkably large well, fourteen feet in diameter, and containing about six feet of water, most of the people take their drinking water. This well is surrounded by a well-raised "num," wide circular platform three feet high. The well stands amongst the houses, and just outside the "num" I noticed a drain full of black impurities running from a neighbouring house. Also, about the centre of the village, another very filthy drain, opening on the middle of the public way and soiling it from side to side for many yards, was noticed. With the exception of these two places, and several very filthy cesspools at the margin of the public ways, I found the village comparatively clean and well swept. 3. I examined all the streets and houses of the village, and carefully sought out all the sick people in it. In this way I found two men and two children suffering from cholera, but in none of these cases were the symptoms such as to preclude a hope of ultimate recovery; indeed I think three of the four are very likely to recover. From this I gather that the disease, in its type of severity, has passed over for the present in Akhoree. 4. I have no doubt whatever that I saw every person ill of cholera in the village; the people evinced an earnest anxiety to show me their sick friends, and to hear what I could say to them of comfort or advice. 5. The cause of the state of comparative cleanliness now existing is that for two days, the 15th and 16th of March, the sweeper staff of Mirzapore city, consisting of 80 men, was sent out to Akhoree and pretty thoroughly swept it from end to end, leaving drains and cesspools, however, untouched-undoubtedly the wiser course. 6. The measures mentioned by the Civil Surgeon in his letter quoted above as having been put in force for the prevention and control of the disease are-quarantine; the burning of wood fires outside to the east and west of the village; the perfect cleansing of the village; the supply of medicines, to be administered by a Native Doctor deputed for the purpose; the use of disinfecting powder to the contents of drains and cesspools. Of these measures I should report that quarantine has only been established in name, as Akhoree is famous for a race of tall strong men who are much employed by merchants as night watchmen at Mirzapore, many, it was said more than fifty, men going there a distance of nine miles in the evening and returning to their homes in the morning, and nothing has been done to prevent these men from pursuing their usual avocation, neither, I suppose, could this be prevented with any measure of justice short of providing the men with an equivalent for their lost wages; and indeed, under any circumstances, I cannot believe quarantine in inland towns can be established without a very large amount of injustice or loss to individuals. Of the burning of wood fires.-I noticed three large wood fires burning on the east and three on the west side of the village, but they were burning brightly with a clear flame. The object desired to be gained by the burning of such fires is to fill the air with smoke, or charcoal in a finely divided form. This was explained to the native attendants feeding the fires; and, as natives of India know quite well how to produce a fire of much smoke with little flame, I hope the fires will be properly burnt in future. The perfect cleansing of the village.-This has been done very fairly, but still in places much improvement in this respect might be expected. The sweepers suddenly
?(4) employed have returned to Mirzapore. I think six sweepers might be usefully employed for some days in perfecting the cleanliness commenced. All cesspools and drains should be filled up with dry earth, and so left until such time as cholera has disappeared, when their contents should be carried out and buried. The village with its lands belongs to the Rajah of Benares, who might perhaps desire to permanently improve its sanitary state by permitting the entertainment of two paid sweepers for its conservancy. The supply of medicines for administration by a Native Doctor.-The Native Doctor employed was noticed to be a young lad, a compounder, sent from Mirzapore. His medicines were noticed to consist of about eighty cholera pills, one drachm of camphor in a piece of paper, and one drachm of carbonate of ammonia in a bottle, and a few ounces of castor-oil. With this supply of medicines, and two bottles of brandy, neither of which had been opened, the Native Doctor was endeavouring, I believe to the best of his ability, to dispense the benefits and uphold the advantages of modern medical science, but not, I think, so successfully in the eyes of the Native population as seems desirable. But this is a wide question, which cannot be properly discussed here. Yet I may say that of the four patients I saw I think three would have been greatly benefited by tonic doses of quinine, and one by the application of a turpentine stupe to the loins; and perhaps it might be advantageous to cause Civil Surgeons to be supplied with a properly-divided medicine-tray in which a reasonable supply of medicines might be sent with the Native Doctor deputed in any district to such work as this at Akhoree. The use of disinfecting powder.-This I saw sparsely sprinkled over the contents of three cesspools; but then I saw several not so treated; and I believe if dry earth is largely used, and drains and cesspools filled up with it, they will be better disinfected than by a partial treatment with any disinfecting powde r. 7. Altogether it cannot, I think, be doubted that a considerable amount of energy has been displayed by Dr. Paske, the Civil Surgeon, and Mr. Anthony, the Deputy Magistrate, of Mirzapore, (the latter of whom kindly accompanied me to Akhoree) in combating the rather severe visitation of cholera from which Akhoree has recently suffered. The disease appeared 35 days ago, and during that time 73 men, women and children have died of it, or 1.5 per cent. of the inhabitants. 8. The village stands almost due west of Mirzapore, and about half way between the two lies the town of Bindhachul, a rather important place on the banks of the Ganges, famous for its temple to Devi, reached by narrow ascending stone-paved streets with many crowded shops. 9. During my recent visit to Mirzapore I inspected Bindhachul also, as I heard the Nauratree fair was taking place there daily at this time. I found it greatly crowded with people-it was said 15,000 strangers in all were assembled. At the temple on the highest point of the town was a scene of extraordinary confusion, very many people passing in and out of the narrow temple, throwing water on the idol, the water running down into the narrow street below; and facing the temple door, down in a large shallow stone tank, a scene rather horrible and disgusting-many men bringing sheep and lambs, goats and kids, and young pigs for sacrifice by the Pundahs, who decapitated the animals with considerable dexterity, and in such numbers that the floor of the tank was covered with blood, dogs being engaged amongst the legs of the men in licking and eating it up. The animals' bodies were carried away by the owners to be eaten in the evening, and I noticed many places in and about the town where offal had been thrown out to decompose. The place was too crowded to permit
?(5) of any careful inspection; and I mention my visit to Bindhachul in this report with a view to impress on the notice of the authorities the great necessity there is, seeing that cholera is actually present within four miles of the town, for an earnest attention during the passing time to the proper conservancy of Bindhachul, and the enforcement there of such of the rules for the management of important fairs as may obviously apply to the management of a small fair. I have, &c., C. PLANCK, Sanitary Commissioner, N. W. P. From Secretary to Government, North-Western Provinces, to Commissioner, Benares Division (No. 50).-Dated Allahabad, the 3rd April, 1869. SIR,-I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter No. 38, dated the 16th ultimo, with its enclosure, regarding an outbreak of cholera in the village of Akhoree, in the Mirzapore District. 2. In reply, I am desired to state that the measures carried out at the recommen- dation of Dr. Paske, the Civil Surgeon of Mirzapore, appear to have been judicious, and effectual at any rate in securing temporary cleanliness. 3. The outbreak of the disease appears to have been severe; but it did not spread. Nevertheless the appearance of the epidemic in a severe form at so early a period, ought to keep the District Authorities on the alert for the future. * No. 44, dated 23rd instant. 4. I am to forward copy of a letter* on the subject, from the Sanitary Commissioner, North-Western Provinces, and to request that the remarks therein contained may be communicated to the Magistrate of Mirzapore. 5. The attention of the Rajah of Benares might advantageously be invited to Doctor Planck's suggestion as to permanent arrangements for the cleanliness of the place. 6. The suggestion of the Sanitary Commissioner for the supply of medicines to Native Doctors will be communicated to the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Upper Provinces, for consideration. 7. The Magistrate's special attention is desired to the circumstances described in paragraph 9 of Doctor Planck's letter; and to the expediency of introducing some measures into Bindhachul for obviating the objectionable results arising from the sacrifice of animals at the temple there. I have, &c., R. SIMSON, Secy. to Govt., N. W. P. No. 51. COPY forwarded to Sanitary Commissioner, North-Western Provinces, for information, with reference to his letter No. 44, dated 23rd instant. 3 2
?(6) From Secretary to Government, North-Western Provinces, to Inspector-General of Hospitals, Upper Provinces (No 52).-Dated Allahabad, the 3rd April, 1869. SIR,-I am directed to forward to you for consideration the accompanying extract from a letter No. 44, dated 23rd ultimo, from the Sanitary Commissioner, North-Western Provinces, reporting on the outbreak of cholera in the village of Akhoree in the Mirzapore District, in which he suggests the expediency of supplying Civil Surgeons with a medicine-tray, containing sets of medicines to be sent with Native Doctors deputed to cholera-stricken districts. I have, &c., R. SIMSON, Secy. to Govt., N. W. P. OFFICE MEMORANDUM,-No. 64. GENERAL (SANITATION) DEPARTMENT. Dated Allahabad, the 10th April, 1869. THE undersigned is directed to forward, to the Secretary to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India, a printed copy of papers relative to the outbreak of cholera in the village of Akhoree, in the Mirzapore District. F. HENVEY, Offg. Jr. Secy. to Govt., N. W. P. From Inspector-General of Hospitals, Bengal Medical Department, to Secretary to Government, North-Western Provinces (No. 8).-Dated Fort William, the 8th April, 1869. SIR,-In acknowledging the receipt of your letter No. 52, of the 3rd instant, forwarding, for my opinion, a suggestion from the Sanitary Commissioner of the North-Western Provinces, on the advisability of supplying Civil Surgeons with a medicine-tray, containing sets of medicines to be sent with Native Doctors deputed to cholera-stricken districts, I have the honour to state, for the information of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-Western Provinces, that I consider the measure judicious, and beg to recommend its adoption. I have, &c., J. MURRAY,  Inspr.-Genl. of Hospls., Bengal Medl. Dept. CIRCULAR No. 19. From Secretary to Government, North-Western Provinces, to all Commissioners of the North-Western Provinces (No. 72).-Dated Allahabad, the 1st May, 1869. Perhaps it might be advantageous to cause Civil Surgeons  to be supplied with a properly-divided medicine-tray, in  which a reasonable supply of medicines might be sent with  the Native Doctor deputed in any district to such work as  this at Akhoree. SIR,-I am directed to draw your attention to the extract entered in the margin, from a letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, North-Western Provinces, No. 44, dated the 23rd March last, in which he
?(7) suggests that Civil Surgeons should be supplied with medicine-trays containing sets of medicines, to be sent out with Native Doctors when deputed to cholera-stricken parts of the country. 2. This suggestion having met with the approval of the Inspector-General of Hospitals, I am desired to request that you will be good enough to instruct District Officers to arrange with Civil Surgeons for the supply of a sufficient number of sets of medicines to be used in such cases of emergency. The expense should, in the Lieutenant-Governor's opinion, be met from the Local Funds of the district; or, where there is a Municipal Committee, from the Municipal Funds of the places which may require the services of the Native Doctors. I have, &c., R. SIMSON, Secy. to Govt., N. W. P.
