I.-Report by Surgeon-Major Lyons, I. M. S., President of the Plague Research Committee. The Plague Research Committee was originally formed, under Govern- ment Resolution, General Department, No. 4533, dated 13th October 1896, to inquire into the nature and history of the disease, stated to be bubonic plague, of which a number of cases had occurred in Bombay City. Surg.-Major R. Manser, President. Surg.-Capt. L. F. Childe. Dr. Nusservanji Fakirji Surveyer. Dr. W. M. Haffkine. Mr. E. H. Hankin. The Committee was composed as per margin, and the members decided to distribute the work among them as follows:- SURG.-MAJOR MANSER:-The clinical aspect of the disease; its treatment by drugs; the source of the Bombay outbreak; the history of its introduction and spread; and the evidence relating to its incubation period. SURG.-CAPT. CHILDE:-The macroscopic and microscopic pathology of the disease. MR. HANKIN:-Its origin in the outside world; search for the microbe in food, clothing, bedding, drains and sea-water; and whether the microbes surviv- ed longer in rotten than in sound grain. DR. SURVEYOR:-The nature of the disease in rats and fowls; bacteriological proof that rats are suffering from the disease; the effects of antiseptics on the microbe, and the relative value of different antiseptics practically. DR. HAFFKINE:-The study of the microbe and its relation to the patient and to the animal body; the question of its communicability by infection or contagion between man and man, and between man and animals, inocula- tions, etc.; diagnostic methods; the period during which the patient continues infectious; immunity; and antitoxine and other treatment. Surg.-Major Manser contracted plague from which he died on 6th January 1897, and his place on the Committee was taken by me on the 25th January 1897. Dr. Surveyor has been unable, owing to illness, to pursue his line of investigation or to write a report. The reports of the other members, with the exception of that of Dr. Haffkine, are submitted herewith in full detail. Owing to the pressure of laboratory work, in which he is still engaged, Dr. Haffkine has not yet been able to arrange the material he has collected in the form of a report. Such suggestions as have been submitted by the Committee will be found in the General Appendix. The members of the Committee have in addition examined and reported on a very large number of specimens from suspected plague cases sent from every part of India; experimented with numerous antiseptics sent for report; and answered an immense number of inquiries addressed to them; involving tedious laboratory work and a considerable amount of correspondence. The difficulties of laboratory research were very great, owing to want of apparatus and of trained and intelligent assistants to carry out the ordinary routine work. The portions of the programme which devolved on Surgeon-Captain Childe and myself had to be carried out at such times as we could spare from our other duties, which, owing to the presence of the epidemic, were unusually heavy. In the present outbreak of plague the infection was no doubt imported from some locality in which the disease existed, but the most searching inquiry, instituted at the time it was first noticed, failed to discover evidence of plague cases (or indeed of any severe form of sickness except twelve cases of cholera) on board vessels which entered Bombay Harbour after 1st June 1896. B 1751-1
2 Inquiry was also instituted among ship-owners regarding any noticeable mortality among rats on ships trading with China and ports where plague was known to have existed, but in this case also with negative results. As the outbreak commenced near the Docks, it appears most probable that the infection was introduced by sea and carried in their clothes or goods by traders* who were themselves insusceptible. It is also possible that it may have been introduced in this way by traders from Northern India, as plague is believed to be endemic on the southern slopes of the Himalayas. The disease probably commenced to spread in Bombay about the beginning of August 1896, as the mortality of the city began to increase in the second week of that month (vide Table VII). This increase in mortality was attributed at the time to remittent fever and lung affections, but as rats were dying in great numbers in Mandvi Ward,-whore the death-rate among the population was unusually high and where the prevalence of the epidemic was first discovered, there can be little doubt that the excessive mortality was due to plague. The epidemic spread slowly, and the total mortality continued to increase until by the second week in February the whole city had become infected. After that timo the mortality began to decrease, and by the end of May it had fallen to the normal and deaths from plague ceased to occur. The official returns of deaths from plague aro for various reasons not very accurate. A fairly correct estimate of the mortality can be obtained, however, by taking as plague mortality the difference between the weekly mortality and the mean of the corresponding weeks during the preceding five years (vide Table VII), as there was no other unusual cause of sickness present. It must be remembered that the average weekly mortality during the preceding five years is taken on a population of 800,000, and that, owing to the exodus which occurred after the outbreak of the epidemic, the population was reduced by from a fourth to a third of that number. The true incidence of the disease was consequently considerably heavier during the later weeks than shown in the table, and this error is a gradually increasing one growing with the decrease of the population. It has been stated that in other places outbreaks were often preceded by the appearance of cases of painless buboes unaccompanied by vomiting, fever, headache or other symptoms of plague, but this was not observed in Bombay. It may here be noted that the great difficulty which arises in tracing the mode of infection and the course of plague as compared with the other more common infectious diseases is due to two facts-viz., that animals such as rats readily contract and afterwards spread the disease, and that the microbe is capable of thriving and multiplying outside the animal body, as is seen, for example, when it is cultivated in broth or on ghee. It is evident that infection may be carried by rats to persons who have never been brought into contact with plague patients, nor with persons visiting plague patients, and whose food and clothing could not have been contaminated in any other way. On the other hand the germs may bo convoyed by persons who are themselves insusceptible to plague, and, having grown and multiplied on suitable media and under favourable condi- tions, may infect large numbers of people who have never come into contact with plague patients, their attendants or plague-stricken rats. The development of plague in an epidemic form was believed by many per- sons to be duo to rotten grain which had been buried underground, and it was thought by some, infected with plague germs. Had rotten or diseased grain been sold as food (and there was no evidence that this took place), it would in all probability have given rise to digestive disorders, and in so far have predis- posed to plague ; but if the grain had been infected with plague bacilli, the disease would have appeared in several localties simultaneously, wherever the infected grain had been eaten. It is impossible to believe, too, that large stores of infected grain could have been sold without giving rise to an outbreak of disease * Dr. Jan Mahomed's first casos occurred towards the end o  September among Mooltanis who trade with China, and who lived near the docks.
3 among grain-sellers throughout Bombay. It is well known that this spreading of the disease far and wide among grain-dealers did not occur, and the 64 grain and flour sellers, millers and grain-parchers who died from plague between the mouths of September 1896 and January 1897, died principally in infected localities in the neighbourhood of the Docks where the disease first appeared, but did not themselves form centres from which the disease spread in unaffected districts. The epidemic was observed to increase notably during the cold season and to decline during the hob weather (vide Table VIL). This increase during the cold months was probably due, to a groat extent, to the sick and healthy occu- pying the same rooms during the day and sleeping together at night, and also to the depressing effects of cold. During the warm months the poor live under much inoro sanitary conditions than in the cold season. The influence of animals in spreading the disease was, with the exception of rats, probably inappreciable. A searching inquiry at Damaun, where there were great numbers of pigs at large in the streets, elicited no evidence of a single death, or even of an appearance of sickness among pigs, although an exceptionally severe epidemic of plague had visited the town. Sheep, goats, horses and cows were unaffected. There was evidence (post-mortem) of a dog having been affected, but none that cats contracted the disease. Birds were not at all affected. In the epidemic at present going on at Hardwar, monkeys are infected and dying in considerable numbers. The grey monkey is very susceptible to plague and rarely recovers, the brown monkey is much less severely affected. The influence of ants and bugs in spreading the disease is considered by Mr. Hankin (vide his report) to be unimportant, An alluvial soil, situated at a low level, copiously watered, associated with a high degree of atmospheric moisture and a temperature of 80 F. (conditions which are fulfilled by seaports like Bombay), are generally looked upon as those most favourable for the development of plague to epidemic proportions. But as far as can bo judged, the Bombay outbreak, where these conditions obtained, was certainly no more severe than that which has since occurred at Kirkee. In the latter place the soil is of laterite and well drained, and the cantonment has a high situation, a small rainfall and a dry atmosphere. All observers up to the present time have connected the occurrence and diffusion of the disease with want and filth, and there seems to be no doubt that these factors do favour it, in so far as they lower the general health and diminish natural immunity. But it will bo seen that filth per se has but little influence, from the fact that there occurred in the House of Correction, Byculla, where cleanliness is brought as nearly to perfection as is attainable, an outbreak which exceeded in severity that in any of the filthy chawls and tenements around. There were 345 prisoners confined in this jail when plague broke out there on the 23rd January 1897, the outbreak lasted for 15 days, and in that time 88 prisoners were attacked, 17 of whom died. It is a significant fact, too, in this connection that out of 1.570 patients treated at the Arthur Road, and Parel Hospitals there were only 10 sweepers, and that the halacores who remove the night-soil from the houses, and who form probably the dirtiest portion of the population, were notably free from plague. It is true they are a strong well- nourished class, of whom only the fittest have survived, and they are highly paid and live well. The predisposing causes were mainly those leading to a lower state of vitality, and which consequently lessened the natural resistance of the individual to infection. In this way, as above mentioned, the long-continued and excep- tionally hot season of 1896, the unusually heavy rainfall which followed and which confined the poor constantly in their overcrowded and insanitary dwellings, and the great heat which succeeded the rains, were powerful factors in lowering vitality. Then came scarcity due to dearness of food. During the cold season the unhealthy condition of chawls (native flats) and houses in the city was rendered worse by overcrowding, the inmates being unable to sleep and work in the opon, as large numbers of them are accustomed to do during the warmer months. Indeed, the effect of cold alone on the feeble and on those who are insufficiently clothed, as already mentioned, is a powerful factor in lessening resistance to infection.
4 The largest number of admissions into hospital occurred between the ages of 20 and 30 years. At the Arthur Road Hospital, Bombay, out of 1,275 admissions, 445 or 349% occurred between the ages of 20 and 30 years; 291 or 228% between 10 and 20 years; and 255 or 20% between 30 and 40 years. In the Poona Plague Hospital out of 1,130 admissions, 263 or 2327% occurred between the ages of 20 and 30; 137 or 2097% between the ages of 10 and 20 years, and 197 or 1743% between the ages of 30 and 40. A constant source of error in these statistics is that the ages of those admitted are seldom or never exactly known, consequently those given are only approximate. Another source of error is that in young children death from plague frequently occurs before the nature of the disease is recognised, so they are not admitted into the plague hospitals. In the case of children, however, the very small number of admissions (vide Tables I. and II) is no doubt partly due to the smaller number exposed to infection, as the exodus which took place on the outbreak of the epidemic was very largely confined to women and children. The withdrawal of the women gave rise to a marked decrease (vide Table VII.) in the birth-rate of the city, which during the ten months under review fell below the mean of the preceding five years for the same period by 3,685. That young adults should give the highest number of admissions is not surprising, as they form the largest proportion of the population, and they travel about more, and so are brought more frequently into contact with the disease. The greatest number of admissions into hospital occurred among domestic (cooks, hamals, massalchis,) and personal servants, (vide Table V.) who formed 2088%; mill-hands came next forming 1153%; coolies 88%. The comparatively large number of dhobies (native washermen), dirzis (tailors), gowlies (milkmen) and hajams (barbers) deserves notice, as from their occupation they are likely to spread the disease. The large percentage of admissions among domestic servants is doubtless duo to the disease being detected early, and to their masters seeing that they were taken to hospital.* It is impossible to estimate the influence of race and caste on susceptibility to plague, owing to Europeans living under very different sanitary conditions from natives, and to the effect of social position in altering the conditions obtaining among natives themselves; besides, correct statistics cannot be obtained as to the native population present during the epidemic and the numbers attacked by plague. That more males than females were attacked (vide Table IV.) is probably entirely owing to the former having been present in larger number. The exciting cause of plague is the plague bacillus of Kitasato, which is believed to gain admission to the body, usually through an abrasion of the skin, or more rarely of a mucous surface. In a number of instances in the present epidemic points of inoculation were found on the extremities of plague patients, from which plague cultures were obtained, and in these cases buboes were found above the point of inoculation. In the majority of instances however no local indication could be found marking the point at which the microbe was implanted. Less frequently infection is believed to have occurred in the respiratory organs or in the digestive tract. When the disease appears in the form of primary plague pneumonia, it may be caused by the inhalation of bacilli disseminated in the air by patients as they cough, or it may be carried by the blood vessels, or lymphatic vessels to the lungs, where it developes. When a monkey is inoculated by pricking its hand with a needle dipped in plague culture, the slight wound made disappears in a couple of days, and leaves no indication of the point at which inoculation was performed. After 4 or 5 days a bubo appears in the axilla or at the bend of the elbow, and the symptoms of plague develop. The lymph from the bubo in these cases contains plague bacilli in great numbers, from which cultures can be made. In the case of man also, as already mentioned, the point at which inoculation occurred was but rarely discovered. Plague bacilli could however be obtained in immense numbers, and cultures made, from lymph taken from buboes. In septicæmic cases they could  For the purpose of comparison, it was intended to have also given a statement showing the number of deaths from plague in Bombay City according to occupation (Table VI), but information could only be obtained up to 31st December 1896.
5 be obtained from the blood as well as from lymph from enlarged glands; and in pneumonic cases they were obtainable from the sputa and from enlarged glands when present. Bacilli were probably also present as a rule in the sputa, vomit, urine and fces of plague patients, but they were hardly ever found in the blood taken from the finger in cases where a bubo was present from the first. The slow spread of plague and the immunity observed among hospital ser- vants, nurses and medical men who were in constant contact with the disease, handling the sick, and making post-mortem examinations, indicates that the germs produced in the bodies of the sick are but little infectious to healthy persons under ordinary circumstances. The conditions under which they become virulent will only be known when the life history of the microbe outside the body has been traced. Infection occurred most frequently among those living in the same rooms with, and in constant attendance on, the sick, and there can be little doubt but that among the poor and ignorant it was often due to the common custom which exists of friends receiving the sputa of the sick in their hands,* and using their hands and clothing to wipe away discharges from the patient's mouth. It is easy to understand also that want of personal cleanliness among the friends of those affected, and the neglect of precautions as to the disinfection of clothing soiled by the discharges and excreta of the sick were fruitful sources of infection. Plague in its epidemic form, as seen in Bombay, is a malignant infectious disease characterized, in the majority of cases, by enlarged and painful lymphatic glands, high fever and great prostration; and is due to the presence in the system of the plague bacillus. In the Bombay epidemic the period of incubation varied in duration from 36 hours, the shortest,  to ten days, the longest recorded, while in the majority of cases the period of incubation appeared to be from four to six days. No definite history of premonitory symptoms could be obtained, the invasion being, as a rule, sudden and marked by severe rigors or by chills. In infants and young children convulsions frequently ushered in the attack. In a small pro- portion of cases, however, no marked onset was noticed, the patients stating that the disease began with fever, heat of the skin and pains in the limbs. These cases usually ran a mild course ending in recovery. The symptoms in a typically severe case generally commenced with a well marked rigor, which was followed by fever, accompanied by vomiting, headache and intolerance of light, pain in the epigastrium and frequently also in the back and limbs. Thirst was unusually much complained of. The temperature rapidly rose to 104 F. or more, reaching its maximum, often 105 F. or 106 F. on the evening of the second or, more rarely, on the first day; occasionally a remission of 1 F, or sometimes more, occurred during the day, but with no regularity as to time. A well marked fall in temperature of 2 F. to 3 F. or more was frequently noticed on the second or third day, after which the temperature rose again, but seldom to its former height (vide Charts III, IV, VII, X, XV, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXII); a further fall to normal, or subnormal, occurred be- tween the fifth and seventh days (vide Charts I, II, III, VIII, XXII). In un- complicated cases a fall to normal sometimes occurred on the second or third day (vide Charts XX, XXVI), and was often attributed to a particular line of treatment * It seems not improbable that plague cultures grow in the ghee always present under the nails of natives who eat curry with their hands, and that they often infect themselves from the cultures when scratching skin eruptions. &c.   The case of Chinwal Khan reported by Surgeon-Major MacCartie, Health Officer of the Port of Bombay, on the 11th January 1897. Chinwal Khan was a fireman on the S. S. Hydaspes which arrived from Shanghai (an unin- fected port) on Thursday, 7th January, and entered dock the same evening. He did not complain of illness during the voyage to Bombay, and was on regular duty up to the evening of the 7th. Probably on that evening and certainly on Friday morning the 8th he visited the city. On Saturday morning the 9th he complained of fever and pain in the groin, and on examination was found to be suffering from plague. The incubation period in this case was at most 11/2 days and may have been only one day. Nurse Joyce went to attend on Surgeon-Major Manser on the 4th January at his house. She was in good health and had not been near plague cases up to that day. She nursed him from 4th to the morning of the 6th. She was attacked by plague on the evening of the 7th, and died on the 9th January 1897.  This period cannot be accepted as finally settled, as the person attacked, a native of Bombay, may have carried the infection with him and infected himself in Poona, where he was attacked ten days after arriving from Bombay and before plague had broken out in Poona. B 1751-2
6 when it was really the usual course of the temperature unaffected by the treatment. The occurrence of complications, e. g., the appearance of fresh buboes, secondary pneumonia, &c., gave rise to great irregularity in the course of the temperature (vide Charts II, XIV, XX, XXIII, XXVIII). Nausea and vomiting were met with at the onset in almost every case, and frequently continued for the first day or two. Splitting frontal or general headache was present from the first and continued while the temperature remained high, subsiding with the fall which occurred on the second or third day. Occasionally epistaxis occurred about this time. The countenance was pale; the eyes red and injected with bands of deeper colour at the outer and inner canthi owing to the eyelids remaining constantly unclosed. Sleeplessness was a distress- ing symptom, and there was often delirium at night. The pulse frequent, 100 or more, and full at the beginning, soon became soft, compressible, and dicrotic, and eventually running, so that it was difficult or impossible to count. The tongue was as a rule very characteristic. At first it was tooth-indented, somewhat swollen, and evenly covered with a thin white fur, except at the tip and edges, where it was clean. Later, it became dry, thickly covered with a yellowish white or brownish-white fur, the tip and edges remaining red and irritable. The bowels were almost always constipated at first, but sometimes diarrha was present. Buboes were met with in over three-fourths of the cases, and in about half the number of cases in which buboes were found, the glands of the vertical set in the groin were involved. They were as a rule noticed at the onset of the disease, giving rise to lancinating pain, but in a number of cases were not found until the second or third day. Generally one gland was markedly affected, and two or more adjacent ones less so. The affected glands varied in size from that of a filbert to a walnut, and they were very tender from the first, although often but little swollen. When in the groin the patient kept the thigh well flexed on the abdomen in order to relieve tension. In about two-thirds of the remaining cases the axillary glands were found to be affected, the patient usually lying on his back with the arm held away from the side and kept per- fectly still. In the remaining third the glands below the angle of the jaw or of the superficial cervical set were enlarged. As a rule a bubo appeared only in one region, but sometimes they were found in more than one region, or on both sides of the body. As the disease progressed the glands of the same chain, situated above those first affected, often became enlarged; so that in cases of a femoral bubo the glands lying along the course of the external iliac and common iliac vessel were also found to be enlarged and tender on pressure. A rise in temperature occurred with each fresh gland or group of glands involved. In cases which proved fatal early the buboes continued hard and very tender to the last; while in more prolonged cases effusion, frequently large in amount, occurred around them giving rise to a doughy or brawny swelling, and often causing dema of the limb below from pressure on the vessels and nerves. With the appearance of effusion the buboes usually became less painful. In a few cases where the patient lived long enough, the swelling subsided by resolution, but in the majority of instances suppuration occurred after the seventh or eighth day, the skin over the infiltrated area becoming inflamed. On opening the bubo thin yellowish or sanious pus was evacuated ; the skin frequently sloughed eventually, however, leaving an indolent unhealthy ulcer, with ragged overhanging edges and a greyish sloughing base, on which one or more necrosed lymphatic glands might be seen. Such ulcers usually took weeks to heal and gave rise to large thickened cicatrices. In cases where suppuration did not take place the glands remained hard and indurated long after con- valescence was established.  The nervous system was markedly affected in almost every case from the beginning of the fever. The patient complained of extreme feebleness and prostration; in many cases he could only walk with the greatest difficulty, and was sometimes unable even to leave his bed. There was some loss of sensibility
7 to touch, and often the general cutaneous sensibility to pain also seemed impaired, but in a few cases there was marked hyperthesia. Intelligence was generally unaffected at first, but sometimes the patient appeared to be dazed and stupid and totally indifferent to his surroundings. Memory was defective, or he was unequal to making an effort of memory when asked, for example, to give the date of attack, or to state what his symptoms had been. In a number of cases, owing to inco-ordination of the lingual muscles, there was thickness of speech like that caused by alcoholic poisoning, and this symptom was so characteristic that the attendants in hospital came to look upon it as a certain sign of plague in cases where enlarged glands had not already appeared. Later in the disease dumbness not infrequently occurred from paralysis of the laryngeal muscles. In addition to loss of muscular power in the upper and lower limbs there was tremor and twitching of the muscles of the hands, and in many cases marked loss of co-ordination also, causing clumsiness of movement in the hands, and giving rise to a staggering gait on attempting to walk. As a rule there was loss of expression, owing to relaxation of the facial muscles, giving the patient an apathetic or a stupid look, and masking the approach of death. Occasionally at the beginning of the illness the expression was anxious. In a number of cases cerebral symptoms were present from the commencement of the disease and continued day and night throughout the attack, taking sometimes the form of delirium and at others that of coma. The delirium was of the busy type, like that of delirium tremens, and was often accompanied by illusions terrifying in character, from which the patient tried to escape; among children convulsions frequently took the place of delirium. In cases marked by stupor the mental faculties appeared to be paralysed, the patient lying in a comatose condition, from which he could only be roused with difficulty, if at all. Such cases generally died within the first two days, but sometimes even within 24 hours. The respiratory symptoms were hurried breathing and a sense of oppres- sion and tightness across the chest. In most cases congestion of the bases of the lungs occurred early, and was rapidly followed in many instances, parti- cularly during the cold months, by bronchitis, by "dema of the lungs, or by secondary pneumonia. In these cases of secondary pneumonia the expectoration was bronchitic in character, and after a short time became profuse and watery, often showing a considerable colouring of blood. These blood-stained serous sputa, owing to the patient's clothing becoming reddened by them, sometimes gave rise to the impression that hmoptysis had occurred. Primary plague pneumonia was also met with, but this form of plague (which was first re- cognized and described by Surgeon-Captain Childe) during the present epidemic is so important as to require a detailed description. In connection with the digestive system, the occurrence of vomiting at the onset of the disease, in some instances accompanied by diarrha, has been referred to above. In some cases nausea, vomiting and diarrha appeared at the onset and persisted throughout the whole course of the attack. The vomited matter was at first bilious in character; afterwards it contained only water and such liquid nourishment as had been taken. Diarrha when it occurred was also bilious in character, the motions numbering five or six in twenty-four hours, the stools being always very offensive and sometimes tinged with blood. In a certain proportion of cases there was pain and tenderness in the epigastric region, pain in the back, and abdominal distension, accompanied by enlargement of the liver and spleen. Surgeon-Captain Hojel has recorded a number of cases of this sort in which low nervous symptoms occurred like those met with in enteric fever, and in some of these cases petechi were seen on the abdomen and lower part of the thorax somewhat resembling the rash of enteric. After death the lesions found were those of plague; Peyer's patches were found to be slightly raised, dematous and congested, the solitary follicles were as large as hempseed, but enlargement of the mesenteric glands was absent. In the circulatory system there was throbbing of the carotids, and the apex beat of the heart could generally be seen at the beginning of the attack. The impulse at the apex was found to be more diffuse than normal, and some- times a thrill could be felt in the prcordial region. The sounds soon became
8 feeble, the first sound being very much shortened, and the second sound so weak that it frequently could not be heard at the apex. In one case only, out of a very large number examined, was a murmur present, although in many cases the heart appeared to be dilated. On examining the blood drawn from the finger it was found to coagulate slowly, and the red corpuscles did not tend to run into rouleaux quickly. In cases where the disease had lasted for a few days the number of white corpuscles present was greatly in excess of the normal. In most cases after the first day, and in all cases after two or three days a marked fall in blood pressure occurred; this fall in blood pressure and the great frequency of the heart's action were the most marked circulatory changes observed. In the urinary system pain was sometimes present in the region of the kidneys. The urine secreted was diminished in quantity, of high specific gravity, and intensely acid in reaction. In colour it was generally brownish yellow, but sometimes it was smoky or red from the presence of blood. Albumen was present in about three-fourths of the cases, urea and uric acid were deficient, and chlorides markedly deficient ; casts were generally present. The attached table (Table IX) gives a quantitative urine analysis made by Surg.-Capt. Hojel. It shows the results obtained in fifty plague cases treated at St. George's Hospital. With the exception of No. 19, all the analyses were made between the third and sixth day ; all were examined as soon after admission as possible, and the majority for several days in succession. Micturition was frequent in many cases, but no symptoms of scalding were as a rule complained of. In cases which termi- nated fatally the urine was often retained towards the end, Where pregnancy was present, the patient, as a rule, aborted on the first or second day after the onset of the disease, but this was not invariably the case. Out of three pregnant cases treated at St. George's Hospital only two aborted, and both recovered ; the third (vide Chart XXII), two months pregnant, went on to full term. When premature labour occurred, both mother and child usually died. In one case, however, a native woman was attacked by plague five days before full term; she was confined the same day and died, but the child was born alive; it exhibited no symptoms of plague, and is still living. The skin was hot and burning to the touch from the first, and continued dry and harsh until the temperature began to decline on the third or fourth day, after which it became moist. On the temperature falling to normal or sub- normal, sweating almost invariably occurred and continued for a few days, being usually worse at night. Occasionally before death petechi were observed over buboes or on the abdomen; but no characteristic skin eruptions were seen. In some instances small patches of skin (unconnected with lymphatic glands) two or three inches or more in diameter became inflamed, and eventually sloughed, leaving indolent ulcers with steep overhanging edges. These patches were noticed in some cases at the sides of the abdomen, and over the loins, where they were in no way due to pressure or irritation; but more frequently they occurred on the extremities, being situated on the dorsum of the foot or hand, on the leg, the thigh or forearm. Sometimes extensive sloughing occurred, laying bare the muscles over considerable areas and giving rise to severe hmorrhage. Rarely boils were seen which became black, owing apparently to capillary hmorrhage; but no true carbuncles were observed. Amongst natives the progress of the disease was towards death in about 70% of the cases admitted into the Arthur Road and Parel Hospitals; among Europeans and Eurasians treated in St. George's Hospital the mortality was less, viz., 3235% and 4262% respectively. As death approached, respiration became more and more shallow and feeble, the eyes became sunken, and the patient passed from a state of muttering delirium into coma, and died, as a rule, quite quietly from heart failure. Sometimes the temperature ran up to 107 F. or more before death, and continued to rise after death; but more frequently death appeared to occur from collapse, the temperature falling and the pulse increasing in frequency to such an extent that it could not be counted. In cases that recovered the temperature
9 generally fell by lysis on the fifth, sixth and seventh days. But not infre- quently a fall by crisis occurred on one of these days (vide Charts II. VIII. XXII.) and the patient remained in a more or less collapsed condition with subnormal temperature, profuse perspiration and an exceedingly feeble pulse for days. In this condition the slightest effort sometimes gave rise to fatal syncope. In the Parel Hospital 22 convalescents, out of 304 cases treated there by Surgeon-Captain Thompson, dropped dead through attempting to get out of bed or to sit up. When the patient was recovering, it was occasionally found that he was suffering from dumbness or from partial laryngeal paralysis; or that hemiplegia, paraplegia involving the legs or the legs and arms, monoplegia of a limb or a portion of a limb was present. In some cases facial paralysis was observed, or paralysis of one or more ocular muscles. More rarely the inco-ordination of the tongue, hands, arms or legs, noticed at the beginning of the attack, remained present during convalescence, and the speech continued slow, thick, and indistinct (vide the case of Kallian Vishram given below). Occasionally an attack of plague ran a very mild course, the patient (frequently a boy of 10 or 12 years) not being confined to bed by it. In these cases enlargement and tenderness of a lymphatic gland was noticed, followed by fever (vide Chart XXVI), headache, a characteristic tongue and sometimes nausea and vomiting; the temperature rarely exceeded 103 F. or 104 F., and generally fell to normal or subnormal on second or third day. Prostration and cerebral symptoms were not well marked, and the bubo subsided as a rule without suppurating. The duration of the attack seldom exceeded three or four days, and convalescence was established in a week or ten days. There remain to be described two forms of the disease in which the general features of plague in its most acute form were present, but in which there was no particular enlargement of lymphatic glands (buboes) during life, and in which, after death, only very slight general enlargement and congestion of the glands were found. In one of these forms of plague the microbe grows in the blood, hence it has been called septicmic plague; in the other it grows in the lungs giving rise to primary plague pneumonia. In septicmic plague the invasion was usually marked by a prolonged and severe rigor, or repeated rigors; and vomiting, headache and high fever were constantly present. The most distinctive features of this form of the disease were the great nervous prostration and muscular weakness present from the beginning, and the rapidity with which cerebral symptoms supervened. Delirium often set in during the first day, and was quickly followed by picking at the bed clothes, stupor and coma, in which the patient died generally on the second or third day, but sometimes within 24 hours of the onset. In some cases death did not occur for several days. The pulse early became soft and very frequent, 120 to 140 or more, the temperature (vide Chart XXV.) rapidly rose to 104. F. 105 F. 106 F. ran an irregular course and often reached 107 F. or more before death; respiration was hurried and panting; gastro-intestinal catarrh and tympanitis were frequently present; the urine was often retained. Epistaxis and sub-conjunctival hmorrhage sometimes occurred; blood was occasionally seen in the stools and urine; and, if the patient lived long enough, secondary pneumonia sometimes sot in. These cases were very fatal. In a considerable number of cases primary plague pneumonia was observed, the development of the disease being due to the growth of plague bacilli in the lung tissue. Lobular pneumonia was the form usually met with in these cases. Its onset was marked by rigors, or, in some instances, by chills, followed by a sense of constriction across the chest, difficult and hurried breath- ing, cough and expectoration. As the disease progressed, respiration became very frequent (40 to 60 in the minute) and difficult, and duskiness of the face appeared. Pain was present, but never appeared to be severe or stitch-like in character, and was rarely much complained of. The expectoration, bronchitic at the beginning, very soon became watery and profuse; it often contained little B 1751-3
?10 whitish specks floating in it, and on examination was found to contain plague bacilli in great numbers. Frequently this serous expectoration was tinged of a pink or reddish colour from the presence of blood; but rusty sputa, as  in ordinary croupous pneumonia, were rarely seen. There was great prostration from the first; the pulse soon became feeble and very frequent, so that the alteration in the pulse-respiration ratio ordinarily met with in pneumonia was not observed; the temperature was high and ran an irregular course (vide Charts XI, XII, XVII, XIX, XXIX, XXX, XXXI,); the tougue was coated white, except at the tip and edges, and the bowels were confined.  The physical signs present were those of broncho-pneumonia, patches of consolidation being found in one or both lungs, the right generally being the one most affected. Very soon marked dema occurred, the lungs becoming loaded with fluid. Buboes were not met with in these cases, but slight enlargement of the lymphatic glands was sometimes found before death. Death generally ensued in three or four days, and was preceded by incessant cough and by blueness of the skin due to deficient ration of blood, caused mainly by the amount of fluid in the air vesicles. The complications met with in plague were - in the nervous system delusions, in one case ending in insanity; motor paralysis, local or general: impaired sense of touch; sometimes diminished sensibility to pain, sometimes hypersthesia; deafness; ulceration of the cornea, conjunctivitis, and sub- conjunctival hmorrhage. In the circulatory system, softening of the muscular tissue of the heart with enfeebled cardiac action and dilation of the heart. In the respiratory system, bronchitis; hypostatic congestion and dema of the lungs, secondary pneumonia; pleurisy; and rarely pulmonary hmorrhage. In the digestive system, gastro-enteric catarrh; diarrha; and in a few cases hmorrhage from the bowels. In the urinary system, albuminuria; renal con- gestion, and renal hmorrhage, in one case causing death. In the reproductive system, menorrhagia at the menstrual period; and abortion in many cases of pregnancy.    In the cutaneous system, sloughing of the skin, and boils. The sequel most frequently met with were deafness in one or both ears; impairment of vision due to degeneration of the choroid and retina; dumbness due to the loss of memory of words, or to laryngeal paralysis; paralysis of the muscles of the eyes or face; paresis or paralysis of the muscles of the extremities either hemiplegic or paraplegic; inco-ordination of the muscles of the face, tongue and extremities (vide case given below); impairment of cutaneous sensibility to pain. The duration of the disease in 902 fatal cases admitted into hospital was 19 hours in one case, one day in 5, two in 43, three in 99, four in 143, five in 129, six in 85, seven in 76, eight in 56, nine in 42, and ten in 24 cases. It must be remembered that probably very few of the cases dying during the first 24 hours were brought to hospital, and that many of the cases dying on the second and third day were also not detected and sent to hospital. The average dura- tion of the disease from attack to death in 17 fatal cases among native prisoners in the House of Correction, Byculla, was 51/2 days. Second attacks from plague occurred in two cases which have been re- corded. In the first case the patient who had suffered from plague at Hong kong in June 1894 was attacked in Bombay on the 6th December 1896, had rigors, vomiting, high fever (105 F.), severe headache, and a bubo in the right groin. The fever and other symptoms subsided within a week and she recovered. The second case was that of a cooly admitted into the Arthur Road Hospital in November 1896 for plague. He was discharged cured in December and continued to work until February 1897, when he was readmitted for plague and died. The diagnosis of plague in its most typical form is easy. The sudden onset, rapid  rise in temperature, vomiting, headache, sleeplessness, the stupid expression, injection of the eyes, thick speech and great prostration point to plague; and later, the condition of the tongue, the frequent and very feeble pulse, the enlarged and painful lymphatic glands, the course of the temperature (showing a marked fall on the second or third day followed by a further  fall  to
?11 normal or subnormal between the fifth and seventh days) and the rapidly fatal course of the disease in the majority of cases, render the diagnosis unmistakeable. When however the disease takes the form of primary plague pneumonia, it becomes exceedingly difficult to diagnose, whilst at the same time, owing to the danger of infection from the sputa which contain plague bacilli in great num- bers, it is most important to recognise it early. In primary plague pneumonia the absence of acute or subacute bronchitis before the attack; the rapidity with which high fever, severe headache and marked prostration occur after the onset; the character of the expectoration, less viscid from the first and early becoming profuse and watery, and generally tinged with blood or reddish from  admixture of blood; the rapidity with which signs of dema of the lungs appear; the quality of the pulse, which is never full and bounding, and soon becomes very soft and frequent, serve to distinguish it from ordinary broncho-pneumonia or lobar pneumonia in the majority of cases; and the presence in all cases of im- mense numbers of plague bacilli in the sputa, from which cultures can be obtained, renders the diagnosis certain. Severe cases of malarial fever may be distinguished from plague by the nature of the onset, the cold stage being more prolonged, the features pale and shrunken, and the nails blue. In the hot stage the face becomes flushed and the pulse full and bounding, but is not so frequent as in plague, In malarial cases, too, the temperature generally shews marked periodicity; there is no prostration, patients possessing as a rule their muscular strength and mental energy; and buboes are very rarely met with. Relapsing fever, like plague, occurs in times of scarcity. In both the onset is sudden, and rapidly followed by high fever, accompanied by severe headache, frequent pulse, and a hot and burning skin; the tongue is furred white, the temperature reaches its maximum on the first or second day, and a remission ac- companied by sweating often occurs on the second or third day, the temperature falling to normal between the fifth and seventh days (vide Chart XXI.). But in relapsing fever there is giddiness; prostration is slight; jaundice not in- frequently occurs on the third or fourth day; the face is flushed, and the expres- sion is not stupid nor confused; buboes are not met with; and spirilla are found in the blood during the height of the fever. Plague in its onset and early symptoms somewhat resembles Typhus fever. But the duskiness and flushing of the face present at the beginning of typhus fever, and the occurrence of an eruption on the body and limbs between the fifth and seventh days, as well as the different course of the temperature (vide Chart IX.) and the absence of buboes would serve to distinguish between them. Owing to the feebleness, thick utterance and staggering gait, frequently seen in plague cases, the disease is sometimes mistaken for alcoholic poisoning. The following is a typical case. Govind Jeeva was taken by his friends for treatment to a qualified medical practitioner. They stated that he had had a fall, and the following note of his case was made: "Pupils slightly dilated, breath smells very faintly of alcohol, has a slight contused wound over but not exposing malar bone," and an emetic was prescribed. Fortunately this was not given. Next day a note was made as follows: "Bowels not opened for two days, is not quite recovered from the effects of drink," and on the following day: "Speech indistinct, temperature 102 F., bowels not opened." On the fourth day he died. In this case enquiry showed that the patient had been two days ill with fever, and was given a little alcohol after having fallen down in a faint. He was seen by another medical man shortly after the emetic was prescribed, and found to have a very frequent and feeble pulse, fever, and a typically coated tongue. The diagnosis of plague was made and afterwards verified by post mortem examination. Had the case been one of alcoholic poisoning, there would have been a full and bounding pulse, a normal or subnormal temperature, and considerable mental excitement; or in a later stage drowsiness, or coma with stertorous breathing, a slow and compressible pulse, and a subnormal temperature. In plague cases where abdominal  symptoms are marked and a typhoid con- dition has supervened, the diagnostic  features given by Surgeon-Captain Hojel
?12 are:-The onset is sudden, usually ushered in by a well marked rigor; the tempera- ture shows a high initial rise in most cases, followed by a marked remission to normal (or a little above or below it) on the second, third or fourth day (vide Chart XXIV); the pulse large and full at first, becomes peculiarly soft and is characterized by a great want of sharpness in stroke; it is very com- pressible at an early stage and dicrotic, but the dicrotism is not very easily recognized by the finger; the aspect is dull, heavy and apathetic, and the patient has a peculiar stricken look; the eyes are dull and muddy looking, the conjunctiv are suffused, but the pupils in most cases are normal; there is generally flushing of the face; diarrha when present is simple, but very offensive; delirium and other cerebral disturbance occur early, and there is great prostration from the first; abdominal distension occurs early, on the third, fourth or fifth day; the eruption is not readily effaced and is of a "deep red colour (petechial)"; there is severe pain lumbar in many cases. During the present epidemic no cases of glandular fever among children or young adults were met with; nor did an outbreak characterized by the appearance of buboes, and accompanied by a little or no constitutional disturb- ance, precede or accompany the outbreak of plague in Bombay. Until bac- teriological diagnosis has settled that the microbe in these cases is the plague bacillus, it is premature to speak of them as cases of benign plague. In Calcutta a number of cases of this sort occurred over twelve months ago, but up to the present no outbreak of plague has followed. The bacteriological diagnosis of plague has been purposely omitted, as it will be given in full detail in M. Haffkine's report. Besides, it cannot be carried out in practice by medical men who have no special bacteriological training nor access to a laboratory, and as they are the first persons who come in contact with the disease, it is of especial importance that they should be able to recognise plague cases by their ordinary clinical features. The prognosis of plague is always exceedingly grave, as it is the most fatal of all known epidemic diseases. Dr. Viegas, who practises on the Port Trust Estate and was the first to notice the presence of plague in Bombay about the third week in September 1896, states that the mortality during the first four weeks after the outbreak was discovered lay between 95 and 99%, and between the end of October and the end of November between 85 and 90%. The mortality in 1,579 cases treated in the Arthur Road and Parel Hospitals was 69.54%. In the Poona Plague Hospital, out of 1,130 patients admitted, 757 died, giving a mortality of 67%. In the House of Correction, Byculla, however, where the entire number of those attacked were admitted into hospital at once, only 17 persons died out of 33 attacked, or 51.52%. These prisoners were all adults between 20 and 50 years of age, in good bodily health, and carefully attended to from the time they fell ill. In Damaun, out of 110 persons living in the same families, 54 were attacked by plague, of whom 37 or 68.52% died. Under ordinary conditions therefore the mortality among those attacked during the present outbreak was probably between 65 and 70%. Looking at the mortality, according to race and caste, among the patients admitted into Arthur Road  and Parel Hospitals (Table II), the highest mortality, 71.25%, occurred amongst Hindoos; then follow Jews with 66.67%, Native Christians with 65.45%, Brahmins with 65.21%, Parsees with 64.29%, and Mahomedans with 64.24%: the number of Jews (9), Brahmins (23) and Parsees (14), however, were too small to give reliable results. Among Europeans and Eurasians a much lower death-rate, 38.95%, occurred, owing most probably to their possessing more stamina, and being treated earlier and more carefully nursed during the attack. Out of 34 Europeans admitted into St. George's Hospital 23 recovered and 11 died, the percentage of deaths to attacks being 32.35%, while- out of 61 Eurasians under treatment 58 recovered and 37 died, or  42.62% of  deaths to  attacks.    Table I.
?13 shows the recoveries and deaths among Europeans and Eurasians at the different periods of life, but the numbers are too small to attach much value to their analysis. It will be noticed however (Table III.) that while among natives the lowest percentage of deaths to attacks occurred between the ages of 1 and 20 years, in Europeans and Eurasians it lay between the ages of 20 and 40 years; also that between 20 and 40 years the percentage of deaths to attacks was twice as high among natives (69.75%) as among Europeans and Eurasians (34.21%). It is impossible to give any definite prognosis with regard to individual plague cases, as sometimes those that appear to be quite hopeless recover, while others apparently much less severe die. The conditions regarded as most unfavourable are the occurrence of the disease in its septicmic form, or as primary plague-pneumonia. Among cases in which buboes are found, those where the buboes are situated in the cervical region appear to be more unfavourable than those with buboes in the axilla or groin; and cases with multiple buboes are more unfavourable than those with single buboes. The symptoms which are generally looked upon as unfavourable are the persistence of severe and continuous vomiting, and the early appearance of diarrha, the early onset and continuance of violent delirium, or the setting in of coma. The appearance of petechi is generally believed to precede death, and hmorrhages from the kidneys and bowels are considered very unfavourable. Attacks occurring late in the epidemic, although often no less severe in their onset (Chart XXVI.), run a milder course than those occurring at the beginning of the outbreak. Treatment.-No specific remedy has up to the present been discovered for the treatment of plague cases. During the present epidemic two lines of treatment have been tried, the one, hygienic and symptomatic, with the object of tiding the patient over a certain period when, as in the case of the other specific fevers, experience has shown that there is a natural tendency to recovery; the other, the antitoxic treatment, with the object of neutralizing by means of antitoxic serum the virus produced by the microbe, and of preventing the growth of the bacillus itself. The hygienic and symptomatic treatment consists in economising, as far as possible, the nervous and muscular energy of the patient by placing him under the most favourable conditions and treating symptoms. With this object a plague patient is put to bed at the onset of the disease, kept in the recumbent posture (on account of the tendency which there is to fatal syncope) until con- valescence is established, and supplied with suitable nourishment at short intervals. The symptoms which require special attention are those connected with the nervous system and with the circulation. In the nervous system they are mainly due to congestion of the nervous centres at the commencement of the attack, followed by dema towards its close, the former giving rise to fever, headache, vomiting, insomnia and delirium, the latter to stupor and coma. These symptoms are treated on general lines, i.e. the avoidance of light, the application of ice or cold water to the head and surface of the body if the temperature continues high, and the use of hypnotics and sedatives for sleeplessness and delirium. In connection with the circulation the symptoms to be combatted are vaso- motor paralysis and heart failure, the latter probably due partly to the direct action of the toxic poison on the cardiac ganglia and partly to softening and degeneration of the muscular wall of the heart. For these symptoms the use of alcohol in some form is generally required after the first day; in most cases also the administration of drugs which act as cardiac tonics and vascular stimulants such as ammonia, digitalis, stryehnine, quinine, is found necessary. All drugs which depress the heart and circulation should, as far as possible, be avoided. The treatment of pneumonia, primary or secondary, calls for the free administration of stimulants and of stimulating expectorants for the relief of cough and dyspna, due to the accumulation of fluid in the bronchial tubes, B 1751-4
14 Gastro-intestinal symptoms, buboes and such other complications as arise are managed on general principles. In treatment by antitoxine the correct principle of removing the cause of the disease is aimed at, but up to the present time, so far as information is obtainable of M. Yersin's results, and those of other doctors, French and Russian, who have tried it, it has failed to influence favourably the mortality among those attacked. Surg.-Captain Thomson, the Medical Officer in charge of Parel Plague Hospital, has kindly supplied  me with a tabular statement (vide Table VIII.) showing the details of 27 cases under his care treated by M. Yersin's antitoxic serum. From these 27 cases he excludes 4 (2 of which died and 2 recovered), viz., one suffering from meningitis and an osseous tumour pressing on the medulla (case 4), one treated prophylactically (case 11), and two which were not plague cases (cases 24 and 27). Of the remaining 23 plague cases, 14 or 60.83 per cent. died. The detail of the cases treated by M. Haffkine with the antitoxic serum prepared by him in Bombay will be found in his report. The prophylatic measures which demand attention on the occurrence of a case of plague in a family are the removal, when practicable, of the unaffected members from the house, to allow of its being thoroughly cleaned, and of the patient to a hospital, where he can receive proper care and attention, unless suitable provision can be made for his treatment at home. All those who have been living with him should undergo inoculation against plague, as this is found to diminish the risk of infection by 70 to 80 per cent., and to increase the prospect of recovery in those attacked after inoculation by 60 to 70 per cent. (vide report on inoculation). The patient's sputa and excreta and all discharges from buboes and sores should be received in vessels containing suitable disin- fectants, and on the termination of the illness everything which was used by him, or had been rendered liable to contamination, should be thoroughly cleansed and disinfected, or, if practicable, burnt (vide Mr. Hankin's report). Nurses and attendants who are in close and constant attendance on plague patients should undergo inoculation. All wounds and abrasions on the hands, etc., should be protected from the risk of infection, and the hands should be thoroughly washed and disinfected after dressing sores or otherwise becoming soiled. Their natural immunity should be increased as much as possible by regular meals, sufficient exercise and rest to ensure their keeping in good health.
?15 CASES ILLUSTRATING THE COURSE OF PLAGUE IN THE INOCULATED. Kondabai, a female, aged 11 years, came from a compound in which four other servants were attacked by plague, three of whom had died. Kondabai and the other servant who recovered were inoculated with M. Haffkine's prophylactic lymph nine days before she was attacked. When first seen on the 21st February 1897, at the Arthur Road Hospital, she was delirious, her expression was frightened, the eyes were not red nor injected. The pulse was frequent, 126 per minute and rather wiry, respiration 35 per minute, temperature 103 F. Her tongue was moist and somewhat swollen and thickly coated white except at the tip and edges; the bowels were confined. Her father stated that she had had slight fever after inoculation, and that previous to the onset of plague symptoms she had been in good health. She was attacked on the previous night by shivering, vomiting and headache, and at the same time a very painful bubo appeared in the cervical region at the angle of the lower jaw on the right side. There was a good deal of infiltration into the cellular tissue around the gland, giving rise to a painful swelling which pre- vented her opening her mouth freely. She had slight cough with tough and scanty expectoration. On examining the lungs the bases were slightly congested, particularly the right. The heart sounds were normal. The liver and spleen did not appear to be enlarged, but it was very difficult to examine her, as she was delirious and could hardly be kept in bed. Vomiting had ceased. The urine was passed involuntarily, and was not examined. There was no skin eruption. On the evening of the 21st her temperature had run up to 106 F. (vide Chart VIII),* pulse was frequent and fair in volume, there was a doughy swelling filling up the interval between the lower jaw and the neck and extend- ing for a short distance downwards; the corresponding cervical gland on the left side was also inflamed and tender. She was very delirious, the cough continued, but no examination of her lungs was possible. On the morning of the 22nd she was still delirious, but became conscious towards the evening, her temperature falling to 102.4 F. Next morning a painful gland appeared in the right axilla. All these glands eventually suppurated; otherwise the course of the disease presented no features of special interest. Noronha, a clerk in the office of the B. B. and C. I. Railway, left his house in Girgaum and went to live in the Fort on the 1st April 1897. He had been inoculated with M. Haffkine's prophylactic against plague on the 1st, and on the 3rd March, having been given 3 c. c. on the 1st and 31/2 c. c. on the 2nd occasion. He was attacked by plague on the 9th April. The disease set in with a chill, followed by fever, severe headache and acute pain in the left groin. He stated that on the 1st April a mouse was found dead under his cot, and on the 2nd April a dead rat was discovered in the house. On the 12th April the fever and headache diminished considerably. On the 13th February he was seen by Dr. Bhalchandra Krishna, who found he had a temperature of 100 F. and a left femoral bubo, and diagnosed the disease plague. On the 14th he had no fever and afterwards attended Dr. Bhalchundra's dispensary for medicine, and made an uninterrupted recovery. A CASE OF MARKED GENERAL INCO-ORDINATION AND PARESIS AFTER PLAGUE. Kallian Vishram, aged 19, a Hindu, by occupation a clerk, was admitted into the Jamsetji Jijibhoy Hospital on the 27th September 1897 for inability to walk. Towards the middle of April 1897 he was attacked with plague at Musjid Bunder (Mandvi) and removed to the Jain Hospital. His wife had died from plague.    On the day after  admission   he became unconscious, and on recovering * Chart XVI shows   the   course of the temperature,   pulse   and  respiration in    an  attack of plague occurring three days after inoculation with M. Haffkine's prophylactic.
?16 consciousness was unable to feed himself, and his legs were feeble and unmanage- able as at present. He was discharged from the Jain Hospital towards the end of May; the bubo, which was in the right groin, having cicatrized. He never had syphilis, but had a mild attack of small-pox fcur years ago. He was brought on a stretcher to the ward: nutrition is good; the facial expression is vacant and stolid, all the muscles are quite toneless; he lies on his back and finds great difficulty in turning from side to side or sitting up; he is unable to perform any movements with steadiness and precision. When sitting up, movements of the arms and legs are made with sudden jerkiness and with wider range than normal. The pulse is regular, 52 per minute, of fair volume and tension; respiration 20 per minute, jerky and irregular in rhythm. The muscles are fairly nourished, but relaxed. Electrical reactions are normal; the feet are rather flat; and the hands are held as seen in drop-wrist. Superficial reflexes are present; the planter reflex elicits a sudden and forcible movement. There is marked inco-ordination of the muscles in general. The head falls forwards and is moved from side to side, instead of being turned to look at objects. On attempting to get out of bed the legs are extended with sud- denness, and then thrown outwards with a forcible jerk; he sits holding on to the edge of the bed to maintain his balance; stands with the feet widely apart and leans forwards so as to see their position. The muscles are tremulous, and move- ments markedly exaggerated, the legs crossing one another, when a step is taken, and thrown forward with a sudden jerk, the toes being brought to the ground forcibly, and the body swaying like that of a drunken man. The movements of the hand are exaggerated and unsteady, the right being worse than the left. When the hands are at rest, the fingers tremble irregularly. Simple movements of the hand are accomplished by spasmodic jerks, and fine movements are most clumsily attempted and imperfectly finished, as is seen on carrying a spoon to the mouth or tying a string. He is unable to maintain his balance in any position. The acts of swallowing, defcation and urination are properly performed but delayed. There are no lightning pains, nor formication of the extremities. He does not complain of giddiness, or of gastric or rectal crisis. He has not suffered from vomiting or girdle sensation. Sensibility to touch is delayed but not actually diminished, and the patient is unable to recognise how often he has been touch- ed or by how may fingers. His sense of feeling amounts to something being brought in contact with his body, but he is unable to recognise what it actually is. Sensibility to pain is somewhat diminished, a forcible pinch giving him pain after a little time. Sensation to heat or cold is not affected. A hot tube passed along the course of the spine gives a burning sensation at the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th dorsal vertebr. No spinal nor cranial percussion tenderness is present. Cerebral, mental, vaso-motor and nutritive functions are not in any way altered. There have been no trophic changes. Articulation is slow and deliberate; individual syllables are pronounced separately and forcibly, laying great stress on the final part of the word. The answer to any question put to him takes time, and the act is deliberate. He is intelligent and understands all that is said to him. Taste is normal; hearing is somewhat diminished in the right ear, but he does appreciate after a time the character of the sound: smell normal. There is no nystagmus. The left eyeball does not move outwards to the same degree as the right; besides this deviation in the axis, there is nothing peculiar. Pupils are moderately dilated and the Argyll Robertson phenomenon is not present; pupils react to light and accommodation. In both eyes there is a well defined area of old choroiditis between the optic disc and yellow spot. This is quite symmetrical in both eyes. All other systems were examined and found normal. The patient has been under observation for some time and has as yet shown no improvement. The symptoms present exactly resemble those seen in many severe cases of plague after the second day.
?17 TABLE I. A table showing the admissions among Europeans and Eurasians into St. George's Hospital, Bombay, at different periods of life, and giving the results.  1 year and under.       Years 2 to 5 Years 6 to 10.  Years 11 to 20.   Years 21 to 30 Years 31 to 40. Years 41 to 50. Years 51 to 70. Total. Percent- age of deaths to attacks. Europeans   R 1 0 6 4 6 6 0 0 23 32.35  D     0 1 3 0 3 2 1 1 11  Eurasians             R 0 0 4 13 10 3 3 2 35 42.6 2  D     0 0 2 12 6 2 2 2 26  Total         R     1 0 10 17 16 9 3 2 58   D     0 1 5 12 9 4 3 3 37  Percentage of deaths to admissions     0 100 33.3 41.38 36 30.76 50 60 38.95    R = Recovered.    D = Died. TABLE II. A table showing the admissions among Native Christians, Jews, Parsees, Moha- medans, Brahmins and other Hindus into the Arthur Road and Parel Hospitals, and giving the results : for the Arthur Road Hospital the admis- sions at the different aqes are shown.  1 year and under. Years 2 to 5. Years 6 to 10. Years 11 to 20. Years 21 to 30. Years 31 to 40. Years 41 to 60. Years 51 to 70. Total. Treated in Parel Hospital. Total Percent- age of deaths to attacks.                                        Native Christians    R 0 1 4 19 14 7 9 0 54 22 76  65.45  D 0 2 3 23 30 16 24 1 99 45 144  Jews   R 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 2 1 3  66.67  D 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 3 3 6  Parsees            R 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 3 2 5  64.29  D 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 0 5 4 9   Mahomedans.   R 0 0 0 16 19 9 7 0 51 8 59  64.24  D 0 0 4 21 24 25 24 0 98 8 106  Brahmins           R 0 0 0 2 2 1 0 0 5 3 8  65.21  D 0 0 0 0 3 3 0 0 6 9 15  Other Hindus         R 5 2 19 66 106 42 17 1 258 72 330  71.25  D 0 6 32 139 246 150 112 6 691 127 818  Total    ...  R 5 3 24 105 141 60 34 1 373 108 481  69.54  D 0 8 40 186 304 195 162 7 902 196 1,098  Percentage   of  deaths  to admissions 0 72.73 62.5 63.92 68.31 76.47 82.65 87.5 70.74 64.47 69.54  B 1751-5
?18 TABLE III. A table showing the comparative case mortality per cent. among (a) Europeans and Eurasians and (b) Natives, in youth, adult life and old age.  Years 1 to 21 Years 21 to 40. Years 41 to 70. Europeans and Eurasians  28/18  or 39.137 per cent.   25/13 or 34.21  5/6 or 54.55  Natives 177/293 or 62.34   255/588 or 69.75  49/216 or 81.51  TABLE IV. A statement showing the number of deaths from Plague in Bombay according to age and sex from August to December 1896 * Months.  1 Year and under. Years 2 to 10. Years 11 to 20. Years 21 to 30. Years 31 to 40. Years 41 to 50. Years 51 to 60. Years 61 and over. Total. August Males            Females                      September  Males  4 15 18 14 5 4 3 63  Females   1 3 6 2 3 1  16            October Males 1 11 58 81 36 23 10 4 224  Females   15 23 23 10 12 5 1 89            November    Males  1 15 51 64 32 18 7 5 193  Females   23 25 22 8 8 2 2 80            December     Males  1 56 208 291 183 91 42 18 890  Females  2 49 109 95 50 45 14 17 381            Total    Males  3 86 332 454 265 137 63 30 1,370  Females  2 78 160 146 70 68 22 20 566 Percentage  26 8.47 25.41 30.99 17.30 10.59 4.39 2.58  * Details up to 31st May have not yet been received from the Health Department. Table V. Admissions into the Arthur Road Hospital according to Occupation. Occupation. Arthur Road. Total. Domestic Servants* 266 266 Mill-hands 147 147 Coolies 110 110 Syces 49 49 Beggars 41 41 Sepoys (including Native Soldiers and Police) 21 21 Dhobies, Labourers (each) . 19 38 Dirzies                                                                           18 18 Gowlies, Metalworkers, Peons (each) 15 45 Cart-drivers 13 13 Malies 12 12 School children, Carpenters (each) 11 22 Barbers                                           10 10 * Including personal servants, cooks, hamals and masalchies,
?19 Occupation. Arthur Road. Total. Shopkeepers   9 9 Clerks and Butchers (each) 8 16 Printers 7 7 Masons 6 6 Shoemakers, Painters, Sweepers (each) 5 15 Ward-boys and Lascars (each) 4 8 Priests, Sailors, Firemen, Wool-cleaners, Bakers, Carpenters, Compounders, Fishermen (each) 3 24 Unclassified     398   1,275 TABLE VI. A statement showing the number of deaths from Plague in Bombay City according to Occupation from September to December 1896 * No. Occupation. Number of Deaths in Total.   Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.  1 Municipal and Local Bodies (including Police)   2 19 21 2 Devotees, Bhikshuks, Fakirs, &c.  2 4 11 17 3 Indoor servants  2 3 5  26 36 4 Dhobies (Washermen) ...   2 17 19 5 Servants not otherwise described 5 8 6 27 46 6 General Merchants  6 1 4 11 7 Bankers   1 2 9 12 8 Commercial Agents, Brokers, &c. 6 9 2 7 24 9 Commercial Clerks, &c. 1 11 8 36 56 10 Drivers of public vehicles  1  5 6 11 Cart-owners and drivers ... 3 4 15 22 12 Seamen (not Government)    5 5 13 Messengers, Porters, &c. (not Government)   ... 3 1 6 10 14 Jockey Grooms  4 4 10 18 15 Fishermen, &c  2  5 7 16 Printers by steam, compositors    8 8 17 Figure casters (Otarva)    5 5 18 Engine makers (Fitters, &c.)    2  9 11 19 Carpenters, Joiners, Sawyers  3 4 18 25 20 Masons and Bricklayers  1 1 12 14 21 Cotton Dyers    5 5 22 Spinners, Weavers and Factory workers  1  16 17 23 Cotton goods sellers, drapers   1 1  3 5 24 Tailors    1 6 4 11 22 25 Shoe and Boot Makers   1 5 14 20 26 Workers and sellers of Jute  5 1  6 27 Cow-keepers and Milk-sellers ...  2 1 4 7 28 Grain, Pulse and Flour Dealers 9 15 9 18 51 29 Sweetmeat makers and sellers of pastry, cooks.  1 1 10 12 30 Fruit and vegetable dealers  1 2 10 13 31 Grocers, Spice-dealers ...   1 4 5 32 Stone-cutte 1   4 5 33 Gold and Silver Smiths 1  1 9 11 34 Black-smiths   1 5 6 35 General labourers and coolies  18 66 50 185 319 36 Factory labourers (unspecified)  7 14 92 113 37 Shopmen, &c (unspecified)  9 3 19 31 38 Mendicants   2 20 22 39 Males following no occupation 2 6 4 32 44 40 Females      do.          do. 12 50 34 171 267 41 Children, males  16 41 49 188 294 42 Children, females 9 28 29 131 190  Total     77 299 257 1,205 1,838 * The details up to 31st May 1897 have not yet been received from the Health Department,  Occupations have been excluded in which less than 5 deaths occurred during the 4 months.
?20 TABLE VII. Staement showing the probable mortality from Plague in Bombay City from the commencement of the outbreak to the end of May 1897, and also showing the fall in the birth-rate. For Week ending TOTAL DEATHS INCLUDING STILL-BORN. Probable Plague mortality  in 1896-97. TOTAL BIRTHS EXCLUDING STILL-BORN.  1896 and 1897. Mean of corresponding  weeks in preceding 5 years.  1896 and 1897. Mean of corresponding  weeks in preceding 5 years. August  4th                   564 564   287 313       11th 598 534  64 311 307       18th 650 538  12 263 297       25th 669 581  88 298 301 Sept.  1st 667 540  127 345 291      8th 593 531  62 346 312      15th 618 492  126 321 273      22nd 647 506  141 304 271      29th 720 527  193 339 338 Oct.  6th 791 491  300 279 329      13th 634 498  136 320 336      20th 606 477  129 284 278      27th 698 470  228 283 291 Nov.  3rd 668 443  225 295 303      10th 623 449  174 247 346      17th 704 462  242 238 286      24th 760 446  314 296 301 Dec.    1st 772 457  315 356 331      8th 1,051 460  591 370 355      15th 1,310 470  840 321 333      22nd 1,416 470  946 299 305      29th 1,853 469  1,384 282 317 Jan.   5th 1,711 494  1,217 232 320      12th 1,638 484  1,154 206 341      19th 1,758 501  1,257 138 257      26th 1,721 518  1,203 132 323 Feb.    2nd 1,645 526  1,119 85 313      9th 1,911 540  1,371 98 294      16th 1,728 569  1,159 71 284          25th 1,650 542  1,108 49 271 March   2nd 1,484 546  938 57 292      9th 1,326 544  782 109 284      16th 1,258 534  724 97 253      23rd 1,139 539  600 37 270      30th 1,141 544  597 89 240 April   6th 1,007 559  448 92 281      13th 970 572  398 60 248      20th 836 614  222 81 261      27th 671 625  46 117 263 May     4th 638 606  32 133 295      11th 558 599  156 291      18th 547 602  173 269      25th 541 581  159 276
?21 TABLE VIII. The details of 27 Patients treated at Parel Plague Hospital with M. Yersin's Anti-toxin Serum. No. Initials. Sex. Age. Caste. Occupation, Duration of Disease. Serum in C. C. Total C. C. Re-sult. Remarks.       Days.     1 C. D. N. M 51 N. C. Medical Practitioner. 4-5 30 + 20 50 D Double pneumonia. 2 D. P. F 40 H. Cooly 2 30 + 20 50 D  3 D. N. F 1 1/2 N. C.        2 10+10 + 10 30 R  *4 R. T. N. F 18 N. C.  3 20+20 40 D Meningitis and tumour (osseous) pressing ou medulla in P. M. 5 S. B. M 24 H. Clerk 3-4 20+10 + 10+ 20 60 D  6 S. B. K. M 18 H. Mill-hand 3-5 20+10 30 D  7 P.D. F 60 H.  2 30+30 + 40 100 D  8 E. M. M 25 H. Mill-hand  2 30 30 D  9 J. D. D. S. M 13 N. C. School-boy 36 hours. 40 + 40 80 D Developed pneumonia double. 10 P. R. M 7 H. Do.      2 30 + 30 60 R  *11 R. F. F 25 N. C.   20 20   12 M. D. M 30 H. Haml 2 40 40 D  13 R.M. M 9 N. C. School-boy 1 40+40+40 + 40+30 190 R  14 S. J. M 9 H. Sweeper 2 40+40 + 30 110 R  15 B. J. M 25 H. Do.       2 30+40+40 110 R  16 B. G. S. M 28 H. Clerk 36 hours. 40 + 50 90 D  17 T. M. M 18 H. Mill-hand  2 50+50 + 50+ 50+30 230 R  18 M. S. M 30 H. Mli 26 hours. 40 40 D  19 K. H. M 22 H. Massl 4-5 40 40 R  20 L.R. F 12 N. C.  3-9 hours. 40 40 D  21 A. K. T. M 60 N.C. Merchant 9 hours. 40 + 50+50 140 R  22 M. E. M 45 Parsee. Cook 3 60 60 R  23 D.E. F 11 Parsee.  27 hours. 50 50 D  *24 H. B. F 32 Hindu Jain.  7       50 50 R I heard came from Charni Road Hosp-ital. 25 C. M. F 32 N. C.  24      50+50 100 D  26 K. B. S. F 4 H.  42      40 40 D  *27 G. R. M 52 H. Clerk 3-5 20 20 D Hepatitis and R. Ferri injected at his own urgent request. . * These were not cases of plague. Case No. 4 died of meningitis and should be excluded and mortality = 60.S per cent. 2 cases developed sub-acuto synovitis. 2 cases developed erythematous rashes on the skin. In one of these the rash persisted 2 1/2 weeks. B 1751-6
22 TABLE Showing the results of the quantitative urine analyses obtained by Surgeon-Captain  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 No. Race. Age. Sex. Day. Quantity.  Colour.  Re-action.  Sp. Gr.  Urea. Chlorides.  Sulphates.  Phosp hate.  Solids, Grm. per diem. 1 F. 34 F 4 700.C.C. Muddy Yellow Faintly acid  1,015 2% Trace. P D 25.46 2 Eurasian  36  M 3 760.C.C. Reddish Brown Sharply acid  1,025 1.85% Do. P D 44.27 3 D. E.  18 M 3 800.C.C. Light Yellow Do. 1,018 1.75% Absent. P D 35.55 4 Eurasian  22 M 5 630.C.C. Brown Red  Do. 1,020 1.75% Trace. P D 29.35 5 Do.  21 M 4 760.C.C. Pale Yellow  Do. 1,024 1.85% Absent. Trace. Faint. 42.49 6 E. 32 M 3 900.C.C. Red Yellow  Do. 1,015 2.5% Present. P D 31.45 7 R. J.  36 M 4 800.C.C. Do. Intensely acid 1,026 1.85% Trace. P D 48.46 8 D. E.  9 M 4 900.C.C. Yellow Red  Alke 1,022 1.85% Do. P Abundant. 46.13 9  E. J.  29 M 3 800.C.C Red Yellow  Sharply acid 1,015 2.0% Absent. Trace. Marked. D 27.96 10  E. J.  31 M 4 760.C.C. Do. Neutral 1,018 1.85% Trace. P D 31.87 11  N. C.  18 M 4 800.C.C. Light Yellow Sharply acid 1,025 0.85% Absent. P D 46.60 12 Eurasian  45 M 3 850.C.C. Red Yellow  Do. 1,025 1.80% Do. P D 49.51 13  Do.  22 M 0 1,000.C.C Dark Red  Do. 1,028 1.75% Trace. P D 63.04 14  Do. 23 M 4 850.C.C. Yellow Red  Do. 1,018 1.25% Do. P Present. 35.64 15  Do. 15 F 4 800.C.C. Red Do. 1,015 2.5% Do. P D 27.96 16  G. 34 M 3 760.C.C. Deep Red Do. 1,024 1.85% Absent. P D 42.49 17 Eurasian  26 M 3 600.C.C Red Yellow Do. 1,025 1.75% P. Trace. Trace. D 34.95 18 D.E.  38 M 9 700.C.C. Red Do. 1,025 1.90% Absent. P Trace. 40.77 19 Eurasian  13 M 4 400.C.C. Muddy Yellow Red. Faintly acid  1,020 2.0% Trace. P D 18.64 20  Do. 29 M 4 650.C C. Do. Sharply acid 1,018 1.5% Absent. P D 27.26 21  Do.  9 M 5 1,000.C.C Light Yellow Do. 1,015 2.5% P. P D 34.95 22  G. 44 M 3 700.C.C. Do. Do. 1,020 1.85% Trace. P D 32.62 23  G. 14 M 3 500.C.C Yellow Red  Do. 1,024 2.0% Do. P D 27.96 24 D. E.  18 M 4 950.C.C. Red Yellow  Do. 1,014 2.5% Do. Slight. D 30.98 25 G. 16 M 5 1,000.C.C. Yellow Red  Do. 1,018 1.85% Do P D 41.94 26 Eurasian  15 M 6 800.C.C. Do. Do. 1,010 1.0% Do. P D 18.04 27 G. 26 M 4 800.C.C.  Red Yellow  Do. 1,012 1.85% Do. P D  20.20 28 D. E. 31 F 3 850.C.C. Do. Do. 1,016 1.90% Do. P D 31.68 29 D. E. 7 M 4 630.C.C. Do. Do. 1,015 2.25% P. P D 22.01 30 D. E.  8 F 4 900.C.C Yellow Red  Do. 1,018 2.0% Trace. P D 39.84 31 Eurasian  30 M 3 800.C.C.  Light Yellow Do. 1,025 1.85% Do. P D  46.60 32 D. E.  22 F 4 900.C.C.  Yellow Red  Do. 1,024 2.5% P. P D 50.32 33 Eurasian  21 M 4 1,000.C.C. Light Yellow Faintly acid  1,010 1.75% Trace. P Trace.  23.30 34  Do.  55 M 5 1,500.C.C Red Yellow  Sharply acid  1,025 1.75% P. P D 87.37 35  G. 22 M 3 760.C.C.  Brown Red  Intensely acid  1,026 2.75% Absent. P D 46.04 36 Eurasian  32 M 5 1,400.C.C.  Yellow Sharply acid  1,022 1.50% Do. P D  71.70 37  Do.  19 F 5 1,000.C.C Do. Do. 1,025 2.0% Trace. P D  58.25 38  J. 20 M 5 1,500.C.C Brown Red  Do. 1,024 2.0% Absent. P D 82.88 39 Eurasian  18 F 3 500.C.C.  Do. Do. 1,025 2.5% Trace. P Trace.  29.12 40  Do.  33 M 4 1,260.C.C. Light Yellow Do. 1,030 2.5% Do. P P.  88.07 41  Do.  17 M 4 900.C.C.  Do. Intensely acid 1,024 1.25% Do. P Slight. 50.32 42  G. 44 M 5 950.C.C Red Yellow  Sharply acid  1,026 1.75% Trace Salmon Pink P D 57.45 43 J. 40 M 4 950.C.C. Do. Do. 1,035 1.25% Trace. P D 77.48 44 European  17 F 3 800.C.C. Light Yellow Do. 1,025 1.50%  Fair. P D 46.60 45 R. J. 26 F 4 900.C.C. Red Yellow  Do. 1,032 2.25% Trace. P Slight. 67.10 46 J. 16 M 4 1,000.O.C.  Red Brown  Do. 1,025 2.0% Do. P Do.  58.25 47 Eurasian 12 M 5 1,200.C.C. Light Yellow Neutral 1,018 2.5% P. P Abundant. 50.32 48 Do.  28 M 5 1,900.C.C Red Yellow  Do. 1,018 3.2% D. P D. 67.10 49 D. E. 13 M 4 760.C.C Do. Sharply acid  1,028 2.5% Normal. P Slight  49.55 50 Eurasian  42 F 4 700.C.C. Do. Do. 1,020 2.5% Trace. P Do.  32.62 Abbreviations. -E. = European.  D. E. = Domiciled European. E. J. = European Jew. J. = Jew. R. J. = Russian Jew.
?23 IX. Hojel in fifty plague cases at the St. George's Hospital, Bombay. 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Albumin. Globulins. Peptones. Albumoses. Bile. Sugar. Indican. Leucin, Tyrosin. Acetone, Diacetic Acid. Diazo Reaction. Sediment. Trace. Nil Nil Nil Trace. Nil Trace. Nil Nil Port wine colour. Amorphous urates; no casts. Do.    Do.  Do.   Do. No casts. Do.    Nil  Marked.   Do. Do. Do.      M   Do. Hyaline and uratic casts; uric acid crystals abundant. Nil.    Trace.  M   Do. No sediment; mucous clouds.     Nil  Trace.   Do. Cloudy; no sediment. Trace.      M   Do. Cloudy. Do.      M   Do. Amorphous and triple phosphates. Nil.      M   Do. Amorphous urates; uratic casts. Trace.      M   Do. Urate of ammonium.  Trace.  Present.   Trace.   Do. Granular casts, large and small urate of amnonium. 6 Do.  P ,  M   Do. A few granular casts. Trace. Nil  Nil Trace.  Fair   Light Port wine colour. Do. do. Nil    Do.  M   Port wine colour. Nil. 1/8 Trace.  P Nil  M   Do. R. B. corpuscles; hmoglobin crystals.  Do. P P   M   Do. Do. do.  Do. Nil P   Trace.   Do. R. B. corpuscles; amorphous urates.  Nil  P Trace.  Marked. P Acetone Do. Granular casts. Trace.   Nil Nil  Trace. Nil Nil Do. Epithelial casts. Do.      Marked.   Do. Nil. Nil.      Fair.   Do.        M   Light P. W.  Trace. Trace.     M   P. W.  Nil Nil     Trace.   Do.      Trace  M   Do.      Nil.  Trace.   Do. ,     Trace.  Marked   Do. Urate of soda. Trace.  Trace.  Nil  Trace.   Do. Amorphous urates. Nil  Nil    M   Do. Nil. Trace.    Trace.  M   Do. Vaginal epithelum; no casts. Do.    Nil  M   Do. Amorphous urates. Nil    Trace.  M   Do. Vaginal epithelium; urates. Trace.    Nil  M   Do. Urate of ammonium.     Trace.  M   Do. Granular and epithelial casts.  Trace.  Trace. Nil  M   Do. Uric acid.  Nil Trace. Do.   M   Do. Hyalin casts. 1/6  Nil Do.   M   Do. Nil. 1/8   Do.   M   Do. Amorphons urates. Trace.   Nil   Trace.   Do. Epithelial casts. Do.    Trace.  M   Do. Nil. Do.    Nil  M   Do. Uric acid; oxalate of lime. Do.    Trace.  M   Do. Amorphous urates.  Trace.  Trace. Nil  Trace.   Do. Granular and uratic casts. Trace. Nil  Nil P  Do.   Do. Vesical and vaginal epithelium. Do.    Trace  M   Do. Nil. Do.    Nil  M   Do. Granular casts. Nil      M   Do. Triple phosphates. 1/6   P   M   Do. Nil. Nil ,  Nil Trace.  M   Do.     Trace. Nil  Trace.   Do. Uratic casts. G = Goanese. N C = Native Christian. P = Present. D = Diminished. M = Marked.
24 GENERAL APPENDIX. The following recommendations were made by the Committee:- From THE PRESIDENT, PLAGUE RESEARCH COMMITTEE; To THE SECRETARY TO THE SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY. Petit Laboratory, J. J. Hospital, Bombay, 9th December 1896. SIR, The undersigned members of the Plague Research Committee strongly urge the adoption of the following measures for dealing with the existing epidemic.                                                                                                               2.     Seeing that it is known that each plague patient contains in himself the source  of infection, and seeing  that there is a possibility of this passing either directly or indirectly from the sick to the healthy, it is absolutely necessary that the most rigid isolation of the sick should be practised.    For the attainment of this end it is not necessary in all cases that the sick person or persons should be removed from the house in which the attack commenced.    Suitable rooms might be available in the house in which the case could be efficiently isolated.    In select- ing such room, the points to be especially kept in mind should be the free supply of sunlight and air and the minimising  of the chances of  communication with other persons in the house.    Often, in place of a room, the flat roof of a house or other such open space in connection with a house could be utilised for isolation a temporary erection sufficing to keep off the direct rays of the sun.    Whichever method be adopted, the door passage of communication with  the house  should be  guarded  by hanging  over it a cloth kept constantly saturated with carbolic solution (1 pint to 2 gallons). 3.    All articles  of clothing, etc., used  by the patient, and   all secretions should either be disinfected  before removal from the room, or destroyed by fire. Not more than one attendant, or at the most two at a time, should be allowed in the room. 4.     If no suitable accommodation is available in the house, the patient must be   removed   to   a   suitable    place, which   should,   if possible,   be a   special hospital. 5.     After the removal recovery   or death of the patient, the infected room should first be hermetically closed and thoroughly fumigated with sulphur fumes. The walls and floor should then be scraped, and  they,  together with all  the articles in the room capable of being so treated, should be washed with  solution of carbolic acid (1/2 pint to 2 gallons).    Finally, the walls should be washed with fresh quicklime and water,  or preferably with a  solution of chlorinated lime. Clothing, bedding, etc., should be treated in a steam steriliser.    For the purpose of transporting them to the sterliser, it is advisable that they should be wrapped in a sheet soaked in carbolic acid solution.    The room  should be then  vacated for a period of at least six weeks,    About a week before it  is re-occupied, the floor and walls should again be treated with chlorinated lime.    On the occurrence of a second case in the same  house within 15 days of the occurrence of the first case, the whole house  should be vacated, the  sick person being removed to  a suitable hospital.  If the removal of the sick cannot be effected without giving rise to an objectionable   amount   of prejudice, they should be treated in the house.    The whole house, when vacated, should be subjected to the same process as detailed for the infected room, with the proviso that any godown or place of business, provided with a separate entrance and not used as a residence, need not necessarily be vacated, but should be treated  on its merits as to how far it should come under the operation of the measures applicable to the rest of the house.
?25 6.    To meet prejudices against promiscuous segregation, communities in the various districts objecting to the ordinary isolation hospitals  should be  per- mitted to open as many selected and approved hospitals as may be necessary for the purpose.    Vacant houses, huts, tents or ships in the harbour may be used for the purpose. 7.    To meet the difficulty of housing the evicted healthy persons tempo- rary accommodation might be  required,  and  could be erected on any available open land, but much  might be done by utilising houses already more or less deserted.    Houses that have been vacated for six weeks, owing to the occurrence of plague cases, might be found suitable. 8.     To meet the serious difficulty  of the concealment of cases, all house- holders should be made responsible that all serious cases of illness should immedi- ately be reported to the Health Department of the Municipality.    On receipt of such a report the Municipal Medical Officer should visit the case, and if it should prove to be one of plague, the person reporting might be suitably rewarded. In the  case of chawls, it might be necessary, not only to make the landlord responsible, but also to compel him to keep a representative constantly on the premises to report cases of sickness in the same manner as a householder.    The concealment of cases of severe sickness should be made a penal offence.    To ensure the efficient reporting of cases of plague,  house to house visitations by Municipal Medical Officers should be carried out daily in all infected localities. 9.      Meanwhile the present measures for opening up and cleansing  of drains, gullies &c., disinfecting of roads, burning of dead rats &c., should be continued; but we consider that the practice of burning sulphur in open spaces and in open houses is useless and had better be discontinued. 10.    We consider that an extensive mortality among rats in any locality may be taken as an indication that there is a risk of the appearance of plague among human beings there residing, and that on the occurrence of this pheno- menon, all rat-holes should be dug up and thoroughly disinfected, either by  fire or by means of a strong solution of chlorinated lime.    Rat-holes should also be carefully disinfected wherever found in an infected house. 11.    A set of simple rules for the guidance of the people should be drawn up in the various vernaculars and circulated both by printed notices  and by criers.    Such rules should direct attention to the necessity for free and efficient ventilation, the prevention of overcrowding and the necessity of cleanliness both of the person and of the dwelling.    The whole contents of dwelling rooms should be well aired and exposed to sunlight once a fortnight; bedding and clothing should be so treated every day.    Special care should be  enjoined in keeping clean all injuries or skin abrasions even of the slightest description. They should be washed with disinfectants obtained from the Municipality and protected by plaster, or clean bandages, or otherwise.    Householders and land- lords should be compelled to wash and limewash all houses and rooms which on inspection are found to be dirty.    Such limewashing will obviously  give an opportunity for exposing the contents of a room to sunlight and air.    Persons coming in contact with the sick,  especially if contaminated with secretions, should be instructed to carefully wash all exposed skin surfaces with carbolic lotion of 1 in 20 strength. 12.    In order to increase the accuracy of the death returns  and to obtain a better check  on the progress of the disease,  a Medical   Officer  should be stationed at each of the places for the disposal of the dead, and should be em- powered  to examine   bodies in  all suspicious cases.    As a  general rule, this examination need only be external. 13.    With regard to general measures, it may be noted that overcrowding, deficient  ventilation of   houses and   rooms, accumulated   dirt in rooms and passages, are frequently present and obviously require to be dealt with, where necessary, by compulsion.    The opening up of crowded localities  for the free perflation of air   is urgently needed.      The   crowded   and   insanitary   burial grounds present in the midst of thickly populated districts should be closed on B 1751-7
26 the earliest possible occasion.    We also point out the need for a steam steriliser in each district of the city. 14.    The committee is well aware that the carrying out of much of the above measures will be   attended with   hardship   and   inconvenience   to   the inhabitants, but we consider that nothing less than the above desiderata will suffice to eradicate the disease.    While every effort should be made to prevent the regulations bearing harshly on the people, these regulations should be firmly and unflinchingly applied in view of the enormous interests at stake.    Although interference   with  trade and even panic may ensue on enforcing the above measures, it should be borne in mind that greater interference with trade and greater panic is likely to be produced by the disease itself if allowed an untram- melled course in the succeeding months of the cold weather. 15.    While leaving the carrying out of the above rules to the Municipal authorities, the Committee advocates the employment of a Commissioned Me- dical officer in each of the infected districts to inspect and supervise the methods of combating the disease.    It might be feasible to ask the Army Medical Staff and the Royal Navy to contribute their quota of such officers, if any difficulty is found in providing them from the Indian Medical Service.     Such aid is requisite, as it is feared that in some cases the present measures of disinfection are not efficiently carried out, and more responsible aid is required in super- vising the sanitary needs of the infected areas.    At present it is feared that the Medical officers employed by the Municipality have most of their time employed in inspecting and treating the sick.    These Municipal officers should direct the whole of their time to inspecting their districts and to seeing that the above suggestions are carried out efficiently.     The Commissioned Medical officers, if employed,  should be independent of the Municipality and should report to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of Bombay. 16.    We also consider that steps should be taken for obtaining further supplies of M. Yersin's antitoxin for treatment of the sick. 17.    In conclusion we wish to point out that until scientific researches have shown us the exact sources and modes of infection in this disease, the utility of any special mode of disinfection must remain a matter of theory, and the safest way of avoiding the disease must be to run away from it.     In other words, although it is probable that the suggested measures of disinfection will be of some use, we consider that there is reason for placing more reliance on the evacuation of infected houses as a means of combating the disease. We have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servants, (Signed)    R. MANSER, M.D., Surgeon-Major, I. M. S., President. (Signed)    E. H. HANKIN. (Signed)   L. F. CHILDE, Surgeon-Captain, I. M. S. (Signed)    N. F. SURVEYOR, A minority report by Professor Haffkine is appended.
?27 Petit Laboratory, 10th December 1896. DEAR DR. MANSER, I regret to be unable to sign the paper which you have read us during our sittings yesterday and on the day before yesterday, even after its having been altered by the Committee. Kindly forward to the Surgeon-General the following statement which represents the views I hold personally on the situation. The sanitary precautions now being taken against the plague are in conformity with the general sanitary principles adopted at present. Any new suggestions can be made only after a patient study for which we have not yet had sufficient time and which ought to be uninterruptedly pursued. No immaterial alterations or additions in the present measures are in the least likely to affect the course of the epidemic, and it is not advisable to inter- fere with the sanitary system at present at work in the city, for which there is no reason to substitute any other. The preparation of an antitoxin serum, similar to that which is being experimented upon by Dr. Yersin, is a correct attempt, and in my programme of work submitted to the Government of India previous to my coming to Bombay, this was the first problem to be taken up after having ascertained the identity of the disease. Since several weeks horses, cows, goats and sheep are being immunised at the Government Lazaretto at Siwri. Dr. Yersin has also been asked for a supply of serum, just at the commencement of the outbreak, through the Consul General in Calcutta, and he answered that he had only a small amount of serum, of which he could send only two doses, since then received in Calcutta. At my request to have the sample here for a trial, I had first a tele- gram from the Health Officer of Calcutta, saying that it was being despatched to me, but later on he informed me that he could not spare the specimen. I am repeating the request to-day. As there is the possibility of Dr. Yersin having since prepared another supply of serum, or of his being now ready to submit it to trial, it is advisable to repeat the inquiry, and I concur with the rest of the Committee in the clause which has been inserted in your paper to that effect. Yours faithfully, (Signed) W. M. HAFFKINE. MEASURES RECOMMENDED TO BE ADOPTED FOR LIMITING THE SPREAD OF PLAGUE IN THE MOFUSSIL.* 1. On the appearance of plague in a district or when the disease is pre- valent in the neighbourhood, Collectors should take measures to prevent the admission into villages of persons from infected areas and the movement of villagers between neighbouring villages. 2. Sanitary measures such as will improve the water supply and drainage, the provision of food where scarcity prevails, and the supervision of the quality of the grain sold in the bazaar-in short, all sanitary measures calculated to improve the general health-should be carried out without delay, as improve- ment of the general health of a population increases its resistance to epidemic disease. 3. The death-rate should be closely watched and the cause of any unusual mortality enquired into, so that the disease may be detected before it has spread throughout the village. 4 When the presence of plague has been ascertained, a temporary hospital should be erected, if possible, with wards for male and female patients, and shelter provided near the hospital for such of the patients' friends as will act as nurses. "When a temporary hospital cannot be provided-e.g. in the monsoon-as suit- able a house as possible should be obtained. *For translation into vernacular for the use of village officers.
?28 5. A hospital establishment, medicines, instruments &c. will be necessary in proportion to the size of the village and extent of the outbreak. A dooly or the patient's cot may be used for conveying the sick to hospital. 6. In the fair season and when the disease is limited to a few families, segregation of the infected families should be carried out. For this purpose sheds or other accommodation will generally be necessary. Occasionally the whole population of a village will turn out into the fields of their own accord on the appearance of plague. This appears to act excellently in checking the outbreak and should be encouraged. They should not return until cases of plague have ceased to occur among them, and in the interval their houses should be thoroughly cleaned. During the rains the most that can be done, as a rule, is to warn the uninfected not to expose themselves unnecessarily by going into infected houses. 7. The dead should be buried at a safe distance from banks of nlas and from wells. Where burning is employed, the body should be entirely con- sumed. 8. Schools should be closed, and gatherings at fairs &c. discouraged or prohibited. 9. In cleaning houses the woodwork should be well washed, and articles of furniture washed and exposed to the sun and air for some days. The walls and floors should be swept as clean as possible, and the house thrown open to the light and air; where there are mud floors, these should be renewed. 10. The clothing of infected persons should be disinfected by boiling or steeping for some hours in perchloride of mercury solution (1 in 1000). 11. Villagers should co-operate with the village officers in carrying out these measures as thoroughly as possible, as they are intended for the good of the whole community. Professor Haffkine objects to paras. 6, 10 and 11. He thinks they should run as follows:- 6. While the disease is still limited to a few families, the Ptel should explain to the people the danger of residing in the infected houses, and try to induce them to go to some other unoccupied dwellings. As far as practicable, they should be assisted by providing them with accommodation at the public expense. When the village is small and there is the possibility of the whole population vacating it for a time, this ought to be encouraged, the people remain- ing outside the village till the cessation of the epidemic amongst them. The practicability of this measure is limited in the rainy season. 10. The clothes of infected persons should not be used before being thoroughly washed and dried in the sun. 11. The head of the village is enjoined to watch over the carrying out of the above measures, as they are for the good of the community under him, R. W. S. LYONS, M. D., Surgeon-Major, I. M. S., President, Plague Research Committee, Bombay, 2nd August 1897.
