Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. VOL. IV. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM BENGAL AND ASSAM TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. CALCUTTA:OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1894. Price Three Rupees.
QUESTIONS FRAMED BY THE COMMISSION. Evidence before the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-94. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY. 1. What opportunities have you had of obtain- ing information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs in regard to which your answers are framed? 2. In the most recent work on ganja (Dr. Prain's report of 21st June 1893) it is stated that "in India three narcotic articles are obtained naturally from hemp. These are, siddhi or bhang, charas, and ganja." They are thus defined by Dr. Prain: "Siddhi, bhang, subji or patti are different names applied to the dry leaves of the hemp plant, whether male or female and whether cultivated or uncultivated. "Charas is the name applied to the resinous matter which forms the active principle of the plant when collected separately. "Ganja consists of the dried flowering tops of cultivated female hemp plants which have become coated with resin in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely. The formation of seeds is prevented by the destruction of all the male plants. "Three varieties of ganja are sold. Ganja is usually manufactured by being trodden under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops assume a flattened shape. This is 'Flat ganja.' The other sort of ganja is not trodden, but rolled under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops are less closely adherent, and assume a rounded shape. This is 'Round ganja.' The flower-tops of ganja detached from the twigs, whether of flat or of round ganja, and whether the detachment has been accidental or deliberate, form 'chur' or 'Broken ganja.'" May these definitions be accepted for your pro- vince? By what name is each of these products locally known? CHAPTER II. CULTIVATION OR GROWTH OF HEMP. (Cannabis sativa.) 3. In what districts of which you have know- ledge does the hemp plant grow spontaneously? Mention any in which it is abundant. 4. By what different names is it known? Do these refer to exactly the same plant? 5. What special conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, elevation above sea level, etc., are necessary to the growth of the wild hemp? 6. Is the growth of the wild hemp ordinarily dense, or scattered? 7. Is there any cultivation of the hemp plant in your provinceii it quite lose its effect in time? How long does it keep good with ordinary care? What are the causes of deterioration? What special measures can be taken to prevent deterioration? CHAPTER IV. TRADE. (Statistics to be obtained from Government offices.) CHAPTER V. CONSUMPTION OR USE. NOTE.iii 38. Have the three different preparations of ganja (round and flat ganja and "chur") any different effects in kind or degree on consumers? 39. Is the smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant in any way a less injurious form of consumption than drinking or eating the same or any other preparation? Give reasons for your answer. 40. (a) Is the use of any of these drugs prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by any school of Native Doctors? (b) Are any of them used in the treatment of cattle disease? 41. May the moderate use of charas, ganja, or bhang be beneficial in its effectsiv 60. If ganja is produced in your province, do you think that the cultivation of the ganja-bear- ing plant and the process of its preparation are sufficiently controlled, or that the system requires modification in any respect? If so, in what respects and why? 61. If charas is produced in your province, do you think the cultivation of the hemp plant for its production and the process of preparation are sufficiently controlled, or that the system requires modification in any respect. If so, in what res- pects and why? 62. Do you think that the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should be in any way controlled? Would this be feasible? If so, indicate the method by which such control could be exercised. 63. Have you any objection to the present system of a wholesale/b retail vend of 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang or preparations of them? If you have any objections, state them at length, and indicate the improvements you suggest. 64. Have you any objections to the existing regulations governing the export and import of these drugs or of their preparations from and into your province, or their transport within the pro- vince? Give reasons for your answer. 65. In your opinion is the taxation of 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang reasonable with reference (a) to each other, (b) to alcoholic or other intoxicants? Give reasons for any alterations in the amount of taxation of any of these articles which you may suggest. 66. In your opinion is it necessary that there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja (such as the "flat," "round," and "broken" ganja produced in Bengal), or for ganja grown in different localities? If so, on what principle? 67. Having regard to the ultimate incidence of the tax on the consumer, have you any objections to the present method of taxing 1ganja/2 charas/3 bhang? 68. Are there in your province houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs or their prepar- ations where they may be consumed on the premi- ses? What is your view in respect to such houses or shops? 69. Are the wishes of the people consulted or considered in any way before a shop is opened in any locality? What measures are taken for this purpose? Ought local public opinion to be thus considered? 70. Are there any facts regarding the importa- tion or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States into your province to which you wish to draw attention? Is duty really paid in respect to the ganja and other hemp drugs used? Or is there any general use of untaxed drugs, and by whom?
INDEX TO BENGAL AND ASSAM WITNESSES. No. Name. Designation. Page. BENGAL. 1 Hon'ble D. R. Lyall, C.S.I. * Member, Board of Revenue 1 2 E. V. Westmacott* Commissioner 6 3 W. H. Grimley* Ditto 10 4 G. Toynbeevi No. Name. Designation. Page. BENGALvii No. Name. Designation. Page. BENGALviii No. Name. Designation. Page. BENGALix No. Name. Designation. Page. BENGALX No. Name. Designation. Page. BENGALxi No. Name. Designation. Page. BENGAL xii No. Name. Designation. Page. ASSAM. 1 S. Godfrey * Commissioner 529 2 J. J. S. Driberg * Commissioner of Excise 530 3 Major M. A. Gray Deputy Commissioner 535 4 J. D. Anderson* Ditto; Offg. Excise Com- missioner ib. 5 R. B. McCabe xiii No. Name. Designation. Page. ASSAMINDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. EVIDENCE OF BENGAL WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of the HON'BLE MR. D. R. LYALL, C.S.I., Member, Board of Revenue, Calcutta. 1. I have been in the service of Government for over 32 years, and have been in charge of the Districts of Dacca, Tippera, Faridpur, Howrah, and the 24-Parganas. I have also been Com- missioner of the Dacca, Presidency, Chittagong, and Patna Divisions, and have been also Inspector- General of Police, and now am Member of the Board of Revenue and in charge of Excise. In all these capacities I have had opportunities of obtaining information and have been Administrator of Excise in the districts above named. I never made this branch over to a Deputy Collector, except in the 24-Parganas, and even there I kept administration largely in my own hands. 2. The definitions are those current in Bengal. 3. I know no district in all Bengal in which the hemp plant does not grow spontaneously. Per- sonally I have noticed it most in Champaran and Tippera, but it is common everywhere. 4. See reply to 2. So far as I know the plant is the same every- where. 5. See reply to No. 3. 6. Generally scattered, but I have seen also considerable fields of it. 7. (a) Yes, about Naogaon. (b) No. (c) Yes, in Bhagalpur and Monghyr chiefly, but also elsewhere to a smaller extent. (d) To a smaller extent only. 8. There is not much variation. The amount of land cultivated since 1877-78 for ganja is as follows:2 1887-88, 6,550 maunds; and the lowest, in 1892-93, maunds 5,451. This is the amount on which duty was paid. Charas has increased in the last 10 years; but the total sales are only 10 or 12 maunds at most. In 1880-81 811 maunds of bhang were sold against 1,064 in 1891-92. The increase is small. 26. The great bulk of the ganja smokers are habitual moderate consumers. Bairagies and such like are habitual excessive consumers. I should say there were very few of classes (c) and (d). 27. The lower classes in East Bengal, boatmen and such like, nearly all consume ganja moderate- ly. Hindu religious devotees are those who habit- ually consume in excess, and also Muhammadan debauchees. 28. (a) About a pice worth. (b) Six or seven times that amount, or even more. 29. (a) Tobacco. (b) Dhatura. In the case of (a), it is the ordinary mixture. In the case of (b), it is used as a stimulant and drug. 30. Both in solitude and company, chiefly the latter. It is most used by males. I have not come across any consumption by children. 31. The habit is easily formed and not easy to break off. Looking at the enormous preponder- ance of moderate habitual smokers, I should say the tendency to develop into excess was small. 32. Ganja and bhang both enter into the Hindu festivals; but on this point natives will give better evidence. 33. Ganja smoking is not held to be respect- able; but I do not think there is much feeling against it. Seeing it is used so much by devotees, religious public opinion cannot be against it. Here again native evidence will be best. 34. I do not think the hardship is very great; but my experience is drawn from jails. I refer to moderate consumers. Excessive consumers feel it more. 35. (a) I do not think so. (b) Certainly. (c) It could not be enforced without an en- ormous preventive service and much cost. (d) and (e) I think the discontent would be great, amounting to a political danger, and that the cry of interference with religion would be raised. (f) Yes, and to illicit growth of the hemp plant. 36. No. It is the other way, if anything, but not very markedly. 37. I know of no difference. 38. None, so far as I am aware. 39. This is more of a medical question; but I should say smoking was the less harmful. 40. I believe so; but the evidence of native doctors may be taken. 41. I should say yes to all questions. The boatmen of East Bengal use it largely and thrive on it. It is, like most other things, good when not taken in excess. I refer to moderate habitual use. As noted in reply to question 26, few use the drug occasionally. 42. See above. 43. Absolutely so. In this view alcohol renders those under its influence much more offensive thanganja. 44. Ganja smoked in moderation produces ap- petite and revives the spirits. It does not produce intoxication. The effect lasts some time. I have never noticed any after-effects in the case of moderate consump- tion. 45. (a) I do not think so. (b) I have never seen any instance; but doctors can say. (c) No, quite the contrary. (d) Not to my knowledge. (e) I do not think so. (f) Immoderate use is said to cause insanity; but I doubt it, else the proportion of insane Bairagies and such like would be greater than it is. I fear ganja is held responsible for more cases of insanity than are really due to it. I never heard of bhang being blamed for insanity. I think ganja affects some men more than others, as I have seen the same man sent time after time to an asylum and always come back. 46. See above. I believe habitual use of bhang is bad for the digestion. 47 and 48. Not to my knowledge. 49. Ganja is certainly so used, also bhang, generally in the form of majum. It seems rather to strengthen existing desires than to be an active aphrodisiac, and for this purpose it is generally mixed with other drugs. A man who uses hemp for this purpose necessarily wears himself out more than he otherwise would do, and in this way it is more injurious. 50. I cannot say if hemp produces impotence. 51. My experience is that most bad characters consume ganja. I hold that in itself ganja does not dispose to crime; but it may strengthen the will to commit crime if it is already there. I do not know that the moderate use of ganja is con- nected with any particular form of crime. 52. The above applies generally. Men under ganja sometimes commit murder; but it is hard to say how far the ganja is responsible. 53. Generally premeditated. I have known cases of temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. To some extent. 55. Dhatura is generally mixed when drugging is intended. Ganja alone, unless taken to an enormous extent, would not cause complete stupe- faction. In fact, I am not sure that alone it would ever do so. 56. See question above. The ordinary ganja smoker does not use dhatura. 57. I know of no such cases. 58 and 59. On the whole it works well, but is capable of improvement. Ganja.3 In the first place ganja as it is now prepared, the great bulk of it being "flat," takes much room, and in the next place the damage from rats and mice would be very great. As a fact, at pre- sent each raiyat's house is a gola for his crop until it is sold, and this is fair, as the crop is the raiyat's property. At present the raiyat sells to a middle- man or goladar, and it is only when the sale is complete and the drug is to be removed that the crop comes to the Government gola to be weighed and packed. This goladar is the middle- man between the producing raiyat and the retail vendor, and these men make large profits. They are generally also retail vendors, and they are able to exact very high prices from the other retail vendors. These profits, I hold, ought to come into the pockets of Government; and if the experiments made by Dr. Prain turn out success- ful, it will be very easy for Government to deal with the raiyats and the retail vendors direct. In dealing with the raiyats I would have Gov- ernment purchase the crop at once from the raiyats and undertake the preparation in the manner pro- posed by Dr. Prain (square cakes). The amount of crop varies from 3,768 maunds in 1878-79 and 3,888 in 1885-86 to 9,448 in 1877-78 and 8,982 in 1883-84. I would buy this just as it is cut, and would fix the price yearly according to the harvest, paying higher rates in bad, and lower in good years, with a fixed minimum and maximum, which can be settled from the prices now obtained by the raiyats. The weak point in our opium system is that all the loss of a bad year falls on the raiyats, while Government pays them just as much in the bad year as in a good. If this be done, I take it the area of cultivation could be much reduced. The statistics show that from one to three thousand maunds a year more are grown than are consumed. This is partly destroyed as damaged (about 4 or 5 hundred maunds) and partly never passes out of the raiyat's hands, the demand not being sufficient. This last element of uncertainty to the raiyat would go if Government bought all the crop, and if Dr. Prain's proposals succeed, Government will be able to keep the drug longer without deterioration. After the drug has been bought and pressed, and, if necessary, put up in tins, it should be made over to Collectors on in- dents, just as opium is now made over, and retail vendors should buy from Collectors direct. The great bulk of the crop is at present at once removed from the producing district, and Collec- tors' indents could be arranged so as to continue this custom and secure the immediate removal to the districts of the bulk of the crop, and thus economise gola space at Naogaon. The pressing sheds need not be substantial, as the weather is always fine at the time of the ganja harvest. What I propose would be liked by the cultivators, and by the retail dealers, and Government would at once secure 2 or 3 lakhs of revenue, and would also have a much stronger hold on the distribution and regulation of the sale of the drug. The only men likely to object to it (besides the goladars) are those who hold that Government should have nothing to do with excise and similar matters; but the public gain would in other respects be so great as to justify Government in disregarding their views. So far as I am aware, there is abso- lutely no desire on the part of any section of the native community to put down the use of ganja and bhang, and even those who generally support Mr. Caine and the views put forward in Abkarido not join in this respect. 60. The cultivation is sufficiently controlled. 61. Not produced, but might be. Charas.4 am not disposed to recommend much of a rise,5 amount of the stuff in the custody of the raiyat. The bulkiness of ganja is an additional safeguard as compared with opium. We have never within my knowledge discovered a cultivator disposing of his crop illegally. Of course, if there were collusion between the protective establishment and the cultivators, this safeguard would be of little use, but as a fact I believe the establish- ment is trustworthy. The public gain to which I refer at the close of this answer consists in the financial gain and the removal of facilities for smuggling. I wish to add that since writing this answer the line taken by the anti-opiumists on the Opium Com- mission has greatly strengthened my view as to the weakness of the opposition to Government establishing a monopoly in ganja. At first we were prepared to bring forward strong evidence as regards the working of the monopoly system as regards opium. But within very few days of the opening of the Commission the anti-opiumists intimated that if the growth of opium were not entirely prohibited they considered the Govern- ment monopoly as the best and most restrictive system under which it could be grown. In Bengal the financial benefits to be gained by Government assuming the monopoly would be very great. Only the other day the Excise Com- missioner found the wholesale vendor at Balasore selling ganja at the price of Rs. 3 per seer to the retail vendors, and the price there is occa- sionally as high as Rs. 4, while his expenses could not possibly exceed Re. 1 per seer. This occurs more or less all over the province. The wholesale vendor pays a fee of Rs. 2 for each license. I should say that there would be distinctly less difficulty in the way of Government undertaking this monopoly than in the case of opium, on ac- count of the limited area in which the drug is grown. The main difficulty would be the bulki- ness of the crop, which would be greatly reduced if Dr. Prain's experiments turned out successful. I will place the Commission in possession of the result* of Dr. Prain's experiments so far as they will be available in March 1894 (page 22 of Dr. Prain's report). I do not think the quality of ganja varies so much as that of opium, but it is true that the latter can be accurately ascertained, whereas at present the former cannot. It is pos- sible that if Government undertook the monopoly they would be able by chemical experiment to gauge the quality of ganja. The quality of ganja does not vary so much as opium from field to field, but does vary from harvest to harvest. Crops of inferior ganja do sometimes occur, and people do make complaints. This would be a difficulty in the way of fixing a price, but not an insuperable difficulty. It would not be so easy to fix a price according to standard as in the case of opium. The difficulty caused by the deterioration of the drug is distinctly more serious than in the case of opium, but we hope that Dr. Prain's experiments will enable us to discover a remedy for this. At present all ganja is destroyed after two years. My principal object in proposing the monopoly is to get the maximum of revenue with the mini- mum of consumption and to benefit the culti- vators. At present a large share of the revenue goes into the pockets of the middlemen. Further, Government is unable to fix any sliding scale of price for districts where smuggling is impossible or easy, as is done in the case of opium. The price of opium in the consuming districts is Rs. 16, rising to Rs. 32 per seer in the more distant and inaccessible districts. If Government purchased the ganja crop the cultivator would have a sure market and not suffer the occasional losses he does at present. Government would of course have to regulate the area of land for which licenses should be given and not issue licenses, as at present, to allwho apply. At present the price of the crop is fixed by the ordinary rules of the market, and all risks on account of the crop are taken by the cultivator and to a less degree by the middlemen. The ar- rangements of the market are all made by the wholesale goladar (middleman). Government is then saved a great deal of trouble and risk in regard to the custody of the crop, the fixing of the price, and the transport of the drug. At the same time I think this relief is too dearly bought. The system of fixing a price at which the whole- sale vendors should be bound to supply retail ven- dors and auctioning the right of wholesale vend would to a certain extent meet the difficulty by giving a share of the goladar's profit to Govern- ment, and would also be of advantage in enabling the retail vendor to know what he was contracting for; but I doubt if the system would result in much financial gain on account of the limited competition among goladars and probable com- bination among them. As the head of excise I should much prefer to take up a Government monopoly and would guarantee to work it. Question 62.6 2. Evidence of MR. E. V. WESTMACOTT, Commissioner, Presidency Division; late Commissioner of Excise, Bengal. 1. Thirty years' experience as a Revenue Officer, including four years as Commissioner of Excise. 2. Not all the male plants are destroyed, but as many as possible. There are seeded plants in every sample. The definitions are correct. Bhang is known as siddhi or bhang. I do not remember meeting with the names of subji or patti, but they are applicable. 3. I think it grows in most Bengal districts. I frequently meet with it. In Nadia I have re- cently specially noticed it; also in Murshidabad. 4. Generally ganja or bhang. So far as I know there is only one plant. 5. I cannot say. Lower Bengal seems to suit it well. 6. I should say dense. I sometimes see a single plant, but have more often seen it growing in a fairly dense patch, covering up to several hundred square feet. 7. The only admitted cultivation is ganja in the Naogaon sub-division. I believe, however, that so-called wild bhang is really often cultivated. 8. This can be obtained from figures in the office of the Board of Revenue. 9. See Watt's Dictionary. I can add nothing to it. Prain may have got more information. 10. Same classes, I think. Ask Collector ofRajshahi. 11. I believe not. Ask at Naogaon. 12. I think not. The plant in the Gurjat mahals is not much better than bhang, but is used for smoking. I doubt whether much care is taken about extirpating the male. 13. (a) Naogaon sub-division and neighbouring tracts. I do not know why selected. (b) I do not know. I should think all Bengal would be suitable. (c) Not that I know of. 14. This is answered in the annual report by the Commissioner of Excise. 15. For the preparation of ganja see Watt's Dictionary. It is smoked with tobacco. Half a tola will last a smoker three or four days. For the preparation of bhang, the information noted by Mr. Fraser at Naihati is correct, so far as I know. 16. (a) I am not sure about this. (b) Yes. (c) No. 17. No particular class that I know of. 18. All of them deteriorate. Ganja and bhang lose their effect in time. I am not sure about charas. By the time the new crop comes into the ware-houses, last year's ganja is not worth much. Damp, I should say, causes deterioration. It gets mouldy. Air-tight cases, of course, delay de- terioration. I never tried oven-drying. I should think it would destroy the flavour. 19. I believe only for smoking. 20. I can only say that I do not think ganja is much smoked by the educated classes, except in isolated instances. Charas seems most used where there is a ShiyaMuhammadan population (Murshid- abad), but there are also a number of Jains there. I don't know who the consumers are. I should say ganja is most used by the laborious classes on the mud soil. 21. I don't think there is any preference. I have inquired about it, and think consumers seem content to take whatever it best pays the trader to import. 22. See annual excise report. 23. Very little, I fancy. Generally used as a drink. 24. All Hindus drink bhang at the Durga Puja. It is also taken (1) medicinally, (2) as a mild, slightly intoxicating, stimulant by all classes in Bengal, but more on the mud than on drier for- mations. 25. I doubt there being either increase or decrease. High prices affect consumption; but official figures are affected by the success of detec- tive operations, and if smuggling were completely stopped, figures of consumption would undoubtedly go up. 26. This is a difficult question. I should say 75 per cent. or more came under class (a), perhaps as much as 95 per cent. The number under (b), (c), (d), I should say, was very small indeed. 27. Consumers of class (a), I should say, belonged mainly to the laborious classes, agricul- tural and aquatic, on the mud soils. Classes (c) and (d) I should look for among professional harlots and town badmashes. As to (b),I am doubtful. I should think an occasional isolated case might occur in any class, even thehighest. 28. (a) For the answer to (a), see Mr. Fraser's notes taken at Naihati. (b) I cannot say; such cases are rare. 29. The Naihati notes give all I know. 30. (a) I should say the habit was just that of native tobacco-smokers. (b) Males over forty. (c) Most unusual. I should call such an in- stance extraordinary. 31. (a) I believe so. It meets a natural craving for some kind of stimulant on the mud soil. (b) I should suppose so. (c) I do not think so. A man may very well be a moderate consumer all his life. 32. (a) Drinking bhang by Hindus at Durga Puja. See Naihati notes. (b) Yes. (c) Temperate. (d) Not in the least. There is further use of it in worshipping Maha- deo (Hor-Gouri, Siva), but I cannot give details. 33. (a), (b) Among the agricultural and boat- ing classes it is an ordinary thing, and unobjection- able for a man to take to ganja at middle age; but among the more effeminate classes, the Babus, a man, and especially a young man, who takes to ganja would be looked on as going to the devil, though not so much as if he smoked madak. I should look on such a young man, if a ward of mine, as on a most depraved course. It is not worse than any other wanton intoxication. (c) I do not know.
7 34. (a) It would be a wicked thing to deprive hardworking men, much exposed to weather, on the mud soil, of their stimulant. Whether opium or liquor could be substituted for it I can't say; but there is a natural healthy craving for a stimulant, and ganja seems to suit them best. On the drier soils they drink fermented or distilled liquors in preference. Price, however, affects this. Among the Babus, ganja smoking is a vice, and it would not hurt them to give it up. (c) I cannot. 35. Prohibition quite feasible; but it would require an army of detectives to enforce it. The drug would undoubtedly be consumed illicitly. Prohibition could not be enforced without such a staff as we could not possibly pay for. We should want a man in every village, and then could not trust him. The discontent among consumers would be enormous, as I think the illicit article cultivated and prepared secretly would be most inferior, while producing quite as strong effects if used in sufficient quantities, as its cheapness would make possible and easy. Whether such discon- tent would amount to a political danger would depend on the strength of the administration. It would do so in a district under a native magistrate, but not in a district properly officered, where the magistrate had his police in hand. Even in the latter case, I could not say that it would not be dangerous that there should be such discontent among the masses as there would be in an eastern (mainly Muhammadan) district. The prohibition would undoubtedly be followed by recourse to other stimulants; but I should ex- pect to find a general attempt to improve the cul- tivation of the so-called wild bhang and to make ganja of it. This could be done in every back- yard in the country. 36. Not at present. We have increased the taxation on alcohol to such an absurd extent in the mud districts that people have taken to ganja more than they otherwise would. 37. I do not know. 38. I believe no difference whatever. 39. Smoking is more intoxicating than drinking bhang; but, where used in moderation, I should not say that consumers get intoxicated at all8 the market with a quantity of wood, and even that in gol ganja is unnecessarily large. 67. No, I think it works well. 68. I do not remember any consumption on licensed premises, and do not think any such accommodation is required. 69. I think it is rubbish consulting local public opinion. It generally means only consulting a number of Babus, who are out of all sympathy with other classes, and utterly ignorant and care- less of their requirements. 70. The smuggling of Gurjat ganja into Orissa and elsewhere is very great. You should look up the papers in the Excise Office: otherwise I think most of the ganja consumed really does pay duty. If it were easy to evade the tax, the astute traders would not pay it to the extent they do now. Oral evidence. Question 1.9 Question 62.10 3. Evidence* of MR. W. H. GRIMLEY, Commissioner of Chota Nagpur. I am a member of the Indian Civil Service of more than thirty years' standing, and have been posted to nine different districts in various official capacities, besides holding special appoint- ments, which necessitated my travelling about in nearly every district in Lower Bengal. I was for a few months Magistrate and Collector of Raj- shahi, the district in which ganja is grown under Government supervision, but during my brief stay there I had no occasion to visit Naogaon, where the cultivation is carried on, though I am well acquainted with the system. I was for many years Secretary to the Board of Revenue, and had there special opportunities of becoming acquaint- ed with matters connected with the revenue ad- ministration of the hemp drugs. Ganja, bhang or siddhi, and charas are nar- cotic products of the hemp plant, Cannabis sativa.Ganja consists of the resin-coated flowering tops of the cultivated unfertilized female plant; bhang or siddhi is the name applied to the dried or mature leaves, and is usually gathered from the plant in a wild state; charas is the resin which is collected from the unseeded plant while it is growing. The plant in its wild state does not produce ganja. It is cultivated for the sake of the narcotic property which is due to a resinous substance secreted both in the leaf and the flowers. This exudation is collected in various ways. In Nepal it is gathered by the hand. In Sind and Central India men wearing leathern aprons run through the hemp fields, but in some places they oil their bodies and run naked. In Persia it is pressed on to coarse cloths and after- wards scraped off. The use of ganja, while per- mitted by the Hindu religion to some, is denied to others, and amongst its votaries the narcotic is known by as many seductive terms as are wont to be applied to beverages of American origin, such, for example, as "the conqueror," "the all-con- quering," "the dispenser of happiness," "the quick pleasure-giver," "love-dagger," "rose- pillow," "wife of the dhatura or thorn apple," "cementer of friendship," "delighter," and "ambrosia of the gods,"11 toffy, which is cut up into small slices for sale. For drinking, the leaves are pounded up small and mixed with water, pepper and other spices being added to give a flavour; the concoction is drunk with sugar and milk. In order to preserve the leaves of bhang, they are first dried in the sun, and then boiled in the milk and water and again dried. Charas is also used for smoking. Being glutinous, a quantity of tobacco is placed around it to make it burn in the chillum when lighted. Bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown, but I am doubtful about ganja. The hemp preparations are made by the consumers and not by the vendors. The drugs deteriorate by keeping, but if kept in air tight or tin- lined boxes deterioration can be prevented. The Raja of the Jashpur Tributary State reports that deterioration can be prevented by covering the drugs with the leaves of the moulan tree. Ganja and charas are usually smoked. The former is said to be occasionally chewed or eaten and rarely used with spirits. When eaten or chewed, it is used as a medicine for colic or in- digestion. It is also used with oil for the cure of itch. It is also given to horses as medicine; and in the work of Raj Bullub Kabiraj it is described as a tonic, as increasing animal heat, and as a cure for leprosy. Bhang is used as a beverage by all classes of people, specially in the hot season, and largely by up-country people. Its use is not con- fined to any particular locality. It is sometimes eaten with sweetmeats. It is also taken as a medicine for the cure of diarrh12 and cares of their unhappy life. It is not usual for children to consume either of these drugs. The habit of consuming both is, I think, easily formed. It is difficult to break off in the case of ganja. In the case of both the tendency of the habit is to develop into the excessive. There seems to be no custom, social or religious, regarding the consumption of ganja, but bhang is required to be used by both males and females on the last day of the Durga Puja, after the images have been thrown into the water. The use, however, on this occasion is very moderate, and not at all injurious or likely to lead to the forma- tion of the habit of using the drug. Those unwill- ing to drink it merely put a drop on their tongue by way of acceptance from the dispenser. The consumption of ganja is generally regarded with dislike, and an inveterate smoker of the drug is always considered a disreputable character. The use of bhang is not considered equally reprehensi- ble. The use of ganja is considered disreputable, because its effects are injurious, both physically and mentally. The custom of worshipping the hemp plant is unknown here; but in the cultivat- ing districts the treaders-out of the ganja salute it before commencing operations. A shopkeeper keeps a small branch of ganja in a pot or lota as a sign of his trade, and may be observed to salute it reverentially on opening his shop in the morn- ing, but there is no special sanctity attached to the plant, the practice of making a salaam on opening their stores being common to other shop- keepers. It would be a serious privation to habitual smokers of ganja if obliged to forego the con- sumption of the drug, because the habit, when once formed, cannot be easily given up. Not so in the case of bhang. The habit of using it is not so difficult to give up. It is not easy to make a correct or even an approximate estimate of the probable number who would suffer. It would be feasible to prohibit the use in the case of bhang, but not so in that of ganja, the smok- ers of which will most assuredly resort to the use of dhatura and other drugs of a more virulent character to satisfy their cravings. The prohibi- tion of the use of ganja would cause very serious discontent among the consumers, especially among those every-day toilers who use it as a food-accessory while undergoing fatigue, or as a refreshing pick-me-up when the day's work is done. It cannot be asserted that the discontent consequent on the prohibition will not amount to a political danger. It is, however, almost certain that the prohibition will be followed by recourse to either alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. The effects of charas smoking are milder than those of smoking ganja. Charas is the rich man's drug, and the man that keeps his body well nour- ished feels least the effects of any drug. I am aware also that these drugs deteriorate. I believe there is really very little difference between the three preparations of ganja, but round is said by some to cause headache, and to be more effective than flat or "chur" in producing intoxication. Flat ganja is undoubtedly milder, and the drink- ing preparation of bhang is less injurious than smoking ganja or bhang. Native physicians use bhang as medicine for diarrh13 with these figures, we must endeavour to guard against the post hoc ergo propter hoc method of reasoning. It is difficult to procure accurate ante- cedents of lunatics. All that may be known is that they have been accustomed to smoke ganja, but the exact bearing of smoking on insanity has never been precisely determined. According to Rai Kanny Lal Dey, Bahadur, of 2,283 cases admitted in the Bengal lunatic asylums during the five years ending 1867, 878, or 38·4 per cent., were attributed to this cause. In the opinion, however, of Dr. Lyon many of these cases were simply cases of temporary intoxication from cannabis.Chevers remarks that "it is a matter of popular notoriety both in Bengal and the North-West Provinces that persons intoxicated with ganja are liable to commit acts of homicidal violence," Dr. Grieve, Surgeon-General of British Guiana, wrote in November 1882, when he was Director of Lunatic Asylums there:14 The memorandum submitted with my letter No. 404-P., dated 13th January 1894, contains one possible inaccuracy to which I wish to draw attention. It states that there is now nowhere in the Tributary States any shop for the sale of hemp drugs. A license was given by me a few months ago, as I have said, to a vendor in the Gangpur State to import ganja. Of course I cannot de- finitely say that the shop has been opened yet. The statement that there are no shops is based on reports received from the States. As to Mr. Hewitt's order I am not prepared to say that the Rajas keep the lists he prescribed. But I think the spirit of the order is carried out. I think the Chiefs are very loyal and willing to do what they are told in regard to such matters. Speaking generally, my remarks regarding the use and effects of the drug in its various forms are based to some extent on personal experience, on records, on conversations with people, on the information I acquired as Secretary to the Board for example, and on enquiries I have made from persons whom I believed to be able to give me valuable information. I have seen men smoke and had them prepare their ganja before me to show me how they did it. I have also examined golas and shops. So I am not without experi- ence. I have also in the rivers of Eastern Bengal seen the good effects which boatmen and fishermen attribute to the drugs. 4. Evidence of MR. G. TOYNBE, Commissioner, Bhagalpur Division. Oral evidence. Including furlough my total service is 28 years, all in Lower Bengal. Out of that I have passed about 10 years in Orissa in all the grades from Assistant Collector to Commissioner. Of my Bengal service I have been for almost equal periods in Bengal Proper, Eastern Bengal and Behar. I have formed no general opinion of the effects of the drugs, for the use is not common. As well as I can judge, the effects of the drugs are the reverse of favourable. A bearer of mine was said by his fellow-servants to eat ganja, and the effect was temporary insanity. He found his way into the Hughli jail, where he was very filthy in his habits. I cannot say whether he went to the asylum from the jail. He left my service, as he was taken up for theft, and he became insane in jail after a week or two, I be- lieve. I conclude that his insanity was due to ganja, because the servants said he ate it. He had not to my knowledge been mad before. His eyes always had a wild look. He had only been two or three months in my service. My wife said she was afraid of him on account of his wild appearance and peculiar manner. He was only a temporary mate-bearer, and I did not see much of him. I knew nothing of his previous history. This is the only specific instance of the evil effects of the drug which I can give. As Magistrate and visitor of jails I have formed the general impression that crimes of violence are very frequently attributed to the hemp drugs. This impression is not based on specific knowledge, but on general reports and popular rumour. I do not remember coming across any cases of ganja consumers except the one I have described, and in that it was the servants' statement only. The consumption of ganja has not been a fact which intruded itself upon me, so that I cannot point to any person and say he is a consumer. I have never had persons pointed but to me as social wrecks from the effects of ganja. On the other hand I have known several cases in which I was certain of the use of alcohol, and I remember for certain dismissing at least one clerk for repeated intemperance. I think I have dis- missed more. I have seen many careers among my clerks wrecked through indulgence in alcohol. I am only referring to cases of natives, and these were frequently of good social position. As far as I have seen, many more cases of evil effects from alcohol than from hemp have come before me. The effects of the former seem to be more on the surface. The hemp plant is, I believe, universally grown in the Gurjat Mahals. I have only made one tour in these tracts, which lasted three months. I saw the plant growing near houses, but cannot say whether it was cultivated or had sprung up of itself. I have never seen it away from the villages. I could not say for certain whether the plant is used in the hill tracts. But I have heard that it is used medicinally in a decoction made from the plant in the green state. I have never heard of its being used for cattle. It is sold into the Mogalbandi. The fact that the plant is found near the houses, and not found in the jun- gles, points to its being either cultivated or sprung from seed thrown aside by consumers. It is not grown in fields, but five or six plants may be found in almost every village. This amount of growth is more than would be required for the alleged medicinal use, and I doubt if all the drug is used medicinally. I believe it is collected in centres and sold into British territory, most pro- bably by the Rajas or their underlings, certainly not without the Rajas' consent. I do not think it is much used by the people themselves. About three years ago we tried to get the Rajas to agree to allow the drug to be exported under regular supervision, and a set of rules was drawn up for the purpose. These rules must have been subse- quent to the Bengal Government Resolution No. E. 115 Regarding the orders issued by the Bengal Government in September 1889, it was no doubt a mistake in fact to suppose that the Gurjat ganja was used entirely or mainly as a drink; but I do not think there was any mistake in the policy of that Resolution, because, though the Superintend- ent reported that the prohibition had been en- forced in eleven of the States, I do not believe that the enforcement was more than nominal. Even if a Raja agreed to prohibit, I do not believe he would carry out the arrangement. Therefore, believing this, though I have no personal know- ledge of what had occurred before 1890, I think that no real progress had been made. If I heard that greater success had attended similar prohi- bition in States of the Central Provinces, I should attribute it to the better supervision exercised in the Central Provinces, owing to the fact that they have a Political Agent who is much more in touch with the Rajas than the Superintendent of the Tributary Mahals can possibly be. I believe also that the Central Provinces Government exercises stricter supervision and more severe control over the proceedings of the Rajas than the Bengal Government allows the Superintendent to do. I understand that the Commissioner in the Central Provinces has authority to send for a Raja and reprimand and warn him regarding the mis- government of his State; whereas on our side this is not allowed, except in cases of open revolt. In my opinion, if the Government is to secure the Rajas against revolt as the consequence of misgovernment, there ought to be greater powers of supervision and control than there are at present. With these greater powers in the hands of the Superintendent the Rajas would be more amen- able to advice. And any advice which the Chiefs affected to accept, and any orders issued in accord- ance therewith, would also be much more easily given effect to and carried out if there were a political officer appointed to visit the States and be in constant touch with them as the Superin- tendent, Tributary Mahals, cannot possibly be. In excise matters the Rajas would become more amenable if such an arrangement were made. And as regards ganja, all that would be necessary would be to get the Rajas to order all the ganja intended for export to British territory to be brought together into a central depôt and to be sent only under pass. Such ganja would be sub- jected to an adequate duty on entering British territory. I should not interfere with internal consumption at all. The Raja would then be responsible that ganja was not exported from his territory without pass, that is to say, he would issue orders against any export except through the gola, and he would punish any attempt to evade such order. A smuggler would render him- self liable to punishment by his own Raja and the co-operation of the Raja would be secured. If this were effectually carried out, it would be sufficient. If the Rajas would agree to prohibit cultivation and accept our ganja, receiving the duty them- selves, as in the Central Provinces, that would be a better and simpler solution of the matter. The effect of the decision of the High Court and the Secretary of State declaring the Gurjat States to be foreign territory has been followed by the repeal of the Regulations which were previ- ously in force. On the matters provided for by Regulation, e.g., succession and settlement of boundary disputes, executive orders have been substituted, and no practical change in the rela- tions between the Rajas and the Superintendent has taken place, except that the Superintendent's authority has been weakened owing to the neces- sity for referring everything to Government. With regard to excise, there was no law or regula- tion in force in the States. The position of the Government in excise matters in relation to the States is affected by the Secretary of State's decision, inasmuch as the authority of the Superin- tendent has been weakened, and inasmuch as the Rajas are more independent in their tone. I cannot say whether it has actually been altered: that will depend on the terms of the sanads which are under consideration. So far as I remember, there is no special reference to excise matter in the proposed sanads, but they define generally the relatious between Government and the Rajas. I see no objection to the introduction of Rajshahi ganja into the States if the Gurjat ganja is prohibited. I am not prepared to say that 1 approve the opening of shops where none now exist. I have not formed any opinion as to the comparative strength and effects of the Rajshahi and Gurjat drugs. The introduction of a system of ganja excise involving the establishment of shops would tend to the reduction of consumption if the native drug were prohibited. There is no limit to the amount of their own ganja which the people of the Gurjats can obtain at present. I doubt if the opening of shops would increase con- sumption even if the drug supplied were of supe- rior quality, because the inhabitants of the Gurjats are satisfied with the commonest kinds of drugs and other articles. 5. Evidence of MR. A. W. B. POWER, Commissioner, Burdwan Division. As regards myself, I regret to say that I am not sufficiently acquainted with the subject to be able to give a personal opinion of value, and would prefer not to hazard any generalization on the evidence which has been collected. All I would remark is that during a varied mufassal experience extending over 26 years, the evils arising from ex- cessive use of ganja came prominently to my notice only in one isolated instance, some fifteen years ago, where temporary insanity accompanied with violence was ascribed to that cause; but I cannot now remember whether the supposition was verified. With regard to public associations, I beg to state that the Collectors in this division have not discovered the existence of any public association willing to adduce evidence in the matter. In fact there is no association in this division which deals with such subjects.
16 6. Evidence of MR. H. LUTTMAN-JOHNSON, Commissioner of Dacca. Oral evidence. I came out in December 1867, and have served in Bengal, Behar and Assam. I was only a year in Behar, and have chiefly experience of Assam and Bengal. Sylhet and Cachar are much the same as Eastern Bengal, though part of Assam. The Brahmaputra Valley practically constitutes Assam as contrasted with Bengal. I have been Secretary to the Chief Commissioner when he managed excise direct, and have also been Com- missioner of the Brahmaputra Valley; so I have considerable experience of the Assam side of the question. The problem may be viewed for Eastern Bengal and Sylhet and Cachar together on the one hand, and for the Assam Valley on the other hand. I have seen the hemp plant wild in Sylhet, Cachar, and Mymensingh, and all the districts of the Assam Valley and the Khasia hills; and I know it grows wild in the Naga Hills and Bhutan, because it is smuggled down. I should say that the wild growth is from seed accidentally sown. I judge this from its situation. I have seen it near villages in bunches and so on, but not actually in the jungles of Cachar or Assam. I have seen it rather in connection with habita- tions than in jungles; and I judge, therefore, that it grows from seed of imported ganja. I find that this view is stated in the last Excise Report for Assam. I have noticed it most in the waste spaces, especially near villages on the Grand Trunk Road through Assam in the Nowgong district, in tobacco fields in a village near Korabandar Ghat in the Kamrup district, and last cold weather, when out shooting in Mymensingh, I found twenty or thirty acres of it (more or less thick) in Thana Durgapur. These instances occur to me at present. But I have seen many other instances. In these cases I did not think it had been intentionally sown. I asked about it. The people said it was jungly, grown up of itself, and that they did not use it for anything. I have known of illicit cultivation in Assam. There were a good many cases discovered in the Golaghat sub-division and also in the Dibrugarh country. The cultivation was, as a rule, only of a few plants. In the Dibrugarh case there was not ganja by the acre, but there were many plants. All the people of the village seemed to be culti- vating. I have not known any systematic cul- tivation on a large scale; but agricultural culti- vation generally is much scattered in Assam; and I have known cases of cultivation of ganja on a small scale being discovered in remote places. I fancy the reason I do not remember many cases in Sylhet and Cachar is because we did not make any great effort to stop it or pay much attention to it. It is since I left that greater efforts have been made to stop unlicensed cultivation. In my opinion the prohibition of cultivation of ganja is effective both in Bengal and Assam. I think it has been effective without much harass- ing of the people. But you have only to stir up the police with a circular and hope of reward to give trouble. The cultivation which exists is trifling; but, on the other hand, a little ganja goes a long way. Cases of illicit growth are not very common; the cases that do occur often turn out not to be cases of cultivation, but merely accidental growth. Complaints by licensed ven- dors are very rare. The wild plant is not used for ganja, but the leaf is used for bhang. The ganja from the cultivation of the wild plant would be very inferior. I must have seen ganja pro- duced from this wild growth; but I cannot recall a case. I know no case of ganja prepared from the wild plant without cultivation. But I have seen it smoked. We experimented with it; it was not anything like excise ganja, but poor stuff. My general conclusion is that it is not feasible17 I cannot say whether ganja or alcohol is more connected with crime. But my experience leads me to say that in the Assam Valley districts it will be found that both these intoxicants are sometimes associated with crime, especially in tea gardens. There has been considerable increase in the taxation of ganja both here and in Assam. I do not think the limit has been reached. I cannot say precisely how the taxation of ganja com- pares with that of other intoxicants. But I think it could still be increased. I have, how- ever, no definite proposals to make. I do not think there is much smuggling of excise ganja. Government keeps careful watch over stuff kept in the local golas, of which Gov- ernment keeps one of the keys. 7. Evidence of MR. P. NOLAN, Commissioner, Rajshahi Division. There can be no doubt that the practice of smoking ganja is regarded with disfavour by the upper classes of this division, while drinking bhang on certain occasions is among them an honoured custom. The distinction thus made does not, however, rest on an impartial judgment formed after a full investigation of the effects of the two practices. The extent to which ganja may be injurious is not at present known, and we must trust to the present inquiry to elicit the real facts. Ganja smoking is despised by the well-to-do, because its consumption is confined to the poor who can afford no other indulgence, just as drink- ing gin in a public house is looked down on by gentlemen who take champagne and liquors in clubs. But the sentiment is stronger here, for in this land of caste, more than any other, the well- to-do feel a repulsion for any food or stimulant used exclusively by those beneath them in the social scale. Opium is certainly more injurious than ganja, and yet its use excites no such aversion, as it is taken by the rich. Apart from this class prejudice, that is among the working classes themselves, there is no more antipathy to ganja, than there is, in England, to strong tobacco. It is regarded as a form of smoking. It would probably be possible to put a stop to the supply of ganja, as the crop cannot easily be grown without observation. But the use of bhang cannot be prevented, because the plant grows wild everywhere. There are many forms of self- indulgence open to abuse; and it is a question for investigation whether men inclined to intemper- ance, when stopped from using a particular drug, will not take to some other evil practice. Oral evidence. Question 1.18 I have not studied the question of production or cultivation in other provinces. Nor have I con- sidered the question of prohibiting production elsewhere than at the centre. But the experience of Bengal shows this to be feasible. I do not express any opinion at present as to total prohibition. That is the question now under trial before the Commission. I have observed a proposal in the replies to the Commission's questions by the officer in charge of the Rajshahi tract, that Government should pur- chase the ganja from the cultivator, store it, and distribute it to the distant districts where it is con- sumed. If this proposal is under the serious con- sideration of the Commission, I desire to record an opinion against it. It would be impossible for Government to purchase from the cultivators as private dealers do. The experience gained by the State in regard to opium, and by planters in regard to indigo shows that when there is only one pur- chaser in the field, he must make his arrangements before the crop is grown on a system of contract and advances. I do not think it desirable to undertake such a business in regard to a commod- ity for which there is so little demand, merely for the object of intercepting the moderate profits now made by the wholesale dealers. The system by which the right of wholesale vend is put up to auction with the condition that the wholesale dealer shall sell to the retail dealer at a fixed price is new to me, and I am not pre- pared to give an opinion on it at such short notice. Appendix to MR. NOLAN'S evidence. The consumption of ganja is much smaller than is popularly supposed. All Bengal, Assam, and a part of the North-West Provinces, with a population of about 80,000,000, is supplied from an area of 800 acres, the standard size of a single tea garden. The gross amount grown averages 8,000 maunds a year; but much of this is wasted before issue, so that duty was paid last year on 5,451 maunds only. Even of this a considerable part consists of twigs, separated before consump- tion, so that the quantity smoked cannot exceed 4,000 maunds. If every one smoked, the allow- ance a day for the individual would be 1/2281 part of a tola, or the twelfth part of a grain. At the rate of a tola a day, which tobacco-smokers would think moderate, 36,000 persons would con- sume all the ganja produced for 80,000,000. It follows from these figures that the habit must be rare or the doses taken hom19 22. Excised charas is used in Bengal. I have never heard of charas other than excise charas being used; even in Orissa the drug produced in the Tributary States is not, so far as I am aware, smuggled into Orissa in this form. 23. I have never heard of such a case; but it is alleged to be so in the Excise Manual. 24. The priests of the temple of Jagannath at Puri, and the worshippers, when they visit the shrine, are addicted to the use of bhang. 25. There has been no marked increase or de- crease in Orissa; exciseable ganja has been less consumed in Orissa since the restriction on its cultivation in the Gurjat States has been with- drawn; but Gurjat ganja doubtless accounts forthis. 26. I am unable to form an estimate. 27. All classes. I find it impossible to say what leads to such a practice: religion is undoubtedly a factor. 28. I do not know. 29. Ordinarily tobacco, ghi, or milk, and sugar in the case of majum and ganja. I have never heard of dhatura being added. The other ingredients are added to form a con- fection, add flavour, and increase its strength. I have never heard of bhang massala being sold. 30. In solitude and in company. All drugs are used mainly by the male sex, and chiefly by the middle-aged and old. I believe it to be un- known for children to take any form of the drug. 31. With regard to the use of all forms of the drug, it is believed to be difficult to break off the habit, and there is a tendency for its use to become excessive. 32. I do not know precisely the customs, beyond that Snivite devotees and the priests of Jagannath use ganja and bhang respectively on religious grounds, and that one or the other is consumed by the laity at certain religious festivals, e. g., Bejoy Dasami. The use of the drugs cannot, I think, in this connection be said to be generally excessive; it doubtless would conduce to the formation of the habit in some cases. 33. The habit of taking any of these drugs in excess is regarded with disfavour. I do not think that the feeling extends to their moderate use; it is true the word "ganjari" is opprobrious as applied to an individual, but, I believe, in the same sense that drunkard or sot is similarly applied to those who exceed in strong drink, and is inapplicable to moderate consumers of alcohol. I attribute the sentiment to the evil results of the habit which affects body, mind and morals20 62. It is already controlled, as far as possible, in Bengal, Behar and Orissa, though I doubt whether the control is effectual. In the Gurjats it is uncontrolled, and could not be controlled. 63. I have no objection. 64. None. 65. I believe it to be reasonable. 66. Undoubtedly each class of ganja contains a different proportion of intoxicating properties as compared with its bulk. Whether Gurjat ganja should be taxed as at present less than Rajshahi appears questionable; but the evidence on the subject is conflicting. 67. None. 68. None in Orissa so far as I am aware. 69. Such are the orders of Government, and I believe that they are obeyed. Excise Officers make local inquiries. I think local opinion should be considered in these matters. 70. The smuggling of ganja from the Tributary Mahals is now under consideration of Government. I believe that it is impracticable to prevent its cultivation owing to the nature of the country, and there are political obstacles to this being done. All that the British Government can do is to pre- vent its import. Should any policy of suppressing the use of the hemp drug be adopted, the Tributary States of Orissa will always afford facilities for smuggling, which will, I think, be beyond the power of the British Government to check. Oral evidence. Question 1.21 maunds of licit ganja within the past six months; and as this increase has been obtained by simply checking the casual smuggling by pilgrims, it may safely be assumed that, were all smuggling put a stop to, at least 50 maunds of licit ganja would be required to take the place of the ganja now smuggled. "From the last Excise Administration Report I find that the average consumption of ganja in this district for 1880-1885 was 122 maunds, of which 25 maunds were Gurjati. The stoppage of sale of Gurjati ganja led to a falling off coresponding to this 25 maunds as in 1885-86; only 105 maunds of licit ganja was consumed, and it may safely be said that the result of the stoppage of the sale was simply to cause an increase in smuggling of 25 maunds a year, and the smuggling trade must be an extensive one if it could increase so as to meet one-fourth of the annual consumption in the course of one year." I cannot say that Mr. Metcalfe's is an exag- gerated estimate; but I cannot see now where so much illicit ganja comes from. I am not able to say how much ganja is grown in the States. I have myself not seen much of it. I should be inclined to accept the opinion of Narayan Chandra Naik as to the extent of the cultivation there at present. He has much experience of these States. He was examined before the Commission yesterday (witness No. 73). Cultivation of ganja within three miles of our border was prohibited in 1878, and importation of Gurjat ganja in 1882. The former order was withdrawn in 1889, and the latter in 1892. In 1882 there was a jump of thirty maunds in the Cuttack District in the consumption of excise ganja, and there was a marked decrease in 1891- 92. The alterations in duty, which occurred mean- time (especially in 1887-88 and 1889-90), have to be borne in mind; but the figures undoubtedly point to the extensive use of Gurjat ganja. The districts of Puri and Balasore are said not to be affected by the Gurjat ganja so much as Cuttack. Balasore people are said to prefer Rajshahi ganja. I cannot explain the figures for Puri, which seem to indicate that it is also not affected by Gurjat ganja. I know nothing personally regarding the smuggling into Puri from Madras; but I know there has been much correspondence regarding it. The smuggling of Gurjat ganja, which is known to exist, certainly requires a remedy. I have considered the matter carefully. I do not think we can expect the States to provide a preventive service. We must do it on our side; nor do I think the Rajas have the establishment or energy to prevent smuggling. I therefore said in my answer No. 59 that the only remedy was to strengthen greatly the preventive force. But, as I have shown in my answer No. 70, this does not appear to me to be a perfectly efficient method. You may do something, but I do not see how over such a border you can hope to succeed I see no efficient method, except as was done before, going to the fountain-head and getting the Rajas enlisted in our system. There was a proposal to have a licensing of cultivation in the States by the Rajas and ad- mission of the ganja into British territory as excise ganja under regulations similar to those regarding Rajshahi ganja. I do not think this would succeed. For the success of the plan would depend on the efficiency of the Raja's arrange- ments. The third method is to call on the Rajas to prohibit growth, and get them to take their ganja supplies from Government. I was not aware that this has been done in the Feudatory States of the Central Provinces, and that these States are now carrying out this system. I see no difficulty in this proposal except the difficulty of preventing the order of the Raja, or his promise to issue the order, remaining a dead-letter. If the Rajas themselves agree, there is, of course, no objection whatever to the consumer in their States being taxed as consumers are in our territory. But it would have to be considered how far it would be wise politically to tax the excitable tribes, such as Khonds, Bhunyas, and Santhals. I cannot say how far these tribes use the drug. I have not had opportunity of inquiring. In Mohurbhunj, where the prohibition was carried out and excise ganja used, there are many Santhals. This would indicate that there was no difficulty with them. None of the other States that agreed are remark- able for these aboriginal tribes; but they all have them to some degree. *Vide his letter No. 1196, dated 22nd July 1886. 22 goes a long way. We have seen this in the effect of the three-mile order. I believe, therefore, that there would be great effect, but not a rigid system at once. I believe a persistent policy would soon effect all that is desired. I believe it would be much better to have a persistent policy than a policy of vacillation, as in the past, which is perhaps inseparable from a struggle against smuggling. 9. Evidence of MR. J. C. PRICE, Magistrate and Collector, Rajshahi. 1. I have served 32 years in Bengal, having been employed in no less than 14 different dis- tricts of the province; in some of them I have served more than once. For the last four years I have been District Officer in Rajshahi, where I have had the supervision of the Ganja Mahal. 2. The definitions in Dr. Prain's report may be accepted. The local names are (1) bhang or siddhi, (2) charas, and (3) ganja. Rolling by the hand is also applied in the manufacture of round ganja, besides rolling under foot. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in all districts of Bengal. It is to be seen growing in the Ganja Office compound at Naogaon: most pro- bably the seeds of plants brought to the office for weighment have fallen off and germinated. There is scarcely a place where it does not grow wild to a smaller or larger extent. In the chatars, i.e.,manufacturing grounds and adjacent places, and in waste lands on the outskirts of villages and around dwelling-houses in the ganja tract of Rajshahi, the growth of wild bhang is frequently noticed. 4. Bhang and ganja are the only names I know to be used in reference to the plant. 5. The wild hemp affects a high and compara- tively dry site. No special conditions of climate or rainfall, or elevation above sea level, appear to be necessary, as it is seen to grow everywhere in Bengal. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily scattered. Sometimes in this district half-a-dozen plants may be seen growing together. But in the ganja-producing tract even a hundred plants may be occasionally noticed in one locality. 7. Yes; for production of ganja in Naogaon, a sub-division of the Rajshahi District, and parts of Bogra and Dinajpur that are adjacent. The area cultivated annually averages 800 acres, the produce being about 8,000 maunds in quantity. Not for charas; the little charas that adheres to the soles of the feet and to the hands during manufacture of ganja is washed off, as the quantity of it that might be scraped off would be inappreci- ably small. 8. There has been no appreciable increase or decrease. I give the figures for the last five years, and the quantities produced23 (b) Charas is very little, if at all, con- sumed in this district, and is manufactured, I understand, entirely in Nepal and some parts of the North-Western Provinces, from where it is imported into Calcutta and other consuming dis- tricts under cover of an import pass No. 121 issued by the Collector, and distributed to places where it is in demand. The importer brings the quantity passed by the Collector, and duty upon it is realised at R8 per seer, half before the issue of pass and half after the charas arrives. Bhang, I understand, can be and is used by many persons in every district of Bengal. The leaves of the wild plant are taken, dried and pounded, and then mixed with sugar and water, and taken in a draught. Any one can make this "sherbet" for himself. For this kind of use the Bhagalpur and Monghyr bhang is generally preferred. For purposes of taxation these dried leaves are called siddhi. A licensed vendor, authorized to sell, collects the leaves in the presence of an excise officer deputed by the Collector to attend when an application to be allowed to collect bhang is made to him. Duty is paid at 8 annas a seer according to weight. In siddhi-consuming districts the im- porter, a licensed vendor, stores siddhi in a ware- house, and pays duty for the quantity he takes out. There is no appreciable consumption of siddhi in Rajshahi. 15. I can speak with authority only of ganja, and this can be produced from the cultivated plant only. Ganja is used only for smoking, generally with an admixture of tobacco24 21. In this district flat ganja is principally smoked. In Calcutta and the metropolitan dis- tricts, and in Orissa, I understand round ganja is in demand. In Eastern Bengal people affect flat ganja mostly. I give particulars of the export of the different kinds to the different districts (Appendix A).* It is with ganja as with tobacco. The man who has learnt to smoke latakia will stick to it; a man accustomed to bird's-eye will smoke none other. These varieties would be despised by the common sailor, who thinks Limerick Twist the only tobacco fit to smoke. A taste once formed in this direction rarely alters; so it is with ganja. The man or boy who has learnt to smoke with flat keeps to flat; another whom his father or a friend taught to smoke round affects round. Chur is preferred to the other two because it is more free from stalk and is more potent; but as it is made from both flat and round, it is mere caprice or fancy which will induce a man to smoke chur instead of the other two varieties. Chur is cleaner and of course more expensive, and goes further. 22. I have nothing to say. 23. No. 24. I cannot say. I have no good inform- ation; but a very small proportion, 1 in 500, will be a habitual drinker or eater of bhang: he will be found principally amongst bairagies, sanyasis, fakirs, who wander about the country. 25. I can speak only of ganja. Smoking ganja is certainly not on the increase. There is no appreciable difference in the quantity exported to the different districts from Naogaon. The largest differences are found in Shahabad, Darbhanga, Hazaribagh. From the detail export list* submitted herewith, it will be seen there has not been very great in- crease in export to any district. But export to all districts of the Patna Division is very large as compared with the export to most other districts in Bengal. The reason for this large export is explained by the fact that from there, that is, Behar, certain quantities are transported to the North-Western Provinces. 26. It is difficult for me to give figures which will carry conviction to the minds of others; but I should say habitual excessive consumers and oc- casional excessive consumers of ganja are very few25 4,000 or 5,000 people in this district who would perhaps feel aggrieved if their supply of ganja was stopped. 35. Of ganja with the greatest ease. Pro- hibit the cultivation altogether and no ganja could possibly be produced in Naogaon; or enforce strictly the various restrictions already prescribed with regard to the cultivation, manu- facture and storage of ganja, and the cultiva- tors would gradually throw up the cultivation of the plant in disgust and betake themselves to the cultivation of jute and sugarcane. I may add that the profits from sugarcane now equal, if they do not exceed, those from ganja; and there is no inquisitorial supervision connected with the cultivation of the former. There would be no illicit consumption, because there would be no ganja at all. Ganja cannot be cultivated secretly by a cultivator. If it were so cultivated, every one would know all about it. Neighbours would turn informers to get the reward which would be offered. The prohibition of the use of ganja would occasion much discontent among the con- sumers; but such discontent could not in any case amount to a political danger. I do not think there would be any recourse to alcoholic stimulants in case of the prohibition of the use of ganja, because the influence of alcohol is so different from that of ganja. Excessive indul- gence in alcohol makes a man generally noisy and boisterous. Ganja renders him quiet and sedate, sometimes morose and sullen, occasionally irritable with a decided disinclination to be disturbed. Recourse to opium would not follow, for opium is too expensive. 36. There is no reason. 37. I do not know anything about charas- smoking. 38. They are all from the same plant, the method of manufacture only being different as between flat and round, and there cannot be any difference in effects. 39. I am acquainted only with ganja, and that is never eaten but smoked. I cannot tell. 40. Not that I know of. 41. The moderate use of ganja in smoking is said to be beneficial, because (a) it promotes diges- tion and acts like a tonic; because (b) it gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, and alleviates the sense of fatigue; because (c) it prevents and cures dysentery and bowel com- plaints. Only labouring men use ganja habitually in moderation in this way, and very few even of this class. 42 to 57. I believe the moderate use of ganja in smoking to be harmless, because, in my 32 years' experience of Bengal, I have never come across a single instance of the injurious effects of such ganja-smoking. Surely if ganja-smoking was so baneful, and so widespread as many people wish to make out, there would be numerous examples to be met with in every large town, and especially in the hospitals maintained therein. I do not remember to have ever been made acquaint- ed with a single case. I believe moderate con- sumers of ganja to be inoffensive to their neighbours if left alone; if disturbed, I am told they are very irritable. About the effects of ganja-smoking, immediate or remote, I can say nothing. I have no personal experience. I could speak only from hearsay, and there must be many people able to speak of the effects of ganja- smoking at first hand: I believe, principally because I have not met with a single instance in my long service, that excessive ganja-smoking is rare26 were recognised, and the same duty was levied for both. A different rate of duty in Orissa Division was of later introduction, and it is now as follows: Rs. 4 1/2 for flat, Rs. 6 for round, and Rs. 6 1/2 for chur. Compelling cultivators to build secure store-houses would check pilferage and consequent smuggling, and raising the duty on chur would have the effect of limiting the manufacture of chur ganja, which acts detrimentally to the Government revenue owing to the abstraction of the woody portion. 60. I am quite satisfied that the present method of cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant and the process of its manufacture are sufficiently con- trolled. At the same time I am quite prepared to admit that improved systems of manufacture could be introduced. It is possible that the manufac- tured ganja could be made up into cakes, like tobacco; but I can give no advice in this matter, not having the necessary information or know- ledge. 61. No charas is produced in Bengal. 62. No; the plant is not cultivated, but growswild. 63. I have no objections, and I cannot indicate any improvements. 64. I have no objections. 65. I think the taxation of ganja is reasonable with reference to siddhi and charas, and with re- ference to alcoholic and other intoxicants. 66. It is proper that there should be different rates of taxation, as at present, for the different kinds of ganja. The chur has not any or very little admixture of the woody portion of the twigs; while round has a large admixture and flat a larger still. Only the flowery portion, which con- tains the resinous stimulating matter, is used in smoking, and this alone should be taxed. Ganja is grown in one place only in Bengal, in and around Naogaon of the Rajshahi district. 67. No. 68. There are no such houses or licensed shops. I do not think that I would allow them, because I think the consumption would be stimulated. But at the same time there is no doubt that many a ganja smoker, especially a traveller or way-farer, takes his smoke in the shop where he buys the ganja. Very often the shopman invites a smoke from the shop chillum to show the good quality of his ganja. 69. Yes, especially in municipalities, where the Commissioners are consulted. There is no public opinion outside municipali- ties; but I never open a new shop in the interior without consulting the residents. 70. I have nothing to say. Oral evidence. Question 3.27 the drug has done for him." I have seen evil effects of alcohol. I knew one man who cut his throat in delirium tremens. I have known several cases of the evil effects of alcohol, not many, but certainly some among natives. I cannot explain why my experience of ganja should differ from what is frequently asserted. It may be unique. But it is my experience. I have no doubt that disease and other evil things which have no sort of connection with ganja are often attributed to it. It is natural to cry down the poor man's stimulant. The rich men and leaders of society do not use it. Question 35.28 Therefore the most complete system would be to have a public gola. There are none provided. I do not recommend them, because the custody of the stuff would be in the hands of Government officers and subordinates. They would not take care of the stuff as the owners would. No doubt a well-built Government gola would be safer both from vermin and from abstraction than the houses of the cultivators. I do not think there would be any great difficulty if there were several Govern- ment golas situated in central places; but I do not think the cultivators would view the change with favour. They would require to have access to the stuff from time to time. If the stuff were weighed and registered and put in a secure place, the cultivator would not want to see it often. He would want to see it two or three times a week in wet weather. I see no great objection to the plan. The concentration of the market would also be a great advantage. The initial expense is a great objection, unless it is believed that much is ab- stracted. I do not think there is much pilfering; but I have no data of course. I do not think the expenditure on buildings and establishment would be recouped by the prevention of such pilfering as takes place. At the same time you cannot have a perfect system without Government golas. At present some believe that wholesale vendors make high profits, and that retail vendors are in the dark when bidding at auction owing to the ignorance of what they will have to pay for the stuff. I do not think myself that the wholesale vendor has too much profit in view of his expenses and the risks of the trade, because I have estimat- ed that his net profits are only from Rs. 10. to Rs. 15 a maund on a average throughout the province. His expenses are in transport, buildings and estab- lishments, and the risk of expenditure on the duty on waste above the allowed percentage is great. As to the retail vendor, of course he does not know what price he has to pay for the stuff, but it is a speculation, and I see no reason why Government should interfere. He knows his own business. There is nothing to prevent a retail vendor going to Naogaon to buy ganja if he has a wholesale gola in the importing district. He must have this, or where can he take the ganja ? A retail vendor, to deal direct with the cultivator, must become also a wholesale vendor. And I have no doubt that there are cases where the wholesale dealer has the monopoly of the retail trade as well, i.e.,where the whole ganja trade is in the hands of a syn- dicate. I have my attention drawn to Rule 27 of Sec- tion XX of the Manual. But it contemplates a warehouse. I have no doubt this means a wholesale storehouse in the importing district. Therefore the retail vendor must be a wholesale vendor before he can purchase direct. The retail dealer can go to any wholesale dealer. At the head-quarters of my district there are three wholesale dealers. There would thus be competition. This is, of course, liable to combination. I think the retail vendor can go to the wholesale dealer of any district. This is contemplated by Rule 60 of Section XX of the Manual. The income from retail licenses has increased steadily. This indicates that the retail licensee makes a profit. I do not think that they are at the mercy of the wholesale dealers, because combination would be difficult among the wholesale vendors of a district. And in any case I see no reason for interference. The rise in retail license fees is due, no doubt, really in large measure to the rise in the price charged for the drug to consumers. At the same time the retail vendors are in the dark as to the price of the drug when they bid; and the wholesale vendors have better opportunities of knowing what the price will be than the retail vendors can have. For it is the wholesale vendors who go to the ganja-producing tracts and do business there. The present system affords no criterion of the profits received by the wholesale vendor, except by particular enquiry in each case as to prices and expenses. At present wholesale goladars are appointed on application. I do not think any one would be refused who made satisfactory arrange- ments. I know in my district there are eight; and I should say that was a very small number as compared with other districts. All the work could be done by one man if he had a monopoly. Explanatory statement submitted by MR. PRICE. I said in my evidence that the cultivators would view the introduction of the system of public golas into the ganja tract with disfavour; they would want to inspect and exhibit their stocks three or four times a week. They would want this for some time at first, in their desire to dispose of their stocks. Intending purchasers would not buy without inspection, and it is quite possible that on many days the ganja would be required to be exhibited several times a day to intending purchasers. In any case I am quite sure that a cultivator would wish to view his stock very much oftener than twice or thrice a week when it is stored in a public gola. I omitted to mention this cause of constant inspection when I was being examined. 10. Evidence of MR. F. H. BARROW, Magistrate and Collector of Bankura. 1. The answers are prepared chiefly by Babu Bhuban Mohan Raha, a retired Deputy Collector, who long held charge of the Excise Department in this district. 2. The definitions of ganja, siddhi or bhang and charas given in the question apply to this district. In this district only two kinds of ganja, viz.,round and chur, are consumed. 3. The spontaneous growth of the hemp plant is not allowed in this district; sometimes it grows spontaneously if seeds fall in moist places; but such instances are very rare. It grows wild and abundantly in the districts of Dacca and Faridpur, and similar districts of which the soil is damp. 4. The wild plant which grows here is called siddhi. Only one kind of wild plant grows. 5. A damp climate and moist soil are favourable to the growth of the wild hemp plant. 6. Ordinarily the growth of the wild hemp is dense. This remark applies to the districts where it grows. Not of course to this, where it grows only sporadically. 7 to 13. Do not apply to this district. The hemp plant for ganja is not cultivated in this
29 district; but in some places it grows wild and the leaves are generally used as bhang. Wild hemp is not cultivated in this district for the produc- tion of ganja. It would be penal to do so. 14. Ganja and charas are not prepared in this district. It is suspected that in a very few in- stances leaves of wild hemp plant are used as bhang. But the consumption of the so prepared bhang is very inconsiderable. 15. The leaves of wild hemp plants are con- sumed after being ground into a paste and then dissolved in water and drunk. 16. Here bhang is not generally prepared by the people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. On enquiry made it appears that charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant, but ganja of very inferior quality may sometimes be prepared. 17. Not applicable to this district. 18. Ganja, charas and bhang do deteriorate by keeping. They quite lose their effect after two years; with ordinary care they can be kept good for one year. By long keeping they lose the resinous matter and consequently their narcotic power; deterioration after two years can- not be prevented by any special measure. 19. As far as this district is concerned, ganja is used only for smoking. Charas is very rarely used in this district, and only by those who have purchased it elsewhere within the prescribed limits. 20. The ganja smokers of this district may be classified as follows:30 consort, Kali or Durga, a very large quantity of ganja is consumed. These ceremonies are Siva- chaturdasi, Chait-sankranti or Sivagajan. These two religious ceremonies are well known and require no description. In this district Pous-sankranti day, i.e., the last day of the month of Pous, is usually spent by the people in hunting excursions, and a large quantity of ganja is consumed on such occasions. There are also some religious ceremonies in this district called Ahoratra, which lasts for a day and night; Chabhisprahar which lasts for 3 days and 3 nights; and Pancharatra which lasts for 5 days and 5 nights. In these ceremonies large crowds of Baisnabs assemble and recite vociferously the names of "Radha Govinda" continuously with- out any intermission whatever during the time the ceremony is to continue. They divide them- selves into parties, and when the energy of one party is exhausted, its place is taken by another. In the above ceremonies ganja is consumed rather excessively. In the above ceremonies, both social and religi- ous, the consumption of ganja is not considered essential. It sometimes leads to the formation of the habit. The consumption of bhang is very considerable on the third or Nabami day of the Durga Puja, when a cup of bhang is drunk by almost every Hindu. On the last day of Durga Puja, after the idols are thrown into the water, it is customary for the Hindus to see their friends and relatives and embrace them; and when visitors come, it is usual for the owner of the house to offer them a cup of bhang and sweetmeats for tiffin. 33. The consumption of these drugs, especially that of ganja, is looked down on. A ganja smoker is generally in bad repute, the reason being pro- bably that the consumption of it excites low pro- pensities and makes a man violent in temper. The hemp plant is not worshipped in this district. 34. The prohibition of the consumption of any of these drugs by people of all classes who use it will lead to much privation. They would lose appetite their food would not be easily digested, and they would feel a sort of aching sensation all over their body. 35. It would scarcely be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs. The prohibition would certainly lead to smuggling and occasion serious discontent among consumers; but such dis- content would not amount to political danger in this district. But the prohibition would be followed probably by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. No; alcohol is dearer than these drugs, and is not being substituted for any of them. On the contrary alcohol is at present, on account of its dearness, finding a substitute in ganja. 37. Charas is not practised in this district, except very rarely. It is said, however, that it produces a very mild effect on the smokers and induces sleep. On the other hand, ganja-smoking affects the mind, and excessive indulgence in it makes a man violent in temper and sometimes insane. 38. Of three kinds of ganja, flat is not used in this district. Round and chur produce the same sort of effect on consumers, the only difference being that the chur ganja is more powerful and produces inebriation more rapidly, the reason being that the fragments which constitute chur ganja contain more resinous matter. Questions 39 to 57 have been answered by Dr. Mukerji as follows:31 for want of subsequent gratification, and it would be a pity to deprive a habitual moderate consumer of his dose when it is so beneficial to him without any marked after-effect. 45. It does not. Nor does it impair constitu- tion, cause any disease, impair moral sense, or insanity, permanent or temporary. 46. But when taken in excess temporarily or habit- ually, it may cause those constitutional, moral or intellectual derangements as alluded to above. I have seen several cases of insanity principally due to ganja smoking, specially in cases where intellect was weak, but in almost all such cases I found the in- sanity to be of a temporary nature, which under pro- per care and restraint passes off in course of time. Some of these insanes, when under observation, often ask for ganja or, in its absence, for tobacco. There are many cases seen who owing to excessive habitual use of ganja suffer from chronic dysentery, asthma or bronchitis, while its moderate use gene- rally cures these ailments. 47 and 48. Not any that I am aware of, whether in the case of moderate or immoderate consumers. On the contrary, I have seen many children of very bright intellect and of excellent parts, though their fathers were or are inveterate consumers. 49 and 50. Yes, but the immoderate use generally causes impotency. I have heard many prostitutes use this drug as an aphrodisiac when they cannot procure alcohol, and in such cases it is liable to be used in excess occasionally. 51 and 52. I have not heard of any crime committed by moderate consumers. But the excessive use causes homicidal tendency, quarrel- someness, and induces consumers to commit many rash acts, but seldom to commit theft. But siddhi or charas, even when taken in excess, does not induce consumers to commit any rash act. They in such cases induce laziness, and at the worst confine the consumers to their beds. 53 and 54. Not so as in the case of alcohol. But there have been instances of habitual ganja smokers, who, if occasion requires, take the drug a little in excess to fortify themselves with a view to taking revenge upon their adversaries. 55. Yes; ganja alone is used with the admix- ture of dhatura, nux vomica, and of both, for the purpose of committing road-poisoning, and in- stances are not wanting to show that complete stupefaction has been induced or even death has occurred. 56. Dhatura is admixtured to siddhi or ganja to increase their intoxicating or even stupefying power. Siddhi or ganja is thus used by the people for their own use, with a view to securing greater pleasure. Ganja with dhatura, or with nux vomica, or with both, given generally in excess, for administration to others with a criminal motive when some object is to be gained from the stupefaction of the victims. Unpleasant effects have also resulted from one of such admixtures when given to friends simply for fun. 57. I have not seen or heard of ganja or charas being eaten or drunk. 58. The present system of excise administration in respect of hemp drugs seems working well, and no change is necessary. 60. Ganja is not produced in this district. 61. Charas is not produced in this district. 62. In this district hemp plant for the produc- tion of bhang grows wild in a very few places and to a very limited extent. It is not feasible to control the growth of such plants. Any attempt to restrict the growth would give rise to discon- tent without producing any beneficial effect. 63. There is no objection to the present system of a wholesale/b retail vend of ganja/2 charas./3 bhang. 64. No objection. 65. The taxation of 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang is reasonable with re- ference to each other and to alcohol or other in- toxicants. 66. Yes. It is necessary that there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja, and such different rates for different kinds of ganja produced in Bengal prevail here. Ganja grown in any other province is not imported into this district. 67. No; there is no objection to the present method of taxing 1 ganja./2 charas./3 bhang. 68. There are licensed shops in this district for the sale of ganja and bhang, but not for their pre- parations. There is no shop in this district for the vend of charas. There is in this district an adequate number of shops, and no increase is called for. 69. The wishes of the people are generally consulted and considered before a shop is opened in any locality, the enquiry being generally made either by the Excise Deputy Collector or by local police. 70. Hemp drugs are neither imported nor smuggled into this district from Native States, Duty is really paid in respect to the ganja and other hemp drugs used in this district. Untaxed drugs are not used. 11. Evidence of MR. F. H. B. SKRINE, Magistrate and Collector of Bhagalpur. 1. These replies have in part been suggested by the local Excise Deputy Collector, Babu Nobin Chandar Kar, who has two years' experience here. My own knowledge has also been freely drawn on. 2. Yes. They a re known as bhang, charas and ganja, but charas is not smoked in this district. Ganja is again classified as flat, round, and chur. 3. Bhang grows in profusion wild, and it is impossible to check its use without adopting in- quisitorial methods and incurring large expense. 4. Siddhi and bhang, yes. 5. Alluvial land is the best soil for the growth of wild bhang. 6. Generally very dense. 7. Hemp is not cultivated. 13. The cultivation is restricted to one tract on the borders of the Rajshahi and Bogra districts. 14. Bhang is made from the wild plants. The average production is estimated at 200 to 300 maunds a year.
32 15. When the plants have attained a height of 2 to 3 feet, they are cut and sun-dried. They are then beaten with sticks to separate the leaves from the twigs. The dried leaves constitute bhang, and it is used either as the basis of an in- fusion or a sweetmeat. It is not smoked. 16. It is made generally by excise vendors at their homes. Yes, it can be prepared from any species of hemp. 17. Bhang is usually made by persons who have excise licenses. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by long keep- ing. They dry up and lose their power of intoxi- cation. Deterioration arises from damp, the ravages of rats and the length of time during which the drug is stored. If tin-lined air-tight boxes are used, the drug can be kept for years. 19. No charas is consumed in this district. In rare cases it is chewed by ascetics, but it causes vomiting. Oil is extracted from ganja and used in medicine. 20. The labouring classes are the largest con- sumers of ganja; but debauchees of all ranks and public women also use it. Hindu fakirs are often greatly addicted to it. 21. Flat ganja is preferred as containing less dust and twigs than round, but there is really very little choice. 22. No charas used in this district. 23. Not known. 24. Kayasthas, Brahmins, Kshetriyas and Mar- waris consume bhang as a sweetmeat or infusion, generally the latter. 25. On the decrease33 It is not taken as an inducement to commit hein- ous crimes. They are used by habitual criminals, but I do not think as a stimulus to crime. 53. No. 54. Bhang or ganja taken in any quantity rare- ly makes a man violent. 55. Sometimes complete stupefication may be effected by the use of ganja in persons unaccus- tomed to it. Opium is also sometimes mixed with it for this purpose. 56. Not known. 57. See above. 58. It works well on the whole; but, like all institutions, it is capable of improvement. 59. If the use of ganja is to be tolerated, I should prefer it issued from governmental ware- houses to retailers, the price being periodically raised or lowered with the demand. The present system of levying duty and transit expenses is cumbrous and open to fraud. 60. Not produced. 61. No charas produced. 62. The cultivation of bhang cannot be con- trolled. 63. See above, answer 59. 64. Exports to other provinces should be cer- tainly allowed. 65. I do not see any substantial difference be- tween taxation on ganja and taxation on spirits and tobacco. Civilised governments have all agreed that intoxicants are proper subjects for taxation; and prohibition is opposed to the modern spirit as well as to racial progress. It is only the human weeds whose decay is a gain to the race who succumb. I am at one with Bishop Magee, who said that he would rather see his countrymen drunk and free; and I abhor the principles and tactics of the so-called temperance fanatics. 66. No. 67. See answer 59. 68. Yes; consumption on the premises should not be allowed. Men smoking there are nuisances. 69. Neighbours are generally consulted, and I think this is sufficient. 70. Yes; Nepal ganja is smuggled into this district, and affects the sale of the drug here. This practice should be stopped. The border shops suffer much from smuggling. Oral evidence. Question 1.34 production of bhang. I have seen the wild hemp plant in flower. It seems to me to resemble that of the cultivated plant, but in miniature. The wild plant is much smaller than the cultivated plant. Question 17.35 18. Ganja only deteriorates by keeping, but neither bhang nor charas. Yes, ganja loses its resinous substance after about two years, its rapid deterioration being due to its susceptibility to dampness. It can be kept in a good condition if protected from dampness. 19. Ganja and charas are generally used for smoking purposes. In Eastern Districts majum, which is a preparation of ganja and some sweets, is eaten. 20. Lower classes generally smoke ganja. Charas is rarely used. Most of the Sanyasis and mendicants, day-labourers, and up-country palki bearers generally use ganja. 21. Flat is prepared for smoking. 22. None here. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. In Behar respectable people drink bhang daily as a luxury; in Bengal, it is used by all classes, specially the middle class. In Bengal people drink bhang at the time of some religious festival. Regular bhang eaters are few and far between. Bhang is eaten very rarely, but cooked. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase. The reason for increase in consumption here is that the people of this district shew likeness to ganja in preference to drink, the consequence being the consumption of ganja increases with the decline of that of country liquor. 26. The approximate figure for ganja will be this36 68. Yes. It is better that ganja should be consumed as we do tobacco, not in shops. Ganja shops are apt to develop into places for the con- coction of crime. 69. No. A shop is opened where Collector thinks that it would be paying. I do not think it is necessary to consult local opinion in this matter, for I don't believe there is any public opinion on the subject. 70. None. 13. Evidence of MR. H. C. WILLIAMS,* Magistrate and Collector of Darbhanga. Oral evidence. I have been over twenty-two years in the service, I was twelve years in Assam (including two years on furlough.) This was after seven years in the Central Provinces. Since leaving Assam I have been three years in Bengal. In Assam, I was Assistant Commissioner in Cachar, Deputy Commissioner in the Darrang District, and then for four and a half years Inspector-General of Police, Excise Commissioner, etc. Question 5.37 14. Evidence of MR. G. STEVENSON, Magistrate and Collector of Cuttack. Oral evidence. I have been in the service since 1872, and in this district as Collector since November 1890. I have no concern with the Tributary Mahals All Collectors in this division are ex-officioAssistant Superintendents of the Gurjat States; but the Commissioner being here, I have nothing to do with them. I have ordered a copy of Mr. Kanti Bhusan Sen's report on the ganja across the Gurjat Border to be sent to the Commission with my forwarding letter. I have no knowledge of the cultivation across the border such as would enable me to give evidence that would be of use to the Commission. The plant grows38 15. Evidence of the HON'BLE F. R. S. COLLIER, Magistrate and Collector, 24-Parganas. 1. As Collector of several districts, I have had opportunities of obtaining information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs. 2. Yes. The drugs are known as siddhi or bhang, charas and ganja in this district. 3. It grows in Murshidabad, Jessore, 24-Par- ganas, and is abundant in Jessore. 4. Bhang or siddhi. These refer to exactly the same plant. 5. I am unable to answer the question fully; but it appears to flourish in the alluvial tracts of Lower Bengal. 6. Ordinarily dense. 7. Yes; but not in this district. 8. I am not aware of any such increase. 9. I am not acquainted with the methods of cultivation. 10. No; the ganja cultivators are of the same class as other agricultural cultivators. 11. Not so far as I am aware. 12. Not so far as I am aware. 13. The cultivation is restricted to the districts of Rajshahi, Bogra, and Dinajpur, known as "Naogaon ganja mahal." The districts were selected, I think, for their peculiar soil. I think a soft loamy soil with adaptability for irrigation is necessary for the cultivation of hemp for pro- ducing ganja. Its cultivation would be impossi- ble, I think, in marshy land. 14. (a) In the Rajshahi, Bogra and Dinajpur districts. (b) No. (c) Illicitly prepared in this district, but the quantity is very small. 15. Only from cultivated plants different sorts of ganja are manufactured. I do not know much about the preparation of ganja and charas. Siddhi or bhang is prepared illicitly from the wild plants. The leaves are removed from the plants when they are flowering and then dried in the sun. After this process it is powdered and drunk after mixing it with water, milk, sugar, and spices. Ganja and charas are only smoked, generally after mixing with tobacco. 16. (a) Prepared to a very small extent in this district. (b) Yes. (c) No. 17. Ganja is prepared by the ordinary cultiva- tors, both Hindus and Muhammadans. Siddhi is illicitly prepared by all classes of people who drinkit. I do not know what classes of people prepare charas. 18. The drugs deteriorate by keeping and lose their effect in time. Ganja and siddhi keep two or three years and charas four to five years. The evaporation of narcotic matter causes dete- rioration. If the drug is kept hermetically sealed in tin boxes, I think it might prevent deterioration. 19. Used only for smoking as far as I know. 20. Charas used to be smoked by both the upper and lower classes of people, but now its use is almost confined to a limited number of the latter. The consumption of charas in this district is not more than 30 seers per annum, and the number of smokers of this drug is not more than 300. Ganja is smoked generally by people of the lower castes, who have much outdoor work, such as boatmen, fishermen, and coolies, and by a limit- ed number of the upper class in the Barasat sub- division. I think about 75 per cent. of the adult population of the labouring lower class of people smoke ganja. 21. In this district round ganja is prepared. Flat ganja is not used at all. The consumption of chur is very little. 22. Foreign. Nepal charas is imported from Amritsar. 23. Not as far I am aware. 24. Bhang drinking is prevalent among all classes of people. It is specially used by the inhabitants of Behar residing in this district. I think about 40 per cent. of the people drink siddhi or bhang. 25. The annual reports show that the consump- tion of ganja is falling off year by year. The consumption of siddhi shows an increase. In charas the increase of consumption is nominal. The vendors of this district formerly used to obtain charas from Calcutta retail shops in small quantities, but now they are importing it direct from Amritsar, and are selling it wholesale to the vendor of the other districts. Year. Ganja. Siddhi. Charas. Mds. Seers. Mds. Seers. Mds. Seers. 1888-89 185 35 37 31 1889-90 163 19 43 9 1890-91 172 29 46 5 0 25 1891-92 177 2 56 29 0 31 1892-93 173 26 60 26 1 25 26. (a) 70 per cent. (b) 4 per cent. (c) 25 per cent. (d) 1 per cent. 27. These are mainly taken from the lower castes who have a good deal of rough outdoor work, such as Bagdi, Podh, Behara, Chamar, Mallah, Dhangar, Dulia, Dome, Mether, Boistab, Sanyasi, Koibarta, etc. They are generally moder- ate consumers. 28. (a) Ganja, two annas weight, price two pice. Charas, three annas weight, price one and a half annas. Siddhi, one tola, price two pice. (b) Ganja, one tola, price four annas. Charas, one tola, price eight annas. Siddhi, two and a half tola, price five pice. 29. Ordinarily with ganja and charas prepared tobacco is mixed, and with siddhi spices, sugar, and milk. I am not aware of any thing exceptionally mixed. I have heard that dhatura seeds are used with ganja to increase its intoxicating power, but I have not seen any one use it.
39 In case of tobacco with charas and ganja the object is to soften the narcotic effect and to give a better flavour. Spices, etc., are used with siddhi to improve the taste and also to increase its intoxicating effect. No. I do not know "bhang massala." 30. (a) Ganja and charas are smoked generally in company. No privacy is observed in case of drinking siddhi. (b) It is mainly confined to the male sex and not to any special time of life. (c) No. 31. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Not to the same extent as alcohol or opium. 32. The consumption of ganja and charas are not required by any social or religious custom. Bhang is drunk partly as a religious and more as a social custom on the fourth or last day of the Durga Puja, as it is believed that success in life results thereby, and the name itself, siddhi, im- plies success. It is popularly believed to have been the favourite drink of Siva, and is therefore used as an offering to him by devotees. The use is generally temperate, and there is no likelihood, of its leading to the formation of a habit. 33. The smoking of ganja is held in disrepute, but such is not the case with siddhi drinking or charas smoking. The sentiment against ganja smoking is, I think, due to the fact that its use is confined generally to the lower castes. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion by any sect of people. 34. Yes. The labouring class of the population use ganja or charas as a stimulant to enable them to do hard work. They cannot possibly give up the practice without some substitute. Bhang again could not be given up by the habitual con- sumers without aggravating the complaints to prevent which they had recourse to its use. About 50,000 of the labouring classes of this district use ganja as a stimulant for hard work. There are no less than 10,000 habitual consumers of siddhi; but the charas smokers are not more than 300 in this district. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of charas but not of ganja or siddhi. These two may be consumed illicitly. I doubt if the prohibition could be enforced with regard to them. The pro- hibition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, but that would not amount to a political danger. The prohibition would be fol- lowed by recourse to other deleterious drugs. 36. Alcohol is to a very small extent substi- tuted for these dugs. Amongst the better classes, as stimulant, alcohol is considered superior. The use of these drugs is gradually diminishing. Tari to some extent has taken the place of ganja among the lower classes of people, for it stimulates, and at the same time satisfies hunger, although a little costly. 37. Yes. The effect of charas smoking is con- sidered to be milder than ganja smoking. 38. No. 39. Siddhi drinking is less injurious than smoking charas or ganja. Smoking produces a strong instantaneous effect, but drinking is decid- edly an easier method of consuming a large quan- tity at a time. 40. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 41. (a) Believed to be both. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) The use of ganja is supposed to enable a man to concentrate his mind on a subject. Labouring class, 75 per cent. of them. The moderate use is referred to. 42. The moderate use is harmless, as it has no after-effect on the system. 43. Yes. 44. (a) It invigorates and causes a pleasant feeling of intoxication. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) No. (e) Yes; it does when taken in the form of siddhi. (f) One hour in case of ganja and charas and three to four hours in case of siddhi. (g) No. (h) Produces longing in case of habitual consumers. 45. (a) No. (b) In case of intemperate use it does. (c) No. (d) Yes, both in case of intemperate use. (e) No. (f) The moderate use does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. It is said that adul- teration of the drugs with other poisonous ingredi- ents, such as dhatura, etc., produces insa nity. (g) It has been ascertained that of the in- sane persons in the district, only 19 are considered to have become so by the use of ganja. Of these 19 only one is reported to be violent. On suffi- cient enquiry, and as well as from the confes- sion of these persons, it was elicited that in the majority of cases their insanity was due to other causes, such as family misfortune, etc., and some have taken to ganja after being insane. In four cases no other cause for their insanity could be ascertained, except the excessive use of the drug. 46. Habitual excessive indulgence causes the peculiar frenzy which causes Orientals to run amuck. 47. No. 48. Same as above. 49. (a) Yes. (b) It is used so by the lowest class of prosti- tutes who frequent mêlas or fairs. (c) I am not aware. (d) No. 50. Same as above. 51. No. 52. No. 53. No 54. No. 55. No. 56. I have no personal knowledge of the ad- mixture of other substances than what I have already noted, 57. I do not know that ganja and charas are eaten or drunk.
40 58. The excise administration in respect of hemp drugs is working well, and I am not pre- pared to suggest any improvement. 60 and 61. I think that there is sufficient control, and have no suggestion to make for the modification of the system. 62. I would not suggest any changes in this respect. 63. No. 64. No. 65. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 66. Yes; for flat and round have twigs which the chur has not. Each kind of ganja should be taxed in proportion to the narcotic matter that each is found to contain. 67. Yes, as remarked above. 68. There are licensed shops for the sale of these drugs; but ordinarily they are not smoked or drunk on the premises. The shops are not dis- reputable. Generally mudi shopkeepers are the licensed holders of these shops. 69. Ordinarily the wishes of the people are not consulted or considered when a shop is opened in any locality. On the application of vendors and local inhabitants, licenses are granted after due enquiry at the auction settlement, held with the sanction of the Board. I do not think it is neces- sary to consult or consider public opinion, as these shops are not a nuisance. 70. (a) No. (b) Yes; in respect of ganja and charas but not of siddhi. The latter is used to some extent illicitly, but the use is not general. Oral evidence. I have served for 22 years in Bengal and Behar. The paper No. 247 submitted by the District Board of the 24-Parganas was drawn up by a Sub-Committee, under instructions received to the effect that a Sub-Committee should be appointed to report. The paper was not submitted to the District Board. Question 15.41 10. The vendors of narcotic drugs are sunris. 12. It grows as a weed in Bhagalpur, and the ryots are glad to get it cut and cleared off their lands. I have not known any case where it is especially cultivated. 14. No. 18. All. They lose their effects in time, and keep good with ordinary care for a year only. Causes of deterioration have not been ascertained, and no preventive measures suggested. 19. Yes. 20. All classes of Hindus, especially the vil- lagers, nearly one-third of the population, smoke ganja. Charas is not used in this district. 21. Flat. 22. Charas is not used in this district. 23. Never in this province. 24. All classes of Hindus, about one-fourth of the population, eat bhang in winter, and drink in summer, as a cooling beverage. It is the nectar of the Hindus, who give it the name of Mahadeo's buti, or the drug of Mahadeo of the Hindu Trinity. 25. On the increase. 26. (a) One-half. (b) One-fourth. (c) One-fourth. (d) One-twentieth. 27. (a) and (c) from all classes of Hindus, and (b) and (d) from the orders of mendicants (sadhus and jogis). No particular habit of life or cir- cumstances leads to the practice. 28. Ganja42 54. I cannot say, but see last answer. 55. I have not known any case of this sort. 56. Vide reply to question 29. 57. Neither eaten nor drunk in this district. 58. I think it is capable of improvement in the direction of restriction. At present there are too many ganja shops. The numbers should be largely reduced. They should only be established in towns and really large villages. I would discourage the use of ganja by these means as much as possible among the rural population, and only keep suffi- cient shops to supply the large floating population of the province, especially the mendicant class, whose addiction to the use of the drugs we cannot hope to restrain. Oral evidence. Question 1.43 The illicit consumption of ganja would pro- bably be supplied by illicit cultivation of the plant and also by importation probably from Nepal. I have not enquired into the difficulties that lie in the way of such cultivation and importation. I also think that the existence of necessity for the drug among the labouring and agricultural classes would justify the supply of the legitimate demand apart altogether from the question of danger to the revenue from illicit consumption. I think there is a legitimate demand among the Hindus in connection with their religious festivals as well as among the labouring and agricultural classes. The view I formed with reference to the circular which was issued by Mr. Westmacott with the object of exterminating the wild growth in village lands was that such extermination was not practi- cable, at all events in a district like Bhagalpur, and that the attempt to carry it out would cause a great deal of harassment and annoyance to the villagers. The people are glad to have the plants removed from their lands it is true, where it is growing in very large quantities, but they have no special desire to have one or two plants remov- ed from their "baris," where they do no harm. As the plant grows in great abundance in Bhag- alpur, I do not think the prohibition could be carried out without harassment and interference by the police, because, although the existence of the plant is evidence against the person in whose lands it grows, a large amount of labour would be required to exterminate it, and therefore the people would not be likely to undertake the labour of doing it themselves. Appendix to MR. MARINDIN'S evidence. Abstract of the records sent by Mr. Marindin and referred to in his oral evidence. I EMPRESS versus CHAMAN SINGH. This man, Chaman Singh (Rajput, cultivator), murdered his wife on the morning of 19th June 1893, but was acquitted on the ground of insanity by the Officiating Sessions Judge of Bhagalpur on 11th September 1893. There is no mention of ganja in the "First Information Report" of the police or in the pro- ceedings of the Committing Magistrate. The Magistrate records: "The defendant was all along a sane man, and he always pulled well with his wife, who was generally known as a woman of good character. His cousin and uncle, Babuan Singh and Kasi Singh, who live very close to his house, deposed that, just before the occurrence, he asked his wife to cook for him, as he took no food on the night, and his wife said she will do it a little after. Besides this, there is nothing to show that he had even any altercation with hiswife." Before the Sessions Judge the uncle, Kasi Singh, said of the accused: "He was in the habit of taking ganja and bhang occasionally. He took it at an interval of two or three days; but I cannot say if he took it that day. When he took it he became bad-tempered. I never take it." On the other hand, the cousin, Babuan Singh, deposed: "He never took ganja or bhang. If my uncle Kasi says so, I can only say I never saw him." Another witness says: "I never saw him take ganja or bhang." There is no other mention of ganja in the record of evidence. In his letter of 17th July 1893 to the Civil Surgeon, the Sessions Judge specially asked whether the prisoner "appears to be the subject of mania due to taking hemp in any form." This special question was not answer- ed by the Civil Surgeon, nor was he asked about this matter when examined as a witness in Court. The Civil Surgeon's evidence is merely, "I believe him to be a man of unsound mind. His appear- ance is that of a man suffering from monomania. His mania refers only to his wife. He admits having killed his wife, and expresses no regret for having done so, although he admits she had done nothing wrong. He says it came into his mind that he should kill her, and if she were alive again, he would kill her." The judgment makes no reference to ganja, but says: "There is no doubt that the act which ac- cused is shown to have committed was the first outbreak of dangerous homicidal mania, and that that mania still continues." II EMPRESS versus PITHU SONTHAL. Pithu Sonthal was charged with murder of his wife, but was sent to the asylum by the Sessions Judge of Bhagalpur on 11th September 1893 as "of unsound mind and incapable of making his defence." Before the Committing Magistrate he stated: "I was told by my wife that Bhima Paramanak and Chota Dhanoo of my village had had sexual intercourse with her. I heard this and struck her;" and on a later date he said: "I suspected, when deceased went out, that she went to have sexual intercourse with some other man. I went and asked her. She said she had gone to answer a call of nature. I accused her of inconstancy. She said nothing, so I struck her. [Then says] my wife admitted that Bhima Paramanak and Chota Dhanoo had had sexual intercourse with her. It was on this I struck her. I have no wit- ness to prove this." The evidence shows, however, that when asked at the time why he had killed his wife, the prisoner said he did not remember, and also that he had shown signs of madness the previous day. The Committing Magistrate says: "The acts of mad- ness referred to appear to me to be an after- thought, and the Civil Hospital Assistant deposes to having watched accused from the day he was brought in and noticed no signs of lunacy what- ever." It may be noticed, however, that the Hospital Assistant in his evidence says: "He is very quiet and silent, due to depression of the mind." There is no mention of ganja in the whole record; nor is there any explanation assigned by any witness of the alleged madness, except that one witness says: "Accused's only child died during the Bandna festival." Before the Sessions Judge the prisoner seemed incapable of making his defence. The Judge, therefore, ordered that he be kept under obser- vation until the following Sessions. At the later Sessions the Civil Surgeon said: "I consider that he is not capable of understanding or making I 2
44 his defence, nor has he been so at any time during the two months I have seen him.** He appears to me to be suffering from melancholia." There is no mention of ganja on the record. III. EMPRESS versus GANGA SONTHAL. Ganga Sonthal, a cultivator, was charged with murdering his mother, Durgi Sonthalin, who had married a second time, and also his own sister, a child of 9 or 10 years, named Gora Sonthalin. Two other persons were also said to have been assaulted by him. This was on 7th January 1893 (Saturday) about midnight. He was sen- tenced to death; but the High Court directed that evidence be taken as to his sanity. The Civil Surgeon testified: "From the beginning of my observation, or very soon after, he appeared to me to exhibit symptoms of insanity. * * His demeanour was that of a lunatic. I consider that this state of mind continues." On this the High Court, on 26th April 1893, set aside the convic- tion and sentence on the ground "that the accused is of unsound mind and incapable of making his defence." At the trial Durgi's servant Arjun said: "The prisoner was not drunk. Before the Pergunait, the prisoner said Bhagwan had told him to kill the people. ** I never saw any signs of insanity about him." Another witness, Prithu, says: "When I saw the prisoner that night, I did not see any signs that he had been drinking He never showed any signs of insanity." Later he says: "During t0his festival the Sonthals drink, and they had all drunk on the Friday." Three other witnesses said, they saw no signs of drink in the prisoner that night, The prisoner simply denied the murder, and said he could not explain the blood-stains on his clothes. In the committal order the Magistrate says: "It appears that on a night during the Bandna festival on 7th January, when all Sonthals, what- ever they say, are more or less drunk, the prisoner committed the murders with which he was charg- ed." * * "In fact, it may be said that he generally ran amok as Malays are said to do." There is no mention of ganja in the record. 17. Evidence of MR. K. G. GUPTA, Commissioner of Excise, Bengal. 1. During my 20 years' service, I have worked in various parts of Lower Bengal and Orissa, and as Subdivisional Officer and afterwards as District officer had to administer excise in my jurisdic- tion. Latterly I was Secretary to the Board of Revenue for four years and had charge of excise. In 1891 I acted as Excise Commissioner for four months, and have been permanently appointed to the post since March last. 2. The definitions may be accepted. The three varieties of ganja defined here have reference to the Rajshahi drug, which is almost exclusively used in these provinces. The flat ganja retains the larger twigs and the round ganja the smaller ones, while chur has only the detach- ed flower tops. There is thus more woody matter in round than in chur, and most in flat. Gurjat, which is treated as a separate ganja, is used to a small extent in Orissa. In shape it is like flat ganja. 3. It grows spontaneously everywhere in Lower Bengal as well as in Behar and Orissa. It is somewhat scarce in the districts of the Chota Nagpur division; but elsewhere it is generally abundant, especially in Champaran, Monghyr, Bhagalpur, Purnea, Rungpur, Jessore, etc. 4. General name bhang. Siddhi (specially in Lower Bengal). Patti or subji (in Orissa). Thandai (cooler) (specially in Behar). 5. It flourishes in a damp loose alluvial soil. The amount of rainfall is not so material, pro- vided there is sufficient moisture. It is thus found abundantly in such distant localities as the extreme North-West of Behar (Champaran) and the North-East of Bengal (Mymensing). lt does not like a dry laterite soil, but grows luxuri- antly in the chur lands of the Ganges and other rivers, which are submerged during the rains. It is an annual plant. 6. Ordinarily dense. Cultivators and indigo planters do their best to keep down its growth. 7. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) No. (d) I am not aware as regards (d). See my memorandum as Excise Commissioner. 8. The area fluctuates considerably from year to year, but there is little change on the whole. See official note. 9. Vide H. C. Ker's report. 10. (a) No, they do not form a separate class. 11. No. 12. Yes. In the Gurjat States of Orissa, in Hill Tipperah, and in Nepal. The practice is very general in the former; and smuggling of this drug seriously affects the ganja revenue in Orissa. That produced in Hill Tipperah is rarely brought into British territory. The extirpation of the male plant is not so thorough as in the case of the Rajshahi drug; but even in the ganja tract the male plant cannot be absolutely eradi- cated. Gurjat ganja is decidedly inferior in quali- ty, containing more leaves and seeds and less narcotic matter than the Rajshahi drug. It is, however, much cheaper, the price being about one- sixth that of the Rajshahi drug. 13. See official note. Cultivation restricted to a small tract in Rajshahi, Dinajpur and Bogra. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. See official note. 15. As regards preparation of ganja see H. C. Ker's report. No ganja is made from the wild hemp plant. Bhang does not require any special preparation. The plant is cut down and allowed to dry for a day or two. The leaves are then shaken off and collected with bits of flowers. These are kept in bags and used as bhang. Bhang is collected for the market in Monghyr, Bhagalpur and Purnea
45 and stored in the licensed golas of the two first- named districts, which supply the whole province. The plant germinates after the rains and comes to maturity in the following May. Bhang is gathered in that month and also in June and July. Ganja and charas are always smoked and bhang is always drunk. Majum, which is a confection made from bhang, is eaten. Siddhi kachauri is a kind of fritter in which bhang is used. 16. (a) Bhang in small quantities is generally made by the people in their houses, especially where the wild plant is abundant, as in the rural areas of certain districts. (b) Yes. (c) No. 17. Ganja, by cultivators of ganja. Bhang, by wholesale dealers, and by villagers generally. Majum Siddhi kachauri by confectioners. 18. Ganja46 are habitual moderate consumers; while mendi- cants, including sanyasis and sadhus, who lead idle lives, are, as a rule, habitual excessive consumers, the idea being that ganja-smoking helps their meditations. Occasional moderate smokers are beginners, and those who join in any rites in which ganja forms a votive offering, as in the worship of Trinath in Eastern Bengal. Ganja. Charas. Bhang. 28. (a) Quan- 1/16 tola, cost 6 1/4 to 1/2 tola, cost tity, 1/16 to 1/8 pies. 3 to 6 pies. tola, cost 3 to 6 pies. (b) Quantity 1 tola, cost 8 2 tolas, cost 2 1 tola, cost annas. annas. 4 to 6 annas. 29. Tobacco is almost always mixed with ganja in the proportion of one-half or one-third. Dhatura seed is very occasionally used, and only by debauched smokers, to increase intoxi- cation. Various ingredients are mixed with bhang, such as cucumber seeds, ginger, sugar, spices, milk, curd, etc. 30. Ganja and bhang are generally consumed in solitude, except on festive occasions. It is not, however, unusual for two or three persons to sit down together to smoke ganja. The same remark applies to charas. The use of these narcotics is confined to the male sex (the exceptions being very few indeed47 39. Each preparation is usually put to a single use (ganja or charas for smoking and bhang for drinking), and the question of difference in effect, according as it is eaten or drunk, does not arise. 40. Ganja and bhang have occupied a leading place in Hindu pharmacy from remote ages. Bhang is used in the treatment of cattle disease48 difficult to stop its growth in the absolutely occu- pied lands. But I am not sure how far that would avail to stop illicit practices. I am told that cultivators and planters would be glad to get rid of the weed as troublesome. But how far the extermination there would be of much value for excise purposes, I am not sure. In Bengal, too, the stuff is used largely as a medicine for cattle and human beings, and I do not know how far it would be wise to stop the use. Even if we brought the bhang under the same regulation as ganja, I do not think we should get much revenue from it in Lower Bengal. I am not aware of any bhang being prepared from the cultivated plant in Rajshahi district. It is never brought into the golas; and I know nothing of its being made for private use. In Lower Bengal bhang is not much used as a stimulant or intoxicant. In Behar it is a very favourite drink. The consumption of bhang in Calcutta in 1892-93 was 460 maunds. There is there a large up-country population. The statis- tics will show that in Lower Bengal the consump- tion is not great. Of course in Calcutta there is control, and the bhang is not grown in the neighbourhood. So that consumption is more ac- curately known there. But the presence of the up-country population in Calcutta vitiates any deduction as to Bengal generally from the figures for that city. I remember myself as a boy par- taking in the use of bhang at festivals such as the Durga Puja; but (as said in my answer No. 24) this habit is going out. I have said in paragraph 60 of my memorandum that the consumption of bhang is general. That is, however, more in Behar and also occasionally and not habitually. It is true (as there said) that what has paid duty is only a small fraction of what is used. I think an attempt at control might be made by prohibiting growth in occupied land, i.e., by making occu- piers responsible for the presence of the plant on their lands. I would do this experimentally. If this succeeded, however, there would be this loss that the people would be deprived of it altogether in some places where there are not unoccupied lands for the plant to grow on and not a sufficient demand to lead to a shop being established. Of course, I should like to see the Calcutta system of having the stuff taxed extended, if it were feasi- ble. Question 65.49 Appendix to Mr. Gupta's Evidence. Statement showing the ganja exported to the North-Western Provinces, Assam, Kuch Behar, and Nepal during the 20 years, 1873-74 to 1892-93. GANJA EXPORTED TO THENORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. GANJA EXPORTED TO ASSAM. GANJA EXPORTED TO KUCE BEHAR. GANJA EXPORTED TO NEPAL. YEAR. REMARKS. Quantity. Duty. Quantity. Duty. Quantity. Duty. Quantity. Duty. Md. S. Ch. Rs. Md. S. Ch. Rs. Md. S. Ch. Rs. Md. S. Ch. Rs. 1878-74 581 17 0 58,158 No duty is levied here on ganja exported to Assam and Kuch Behar. The information as regards the duty on the quantity exported to Nepal is not available from the Ad- ministration Reports. * Includes quantities ex- ported to Nepal (not separately shown). 1874-75 632 15 2 63,246 1875-76 633 6 12 63,375 1876-77 743 26 8 74,380 1877-78 864 22 2 88,308 697 10 13 1878-79 356 25 4 51,603 211 32 12 1879-80 264 18 13 37,767 700 6 0 1880-81 261 33 0 37,434 686 9 15 1881-82 495 23 8 70,828 472 11 2 69 33 15 1882-83 431 38 5 99,524 530 23 4 80 35 5 1883-84 681 4 4 1,28,707 854 31 8 9 24 6 1884-85 681 19 9 1,30,910 617 23 2 71 12 2 1885-86 812 23 13 1,34,503 567 29 15 66 0 11 1886-87 849 19 8 1,58,519 687 11 6 68 12 14 72 25 0 1887-88 871 0 12* 1,64,917 722 30 15 79 17 6 1888-89 890 28 8 1,69,922 690 2 12 91 5 0 107 4 0 1889-90 737 27 8 1,37,741 739 21 8 84 35 6 126 13 4 1890-91 667 33 10 1,27,065 759 33 13 75 39 8 120 13 12 1891-92 467 10 2 96,497 796 4 3 88 21 13 228 2 4 1892-93 563 2 0 1,22,687 681 0 0 89 0 0 177 17 0 18. Evidence of MR. L. HARE, Magistrate and Collector of Muzaffarpur. 1. As District Officer I have opportunities of obtaining information regarding the subject-matter at hand. These answers have been prepared by the Excise Deputy Collector. I believe them to be correct. 2. Yes, the definitions seem to be correct. These articles are locally known by the names of bhang, charas, and ganja. 3. Only the hemp plant known as bhang grows spontaneously in all districts of Bengal, The rest do not grow spontaneously. 4. It is known by the following names: ganja, siddhi, bhang, and charas. Charas and ganja refer to the same plant. The bhang plant is different. 5. Not known. 6. Dense. 7. (a) No. (b) No. (c) No. (d) No. 8. No. 9. Not known. 10. No special class. 11. As far as is known, no. 12. The excise officers frequently come across plants which have to all appearance been cultivated, though this is always denied. 13. Excepting wild bhang, which grows spon- taneously, no other hemp plant is cultivated here. 14. (a) No. (b) No. (c) Neither ganja nor charas is prepared in this district. Ganja and charas are used for purposes of smoking only. They are never drunk. The ganja leaves extracted from the twig are crushed and mixed with tobacco leaves. These are then put into a pipe and smoked. Sometimes these leaves are eaten just like tobacco leaves. Powdered bhang is sometimes eaten by the sanya- sis. It is generally drunk mixed with the follow- K
50 ing spices:51 Rajputs that stand in their way of taking liquor. 36. No. In Dacca I had reason to believe that the excessive raising of the price of liquor was driving drinkers to use ganja. The reverse action might take place if ganja were made sufficiently dear or were wholly unobtainable. But ganja, etc., would be certainly imported from Nepal long before this stage was reached, and it would be quite impossible to stop this with an open frontier such as we have. 37. The effect is the same; only that charas is more intoxicant than ganja. 38. Chur and flat ganja are more intoxicant than round. There is no difference of effects in kind. 39. Ganja and charas are never eaten or drunk. Powdered bhang is sometimes eaten. Generally it is drunk. Eating iu this case is more injurious than drinking. Drinking is more refreshing, and destroys the natural heat of the plant. 40. In the cure of itches, sometimes, ganja is used mixed with oil. It is also used as preventive of damp. Rheumatic patients and persons suffer- ing from ague are sometimes advised to smoke ganja. Only bhang is used in cattle disease. 41. (a) Yes, when used moderately. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Not known. To those who are unaccustomed to it moderate occasional use of the drug is beneficial. To those accustomed moderate habitual use will also secure the desired end. Generally the cultivators and labourers use the drugs for the purpose noted above. 42. Many persons find the moderate use not only harmless but beneficial. Experience has proved so. 43. Yes. 44. It is refreshing, produces slight intoxica- tion, does not allay hunger, creates appetite. The effect of the consumption of one chillum of ganja and charas (1/20 of a tola) will last for an hour only. That of bhang lasts for four or five hours. There are after-effects in the case of bhang. In the case of ganja and charas, as soon as the in- toxication is over, people feel a little uneasiness. 45. (a) No. (b) No. (c) No. (d) No. (e) No. (f) No. No such case known. I believe insanity has only been connected with habitual immoderate use. 46. The sanyasis, as a rule, habitually use the drug in large quantities. They are not said to have suffered in the least by the use of these drugs. On the other hand, their longevity is partially attributed to their habitual use of ganja, which enables them to sustain themselves in the midst of damp and cold climates. I have no personal knowledge of any cases, but there are in the lunatic asylums many who are said to be there on account of immoderate use of ganja. 47 and 48. I do not think anything of the kind has been authenticated. 49. (a) Not known. (b) Not here. (c) Not known. (d) Not directly. It is excessive debauchery which produces impotence. If used as suggested, the latter would certainly be present. 50. Not known. 51. (a) Not known. (b) No connection has been traced here. 52. No connection. 53. In lunatic asylum visiting, I have come across cases so attributed. 54. No experience of this. 55. (a) Sometimes they do so by mixing dhatura seed with bhang. (b) No. 56. Dhatura is not mixed for personal consump- tion. When mischief is intended, dhatura is mixed for others. A few sanyasis, however, use dhatura as admixture for personal consumption. 57. No such case known. My general experi- ence is that ganja consumption has more markedly bad effects in Eastern Bengal than in Behar, that is to say, more cases of bad effects came to my notice in Dacca than in Muzaffarpur. I believe in Eastern Bengal the Muhammadans are large consumers. 58. Yes. 59. The system in force is working well and does not seem to be capable of any considerable improvement. I would like to see a maximum and minimum price fixed for the retail sale of the drug, as I think violent fluctuations such as sometimes occur are mischievous both to revenue and to con- sumers. It is this. The trade is naturally worked for profit. A ring of one or two or a few dealers is formed which outbids all the small men. If there is difficulty in this, they buy a few shops and sell very cheaply, so as to take away the custom of the small men and reduce their profit by this means, and because they, too, must sell cheap to get any custom at all. Then having got them all out, the retail price is run up and large profits secured. When the small men cease to compete, the big men reduce their bids and the revenue is at once reduced enormously, and it takes a long time to get back the small men to come and com- pete. By fixing a yearly maximum and minimum you, to a great extent, prevent this intershop- competition and each shop is sold on its special average merits. 60. Ganja is not produced in this district. It is grown at Rajshahi, where it is sufficiently well controlled by Government officers specially em- ployed for the purpose. 61. It is not produced here. 62. Attempts were made from time to time to extirpate the growth of wild bhang; but, far from securing the desired end, it proved a source of trouble and oppression upon the people on whose holdings the wild plant grew in profusion. The scheme has since been given up, as it was found almost impossible to check the growth of this wild plant. 63. No. 64. No. 65. Yes. K 2
52 66. Different rates of taxation prevail with regard to the three different kinds of ganja (flat, round, and chur), and rightly too. For in chur nothing is lost, in flat one-fourth, and in round one- eighth are to be deducted for twigs, etc. 68. Yes. These shops are necessary, as they supply people with the drugs which they require. People generally carry away their ganja, but sometimes smoke at the shop. 69. Yes. When any new shop is opened, the opinion of the municipality as well as of the people inhabiting the locality is consulted. Yes, local public opinion should be consulted, as is the case at present, before opening any shop in the locality; but a ganja shop is not objectionable to the general public, as liquor shops may be, if it is unsuitably located. 70. No such case. It is almost impossible to detect the smuggling of ganja in small quantities. I believe that any attempt to stamp out ganja smoking or an undue raising of the tax would lead to extensive smuggling, which we should be utterly helpless to prevent. Again, it would induce recourse to other similar drugs. In Eastern Bengal a decoction is made of the leaves of the jute plant. 19. Evidence of MR. G. E. MANISTY, Magistrate and Collector of Saran. 1. Information has been obtained from officials connected with the Excise Administration for a long time, medical men, as well as from many non-officials of the district. 2. These definitions can be accepted for this district. Each of these drugs is locally known by the name given in this question. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in the districts of Darbhanga, Champaran, Muzaffar- pur, and Saran. It is abundant in Darbhanga, Champaran, Monghyr, and Bhagalpur. 4. It is known by the different names of siddhi, sabuzi, and bhang. All these three names refer to the same plant. 5. Sterile land, moist climate, damp soil, and low ground are conditions favourable to the growth of the wild bhang. 6. The growth of the plant is ordinarily scat- tered. 12. No reason to think so. 14. Bhang only is prepared in this district from wild hemp (vide Question 3). It is not con- fined to any particular tract, nor is it prepared to a considerable extent; only rarely people have recourse to it. 15. The plants (wild bhang) when mature are cut down and dried in the sun. The leaves are then separated from the branches and prepared for smoking, eating, or drinking as detailed be- low:53 plants may also cause the decrease in the use of this drug. 26. (a) 40 per cent. (b) 20 " (c) 25 " (d) 15 " Ganja. (a) 50 " (b) 10 " (c) 25 " (d) 15 " Bhang. 27. Hindus of all classes, Brahmins, Rajputs, and Bhúinhars and mendicants, as a rule, form the consumers of ganja and bhang. Of these the rich and well-to-do class use these drugs for pleasures' sake; the labouring class to alleviate fatigue; and the mendicants to concentrate their thoughts. Bhang also is sometimes used for medicinal purposes. 28. (a) Half anna per diem (b) Four annas " Ganja. (a) Three pies " (b) Six " " Bhang. 29. (a) Ordinarily tobacco leaf is mixed with ganja; (b) rose water and flower are also used with it for flavour. Dhatura is not used with ganja. Tobacco is used with ganja to make it suit the taste, and also to weaken its effect. Bhang. (a) Black paper is ordinarily used with bhang; (b) bhang massala, sugar, and milk. Dha- tura is not used with it. Bhang massala. We know of the preparation called "bhang massala." Its ingredients are aniseed, kasni, rose flower, and seed of cucumber and melon. The object of the admixture is to have a cooling effect and agreeable taste. 30. Bhang. The extent of its consumption is the same in solitude as in company. it is confined to the male sex. Children do not use it. Ganja. In company ganja is consumed con- siderably more than in solitude. Yes; it is main- ly confined to the male sex above the age of 15. 31. The habit of consuming ganja and bhang is easily formed, and it is difficult to break it when formed. There is a tendency in the case of each of these two drugs, like alcoholic drink, for the moderate habit to develop into excess. 32. With the Hindus it is a social custom in Holi to consume ganja and bhang as well as other intoxicants. It is not essential. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit. In the Holi time the excessive use of the drugs some- times proves injurious. 33. The public generally look down upon the consumers of the drugs. There is not any live public opinion, social or religious, in regard to the practice. The use of this narcotic in any form is in disrepute; the sentiment is attributable to the fact that the moderate habit frequently develops into the excessive, which ultimately leads the con- sumers to ruin. There is no custom of worship- ping the hemp plants. 34. In the case of ganja it would be a serious privation to habitual consumers to give it up. The reason simply is this, that they have contract- ed the habit, the discontinuance of which, it is said, would tell heavily upon their constitution. The same may be said in the case of bhang. Pro- bable number of such sufferers would be thus:54 42. The moderate use of these drugs may be considered as harmless, as they are digestive and preventive to malaria, and curative to looseness of bowels and dyspepsia. 43. Yes. 44. Immediate effect of the moderate use of the bhang and ganja is stimulant. It is refresh- ing, and produces slight intoxication and increases appetite. It does not always allay hunger. The effect of ganja is transitory and bhang is some- what lasting. The after-effects are depression and loss of bodily health and flesh, and they are generally noticed when good food is not used by the consumers. If the use be discontinued, it produces craving or uneasiness. 45 and 46. Moderate use of these drugs acts upon the physical health when proper food is not taken. Ultimately the moderate use of these drugs brings on loss of mental power, but generally moral power remains intact and as a rule not corrupted. In the long run it causes dysentery and sometimes bronchitis, leading to asthma or consumption. It does not produce laziness nor impair the habits of morality or induce debauchery as a rule. Moderate use does not produce as a rule in- sanity or deaden the intellect. But bhang some- what deadens the intellect and produces laziness. Moderate use occasionally produces insanity in men of sanguineous temperament. The insanity, when produced, is acute mania, and generally of temporary character when the habit is given up. It may relapse if the habit be resumed. The insanity is of a violent character, and the victim is apt to attack others or commit suicide by injuring himself. Men confess to the use of the ganja which has led to their insanity. No cases have come to my notice in which a person of weak intellect or suffering from some brain disease was addicted to ganja, and subse- quently fell a victim to insanity. The excessive use has a very bad effect on the constitution, which it impairs. It produces loss of appetite, brings on dysentery, bronchitis leading to consumption and asthma, and impairs the moral sense, produces laziness and immorality, but not debauchery, and as a rule produces loss of sexual appetite and brings on insanity of a violent character. 47. No hereditary tendency. 48. Ditto ditto. 49. It is used in moderate doses as an aphro- disiac, and sometimes so used by prostitutes. When used as an aphrodisiac, it is not more injurious than when taken as a narcotic. Moder- ate use ultimately leads to impotence sometimes. 50. When used in excess it produces loss of sexual appetite, and is very injurious. 51. Generally bad characters of low class people are addicted to it. Moderate use does not produce any crime. 52. But when used in excess it leads men to commit crime. 53. Excessive indulgence of ganja or bhang may incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. I am not aware of any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal tendency. 54. I have no personal knowledge of such cases, but it is not impossible, but rather probable, that criminals may fortify themselves by using the drugs before they commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55. Generally it is not used by criminals to stupify their victims, so as to commit violence upon them. 56. Ganja smoked with tobacco leaf has less effect than when taken alone, in which form it is rarely used. Alcohol and opium enhance the in- toxicating effect of ganja and bhang. Bhang mixed with sugar produces much more lasting effect than taken alone. Both are used with tobacco to increase the intoxicating effect. 57. I have no experience as to ganja or charas being eaten or drunk. 58 and 59. I think the Excise Administration in respect of hemp drugs has been working fairly well. The recent increase of duty on ganja has to a certain extent reduced the consumption of the drug in this district. 60. Ganja is not produced in the Saran district. 61. No charas is produced here. 62. Bhang is not cultivated in this district. The wild plant grows spontaneously in out-of-the- way and unfrequented places. These can be con- trolled through the chowkidars if desired. 63. No. 64. No. 65. It is practically reasonable. 66. Yes, according as more or less of twigs and branches contained in each. 67. No objection. 68. Generally not consumed at the shops. 69. Yes. In towns the Municipal Commis- sioners, and in mufassal public bodies are con- sulted through Excise Officers. 70. No. Generally consumed duty-free by all classes of people. 20. Evidence of MR. J. KENNEDY, Magistrate and Collector of Murshidabad. 1. I have served for close on 20 years in districts in which ganja is used. 2. Yes. 3. It grows sparsely in this district. It also grows wild on the hills in the Cachar District, and if I remember right Sylhet. 4. I only know it as ganja. 5. It requires a damp climate. I don't know any more of its necessities. 6. Dense. 7. Yes, but I know nothing about it. I have never been in a district where it was cultivated. 12. I know of no such cases. 13. It is restricted to Rajshahi District I believe, but I know nothing about it. 14. Yes, but I can give no details of my own knowledge.
55 18. Ganja deteriorates if kept over a year and loses its strength. The same rule applies to cha- ras and siddhi. 19. I believe they are used only for smoking. 20. The lower labouring classes, especially fisher- men and boatmen, use ganja. When a man of a better class uses ganja, it is generally because he can't afford spirits. Occasionally well-to-do people smoke charas mixed with tobacco. 21. Chur seems the favourite. 22. Charas imported from Amritsar is generally used here. 23. Bhang is never smoked, but always mixed with water and sugar or milk. Up-country people are the main consumers. It is also made into a sweetmeat and this is consumed both by Bengalis and up-country people. The name of this sweet- meat is majun. 25. Among the middle classes, charas is pre- ferred to ganja because any one smoking ganja is supposed to be very poor. A well-to-do man who smokes ganja is liable to be jeered at. 26. They are mostly moderate consumers. The only class among whom I often met excessive consumers was among the coolies on the Cachar tea gardens, and there I did meet several cases of insanity produced by excessive ganja smoking. I have very rarely heard of excessive smokers in this district, and I have not found a single ganja or charas smoker in this district who has gone mad. There may be one or two in the Lunatic Asylum, but the Superintendent can best answer about them. 27. Poverty seems the main reason for people using ganja. 28. Moderate consumer56 53. I have met with no case of this kind in this district. My Cachar experiences have now rather fallen into oblivion, but I have an impression there were one or two cases there. 54. No. 55. I have met with no such cases. 56. Moderate consumers generally mix it with tobacco and excessive consumers with dhatura. 58. The price of spirits has been raised far too high, and the recent orders forbidding the private manufacture of madak are most objectionable. 59. I would reduce the retail price of a quart of country spirits to from six to eight annas, adhering to the present central distillery system. The interests of the distillers would ensure the chief liquor being cheap. I would also allow private manufacture of madak. 63. I have no objections to present system. 64. I have no objections as they work smoothly, and I am not aware of any smuggling. 65. I would make no change in the taxation of ganja. 66. I am aware of no reasons for different rates in different localities. 67. No. 68. I have never had such shops in any dis- trict where I have been employed. 69. Local enquiries are made as to the wishes of the feelings. The present official tendency is rather to close old shops to opening new ones. 70. I know of no smuggling. Oral evidence. I have been over 19 years in the service. I had seven years' experience in Assam as Assist- ant Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner in the districts of Cachar and Sylhet. I am not prepared to give a precise opinion about ganja. In my written answers I made as precise state- ments as I could, based on enquiries specially made here in the Murshidabad district on pur- pose. I did not like to trust my memory in regard to definite details. The effects of ganja never came prominently before me, except when I was in charge of the Cachar Jail as Assistant Commissioner. There I saw its alleged effects in connection with tea garden coolies as producing insanity. They were lunatics sent to the jail for observation. Ganja was the principal cause assigned. I, of course, did not make special enquiries as to the cause. It was not my business to do that. I heard dhatura mentioned there. It was said that coolies and others put in dhatura and other substances to increase the effect of the dose. I have heard the same here. I did not verify this statement. It was a matter of common talk that other drugs were thus used to increase the effect, that there was admixture of intoxicants for this purpose. I heard this in connection with these insanity cases. The tea garden coolies are also noted hands for liquor. They took anything they could get. We had to take special precautions about their liquor shops. We had constant complaints. I think that the connection of ganja with insanity was probably much exaggerated. Just as in the ordinary vital statistics the police put down every thing to fever, so they are apt to put down insanity to ganja very freely, and often without sufficient cause. So, when there is an epidemic of cholera, everything like diarrh57 as manure. Milk is poured upon the plant in the belief that it causes flowering. 10. No; the persons who thus cultivate the wild bhang do not form a special class. 11. It is believed that the plants cultivated for the production of ganja are never raised from the seed of the wild hemp. 12. See answer to question 7. Such cases are not common in this district, and are not confined to any particular locality. The male plant is not extirpated in such cases, as the cultivator here cannot distinguish between male and female plants. 13. Babu Hem Chandra Kerr's report may be referred to for an answer to this question. 14. (a) Very seldom. (b) Never. (c) Bhang is generally prepared in this district from the wild hemp. 15. The bhang from the wild plant is usually prepared by letting the branches or leaves dry in the sun and then storing these up. A more costly method of preparation is boiling the leaves with milk and water. The leaves are afterwards dried in the sun and stored. This practice is re- sorted to by few only. In rare instances the dried leaves are smoked when sometimes they are mixed with ganja. Bhang is commonly drunk. The drink is prepar- ed by grinding the bhang leaves with bhang mas- sala, a compound consisting of the following in- gredients, and by making a dilution of the paste: 58 Charas is ordinarily used with the prepared tobacco to make it soft and easy of smoking. As regards bhang massala, please refer to answer to question 15. 30. Ganja and charas are usually smoked in company. Bhang is taken both in solitude and in company. Habitual moderate consumers of the bhadra loke class and many cultivators take ganja in solitude. The consumption of ganja and charas is mainly confined to the male sex and not to any particular period of life. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. Bhang is used by both males and females. The latter take it mostly as a medicine. 31. The habit of consuming ganja and charas is easily formed. Once formed, it is difficult to break it off. In case of consumers frequently associating themselves with veteran consumers or obtaining ganja with little or no cost, the moderate habit has the tendency to develop into the excessive habit. Bhang is much more harmless in this respect. 32. The only social ceremonies in which ganja is used by the people of this district are locally known as "Trinather mêla" and "Gorakyanather puja." "Trinath" is a change for Trailakyanath or Mahadeb. The mêla is a social gathering in honour of the deity Mahadeb. Hence the name "Trinather mêla." The ceremony of worship is not gone through on such occasions, nor is there any specific time for it. It is held after nightfall in the houses of Hindus of all classes. It has now almost fallen into disuse among the higher classes of the community. A few of the bhadra lokesnow allow the ceremony to be performed at the special request of their dependants of the lower class. There is no idol made on this occasion, as is generally done for other pujas. The people congregate in an open space of the house or in an outer room, where, in front of the assembled men, a pice worth of ganja, of oil, and of betels and nuts are kept ready. With the oil a lamp is lit and with the ganja three kalkis or chillums are prepared and placed before the lamp. The people then begin to sing Baulah songs in a chorus, and, while so singnig, the persons, three at a time, smoke the three chillums. The cere- mony is over with the extinction of the lamp, and the persons then disperse to their own houses. No Brahmin is required for this ceremony, nor do the females take part in the proceedings. Siddhi or bhang is used on the occasions of Gorakyanather puja and Nowami Dasserah. Gorak- nath signifies the deity that protects the bovine species. When a cow brings forth its first calf, the deity is invoked for her well being, and also for oblations offered for the blessings thus conferred on the family. Accordingly, on the 20th day after the birth of the calf, a ceremony is held for the worship of the god. On this occasion pills or balls are made of bhang powder or paste mixed with the milk of the cow and sugar. The pills are then distributed among the cowherds and others, who chant a legend of Goraknath. The pills or balls are eaten after the chanting ceases. On the third day of the Durga puja festival (Nowami), bhang or siddhi is drunk by persons of all classes and ages in the Hindu community, and the same custom is repeated on the following day, Bijaya Dosami, after the ceremony of the immersion of the idol. The custom is not now universally observed. The use of the drug in connection with these customs is regarded essen- tial and is temperate. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit of indulging in the drugs, nor is it otherwise injurious. 33. The consumption of ganja and charas is not favourably regarded by the people, and, in the case of excessive consumers, the general feeling is one of aversion. They are called ganja-khorsfrom the fact of their always having a peevish and irritable temper. The Hindus are a peace- loving nation, and anything that tends to disturb their peace of mind is disliked by them. There is no such feeling in regard to the drinking of bhang. To the Muhammadans, the use of any narcotic is forbidden by their religion, and they look with abhorrence on those that are addicted to it. The custom of worshipping the hemp plant is not prevalent in this district. 34. It would be a serious privation to the habitual excessive consumers as also to the labour- ing classes habituated to a moderate use of the drug to forego its consumption. The habitual excessive consumers will be driven to the necessity of resorting to some other kind of narcotic more deleterious and expensive, say dhatura and opium. The moderate consumers of the labouring classes will be deprived of a stimulant in which they find soothing relief from the bodily pains caused by hard labour. For example, the Jaulahs, or fisher- men, who, by the very nature of their calling, are required to remain in water for the most part of the day, smoke ganja to invigorate their system, and to deprive them of the drug would be to interfere with their means of livelihood. 35. No; it would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs. The drug would be consumed illicitly. It is hopeless to attempt prohibition by legal enactments. The prohibi- tion would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, particularly among the excessive and moderate consumers of ganja and of bhang, in certain localities, where it is used as medicine or in connection with the social or religious cere- monies, such as have been described above. The prohibition would lead to rioting. The suppres- sion of the trade in ganja would be followed by recourse to dhatura and opium. 36. No. 37. Yes; ganja-smoking acts more instantane- ously on the brain than charas-smoking. 38. No. 39. The smoking of ganja and charas is cer- tainly a less injurious form of consumption than eating or drinking the same. Very few resort to the latter practice when smoking failed to pro- duce sufficient intoxication. 40. Yes; the use of bhang is prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by the kabirajes. Ganja is used in the preparation of oil by a certain class of native doctors. In cattle diseases bhang is used. 41. The moderate use of ganja or bhang may be beneficial in its effects of one or the other kind as described in (a), (b), and (c). Bhang is used as a food accessory or digestive by the bhadra lokes and up-country men, and also for the pre- servation of health. The labouring classes smoke ganja to obtain staying-power under severe ex- ertion or exposure, or to alleviate fatigue. Both ganja and bhang, but specially the latter, is used as a prophylactic for cholera. 43. Yes.
59 44. Yes; it is refreshing and produces intoxica- tion, though its intensity varies with persons of different constitutions. Bhang creates appetite. The effect lasts in the case of bhang ten or twelve hours and in the case of ganja and charas two or three hours. The after-effects of the use of ganja are dullness, languor, and debility. The want of subsequent gratification produces intense desire and uneasiness. 45. If milk and other nutritious food is taken, the moderate consumers of ganja keep very good health. They can work very hard, and are seen in no way deficient, either mentally or morally. The habitual moderate use does not produce any of the noxious effects mentioned in this question. Bhang is perfectly innocuous. 46. The habitual excessive use of all these drugs produces all these noxious effects. 47. No. 49. No. 51 and 52. No; I do not think the excessive or moderate use of ganja has any connection with the commission of crime in general or with crime of any special character, or with the preparation to commit such crime. 53 to 55. No. 56. Bhang used even in moderation with milk or sugar causes more, and when drunk with salt and black-pepper produces less, intoxication. Ganja smoked with tobacco leaves produces ordinary intoxication. In a very few cases dhatura is used with ganja for personal consumption with the object of obtaining the highest inebriation. 57. See answer to question 39. 58. The present system of excise administra- tion in respect of hemp drugs is working fairly well, but not quite satisfactorily. Various ex- periments were made in this district for regulat- ing the taxation of ganja, chiefly by means of license fees. With a view to obtain the highest amount of revenue, the farming or monopoly sys- tem was gradually introduced till nearly three- fourths of the total number of shops passed into the hands of the monopolists, who offered very large increase of fees. This tended to force up the selling price to an abnormally high rate, and to restrict seri- ously the consumption, to the great hardship of the consumers, who formed the bulk of the poorer classes. Illicit sales sprang up. The practice of storing up wild bhang became prevalent, and there were many convictions for illicit possession of bhang. Thus, what was gained in license fee was lost in duty. To remedy the abuse, the monopoly was broken up and the licenses were settled with independent purchasers at less fees. The prices went down to the level of the adjoining district, and the sales received an expansion. The consumers felt great relief, and illicit sales gradu- ally disappeared. The decrease in license fees was more than counterbalanced by the increase in duty. From last year, however, the upset prices have been fixed at very high rates, without regard to local conditions. This has been aggravated by the steady en- hancement of duty. The independent vendors being unable to pay increased fees have been driven out by a body of monopolists. The old state of things has again been revived. Ganja is being sold at prohibitive prices in the town60 Question 46.61 10. I cannot say. I believe the same as other cultivators. 11. I cannot say. I should think not. 12. Exceptional cases of illicit cultivation have come to my notice from time to time, but I cannot now say where exactly. 13. To Rajshahi and other neighbouring dis- tricts. I think that ganja might probably be cultivated anywhere, and have met isolated instances of illicit cultivation in many districts. 14. Ganja is prepared under official control in Rajshahi and the neighbouring districts. I have never seen charas, and know nothing of it. Bhang, meaning hemp tea, is prepared in Orissa. I cannot give figures showing how much is pre- pared of each. 16. I think that bhang is generally prepared by the people in their houses. I think it is generally prepared from the male hemp plant. A sort of ganja is prepared from the wild plant wherever grown, but except when prepared from female hemp it is very weak. 18. Ganja, I know, deteriorates by keeping, but I cannot answer the other questions. 19. So far as I know, ganja is only used for smoking. I know nothing of charas, but am told that it is eaten. 20. No general answer can be given to this question. 21. I am told that round ganja is the strongest and is therefore preferred by regular smokers. I am also told that it is too strong, and so other people prefer 'chur' which is weaker. 'Flat' contains too many sticks to be popular. 23. In this connection I take bhang to mean the same as siddhi. It is used for smoking, but I cannot give figures. 24. So far as I know, bhang is always used as a drink, but I cannot give figures. I think it is not eaten. I have not heard of its use as a drink except in Orissa. 25. I have not been in any one place long enough to reply to this question. 26. This would require special observation which cannot, I should think, be applied. 27. I think that no answer can be given to this question. 28. This cannot be answered because (1) no one will give correct information; (2) in no in- toxicant can an average be laid down62 so. Charas, I am told, is always eaten, but this is what my Uriya servant says. I know nothing of it. 58. I have always had to carry out orders in reference to Excise Administration. I cannot at present suggest any improvement. 62. I am not sure if this question intends 'bhang' as I have used the word. If so, I think that bhang is very harmless, and that no control is necessary. 63 and 64. No. 65. Intoxication by ganja is the cheapest in- toxication of all. 66. The difference is due to the fact that flat ganja contains a large amount of sticks which are of no use. At the same time, as already stated, I am told that round ganja is more intoxicating, and I believe this to be due to greater fermenta- tion. Then chur or broken ganja contains no sticks at all. 67. No: bhang meaning what I call 'siddhi.' 68. If this means where they may be consumed on the premises in the sense that liquors may be so consumed in English public houses, I think not. Ganja is not generally consumed in the shop where it is bought. I do not understand the latter half of the question. 69. Yes. Some enquiry is made, if I am in charge of a district, by the Excise Deputy Collector or myself if I happen to be in the neighbourhood. Sometimes enquiries are made by Excise subordi- nates. Certainly local public opinion should be considered on every question. 70. I think there was some smuggling from Native States into Cuttack when I was there, but I am not sure. Duty is generally paid, I think. 24. Evidence of MR. W. R. BRIGHT, Deputy Commissioner of Palámau. 1. I have been in charge of Excise, both as subordinate officer and district officer for some years past. 2. They are known as chipta (flat), gol (round), and chur (broken). The last is also locally known as "jatt." 3. I have seen quantities of wild bhang in the Bettiah sub-division, and have seen ganja of an in- ferior kind introduced from Nepal. 4. It is there called bhang. 6. The bhang grows very densely, especially near villages. 7. It is cultivated in Rajshahi, but I have never been there. 8 to 12. No information. 13. (a) Yes. To Rajshahi I believe. (b) No information. (c) There is no wild bhang in this district, which would seem to show that the climate is unsuited for it. 14. Vide answer above. 16. In the Bettiah sub-division it was usually reported that the people used the wild bhang as a medicine for cattle. 18. These drugs deteriorate by keeping, and quite lose their effect in time. They will keep with care up to about two years. Damp affects them most injuriously. Deteriora- tion can be prevented by keeping the drugs in tin-lined boxes in dry properly-built godowns. 19. Charas is not used in this district. Ganja is generally used for smoking, but it is sometimes used as a medicine in cases of diarrh63 31. The habit of ganja-smoking is very difficult to break off, but I am told that bhang has no such effect. From what I learnt from ganja- smokers, their consumption is only limited by their purse. 32. The higher orders of Hindus in Bengal almost universally use bhang at the Bijaya Dasami festival, but the practice is said not to be generally observed in Behar. 33. The use of ganja is certainly looked upon as a fault in a man's character, and the question whether a witness consumes ganja, is often asked with a view to discredit a man. This does not seem to be the case with bhang. This dislike of ganja-smokers has nothing religious about it, but is attributed to the idea that ganja-smokers are idle, hot-tempered, useless fellows. In Bengal, and also I am informed in some places here, quantities of ganja are given as an offering to Mahadev on the night of the Shiv Chatardashi. 34. It would be a serious privation to the habit- ual ganja-smokers to give up the drug, as it is a habit very difficult to break. 35. The use of bhang could not be prohibited, as it would be, I think, impracticable to extirpate the wild plant. If ganja production were prohi- bited, no doubt there would be smuggling from the Native States, e.g., Nepal. I hardly think ganja consumption can be prohibited, though I dislike the drug particularly. I should much rather see the price increased and their consumption automa- tically checked. The prohibition would no doubt be followed by recourse to other intoxicants, prob- ably alcoholic. 36. I have no information. 37. I have no knowledge of charas. 38. Not, if they are of the same quality. 39. Not known. 40. Both ganja and bhang are used by the Ayurvedic school of medicine for their medicinal qualities. Bhang is used as a medicine for cattle, but I do not know for what particular form of disease. 41. (a) Bhang is said to be astringent. (b) Yes, both ganja and bhang are used for the purpose. (c) This is said to be the case. Many of the higher classes in Behar use bhang as a household medicine. The labouring classes habitually use it to alleviate fatigue. 42. This is a question more for a medical expert. 43. Yes. 44. It is said to be refreshing. Yes, ganja pro- duces intoxication, and so does bhang. Ganja is said to allay hunger, and bhang to create appetite. The ganja-smokers whom I questioned said that the intoxication of bhang lasted from one to three hours according to the quantity. The after- effects are headache sometimes and giddiness. The want of subsequent gratification does certainly produce longing or uneasiness in the case of habitual ganja-smokers. 45. (b) Ganja apparently does. (c) Yes. (d) Dysentery and bronchitis. (e) It is said to do this. (f) It is said to deaden the intellect, but not to produce insanity. 46. The habitual excessive use of ganja cer- tainly causes temporary insanity sometimes. I have myself seen two cases attributable to this cause, one when I was Deputy Commissioner of the Sonthal Parganas, and one lately in the jail here. In the latter case, which is fresh in my memory, a man was sent to jail for observation as a lunatic. The Civil Medical Officer describes him as "always after ganja64 25. Evidence of MR. N. K. BOSE, Officiating Magistrate and Collector of Noakhali. 2. These definitions may be accepted. 3. Hemp plant is found occasionally to grow spontaneously in certain localities of the district. It is nowhere abundant. 4. Ganja, siddhi, or bhang. 5. Have no experience. 6. Scattered. 7. No cultivation of hemp plant in this dis- trict. 14. No. 15. None prepared in this district. 16. None prepared in this district. 17. None. 18. I have no experience. Vendors say that ganja deteriorates within a year, and quite loses its intoxicating quality in three or four years. Exposure is said to be the cause. 19. Yes; except such as are used for medicinal purposes, in which case they are mixed up with other ingredients and administered internally or applied externally. 20. Charas is seldom, if ever, used in this dis- trict, but ganja is smoked by the following classes of people:65 subsequent gratification produces a longing, which is, however, easily controllable. 45. Habitual moderate use of ganja or bhang is not known to produce any noxious effects, physical, mental or moral. 46. The Assistant Surgeon, Doctor Nobin Chandra Dutta, writes as follows:66 65. Seems unreasonable. 66. Yes; on the principle of their different intoxicating power. 67. No. 68. There are none in the district. 69. Yes; as far as practicable. 70. I have made enquiries into the question of hill ganja. I have questioned several people of the locality, and also some "Tipperahs" who had come down to Amlighata from the hills. There is a consensus of opinion that no hill ganja is grown within a day's journey from the British frontier. I find that in 1870 a specimen of hill ganja was procured for examination, and the Civil Medical Officer reported that hill ganja is much inferior to the Rajshahi ganja in respect of its power of intoxication. The Minister of the Maharaja of Tipperah also stated that ganja was not grown in the Maharaja's territory, except in a very small quantity, which is far from sufficient to meet the local demand. 26. Evidence of MR. L. P. SHIRRES, Magistrate and Collector of Midnapur. 1. Deputy Collector, Sub-Divisional Officer, and Collector in several districts; Junior Secretary to the Board of Revenue; Under-Secretary to the Gov- ernment of Bengal in the Excise Department;Under-Secretary to the Government of India, Excise Department. 2. Yes; ganja, ganjika, turitananda, bora- tamak, sul fa, and suka-tamak. 3. The plant grows spontaneously in this dis- trict, but not abundantly. No doubt it might be easily cultivated, as a few cases occur of Kabirajes growing it illicitly for medicine. 4. See answer to question 2. The Cannabis sativa is the plant referred to. 5. The soil of this district is partly alluvial, partly laterite, and the plant grows on both. It is well known that the plant grows all along the Himalayas, in the uplands of Central Asia and all over India, although it is greatly affected by different conditions of climate. In the uplands the resin in which the narcotic principle resides exudes and is collected as charas; in the plains, where cultivated, it is found in the virginal female blossom, and when allowed to run to seed in the plains, it is found in the leaves, whence it is extracted in the form of bhang. In the Excise Manual, however, Section XIX, paragraph 3, page 152, siddhi is defined as the dried leaves of both sexes, whether cultivated or uncultivated. The preceding statement is, I believe, to be found in Babu Hem Chunder Ker's report, the only book of reference on the subject until Dr. Prain's recent report. Considerable quantities of charas are im- ported into the Punjab and the North-Western Provinces from Samarcand and other places, and probably some of this finds its way into Bengal. But all the statistics relating to this will be before the Commission. It used to be cultivated in the Jessore district, but the cultivation there was given up many years ago; I do not know for what reason; and the cultivation in these provin- ces is now confined within a ring fence in Northern Bengal. Rajshahi used to export a large quantity to the North-Western Provinces, but the exporthas fallen off, as that province now gets its sup- plies from the Central Provinces, where it is more lightly taxed. It is believed to be cultivated in the Tributary States of Orissa, whence it is imported into Orissa under the name of Gurjat ganja. It is also, I believe, cultivated in Assam, and I have known good ganja smuggled into Noakhali from the neighbouring hill tracts, where it has apparently been grown. In Madras it appears to grow wild freely, but is not cultivated, taxed, nor consumed. That province consumes opium instead of ganja. 6. Scattered. 7. Not in this district (as above noted, a few plants are sometimes illicitly grown by Kabirajes). 8 to 10. I have no knowledge beyond what is to be found in published reports. There is no cultivation in this district. 11 and 12. So far as I know, there has been no such special selection in the case of ganja as has made the cultivated fruits of Europe different from the corresponding wild fruits. That there is a marked difference, however, between the cul- tivated and the uncultivated plant is clearly shown by the fact that the Excise authorities are able to tax the wild plant (siddhi) on an altogether different scale and to allow it to be freely circu- lated. Probably this is due as much to the soil being properly prepared and the plants allowed free room as to the removal of the male plants. 13. See above. 14, 15, 16. Ganja, charas, and bhang are imported and not made in this district; that is to say, the dried leaf from which the decoction or infusion called bhang is made is imported. Bhang could be prepared from the leaves of the wild plant, and in fact, as will appear from the section of the Excise Manual quoted above, it ordinarily is so. 17. The consumers of bhang are chiefly men from up-country. It is also mixed with milk, spices, etc., and used as a medicine for dyspepsia. Charas is mixed with tobacco and smoked by a few of the well-to-do people. Ganja is used by the fishermen and the lower classes generally, partly, no doubt, because it is a less expensive habit than liquor or opium. 18. The drugs lose their narcotic properties, as ordinarily kept, in little more than a year. Ganja is kept in tin-lined chests in dry golas, but the Board of Revenue are conducting experiments to see if it will keep better if hermetically sealed. 19. Yes. 20. See above. There is hardly any charas consumed in this district. The consumption of ganja is 71 maunds a year, which, if all be taken by moderate habitual consumers, would supply about one in two thousand of the population. 21. Only round ganja is used in this district. 22. Foreign. Last year the charas used was imported from Amritsar. Eighteen seers were imported, of which seven were consumed and eleven re-exported. There are no habitual cousu- mers. Seven seers would be enough for about fifty habitual moderate consumers in a year. 23. No. 24 Bhang is largely used by up-country men, and a few of the Bengalis also use it.
67 25. Consumption of ganja here has increased by about 29 per cent. in the last ten years, probably at the expense of opium and liquor. The former has increased, but not commensurately with the population; and though statistics for the latter are not available, there can be no doubt that there was a great decrease. Last year was a bad year, and the consumption of liquor fell by 19, while that of ganja increased by 6 per cent, 26. Generally from the lower classes of the people. 27. An habitual moderate consumer would take half a tola of ganja or siddhi and about six grains of charas. Excessive consumers would take more than twice as much. 28. Ganja is mixed with tobacco, charas with tobacco and molasses. With siddhi milk, spices, etc., are sometimes mixed to form what is called a "majum" numerous references to which will be found in the latter part of Baber's Memoirs. Dhatura is not mixed with charas, but is some- times mixed with siddhi to make it more intoxi- cating. 30. Ganja and charas are consumed both in solitude and in company by adult males and public and low class women. Children do not consume it. 31. The habit is easily formed and difficult to break off. As to the development of the moderate into the excessive habit, it seems to me that if the fact had been realized that the oriental differs greatly from the inhabitant of Northern Europe in this respect as regards all nerve drugs, the Commission would never have been appointed. No doubt, this can be satisfactorily explained by the over-pressure to which we are subjected, but the fact remains that whatever form of stimulant the native of this country consumes he as a rule takes in moderation, and very, very rarely is mastered by the habit. 32. On the Bijaya day of the Durga Puja bhang is consumed as a rule by Bengalis of both sexes and of all ages. Its use is regarded as essential. The lower classes indulge in it to excess and the respectable classes take it in modera- tion. This is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit. 33. Ganja is for the most part used by the lower classes. To be a ganja smoker therefore is synonymous with being a "low caste man." If a man of a higher class smokes ganja he is looked down upon. But this, I think, is because he adopts a vulgar low caste custom. So might a taste for gin be regarded among the upper classes in England. Ganja has also got a very bad name, and is supposed to lead to madness, etc., just as, no doubt, many respectable persons in England associate gin-drinking with wife-beating and other brutal crimes. The belief, which is certainly "in the air," that ganja is very deleterious has in my opinion been largely fostered by, if it is not entirely due to, the fact that the bhadra lok of Bengal take opium and not ganja, and "compound for sins they are inclined to." 34. Ganja is never allowed in jails, and I have never heard of any evil resulting from the supply being cut off. 35. I do not think there would be the slightest difficulty in abolishing the use of ganja. For the drug to be consumed illicitly it must first be grown illicitly, and if simultaneous action were taken in Bengal, the Tributary Mahals of Orissa, the Cen- tral Povinces, Assam, and any other, place, if there is any, where it is grown, this would be practically impossible. Here and there, no doubt, a few persons would grow a few plants for private consumption; but it would be impossible for any trade to be carried on, and this would soon cease. There would be serious discontent among the con- sumers, but this might be almost entirely obviated by preceding the abolition by a progressive in- crease of duty. The discontent would never amount to a political danger such as would be caused by the abolition of opium, which would set the whole country against us and probably lead to rising's amongst the Sikhs. 36. In this district at any rate ganja is being substituted for alcohol, not alcohol for ganja. I think there is ample proof that the majority of men prefer to take some stimulant, and that the maximum of work cannot be obtained without it. There is also, I think, ample proof that the stimu- lant may take the place of another. The manner in which tea, coffee, and tobacco have taken the place of alcohol is a striking instance. An Excise map of India will also show that when one stimulant is not used another is, and I believe that the history of. each individual district will show that when the consumption of one is res- tricted another takes its place. 37. The effect of charas is more transient. 38. There is no difference in kind, but the form which contains most ganja blossom contains most resin and is therefore the strongest. 39. Smoking is generally believed to be the most hurtful. Bhang, I have often heard it said, is, when taken in moderation, no more harmful than the tea taken by Europeans. 40. Bhang is used here as a cure for dyspepsia. I have known it used as a charm to cast the devil out of a lunatic. It proved unsuccessful. 41. (a) See above. (b) It is used by people who undergo great exertion, but whether there is any causal connec- tion between the two I cannot say. (c) and (d) I do not know. 42. I should define immoderate use as one which was hurtful, and I should therefore answer this question in the affirmative. 43. They are not offensive because of their moderate consumption. 44. Refreshing. Not intoxicating. Creates appetite, but does not allay hunger. 45 to 50. I leave these questions to medical witnesses. 51. The proportion of habitual consumers among bad characters is comparatively small. These drugs are used by the lowest classes, and these classes, as in other countries, furnish the largest proportion of criminals. Whether there is any causal connection between the two I cannot say. 52. It is well known that different people under the influence of alcohol behave very differ- ently. Some go to sleep and others fight. I presume it is the same with ganja. Bhang, however, is said when taken in excess to produce stupefaction, while ganja excites. 53. When I was in Backergunge, where I served for two years, persons charged with violent crime frequently came before me, and I used to enquire whether they took ganja. In many cases I found they did so, and it was not till some years afterwards that it struck me that I had, for the M 2
68 reason stated above really no proof of any connec- tion between the two. 54. They are said to be so used. 55. Yes; but complete stupefaction is not pro- duced without admixture. 56. Spices, rose-leaf, sweets, milk, curd, and cucumber-seeds are mixed with bhang, the purpose, it is said, being to temperate the intoxi- cating effect. Dhatura is used by hard smokers to aggravate intoxication. A preparation known as thandai is sold, the ingredients of which are chiefly spices and cucumber-seeds. 57. Not is this district. 58 to 60. If it is proved that ganja is more hurtful than other stimulants, it should, I think, be abolished, otherwise I have no fault to find with the system. Personally, I cannot say whether it is worse or not. I am inclined to think that it is, but I do not feel at all certain. 65. In Bengal it is only recently that ganja has been so highly taxed, and it is still, as far as I can learn, the cheapest intoxicant. In the Central Provinces the tax used to be very light indeed (I think only Rs. 1-4-0). I do not know what it is now. 66. Yes, because the plant contains more leaves and twigs and the others more blossom. 67. No. 27. Evidence of MR. E. H. C. WALSH,* Officiating Magistrate and Collector of Cuttack. 2. The above definitions may be accepted. Gurjat ganja is only dried, and not flattened or rolled like the Bajshahi drug. There is no sale of charas in this district. 3. A species of ganja known as Gurjat ganja grows in the Gurjat estates bordering on the Districts of Puri and Cuttack, and (illicitly) will grow spontaneously in the bordering portion of those districts. 4. Siddhi, bhang, subji, and patti; and the differences between them are such as are given in the definitions; charas is a name not in use, and that form of the drug is not consumed. 5. It grows either on the plains or at a slight elevation on hill sides. It is generally grown on a dry and loamy soil, and a damp soil does not suit it. I cannot say the height of elevation up to which it will grow. 6. Scattered in the cases where I have seen it. 7. There is no licit cultivation in Orissa, but in the Tributary Mahals of the Gurjat, the variety known as Gurjat ganja is grown extensively. 8. I cannot say. Enough is grown for local consumption, and also for export into British territory. The area has no doubt increased since 1889, when the prohibition against growing it within three miles of the British border was withdrawn, and that amount of extra land, there- fore, left available for its cultivation, where desired. 9. The plants are grown from seeds towards the end of the rains. They take about six months to come to maturity. They are then cut down and left to wither. When dry, the tops of the female plants containing the flowers are cut off and tied together. This constitutes ganja. The leaves are also collected for patti. 10. There is no restriction of class or caste. 11. Yes. NOTE.69 to develop into excess other than would be the case in any other from of self-indulgence which the person permitted to become excessive. 32. During the Durga Puja, bhang is drunk on the night after the images have been thrown into the water, but not generally leading to excess. Siddhi made up into balls with molasses and ghee is also offered to Ganesh at his festival in the month of Bhadro, but the amount in each ball is very small and would not produce intoxication. I do not think these ceremonies would be likely to lead to the formation of a ganja habit, coming as they do at such long intervals. 33. The taking of ganja is looked down upon by the people, and held in disrepute on account of its effects. The habit of taking siddhi or bhang, however, is not looked down on, being more general and less harmful. 34. It would be a serious privation to habitual ganja consumers to forego its use. It is smoked by the poor as being a cheaper form of intoxication than liquor, and its effects more lasting. If deprived of it, they would therefore probably take to smoking the kuchila or dhatura seeds, which are both injurious. 35. I do not think it would be feasible as regards Orissa, owing to the facility for smuggling from the Tributary States. Its prohibition would also cause great discontent, as in Orissa the con- sumption of these drugs takes the place of alcohol. As stated in last question, its prohibition would probably lead to the consumption of other drugs equally or more injurious. 36. Not in Orissa. 37. I do not know. 38. Rajshahi ganja (round) is the strongest, but the nature of their effects is similar in different degrees, and stronger than that of the Gurjat ganja. 39. The smoking of ganja is said to be more injurious than drinking of siddhi or bhang, and for this reason the habit of taking ganja is more looked down on than the other. 40. Siddhi is used as a drug in the case of bowel-complaints by native doctors. 41. Siddhi is considered to be70 61. Charas not in use in Orissa. 62. Hemp is not grown in Orissa. I would not consider the restriction of its cultivation for the production of bhang in the Tributary States at present necessary, except that if the Rajas took its cultivation under State supervision, it would lead to less smuggling into British territory. 63. A law might be passed rendering the sale of any hemp drug to persons under a specified age penal; but, as stated before, the drugs are not much consumed by the young. 64. The present regulations for the importation of Rajshahi ganja are adequate, but the bales should be more securely packed and in stronger gunny to prevent any removal on the way. The rule for the importation of Gurjat ganja is that not less than eight maunds be imported at a time. This might be somewhat reduced to five maunds as importers are not always ready to buy eight maunds, and in this way the sale of Gurjat ganja would be encouraged, as compared with Rajshahi; and, as it is stated to be less harmful, this would be an advantage. 65. Ganja is for its price much more intoxicat- ing than alcoholic liquor, and hence is the intoxi- cant of the poor. To make liquor so cheap that it would be able to take the place of ganja or siddhi in this respect would not be, in my opinion, desirable. 66. The present proportion between the rates appears good, as by them the more intoxicating form of the drug is the more highly taxed. 67 and 68. No. 69. Yes. 70. There is smuggling from the Tributary States on the borders of Orissa into the districts of Orissa. The only way to prevent this is to have a strong preventive or detective force. In the two districts of Orissa, with which I am acquainted, viz., Puri and Cuttack, such cases have been much better detected in recent years owing to the inducement given to the police and others to detect them, by the liberal distribution of rewards on conviction. 28. Evidence of MR. H. R. H. COXE, Offg. Magistrate and Collector of Puri. Oral evidence. I have been over nine years in the service. I have been Collector of Puri only since the begin- ning of last December. I have been on tour for two months, about a fortnight of which was spent in Gurjat States, and the rest in the interior of this district. I was, while in the States, occupied specially with work connected with a recent rising and had no opportunity to investigate questions of general information. The only way in which ganja came to my notice then was that in the Rampur State, where I had grievances to investi- gate, one of the grievances alleged was that the Raja levied taxation on ganja. The people put up their grievances at great length, and mentioned everything that they possibly could against the administration. In respect to ganja they stated that they should have perfectly free trade in ganja and no taxation. My belief is that this was not a grievance that affected the people generally at all and that there was little of weight in it. But it was mentioned. The Raja taxes the vend; but I am not certain whether he interferes with cultiva- tion. In comparison with other matters contained in the representation of the raiyats this was quite unimportant. I made no inquiries as to the ex- tent of cultivation nor as to the traffic in the drug. I think there is no part of the district in which ganja is not used. By "used" I mean smoked. Ganja is generally smoked, though it is also occa- sionally drunk. My impression is that the use of the drug is common all over the district. At the same time I think it is commoner along the roads. That is, I think, it is commoner with pilgrims than among the real inhabitants of the district. My impression is that Gurjat ganja is at least as popular as the Rajshahi ganja, perhaps more so. This impression is not based on careful inquiry, but it is based on what I have heard here as to the popular view of the drug throughout the district. Besides the Gurjat ganja is cheaper than the other. Yet it is of the Rajshahi that the most is issued. Thus, taking the last quarter's returns, we find that the issues of Rajshahi ganja amounted to 17 maunds and 32 seers and of Gurjat 6 maunds 13 seers. The consumption of licit Gurjat ganja has been steadily rising for the last three years as com- pared with the consumption of Rajshahi. But still it falls very far short. This leads me to have a strong impression that there has been much smuggling of Gurjat ganja. It is popular, yet it is not issued from the legal sources of supply, and the fact that the legitimate consumption is rising so rapidly would seem to show that the people have long used it, but that we are now only begin- ning to get the consumption of it under our control. This seems a logical conclusion. I have before me also the settlement of the shops for next year. There are forty-three shops. Of this, only fourteen shops have taken Gurjat ganja at all during the current year. Of these, all but one or two are in the Sudder sub-divi- sion. The Khorda Sub-division has two thanas, viz., Khorda and Bhanpur. Half of Khorda is surrounded by Native States, and Bhanpur is quite imbedded in the Native States. At the head-quarters of Khorda there is one shop, which takes on an average one seer and three chit- tacks a month. No other shop does. In Bhan- pur there is only one shop, which takes two chit- tacks. All the rest of the Gurjat ganja goes to the Sudder sub-division. Most of it goes to Puri town and the shops on the high road. But the interior shops of the Sudder sub-division also take it. My conclusion is that the Khorda sub-division gets a very large portion of its supply by smuggl- ing. It is obviously natural that the Khorda people would prefer Gurjat ganja, being of the same race as a large portion of the people of the Native States and being accustomed to it. The figures seem, to bear this out. The average issues per mensem are:71 There are seizures of illieit ganja both in Khorda and in the Sudder sub-division. I cannot say at present how many cases come from each sub-divi- sion. The total number of prosecutions for posses- sion of Gurjat ganja in the district for the nine months ending 31st December last was sixty-six. All of the Sudder cases come to me for sanction- ing of the distribution of rewards, and I see many of the Khorda cases. My general impression is that the cases as a rule are boná fide cases. If this is so there must be a great deal of smuggling, because our detective agency is no stronger than anywhere else. All the cases I have seen are petty. The people most concerned in the Sudder sub-division are low class people, either consumers or servants carrying it for others. In Khorda it is generally the people themselves. Of course the drug is also found with pilgrims; but I think the prosecutions of pilgrims are less frequent. There is no search of pilgrims whether coming by sea or land. It would be monstrous to search pilgrims, to search the carts or bundles of pilgrims for Gurjat ganja. We do not search them either for excessive possession of ganja or for illicit Gurjat ganja when coming by routes through the States. Pilgrims by sea are very few. The seizures of ganja being petty would indicate that as a rule it is local consumers who bring it in, but I came across a case the other day in which the man was a professional smuggler. I cannot of course say how large a proportion of smugglers are prose- cuted. I cannot say whether Mr. Taylor's estimate of one-twentieth is correct. But I am certain that sixty per cent., the estimate of the Deputy Collector, is preposterous. Ten or twenty per cent. would, I think, be a high estimate. As I have said, I am convinced that the consumption in Khorda is far in excess of the issues from legiti- mate sources of supply. Gurjat ganja is sometimes used in drink; but so also is the Rajshahi ganja. I have been told by some natives elsewhere that they used Rajshahi ganja thus and been asked to partake. But the principal use of both, so far as I know, is smoking. I do not know which kind of ganja is stronger nor whether the one is more deleterious than the other. I have no experience here to enable me to say whether a man who has acquired the habit of using the one will take easily to the other, or prefer what he is accustomed to. I know nothing of the extent of the use of ganja in the Native States. I do not know about the use of liquor in Native States. The use of liquor there will, no doubt, be much the same among the Uriya raiyats as it is in Khorda. There the raiyats drink hardly at all. But perhaps the Khonds may be great drinkers. I have not had any opportunity of ascertaining their habits. As our relations at present stand with the Native States it would be difficult to introduce any system into any part of their administration. For our present position in regard to them is to stand aloof and practically wash our hands of them. But if we were to enter into closer rela- tions with them, I think there would be no diffi- culty in introducing any ganja system that might be necessary in prohibiting cultivation and other- wise restricting the drug. I think it would be easy, in respect to the three States connected with this district, viz., Ranpur, Naiagarh, and Kanda- para. My attention has not been drawn to smuggling from Madras. We border for a very short dis- tance on Gumsur; but my attention has been directed chiefly to smuggling from our own Tri- butary States. I have no knowledge of the facts about any smuggling from that presidency. The Madras border is comparatively very small. I cannot give any satisfactory explanation of the slight increase in ganja consumption shown in the figures for 1892-93 as against the average for the preceding five years. I think that the withdrawal of the prohibition of cultivation in Native States within three miles of the border would not affect the matter. For the distance of three miles would be nothing in respect to the smuggling of ganja. Nor do I think the prohibition could be expected to be effectively enforced in our present relations with the States. As to the increase in duty I believe that increase in duty is not invariably accompanied with decrease in consumption, and I have shown that the increase in the use of licit Gurjat ganja has increased steadily since 1891-92. 29. Evidence of MR. J. H. BERNARD, Offg. Magistrate and Collector, Nadia. 1. The ordinary opportunities of a Bengal Civilian of 81/2 years' standing. 2. Yes, each of the articles is locally known by the names mentioned in Dr. Prain's report. 3. In the District of Nadia. It is abundant in this district. I have seen it growing wild in Saran and Muzaffarpur districts. 4. Ganja72 20. Generally speaking the labouring class smoke ganja and charas. Some gentlemen also smoke them but they are few. I cannot give the proportion of smokers. 21. Chur is preferred for smoking in Kushtia sub-division and round ganja in the other sub- divisions of this district. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used. It is imported from Calcutta. 23. Yes, but rarely. There is no particular locality where it is used. It is used instead of ganja. 24. No classes of people eat bhang. There are several who drink bhang. They are scattered all over the district and it is difficult to say the pro- portion. 25. Ganja73 30. Evidence of MR. A. E. HARWARD, Offg. Magistrate and Collector, Bogra. 1. I have served in different districts of the pro- vince since 1885. 2. These definitions are correct. The names in common use here are bhang, siddhi, and charas. Flat ganja=chipta ganja. Round ganja= gol ganja. Broken ganja=chur ganja. 3. The wild hemp plant occurs in most districts of Bengal. It grows abundantly in the western part of this district. 4. There are two varieties74 through this district also use the drug. I have written these remarks with special reference to this district, but they would also apply to most districts in Bengal. Charas is not used here. 21. In this district flat ganja is most commonly used. But the tastes of different districts vary. The consumers like the form of the drug that they are most accustomed to. 22. Charas is not used here, and in no district of which I have had experience is there any large consumption of charas. 23. I am informed that ganja smokers, when they cannot get ganja, sometimes, smoke bhang, but this is rare. No instance of this practice has come within my personal observation. 24. (a) Bhang itself is not eaten. Majum, a preparation made from bhang, is eaten in some parts of the province, but it is not apparently used in this district, and I have no accurate information as to the classes who use it. (b) The use of bhang as a drink is not confined to any particular class. It is more general among up-country men than among Bengalis. It is more common among Hindus than Muhammadans. Strict Muhammadans do not indulge in bhang. 25. The consumption of ganja which has paid duty shows a distinct tendency to decrease in this district, as will be seen from the following figures:75 the cessation of the habit does not cause any of the intense craving, uneasiness, and actual illness caused by the cessation of the opium habit. In the case of bhang there does not appear to be any strong tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. In the case of ganja, a great deal depends on the circumstances of the con- sumers. Men of fixed occupation, who get no opportunity or temptation to indulge till late at night, usually remain moderate consumers all their lives; but in the case of men of no fixed em- ployment (especially religious mendicants), there is a marked tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. It is a social custom among Hindus to drink bhang on the last day of the Durga Puja. The drink is offered to every guest and every member of the household. The use of the drug does not appear to be regarded as in any way essential; it is apparently merely a sign of hos- pitality. The consumption is usually moderate; indeed, it is often a mere form. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit. 33. Among the upper classes the occasional use of bhang is tolerated, but the habitual or ex- cessive use is considered disreputable. Among the upper classes the use of ganja is considered disreputable. Among the respectable cultivating classes (including in that term Hindus of higher castes and the ordinary Muhammadan cultivators of this part of the province), the use of ganja is rare, and such few ganja smokers as there are, are generally regarded as rather shady characters. But among the low caste Hindus and among the labouring classes generally the ganja smoker is not thought any worse than his fellows. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion. But ganja usually forms part of the offerings made at certain shrines of Siva. 34. It would undoubtedly cause discontent among habitual ganja smokers if they were de- prived of their ganja, but I cannot say that it would be any serious privation to them. 35. It would be absolutely impossible to prevent the use of bhang. Any attempt to do so would produce no effect, except the harassment of inno- cent people and the enrichment of underlings in the police and excise departments. The only way in which the use of ganja could be prevented would be by entirely cutting off the supply. It would be perfectly possible to put a stop to the cultivation of the ganja plant in this and the adjoining districts, and to prevent the cultivation of the plant on any considerable scale in this prov- ince. If, however, ganja continued to be pro- duced elsewhere, it would certainly be smuggled into Bengal, and it would be impossible to prevent such smuggling. I have no information as to whether the production of ganja is or could be carried on on any considerable scale in Nepal or any other Native State; but the possibility of such production should be carefully considered before any measure of prohibition is resorted to. So long as illicit ganja could be obtained, the prohi- bition of the production here would do more harm than good. The prohibition of cultivation would cause some loss to the cultivators, but would not deprive them of their means of livelihood, as they could grow other crops. The wholesale dealers would suffer more seriously, but their number is small. Prohibition would cause considerable discontent among habitual consumers, but such discontent would not in Bengal amount to a political danger. I cannot speak for other provinces. I regard it as certain that, in event of effectual prohibition of the production of ganja, the majority of persons who now consume ganja would spend on other stimulants the whole of the money which they now spend on ganja. The up-country labouring classes and low caste men generally prefer spirits to ganja, and only resort to ganja because it is cheaper. 36. I do not find any evidence of any such change in this district. 37. I have no experience of the effects of charas smoking. 38. There is no difference in kind in the effects. In this district, where flat ganja is consumed, it is generally reputed that round ganja is stronger; but I do not believe that there is really any great difference in their effects between these two kinds, or between them and chur. 39. Drinking bhang is less injurious than smoking ganja. I have seen many men who have ruined their constitution by excessive ganja smoking, but I have never myself come across any one who had suffered to any serious extent from drinking bhang. 40. Ganja and bhang are both made use of by kabirajes. Bhang is frequently used in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. (a) Both ganja and bhang are said to cause a temporary increase of appetite, but their use in this direction can hardly be said to be beneficial. (b) Ganja undoubtedly has the effect of alle- viating fatigue. Bhang also has, I believe, the same effect; they are both reputed to give staying power under severe exertion. It is a fact that a large proportion of ganja smokers are found among those classes of labour- ers (such as palki-bearers) whose work involves severe exertion, and these men often display remarkable staying power, but whether the ganja gives them the staying power I cannot say. Such men are generally habitual moderate consumers. 42. The occasional moderate use of bhangappears to be absolutely harmless. The habitual moderate use of bhang does not appear to cause any noticeable ill effect. The occasional use of ganja causes unpleasant effects at the time, and is therefore rare. The habitual moderate use of ganja does not appear to cause any noticeable injurious effects in men who lead an active life. I do not think that the use of ganja can be said to be entirely harmless under any circumstances. 43. I have never heard of any case in which a moderate consumer made himself actively offen- sive to his neighbours. Even moderate con- sumers are regarded with a certain amount of disgust by their more respectable neighbours, but they never tend to become violent, nor indeed do they interfere with their neighbours in any way. 44. Bhang consumed in moderation by an habitual consumer produces slight intoxication and hilarity; it creates appetite for the time be- ing. Its effects last for ten or twelve hours. N 2
76 The effects of ganja are much more rapid. It produces immediate giddiness and intoxication. Its effects last four or five hours. The after effects of both drugs are headache and giddiness, but with the habitual consumer the after effects of moderate indulgence are not noticeable. In the case of ganja, the want of subsequent gratification produces some longing for the drug, but not nearly to the same extent as in the case of opium. 45. I am not aware that the use of bhang in moderation produces any noticeable noxious effect. The habitual use of ganja even in moderation appears to have a tendency to impair the constitu- tion, but in what precise way I cannot say. A good deal seems to depend on the habits and mode of life of the consumers. In the case of men who lead an active open air life, the moder- ate consumption does not appear as a rule to pro- duce any perceptible effect, but such ganja smok- ers as I have met with among men leading seden- tary lives have always been unhealthy-looking objects. Ganja does tend to impair the moral sense and induce habits of laziness and debauchery, but in the case of moderate consumers, who lead an otherwise healthy and regular life, these effects do not as a rule become very marked. Ganja probably tends to deaden the intellect, but I have never heard of any case in which the habitual and moderate consumption of the drug caused insanity. There may be such cases. I have met with many cases of insanity attributed to ganja smoking, but in such cases the subjects could not have been termed moderate consumers in any reasonable sense of the word. I have had no such case before me here, and have no notes of cases I have seen elsewhere, and therefore cannot give any precise details. There is one point which should be remembered, and that is that nearly all religious mendicants are ganja smokers. Many of them are men who have adopted this mode of life because they are not quite as sane as their fellows. Cases of insanity among these men should not be too readily attributed to ganja. 46. The habitual excessive use of ganja does impair the constitution and moral sense, and does cause insanity. A prolonged debauch causes an acute form of temporary madness, and long con- tinued excessive use of the drug causes general dulling of the faculties and imbecility. 47 and 48. I have never heard of any such effect. 49. I have heard of such use, but have no accurate information on the subject. 51 and 52. Bad characters may roughly be divided into the following classes:77 but the fact that, in spite of all difficulties in the way of detection, cases are from time to time detected in almost all parts of the province shows that the amount must be considerable. I believe that this smuggling could be reduced within very small limits if ganja were made a Government monopoly. The cultivators would then have the certainty of selling their whole crop promptly and at reasonable rates, and this would remove the principal temptation which they have at present to dispose of their ganja to illicit dealers. I doubt whether any measure short of this would effectually check smuggling. 61. Charas is not produced here. 62. In no district in which I have served is the hemp plant cultivated to any appreciable extent for the production of bhang. The plant often grows spontaneously on high land in the neigh- bourhood of houses, and no doubt householders sometimes protect such plants and encourage their growth for their own use; but there is no profit to be made by cultivating the plant on a large scale for the simple reason that the wild plant is so abundant. Any attempt to prevent cultivation such as I have described would do more harm than good. It would be ineffectual, and would expose innocent men on whose homesteads a few plants might be found to tyranny and extortion. Under the existing law the cultivation of the plant for the production of bhang without a license is for- bidden under section 5 of the Excise Act. I would keep this provision in order to retain the power of preventing cultivation on any consider- able scale should such be attempted, but I would make no attempt to enforce the provision in cases of the casual cultivation of a few plants such as I have described above. 63. I have no objection to the present system. 64. No. 65. I have no alteration to suggest. 66. It is necessary that there should be different rates for the different kinds of ganja for the reason that the different kinds as sold wholesale contain different proportions of the drug actually con- sumed. Flat ganja contains a considerable proportion of useless wood. Round ganja contains less wood, and chur less still. 67. No. 68. There are in this district licensed shops for the sale of ganja. There is no prohibition of con- sumption on the premises, but the drug is not as a matter of fact usually consumed on the premises. The consumers merely purchase what they require, and take it away with them. 69. No special measures are taken to ascertain the wishes of the people, nor is there any necessity for such measures, as the consumers are the only people who have any wishes about the matter. I have never heard of a ganja shop becoming in any way a nuisance to any neighbourhood. 70. I have no information regarding smuggling from Native States. In the case of ganja, there is no doubt that an appreciable quantity of the drug does escape duty. I doubt whether this smuggling could be materially diminished by any measure short of establishing a Government mono- poly. In the case of bhang the greater part of the consumption is untaxed, and I see no practi- cable means of enforcing the payment of duty on this drug. 31. Evidence of COLONEL C. H. GARBETT, Deputy Commissioner of Hazaribagh. 1. Babu Basanto Krisna Bose, as Excise Officer since September 1892, and Rai Jadu Nath Mukerji as one who has given attention to the subject since a long time. 2. Yes. Siddhi is known here as "siddhi" or "sabji." "Charas" as charas. Flat ganja is called "chipta," round ganja "gol," and broken ganja "chur." 3. Nowhere in this Division. 7. No. 14. No. 18. Ganja deteriorates by keeping. It retains its properties for about two years from date of its preparation if kept with ordinary care. Dryage of the resinous substance is the cause of deterio- ration. No means are known here to prevent deterioration. Regarding charas nothing is known, as it is not used in this district. Siddhi is a little more durable than ganja. In the case of ganja people prefer to have fresh ganja, while in the case of siddhi they prefer stuff two or three years old. Siddhi also deteriorates by dryage and consequent breakage. 19. In this district charas is not used at all; and ganja is used only for smoking. 20. Ganja is not used by the Muhammadans, of the district, except those of them who form the fakir (beggar) class. Of the Hindus the lower classes do not use it, while it is very commonly used by the middle and well-to-do classes. This remark applies to the whole of the district. Ganja is not extensively used in this district. The proportion of ganja-smokers to the entire population does not probably exceed one in a thousand. 21. Flat ganja is preferred here. 22. None. 23. It is sometimes used for smoking when ganja is unavailable. Its use is not confined to any particular locality or to any particular class. 24. The eating of bhang is not resorted to by any particular class. It is eaten only on parti- cular occasions with particular preparations. The common use of the drug is in the shape of drink. The drug is used by the middle and the upper classes of the people, and the proportion of bhang consumers to the whole population is estimated to be about one in two thousand. 25. Neither. 26. As regards ganja the generality of the con- sumers fall under head (a). Classes (b), (c) and (d) are rare. As regards siddhi, (a) habitual moderate consumers are about 75 per cent., class (b) is nil, class (c) is 25 per cent., and class (d)is nil. 27. Ganja consumers consist of the well-to-do petty land holders or cultivators, all of whom have extensive cultivations. Exposure in the rainy months to the inclemencies of the weather is generally the cause which make them resort to the practice. As regards sidhhi, the consumers become ad- dicted to it for the sake of its narcotic effect, and
78 it is preferred by the upper classes because its moderate use is not looked down upon by society. 28. (a) In case of ganja, 1/4 of a tola per head per diem, at a cost of one anna. In case of siddhi, 1/16 of a tola per diem, at a cost of three pie. 29. Dry tobacco leaf is ordinarily mixed with ganja; in exceptional cases, prepared tobacco is mixed in addition. By "prepared tobacco" is meant tobacco leaves pounded and mixed with treacle to the consistence of paste. Dry leaf is mixed in order to reduce the ganja to the con- sistency required for smoking. Prepared tobacco is used in order to make it sweet. Bhang massala is ordinarily mixed with bhang, and in exceptional cases sweetmeats. (Dhatura is not used with either of these drugs.) Bhang massala is used in order to make the stuff tasty. The exceptional admixture of sweets makes it a luxury and at the same time stronger in its effects. A preparation known as bhang massala is sold by the Banias (country druggists) in packets containing79 others lessen the feeling of heat in the brain after intoxication has disappeared. The use of dhatura as an admixture produces all the bad effects men- tioned before. 57. We have never known this. 58. The present system is working well in this district and we have no suggestion to offer for its improvement. 63 and 64. No. 65. Yes. 66. Yes, because of the difference in the quan- tity of toxic materials in each kind. 67 and 68. No. 69. Not in this district. The number of shops necessary for this district and the quantity of con- sumption are so small that public opinion in the present backward conditions of the district need not be taken into consideration. 70. There is no importation of any of the drugs from Native States into this district. So far as this district is concerned duty is really paid in re- spect to the drugs used, and there is no general use of untaxed drugs at all. 32. Evidence of Mr. C. A. S. BEDFORD,* Deputy Commissioner of Manbhum. 2. Charas is the name applied to the resinous matter which forms the active principle of the plant when collected separately. Ganja consists of the dried flowering tops of the cultivated female hemp plants, which have become coated with resin. Siddhi and Bhang.80 27. Ganja and bhang81 51. Petty thefts are committed by those who have been long addicted to the use of ganja, and whose intellectual faculties and moral sense are impaired. Violent crimes are also committed by those under the influence of the drug. 52. In the acute stage riotings and murders occur. 53. Yes. I know of no such case. 54. From what I can learn, I should certainly say yes. 55. There is reason to believe so. But in such cases generally dhatura and opium are used in addition. 56. Ganja smoked without tobacco leaves is irritating to the throat, producing violent cough- ing. Bhang used with black pepper has a cooling effect. Nothing special. 57. Ganja eaten does not produce intoxication so rapidly as when smoked. 58. The system under which ganja and bhang are supplied to the consumers has been known to cause no inconvenience to the public, and is believed to be working well. In view, however, of the increasing consumption of ganja, there ought to be further check in the shape of enhanced duty. 59. See above. 60. No cultivation in Manbhum. 63 and 64. No objection. 65. There is no great disparity in the rates of taxation upon ganja and bhang. But supposing that one pice worth of ganja gives as much intoxi- cation as four pice worth of country liquor and two pice worth of opium, I should say that there is ample room for improvement in the taxation of ganja. 66. There should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja, according to the amount of intoxication that a particular kind of ganja is supposed to induce. 67. None: only this, that with a view to check further increase of ganja consumption, rates of duty should be further enhanced. 68. None in this district. 69. Yes. 33. Evidence of Mr. R. H. RENNY, Deputy Commissioner of Singhbum. 2. These definitions may be accepted. Such are the names by which their products are known to me. 3. None. 4 to 6. See above. 7 to 9. I believe so, but not in my district. 10 and 11. Don't know. 12. I have no knowledge on this subject. 13. Yes; to Rajshahi, Bogra, and Dinajpur dis- tricts. Cannot say why. I have no knowledge as to conditions of climate, soil, etc., nor am I able to say if there are any parts of this (Bengal) province where its cultivation would be impossible. From cases which have come up before me for trial in both Chota Nagpur and Behar, I find that it is possible to grow the plant in these divisions, but I am unable to say whether or no this can be done on an extensive scale or not. In the cases referred to, only a plant or two were detected. 14. In this province (Bengal), yes. In my district no, so far as I know. 15. I have no knowledge on these subjects. 16. Bhang not in this district. Ganja, I know, can be prepared from the wild plant. I have come across cases in which people have been prosecuted for so preparing it. I have no inform- ation in regard to charas. 17. I don't know, as they are not made in this district. 18. Yes, it deteriorates by keeping; it loses its effect in time. It remains good for a year with ordinary care. Moisture and dampness are the causes of deterioration. To prevent deterioration it should be kept in a tin-lined box placed in well ventilated rooms. 19. Ganja and charas are generally used for smoking, but the former is occasionally used for medical purposes. Ganja boiled in cocoanut-oil becomes a medicine for itch, and is used in almost all the districts of Bengal. 20. Fakirs and sadhus, Bengalis, Uriyas, Beharis, Muhammadans, Tamarias, Uraons, and Bhuians smoke ganja. About 5 per cent. of the population of these classes smoke ganja. In this district ganja is used at Chaibassa, Baharagorah, Ghatsilla, Chakradharpur, and Manaharpur, and all over the district. Charas is not in use in this district. 21. Round ganja is preferred. The other kinds are not used here. 22. See concluding portion of answer to ques- tion No. 20. 23. No. 24. Bhang is both eaten and drunk by Ben- galis and Beharis in summer season only. At least 10 per cent. of these two classes use it. There is no particular locality, but this is done in places where these people live. 25. On the decrease, as prices of all principal food-grains are ruling high. 26. In this district there are habitual moderate consumers of ganja and bhang only. Their pro- portions are respectively 5 and 10 per cent. 27. About classes of people, I have already answered in questions Nos. 20 and 24. As far as this district is concerned, the use of ganja and charas is not due to any particular habits of life or circumstances. 29. Tobacco leaves are ordinarily mixed with ganja and dhatura is mixed with bhang only. These admixtures are intended to increase intoxi- cation. The ingredients mixed with bhang are anise, a species of parsley, and cardamom. They are known by the name of bhang massala. 30. As regards first part of the question I have no knowledge. Ganja and bhang are partaken of by both males and females. Children do not con- sume any of these drugs. 31. Yes, the habit is easily formed in respect of ganja and charas. Yes, difficult to break off. Yes, there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. o
82 32. At times of the annual worship of Kali, Durga, Sib and other divinities, ganja and bhang in this district are used. The use of these drugs on these occasions is excessive. I cannot answer the rest of the question. 33. The consumption is regarded with disfavour by public opinion, as it is supposed to affect the mental faculties, to impair the constitution, and to shorten life. I do not know of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. No such custom prevails here. 34. I cannot answer this question. 36 to 38. No knowledge. 39. Smoking is said to be less injurious than either drinking or eating. I cannot say why. 41. Beneficial only to those addicted to it. 43. Yes. 44. I am told that it is refreshing, produces intoxication, allays hunger, and creates appetite. Its effects last about eight hours or so, and the want of subsequent gratification produces longing as well as uneasiness. 58. Yes, I am acquainted with the system of excise administration. I consider the system capa- ble of improvement. 59. As regards cultivation, storage and trans- port, I would like to see it put in the same foot- ing as opium. Its cultivation should be supervised by a superior agency, as is done in the case of opium: there should be a factory for its storage and packing, and indents for supplies to districts should be made in a similar way as is done in the case of opium. 60 and 61. I cannot say. I have no experi- ence. 62. I consider that it should be treated in the way proposed in my answer to question 59. 63. I have objections. I would like to see the golas abolished and sales made to retail vendors from the Government treasury, exactly in a similar manner as is done in the case of opium. One good result of the proposed system would be that we could exercise control over the price at which the drug is sold to the consumers and could prevent its being sold too cheap. 64. See answers to questions 59 and 63. 65. In this district the taxation is fair with reference to alcoholic and other intoxicants; but the taxation is, generally speaking, low in all cases. Year by year, however, it is being raised slowly and gradually. 66. In this district only round ganja is import- ed, so I am unable to offer an opinion. 67. The taxation is very low at present; the consumer can afford to pay much more. The low- ness of the taxation is mainly due to the present defective method of taxing. See answer to ques- tions 59 and 63. 68. There are houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs or their preparations, and there is no prohibition to there being consumers in the premises. As no inconvenience has been brought to light as resulting from the present method, I would not interfere. 69. Up to date the wishes of the people have not been consulted; and as no complaints have been preferred, I suppose no cause for any exists. If the public did object, their objection should undoubtedly receive full consideration. 70. I have good reason to believe, in regard to this district, that a good deal of hemp drugs, but in very small quantities only, are smuggled into it from the Native States, which hem it in on all sides. All these drugs, so smuggled, are untaxed. 34. Evidence of RAI NANDAKISORE DAS, BAHADUR,* District Officer of Angul, Cuttack. 1. During the last fifteen years, while travel- ling in the Orissa Tributary Mahals, I have had frequent opportunities of watching the growth of the plant, and here and in the British Districts I have seen their use. 2. Yes, but the method of manufacturing ganja here given applies to Rajshahi ganja, and not Gurjat ganja. In the Tributary Mahals of Orissa (Gurjats) the plants are not trodden under foot, but young plants and their branches are several times twisted at the interval of every two or three days, until the plants are mature and have grown to the height of four or five feet. 3. Throughout the Gurjat; but it is only where the plant has once grown, that the plant grows spontaneously in succeeding years. It does not grow wild anywhere. 4. It is known as the ganja plant and by no other name. 5. The plant germinates at the beginning of the rains, and it grows only in manured rich soil; but there is no wild hemp properly so called. 6. Such as grow here, their growth is scat- tered; but they do not grow wild in the Gurjats. 7. As stated above, the plant is grown in well- manured land, generally homestead. In all parts of the country, a few plants may be seen growing here and there; but there is no regular cultiva- tion to any large extent, and I have nowhere seen more than twenty plants growing at one and the same place. Generally four or five plants are to be seen at a place. These are cultivated chiefly for bhang and to a small extent for ganja. Charas is not manufactured. 8. No. 9. The plant grows of itself if there are seeds of the previous year in the ground; otherwise a few seeds are sown, and nothing more than the twisting of the stem for the production of ganja is done; they are watered when necessary. 10. No; they are all of the agricultural class. 11. There is no such thing as wild hemp here; it is only where ganja has once been cultivated that the plant germinates of itself and often pro- duces ganja. 12. I know nothing of wild hemp. 13. No. No restriction. It is common to all States. No special condition of climate, etc., necessary, except that the soil must be rich. It will not grow in gravelly, concrete, or sandy soil. I do not think that in any part of the Tributary Mahals its cultivation is impossible. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in all parts of the country; but nowhere land is specially set *Was summoned to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but was unable to appear.
83 apart for its cultivation, a few plants being grown here and there. 15. The stem and branches of the plant being twisted, the female plants produce ganja. When the tree is ripe and the leaves assume an yellowish color, the plants are cut, tied into bundles, or rolled in a mat or gunny bag, and then placed under heavy weight for two or three days. Then it is taken out, exposed to dews, leaves and seeds are shaken off, and then it is dried and tied into bundles and stored. This makes flat ganja. The leaves are collected, dried, and kept for use as bhang. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever it is grown. There is no wild ganja here. 17. There is no special class. 18. Ganja is said to keep well for a year or two. Bhang for two or three years; then it gradually deteriorates. But I do not know of these having been kept for a longer period and with what effect. 19. No charas used in the Gurjats. Ganja is used only for smoking. 20. The use of ganja is not confined to any particular class or locality. Bairagis almost in- variably use ganja. No one uses charas. The proportion of people who smoke ganja is not more than 2 per cent., and is perhaps less. 21. Flat ganja locally manufactured is used. No other kind of ganja is manufactured or imported. 22. None. 23. No. 24. Not confined to any class or locality. 25. Normal. 26. As stated above, the total percentage of consumers is small, and amongst them the propor- tion of habitual, occasional or excessive consumers is much smaller. 27. Mendicant Bairagis, to be occasionally seen here and there, are excessive consumers. Labour- ing classes are occasional moderate consumers. They use it after exposure or hard labour. 28. (a) One pice. (b) One pice to four pice. 29. Tobacco leaves are mixed with ganja, because the smokers say that ganja alone cannot be smoked. Black pepper is ordinarily mixed with bhang, and occasionally mace, cardamom, cloves, and other spices, as well as milk and sugar, are mixed with it. 30. Ganja is generally used in company. Bhang is generally used in solitude. 31. No. Not easily formed. It is not difficult to break off a habit, at least is not so difficult as opium eating or smoking is. One can do without ganja or bhang if not available. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into excessive, both in ganja and bhang, if habitually used. 32. There is no such custom. 33. Bhang-drinking is treated rather with in- difference. Habitual ganja-smoking, except in the case of Bairagis, is regarded with abhorrence. 34. No. To none; but the excessive consumers may be temporarily in discomfort. 35. It will be feasible to prohibit the use of both bhang and ganja. The prohibition can be enforced only by prohibiting the cultivation of ganja (provided, of course, the Native Chiefs of all the surrounding States co-operate) and its import. There will be no serious discontent, and it is to be feared that some of the consumers might resort to the use of the more pernicious drug-opium. 36. No. 37. I know nothing of it. 88. Here we have only one kind of ganja, and that is flat ganja. 39. Smoking ganja is considered more injurious than bhang drinking or eating. 40. Bhang is prescribed. It is not used for cattle disease. 41. I know nothing of charas. Both ganja and bhang are digestive. Ganja is believed to give staying-power. In malarious tracts ganja is considered as febrifuge. Bhang is considered a tonic and aphrodisiac. Agricultural labourers use ganja on account of its staying-power. They are occasional moderate smokers. 42. I cannot say. 43. Yes. 44. Ganja is refreshing, It does produce intoxication. It does not allay hunger. Bhang creates appetite, and so does ganja. 45 and 46. I cannot say. 47 and 48. No. 49. Yes. Bhang is so considered as aphro- disiac. It is not used by prostitutes. 50. I cannot say. 51 and 52. No. Not here. 53. I do not think so. 54. No. 55. Nothing of the sort is known here. 56. Dhatura is not used in these parts. The admixture of pepper with bhang and of tobacco with ganja is considered essential, and pepper and other spices mixed with bhang are considered to have the effect of cooling. 57. No. Not here. 58 to 60. There is at present no control over local manufacture or consumption of ganja or bhang. 61. Not produced. 62. So far as the Tributary Mahals are con- cerned, I do not think any interference is neces- sary. 63. There is no such system here. 64. There is no import. As to export, officers of the districts into which Gurjat ganja and bhang is imported are in better position to answer the question. 65. There is no taxation. 66 and 67. There is only flat ganja here, and it is not used. 68. None. 69. No shops. 70. No. O 2
84 35. Evidence of MR. W. MAXWELL, Sub-Divisional Officer, Jhenidah, District Jessore. 1. The opportunities afforded by my official position. The consumption of ganja in this sub- division is comparatively small. The information contained in the following answers has been mainly gained from:85 47. The use is not hereditary. The children are not directly affected. 49. Ganja is so used by prostitutes. This use is more injurious than as a narcotic, because in this way the consumer uses the drug to excess. The habitually excessive use is said to produce impotence. 50. Answered in question No. 49. 51. Crime cannot be attributed to the use of any of these drugs here. 52. A ganja consumer when under the influence of the drug may be more easily provoked to personal violence than non-consumers in general. 53 and 54. No. 55. Ganja and dhatura may be used. The only cases in which these are now used are in theft cases. The commonest type is that of theft of ornaments from prostitutes. 56. Tobacco lessens the effect. 57. They are not eaten or drunk here, as far as I can ascertain. 58. It is working satisfactorily here. 59. The duty should be sufficiently great to prevent the consumption of these drugs increas- ing. The duty has been increased on ganja since 1st January 1894. 69. Enquiry is held by the Sub-Divisional Officer as to the wishes of the inhabitants of any place before opening a shop there. 36. Evidence of MR. W. C. TAYLOR, Special Deputy Collector, Land Acquisition, East Coast Railway, and Pensioned Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Khurda, Orissa. 1. About 47 years' residence in India, including 33 years as Assistant Commissioner, Deputy Magistrate, etc., spent chiefly in the mafassal, where I was in charge of sub-divisions with management of Abkari or Excise matters. Since 1866 I have been in Orissa, but my personal knowledge of the subject is very limited, and most of my answers to the questions have been compiled from replies to enquiries from natives of the district who have some knowledge. 2. Dr. Prain's names and definitions are correct and are used in Orissa. Charas is not much used in Orissa. The formation of seed does not appear to be prevented entirely in the preparation or rather growth of the plant, as most ganja contains fertile seeds which germinate freely. The names flat or chipta ganja, round or gol ganja, and broken or bhanga ganja are all used in Orissa. There are no other names. 3. I am not aware of the hemp plant being indigenous in Bengal, Behar, or Orissa, but the plant grows freely from seed everywhere on suit- able soil. 4. Ganja or ganjai. The Uriya ganja and Telegu ganjai; both names refer to the same plant. There is, I believe, doubt as to the two species, Cannabis sativa and Cannabis Indica, being really distinct. 5. No special conditions, excepting rich light soil, with sufficient moisture, appear to be neces- sary. The plant is indigenous in the hills of Northern India, and grows freely, producing flowers and seeds all over India, and, I believe, Asia. 6. I have never seen wild hemp growing. 7. (a) Yes; in the Tributary States of Orissa and in Ganjam, and Gumsar in Madras. (b) No. (c) Yes. Ditto Ditto. (d) No. I cannot give the extent of cultivation in the Tributary Mahals. The plant is usually grown in the gardens or near the homesteads of the raiyats, but in more or less small plots. No duty is charged on the plant or its products in the Tri- butary States and in Madras, which presidency adjoins Orissa, ganja is not an exciseable article. All the hill tribes, such as Khonds, Santias, etc., grow and consume ganja and bhang as a preven- tive of malarious fevers. 8. There has of late years been some decrease in the area under cultivation in the Orissa Tribu- tary States owing to pressure put on the Chiefs to forbid cultivation near the boundaries of the regulation districts of Puri, Cuttack, and Bala- sore. A few years ago I recollect that the Madras authorities refused to check the cultiva- tion of hemp in Gumsar on the grounds that the Khonds required ganja and bhang as a safeguard against malarial fevers. A considerable amount of what is called Gurjat ganja and patti are smug- gled into Cuttack, Puri, and Balasore. 9. The hemp plant is usually cultivated in small plots of light rich soil, on the plants getting well up, they are hoed and weeded, roots loosened, and vegetable mould or well rotted cowdung applied as manure. 10. All classes and castes will cultivate the hemp plant. The cultivation, where permitted, is not confined to any particular class. In the course of my service I have often found a few plants of hemp growing in the gardens of Brahmins and other high caste natives. Unless these plants are found and pulled up by the police, they are invariably used for preparation of ganja and bhang. 11. I do not know. 12. I know nothing of the so-called wild hemp. In the hemp grown in Orissa and Ganjam the male plants are not, I believe, extirpated. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is not permitted in the regulation parts of Orissa. In the Non-regulation parts or Tribu- tary States the cultivation is permitted by the Chiefs of those States, but in States which lapse to Government, or which come under Govern- ment management, cultivation of hemp is not, I believe, allowed. In the adjoining district of Ganjam in Madras, I believe that there are no restrictions on the cultivation of the plant or the preparation of its products, ganja not being, I believe, an exciseable article in Madras. 14. Flat ganja is prepared in the Tributary States. Charas is not prepared. Bhang is pre- pared all over Orissa. I cannot give the extent,
86 but it must be very considerable. Gurjat ganja is admitted on payment of a lower duty than Rajshahi round ganja. Patti is also admitted. A good deal of ganja is also smuggled into the three regulation districts of the province from the Gurjats and Madras. 15. The hemp heads are cut on the seeds ripen- ing in November. The heads are tied in small bundles and sprinkled with lime-water, and then alternately buried and exposed to the sun for two or three months, when the ganja is fit for use. In the Tributary States of Barambu and Nar- singhpur ganja is not buried, but is first dried in small bundles and then pressed. The flower heads only are used for smoking and called "kali ganja." The leaves, when dry, are steeped or boiled in water or milk; the water or milk in which they are steeped or boiled is thrown away, and the leaves ground up with black pepper and spices, such as cloves and car- damoms, mixed with water, sometimes sweetened, and made into a drink called bhang. Prepared by first boiling in milk the bhang is said to be cooling (thanda), but if boiled in water it is said to retain its heating (garam) or intoxicating pro- perties. 16. (a) and (b) Yes. (c) I have never seen the wild plant. 17. All classes. 18. Ganja, if not well kept, gets mouldy and loses flavour, but it is said to get stronger by keeping. Bhang will not keep. I know nothing of charas. Damp, fermentation and insects are the main causes of deterioration of ganja. The ganja should be kept in a very dry and airy place and occasionally exposed to the sun. It will keep good with care for two or three years. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking, except in rare cases, when some persons mix a little ganja with their bhang. I know nothing of charas. Ganja is also used in medicine. 20. All classes smoke ganja all over Orissa. Charas is not used in Orissa. 21. The Rajshahi or round ganja is preferred for smoking by regular consumers as being stron- ger than the local Gurjat flat ganja. Chur is not different; it is merely the flowers detached from their stalks, and before it can be smoked all ganja becomes chur or broken, as with tea and broken tea; the articles are not really different. 22. No charas is imported into Orissa, so far as I am aware. 23. No. 24. All classes. Can't give proportion, pro- bably as high as 20 per cent. of the males and 5 per cent. of the females. About 100 per cent. of priests and attendants of temples and of Vishnu- vite ascetics take bhang. 25. The use of ganja is said to be on the in- crease; also of bhang. Can't give reasons, ex- cept that the existence of so many ganja shops must have a tendency to attract consumers and increase the consumption. 26. No data to go upon. 27. All classes. I can't say what in each case are the habits of life or other circumstances which lead to the habit of smoking ganja or taking bhang. 28. (a) From pies 3 to 6. (b) From annas 2 to 8 or more. 29. For smoking, tobacco is usually mixed with ganja. Dhatura seeds are sometimes mixed with bhang, especially by ascetics, to make the mixture extremely intoxicating. Bhang massala is sold in the bazars, and is usually made up of black pepper, cardamoms, nutmeg, cinnamon, allspice, anise, carraway, poppy seeds, and flowers of the nageswar (Messna ferrea). 30. Ganja and bhang are consumed both in company and in private, and the consumption of ganja is mainly confined to the male sex. Wo- men occasionally take bhang as a cooling and digestive draught. It is not usual for children to take either ganja or bhang except when prescribed medicinally. 31. The habit is easily formed and difficult to break off suddenly. There is a great tendency for moderate consumers to develop into excessive consumers both of ganja and bhang. 32. I do not know of any. 33. The smoking of ganja is looked upon with disfavour as bad for the health and pocket and as leading to crime. No worship of the hemp plant is known in Orissa. The taking of bhang in moderation is not so injurious as the smoking of ganja, and is not so much objected to. The word "ganjari," smoker of ganja, is used as a term of abuse. 34. Regular smokers of ganja and takers of bhang would, of course, feel it as a serious pri- vation to forego the consumption of the drugs. I can give no figures. 35. As the hemp plant can only be cultivated openly, and as ganja and "patti" are bulky products, there would be no great difficulty in forbidding production or preventing smuggling. The task would be easier than in the case of salt. Consumers would no doubt be seriously discon- tented, and would probably revert to some other form of drug. I do not think that the discon- tent would amount to any serious political danger. 36. No. 37. Charas smoking is not practised in this province. 38. Rajshahi or round ganja is stronger and more intoxicating and more heating than Gurjat or flat ganja. Chur may be of either sort, and, as being the actual flowers and buds, is stronger than round or flat ganja. 39. Smoking ganja is notoriously more in- jurious than drinking bhang. I allude to the regular habit and not to occasional use. 40. All native physicians use hemp in the pre- paration of mudak, carminative digestive tonics. The use of ganja, etc., does not appear to be known here in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. (a). Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Also as a sedative. All classes. I cannot give any figures, and I only refer to the very moderate use of these drugs. 42. Included in 41. 43. They are usually inoffensive. 44. Refreshing and sedative, not visibly intoxi- cating. It is said to allay hunger for the time, but after the effects have worn off, say in one or two hours, the appetite is said to be improved.
87 After-effects unknown, but the want of subse- quent gratification at the usual hour is said to produce longing and uneasiness. 45. (b) and (c) Said not to do so. (d) and (e) Dysentery, bronchitis, and asthma from excessive use, and even the moderate use is said to give a tendency to these diseases. Habits of immorality are said to be induced. (f) The moderate use of hemp drugs is not thought to produce insanity. I cannot answer this part of the question. 46. The habitual excessive use of these drugs is well known to cause insanity, dysentery, asthma, bronchitis, dropsy, general debility, and great nerve deterioration. In fact, excessive ganja-smoking is generally thought to be more injurious than the excessive use of any other in- toxicating drug or alcohol. From the well known fact that religious ascetics and mendicants are usually strong and robust, it is probable that good and sufficient food counteracts the evil physicaleffects of ganja and bhang, for this class are noto- riously excessive consumers of hemp drugs, but they live on the fat of the land. They are, how- ever, generally more or less insane. 47. No data. 48. No data, but, as with drunkenness, the excessive use of hemp drugs probably is to some extent hereditary; and as the parent's general health and strength and moral character are seri- ously impaired, his offspring must be injuriously affected. 49 and 50. The hemp drugs are, I believe, used as aphrodisiacs. Excessive use is said to produce impotence. 51. Yes; bad characters are usually ganja- smokers and takers of bhang. I cannot say what connection the moderate use of these drugs has with crime. 52. Same as 51, but to greater extent. 53 and 54. The numerous cases of what is called running "amôk" which occur in India are often, if not always, due to excessive doses of ganja and bhang taken with or without admixture of dhatura seeds (Datura stramonium). The word assassin is derived from hashishin or hashish inebriate, and hashish is a preparation of charas. 55. I believe that the records of criminal trials in India will shew that many such cases occur. I don't know whether complete stupefaction can be induced by ganja or bhang unmixed with other drugs. 56. I cannot say further than this that the admixture of dhatura renders the drug more violently intoxicating and causes great excitement, amounting occasionally to homicidal frenzy. 57. I have no experience on the subject of the question. 58 and 59. I have not had any acquaintance with excise administration since 1889. 60. There is, so far as I am aware, no restric- tion on the cultivation of the hemp plant either in the Tributary States of Orissa or in the ad- joining district of Ganjam in Madras. The manu- facture of ganja and the preparation of bhang are entirely uncontrolled. I am not prepared to make any remarks on the system. 61. Charas is not produced. 62. One or two plants of hemp in a raiyat's garden would produce leaves sufficient to supply him with bhang, and it would not, I think, be pos- sible to control this. 63. I have no recent experience. 64. I do not know sufficient of the subject to enable me to answer this question. 65. I have no recent knowledge of the subject excepting that the present rates in this part of the country are88 them from contact with the earth, and the process of alternate burying and exposure goes on for two and three months. Question 21.89 drinking, is, according to my experience, mainly confined to the male sex and to manhood. Children seldom use ganja and bhang. 31. So far as I can judge, the habit of ganja- smoking is easily formed, bat not that of bhang- drinking. In the former case there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the exces- sive. 32. The only custom I am aware of is in res- pect of the drinking of bhang on the Bijaya Dasami, or the last day of the Durga Puja. It is a religious custom for the worshippers of the god- dess in certain localities to drink bhang on that day; but the use of the drug on that occasion is not regarded, so far as my experience goes, as essential. The use is generally temperate, and, being confined to one day in the year, is not at all likely to lead to the formation of the habit. 33. Ganja-smoking is looked down upon as a vice. There is a strong social public opinion against the smokers of ganja, who are regarded as a degraded class There is a common nick- name, "ganja-khor," by which the consumers of ganja are generally known among sober people. The epithet "ganja-khor" is so suggestive that it is often applied to fools, though they be free from the vice of ganja-smoking. The sentiment is so deep-rooted and ancient that it is hard to trace it to its original cause. But I should think that the injurious effect of the habit on the intellect, and through it on the general usefulness of the smoker, was at the root of the sentiment. The habit not only impairs the intellect, but makes the smoker's temper irritable. This also accounts for the sen- timent. 34. From what I know, I don't think it would be a serious privation to the consumers of any of these three drugs90 ing unimpaired health, but perfectly sober and sensible, and not in the least obnoxious. In fact, it would be difficult, or more correctly speaking, impossible, to know that the moderate consumer had drunk the drug unless he were either seen or admitted to have done so. 43. Perfectly so. 44. I cannot give any satisfactory answer without questioning consumers, which I suppose I am not expected to do. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja may not be particularly injurious physically, but its mental and moral effect cannot be avoided. It is supposed that the habitual use of ganja leads to bronchitis and other chest diseases. It does im- pair the moral sense and induce laziness. Its excessive use deadens the intellect, and in a few instances produces insanity. I am not, however, familiar with actual cases of insanity induced by ganja smoking, and cannot therefore give details. 53. My experience does not lead me to believe that excessive indulgence in any of these drugs incites to unpremeditated crime, violent or other- wise. It is in this respect that it is so marked a contrast to alcohol drinking. 54. No knowledge. 55. I think complete stupefaction is possible by inhaling the fumes of ganja, but I have no expe- rience of any actual instance. 56 and 57. No knowledge. 58. I have been so long out of the department that I am not in a position to offer any useful opi- nion on this point. 59. I have been so long out of the department that I am not in a position to offer any useful opinion on this point. 60. Ganja is not produced in any district in which I have served. I cannot, therefore, answer this question. 61. Unanswered for the same reason. 62. Bhang grows so wild that I think it would not be feasible. 63 and 64. None. 65. In my opinion taxation of ganja was heavy with reference to outstill liquor at the time I was in charge of the Excise Department, but I cannot give any definite opinion with reference to the present state of things, of which I possess no detailed knowledge. 66. I think there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja. The flat and round ganja contain twigs which have no intoxicating power, whereas the chur or broken ganja is devoid of twigs. It is therefore natural that the last variety should pay higher rate of duty than the two first. 67. Left unanswered, as I don't know the pre- sent method exactly. 68. Not that I am aware of. There used to be none such when I was in charge of the Excise. 69. This used to be done when I was in charge. 70. I am not in a position to answer this ques- tion. 38. Evidence of BABU RAM CHARAN BOSE, Kayasth, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Alipur, 24-Parganas. 1. As Sub-divisional Officer in Bagir Hat, Magura, Bishenpur, Supal, and Ranaghat, and Deputy Collector in charge of Excise at Pabna and temporarily in Darbhanga, and Deputy Magistrate in Noakhali, I had opportunities of knowing of excise cases, and in 24-Parganas, too, I had to dispose of excise cases. My information is based on what I could know from official duties and personal acquaintance with some jogis in different parts of Bengal and the North-Western Provinces, and with people by whom some of the produce of hemp is used. 2. The definitions are accepted so far as my answers have reference to. Of ganja the three sorts are flat, round, and chur. Charas is the resinous matter. Siddhi or bhang or bijaya or sabji, the dried leaves of hemp plant. 3. I have seen it growing in Mansha, in Bagir Hat Sub-division and Jessore. Recently an in- stance was brought to my notice of a large plant grown in the 24-Parganas. The subject of re- moval of the plant formed the ground of a crimi- nal case. 4. Yes, the plant is the same. In Mansha several plants sprang up spontaneous-ly from seeds which were thrown off by up-country darwans who served in the zamindari cutchery, and were addicted to bhang or siddhi drinking. 5. The instances in which such plants were observed grew on bhitta lands, outskirts of human habitation. I could not exactly give the sea level. The soil was partially humid, and the spots where they grew were places where refuse of sweepings were thrown. 6. A few plants were observed at Mansha. 7. I have seen nowhere hemp cultivated and grown for the purposes indicated. 14. None that I am aware of. 15. (b) I have seen no preparation made from wild plants. I have seen ganja prepared for smoking, and bhang for drinking purposes. The articles were of cultivated hemp plant purchased from abkari shops. Ganja for smoking is prepared by cutting it to pieces or squeezing it with dried tobacco leaves, and bhang is made into a paste and mixed with spices and made into a beverage for drinking. 16. Bhang is prepared in houses. It can, I believe, be prepared from wild hemp plant too, but I cannot say whether these grow wild or have the same intoxicating property like the leaves of plants cultivated. 17. There is no special class of people by whom such preparations are made. Bhang is mostly consumed by up-country people, and ganja by manjis, boatmen and fisher- men, cartmen, syces, grass-cutters, whose avo- cations of life lead to constant exposure to sun and water. The up-country sanyasis, men- dicants, and fakirs are mostly addicted to ganja- smoking, and bhang is taken by them as a drink too. 18. Cannot speak much of it. Bhang, how- ever, is said to lose its intoxicating property by long keeping, but its medicinal property is said to increase by time. Ganja is said to deteriorate
91 by exposure and long keeping. With ordinary care both do retain intoxicating property for a year or so. Safety from exposure to moisture prevents deterioration. 19. Yes, so far as I am aware of, for smoking only. 20. This answer has been given in question 17. Charas is seldom smoked. It is used by some people used to night-keeping92 drug is used for healing complaints of the stomach. I have known of no form in which this is adminis- tered in cattle disease except its use in administra- tion with molasses to horses and ponies to remove stomach complaints and refresh them after hard labour. 41. (a) and (b) Bhang is used as a drink to sharpen appetite or as an accessory to digestion. Moderate use of bhang removes complaints of the stomach. Moderate use of ganja is said to remove dullness and ennui in case of people used to hard manual labour and great bodily exertions and exposures. (c) Ganja and bhang are said to have a pre- ventive effect in keeping off malarial influences. I have known of no use of charas for above purposes. The fakirs and sanyasis use ganja to induce con- centration of the mind and helping devotional pur- poses. I mean of course the moderate use of the drug. The classes by whom ganja and bhang are used have been adverted to by me in replies to other questions. 42. I say moderate use of bhang is harmless and beneficial; so the moderate use of ganja by sanyasis and fakir classes. The experience of the habit and mode of life of these classes of the people induce me to say so. 43. Yes. 44. To the habitual consumers moderate use produces no injurious effect. Its effect on their system is not perceptible. The effect is refresh- ing and exhilarating to some extent. The intoxicating effect, if any, is not noticeable. Bhang and ganja to these moderate consumers sharpen appetite. The effect which moderate use of bhang produces to them is like that which is observed amongst tea drinkers, although this does not seem to be so much stimulating. The effect of bhang is of longer duration. It is slow, but lasts for hours. These two drugs do not produce so much lassitude after the effects are over as in the case of alcohol drinkers. The moderate con- sumers are regular in their hours of consumption. Bhang by them is invariably found to be drunk in the afternoon, and ganja in the morning and evening after bath and ablutions. 45. Bhang produces an oblivious effect in course of time, and induces forgetfulness. Physically it does not seem to be injurious. Ganja, after one is used for a time to the course, brings on a consolidation of the frame. With the decay, brought about by years, the frame which had been muscular gets attenuated. The person addicted becomes subject to strong coughing, and towards the close it induces dysentery and loss of appetite. Bhang in course of time has the effect of induc- ing laziness and impotency or loss of vital power. Ganja induces heat in the brain. Its undue consumption generates insanity. At first the effect is temporary, which subsequent indulgence confirms into durable deprivation of better senses, and brings on insanity. In case of temporary effect, restraint and disuse may establish the even tenor of mind, which is liable to disturbance by return to habits of excess. The marked type observed in case of such in- sanes is that they become very irascible, hot and loquacious, and in case of slight opposition offered, flies to rage. These insanes confess to ganja use, and become turbulent and display still hankering for ganja in hallucid moments. I am not prepared to answer the last portion of the question. I have known of no such in- stances of weakened intellect. I am not aware of any cases. 46. Nothing more to add to what I have stated before. 47. None that I am aware of. 48. Nothing to add. 49. None that I have ever come to know. The effect is said to be the reverse, and has a ten- dency to bring on a disinclination for venereal intercourse. Ganja, and specially bhang, is said to induce impotency. 50. In the above the excessive use of the articles has been referred to. 51. Yes, of ganja. The use has the effect of deadening the finer sensibilities and inducing tur- bulence and heat of brain, rendering it less sus- ceptible to fear or consequence of nefarious actions. 52. The excessive use produces a reverse effect, and does not conduce to resorting to such actions, and renders the victim subject to fits unsuited to determined and resolute actions. 53. Yes, ganja does it. It has been in some instances observed to lead to unpremeditated and hasty actions. I am not aware of its leading to homicidal frenzy. 54. Yes, ganja in some cases, like spirits, is used for such purposes. 55. I have known of no such instances. I believe complete stupefaction is not induced unless bhang is admixed with other substances. 56. This question has been given reply to in dealing with other previous ones. I have no information on the subject of dhatura admixtures. 57. I know of no such instances. 58. I cannot speak much of it. I think the system is working well. 59, 60, and 61. Nothing to say. 62. Hemp is not cultivated here. 63 and 64. Nothing to say. 65. Nothing to suggest. 66. I consider the round should be taxed more, considering its comparatively greater intoxicating property. I can suggest no rates. 67. None. 68. There are shops for the vend of ganja and bhang, but I have no suggestions to offer. 69. Yes, to some extent. Enquiries are generally made by the police in regard to the advisability of opening shops in particular localities. It would be better if local public opinion is more consulted. As a rule I have invariably seen some opposition or other raised by residents of the locality in the mufassal when such sites for shops are selected.
QUESTIONS FRAMED BY THE COMMISSION. Evidence before the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-94. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY. 1. What opportunities have you had of obtain- ing information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs in regard to which your answers are framed? 2. In the most recent work on ganja (Dr. Prain's report of 21st June 1893) it is stated that "in India three narcotic articles are obtained naturally from hemp. These are, siddhi or bhang, charas, and ganja." They are thus defined by Dr. Prain: "Siddhi, bhang, subji or patti are different names applied to the dry leaves of the hemp plant, whether male or female and whether cultivated or uncultivated. "Charas is the name applied to the resinous matter which forms the active principle of the plant when collected separately. "Ganja consists of the dried flowering tops of cultivated female hemp plants which have become coated with resin in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely. The formation of seeds is prevented by the destruction of all the male plants. "Three varieties of ganja are sold. Ganja is usually manufactured by being trodden under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops assume a flattened shape. This is 'Flat ganja.' The other sort of ganja is not trodden, but rolled under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops are less closely adherent, and assume a rounded shape. This is 'Round ganja.' The flower-tops of ganja detached from the twigs, whether of flat or of round ganja, and whether the detachment has been accidental or deliberate, form 'chur' or 'Broken ganja.'" May these definitions be accepted for your pro- vince? By what name is each of these products locally known? CHAPTER II. CULTIVATION OR GROWTH OF HEMP. (Cannabis sativa.) 3. In what districts of which you have know- ledge does the hemp plant grow spontaneously? Mention any in which it is abundant. 4. By what different names is it known? Do these refer to exactly the same plant? 5. What special conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, elevation above sea level, etc., are necessary to the growth of the wild hemp? 6. Is the growth of the wild hemp ordinarily dense, or scattered? 7. Is there any cultivation of the hemp plant in your province94 49. I am not aware of. 51. (a) No. (b) Violent crimes, such as severe hurts and murders, are induced by excessive ganja smoking. 53. It does. I know of one case where a murder was committed under the influence of too much ganja smoking by a fakir. 54. I have had no such cases. 55. (a) Sometimes they do. (b) Yes, in case of persons who don't use them habitually or at all. 56 and 57. Don't know. 58. Working well. 59. No improvement appears to me possible. 60 and 61. Not produced here. 62. Only wild bhang plants grow here rarely in places. They are very inferior, and require scarcely any more control than what at present prevails. 63 and 64. No. 65. Yes. 66. They are already differently taxed. Ques- tion not understood. 67. and 68. No. 69. Yes. Excise Sub-Inspectors or Police consult the people. Local public opinion ought to be considered. 70. None here. 40. Evidence of MR. E. MCL. SMITH, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Sonthal Parganas. 1. The following information has been obtained from the persons whose names are given below and who reside in the different parts of this Sub- division:95 26. Ganja.96 duced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. There is no typical symptom. Insanes confess to the use of ganja. There is no evidence to indicate that insanity often tends to indul- gence in the use of the hemp drugs, or that the drug was used for the purpose of obtaining relief from mental anxiety or brain disease. 46. It impairs the constitution of the habitual excessive smokers. Does not cause indigestion, but causes loss of appetite. Does not cause dy- sentery, but asthma and bronchitis. The habit induces laziness and impairs the moral sense, as he becomes untruthful, shameless and utterly un- reliable. It deadens the intellect and often pro- duces temporary insanity. The symptoms may be reinduced by subsequent use of the drug. One Gour Pande himself confesses that he is ruined by indulgence in this drug. Another high caste native (Mohanando Chakravarti) suffered both physically and mentally. Other cases could also be cited, but it would lengthen this report. The effects are physically, mentally and moral- ly bad. 47. The habitual moderate use of this drug is not hereditary, and generally does not affect the children of the consumer. 48. It is not hereditary, but affects the children of the habitual excessive smoker. They are often of weak intellect and are moreover thin and sickly. 49. Not known. 50. It tends to produce impotence in the ex- cessive smoker. 51. A small proportion of bad characters are moderate smokers (the exact proportion is not known). It has no connection with crime in gene- ral, but it is believed that the agitation among the Kharwars, which latterly had turned more into a political movement than religious excitement, emanated from ganja smokers, who imagined they could take the Government of the country into their own hands, pay no rent to landlords and drive the English out. The sudden ebullitions of feelings which from time to time rise among them spring from the same source. 52. The remarks given in paragraph 51 apply to this also. 53. Excessive indulgence in ganja incites to unpremeditated violence. I know the following persons who became violent and dangerous lunatics through ganja smoking:97 of persons who were violent and dangerous from ganja-smoking. All of these persons were sent by me for the Civil Surgeon's observation. Question 63.98 45. (e) Yes. 47. No. 49. (a) and (b) Yes. (d) Excessive use leads to impotence. 51. Moderate consumers are not known to commit any offence. 52. People excessively using ganja are known to commit offences to person and property. 53. Yes; excessive use is known to excite anger and thus to lead to violent acts. 54. Yes; robbers and dacoits before attempting the crime are known to use them. 55. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 56. Thugs, criminals and dacoits administer dhatura mixed with ganja to unwary travellers and pilgrims and to children to rob them of their gold. 57. Generally smoked. 58 and 59. By raising the duty immoderate use may be checked. 63 and 64. No objection. 68. There are shops, but no houses or premises. The present system is working well. 69. Yes. 70. There are no facts regarding the import- ation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States. Duty is paid. There is no general use of untaxed drugs. 42. Evidence of BABU NAVIN KRISHNA BANERJI, Brahman, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Purulia, District Manbhum. 1. My father, the late Babu Mathura Nath Banerji, was for many years, till the time of his death in October 1870, the Excise Deputy Col- lector of Rajshahi, and as such had the ganja cul- tivation under his charge. I was for some three months employed as Excise Deputy Collector of Calcutta. I had during my service to hold tem- porary charge of Excise Deputy Collector's duties. My experience therefore on the whole is limited. 2. The three products are known by the name given by Dr. Prain, the only difference being that bhang or siddhi is also called sabji at different places. 3. Rajshahi and Jessore. 4. See answer to question 2. 5. Wild hemp grows in rather alluvial and moist, but not brackish, soil. 6. Generally dense. 7. In Rajshahi. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Not known to me. 15. (A) Ganja is smoked with tobacco leaves and prepared tobacco, after having been well moist- ened, cut, and then broken up by pressure of the thumb on the palm of the hand. Well-to-do per- sons moisten it with a sprinkling of rose-water when being rubbed on the palm of the hand. (B) Ganja is not eaten, but siddhi or bhang is. (C) Bhang, when well prepared, is made from wild hemp leaves boiled in a mixture of milk and water and then dried. It is well kneaded with anise seed and pepper, generally in a stone pot by a nim sonta or stick. It is then mixed with a good quantity of water and drunk. With a view to make it agreeable to taste, milk, sugar, spices and sprinkling of rose-water are also mixed up with it before being drunk. The addition of sugar, however, increases its intoxicating power. Most of the lower classes of up-country men drink siddhi, They say it cools the stomach and prevents diarrh99 28. Three pice worth of ganja and half pice worth of siddhi is sufficient for a habitual mode- rate consumer of the drugs. A chillum of ganja cannot be smoked till it is entirely done with. It must be smoked with intervals of a minute or two. When there is no company it must be allowed to be consumed by the fire during the necessary in terval. Where there is company it is smoked in- turn by all present, and so full use of the chillum is made. Ganja-smoking people generally as- semble in numbers of two, three or four people and smoke together. Retail ganja is sold at six annas a tola. Three pice ganja generally admits of three chillums being made out of the same. When ganja is smoked in company two pice of ganja may be sufficient for a moderate consumer per diem. 29. (a) See answer to question 15. I do not know of any case of dhatura being mixed with ganja or siddhi. Dhatura generally brings on insanity. I do not know what a bhang massala is. 30. All the three drugs are generally taken in company. Females very seldom use them; children do not use them. These drugs are used after the sixteenth or seventeenth year. 31. Those who mix in low company easily form the habit of smoking ganja. Lazy and rich people as well as young folks are apt to run to excess in ganja and charas smoking. Hardly people go into excess in siddhi-drinking. I do not think that ganja-smoking can easily be given up. 32. On Bijaya Dasami a little siddhi mixed with water is taken by Hindu male adult people,100 43. Evidence of BABU PRAN KUMAR DAS, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector and Personal Assistant to the Commissioner of Burdwan. 1. I was special Excise Inspector of the Dacca Division in 1878 and 1879. I was Excise Deputy Collector of Mymensingh in 1880-81 and of Gaya in 1882 and 1883. I was on special excise duty under the Board of Revenue in 1888-89. 2. Yes, the definitions may be accepted. The names used are bhang or siddhi, charas, ganja. 3. In almost every district of Bengal and Behar it grows spontaneously. I have seen jungles of it grown wild in Dacca, Mymensingh, Faridpur, Gaya, and Murshidabad. 4. Bhang and ganja. They refer to the same plant, male and female. 5. I have seen it growing wild both in damp and dry places, i.e., in the damp districts of Eastern Bengal, as also in the very dry district of Gaya. Moist soil is good for it. Soil mixed with manure promotes its growth. I have seen plants regularly watered grown exuberantly. In gardens and within houses also it grows up vi- gorously. 6. I have seen very densely grown plants on river banks and round wells. It also grows scat- tered within houses. Seeds thrown or falling from plants lead to their growth. 7. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) The North-Western Provinces and Monghyr bhang is the favourite. The hemp plant is culti- vated in Rajshahi and Bogra. 12. I prosecuted and also tried some cases of nourishing and promoting the growth of hemp plants. There was ample evidence of nourishment, such as soil properly prepared, watering, manuring, and otherwise taking care of, but in no case was there any evidence of cultivation. I, however, suspected that it was cultivated in a few cases. In Gaya I found plants grown in a field and being taken care of just as other crops. I found ganja plants grown in Dacca, Mymensingh, and Gaya. The practice is very limited. Growing ganja plants require care and nourishment. The male plants were extirpated in such cases to allow free room to the female plants to grow up. Generally the ganja smokers grow it in places hidden from the public view. Inside house compounds a few only are grown. The largest I saw was in a field in Gaya, may be 20 or 25. 13. Yes, to Rajshahi and Bogra districts. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. 16. Yes, it used to be largely prepared by a large number of people in their houses. Before 1878 there was a general impression that bhang preparation was not illegal. Many did not know that it was an exciseable article. In 1878 a special excise establishment was appointed, and since then the excise detective establishment has been increased. The excise officers as well as the police since then have detected many cases of pre- paration and possession of bhang in large quanti- ties, and people have now come to know the law on the subject, and I think its preparation in houses without licenses has much decreased. It can be prepared from hemp plant wherever grown, but bhang prepared from plants grown wild in Bengal is not so good. Monghyr and North-Western Provinces bhang is considered much superior, and is the favourite. In Bengal people prepare it for their own consumption, seldom for sale. Ganja can also be prepared from wild hemp plant if great care is taken and the plants are well nourished and the male plants grown with them extirpated. I have not known of charas being clandestinely prepared in Bengal. 18. These drugs deteriorate by keeping and lose their effect in about a year. If well seasoned and proper care taken it keeps even for two years. The leaves dry up and gradually lose the narcotic effects. By keeping the ganja in air-tight boxes, safe from exposure and dampness, the deteriora- tion may be delayed. 19. Yes, but ganja mixed with flour and sugar is taken as a sweetmeat by a few of the richer consumers. A mixture of ganja with spirit is taken, I am told, by fever patients. 20. Ganja is taken generally by the lower classes101 from Statement A that in Burdwan in the out- still period the consumption of ganja materially decreased and with the introduction of distillery system its consumption increased. The consump- tion of excise bhang has increased, but I believe the actual consumption of this article has de- creased. The illicit manufacture at home has been very much reduced, and people now take bhang sold at retail shops. Formerly most people took bhang stored up by them, i.e., by collecting leaves of wild plants. Consumption of charas has increased, but its use is restricted to the richer classes of the towns only. In the whole of Bengal in 1892-93, 11 maunds 26 seers were sold, and of this 8 maunds 11 seers in Calcutta alone. In the interior it is very little taken; in villages never. 26. Ganja consumers. Bhang consumers. (a) 70 per cent. 10 per cent. (b) 10 " Scarcely any, except up-country men. (c) 16 per cent. 80 per cent. (d) 4 " 10 " 27. (a) Domestic servants, such as cooks, bearers, waiters, darwans, syces and coachmen, boatmen, fishermen, cultivators, ordinary day- labourers, coal-miners, etc.; (b) sanyasis and fakirs (religious mendicants); (c) some domestic servants and men of better means; (d) men of depraved habits of the lower classes who indulge in excess whenever they have the means to do so. I know of Brahmins, Khatris, Kayasths, and Vaidyas, and also better class Muhammadans smoking it, but their number is indeed very few. Generally speaking, those whose pursuits cause much physical strain on them take ganja. To my knowlege I know of only a very few102 the lower classes of country spirit drinkers as well as gentlemen classes of small means have taken to ganja. 37. Charas is said to be rather stronger than ganja and its effects remain longer. I was told that when in a hurry or for long endurance it is taken. 88. I do not think so. Flat may be weaker than round and chur, as it is less resinous and not so much agglutinated or closely adherent. 39. Smoking is considered more and quickly effective and therefore more injurious. 40. Siddhi is used as a medicine for bowel com- plaints and to improve digestion. I have seen kabirajes using it. In fact, it is not properly con- sidered as an intoxicating exciseable article. Bhang is also given to cattle. Ganja is used with cocoanut oil as a medicine for itch and fresh sores. Ganja is smoked for gonorrh103 duty and license fee and thus regulating the retail price its consumption may be reduced. 62. It would not be feasible to control or re- strict the cultivation of bhang. It grows wild everywhere. It is generally considered almost innocuous and beneficial in some respects. I do not think it necessary to do any more than levy a small duty on bhang stored and to enforce pay- ment of license fee for its sale. 63. No. Once it was suggested that Govern- ment should take the wholesale vend monopoly in its own hands, as is done in the case of opium. I consulted several officers and discussed the pro- posal with many. I think the present system is better. There is no reason for Government to take the wholesale trade in its hands. All that is necessary is to exercise strict control and super- vision over the work of the wholesale vendors both in the producing and importing districts. 65. The duty on ganja for the last twelve years has been more than doubled. It was Rs. 4 on chur ganja per seer in 1878, and this year it is Rs. 9. The license fee for its retail sale by the auction system has been very considerably raised. In 1878 the vendor paid Government Rs. 4¼ for each seer of ganja sold. Last year it paid Rs. 10¾. This year, with the increase made in the rate of duty,104 16. (a) Prepared by the people in their own houses. (b) Yes, from the hemp plant growing wild. 17. By everyone using bhang. 18. Bhang deteriorates by long keeping. It may keep good for six months. Ganja deteriorates by long keeping, say, for two years. Bhang and ganja quite lose their effects in time, but ganja will take a much longer time. Exposure to damp and air is the cause of deterioration. Deteriora- tion may be prevented by keeping these in air- tight boxes. 19. Ganja is used for smoking. Ganja is also pounded and used in mixing with sweetmeats. This is so used in Dacca by hardened ganja smokers. 20. The lower classes of Hindus and Muham- madans smoke ganja and very little is smoked by the middle classes and trading classes. I think the ganja smokers may be 3 per cent. in all local- ities. 21. Flat ganja is preferred. Flat, round, and chur ganja are used, but chur ganja in very small quantities. 23. Bhang is sometimes used for smoking when ganja cannot be got by the consumers. In all localities; by all habitual smokers; and to a very small extent. 24. The up-country men eat or drink bhang, but not the coolies. Kshetryas and Brahmins use it. About 20 per cent. so use it. This is to be found in all places. Natives drink bhang; about 5 per cent. so use it. All classes of the people use bhang for medicinal purposes. In all localities. 25. The use of ganja was on the increase, as many opium smokers took to ganja-smoking on account of the increase of price of opium, but the increase of duty this year has checked the increase in consumption. The use of bhang is on the decrease, as the present generation do not consider it very necessary for stimulating their digestive organs. 26. Ganja consumers are105 36. No. It is the reverse. 37. I do not know. 38. The flat ganja is said to produce narcotic effects more quickly and its effects last longer. 39. No; all are alike injurious. Drinking or eating ganja is more injurious. Bhang is seldom smoked. 40. Bhang is used for medicinal purposes by kabirajes and Tantriks. Bhang is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) Bhang is used as a digestive. (b) Ganja is used under severe exertion and to alleviate fatigue and as a staying power under severe exertion. (c) Ganja is used as a preventive of disease in malarious tracts. (d) Nil. Low-class people use ganja. Middle and upper classes, especially up-country men, use bhang. The moderate habitual use is referred to. 42. The moderate use of bhang is harmless. Ganja is not harmless. 43. Yes, they are. 44. The moderate use of bhang is refreshing in its effects. That of ganja produces intoxication, but not for habitual consumers. Bhang creates appetite. Ganja impairs appetite. The effect lasts for two hours. Yes; the want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 45. It does impair the constitution, unless milk is taken. It does injure the digestion, but bhang does not. The use of ganja causes bronchitis. The use of ganja or bhang does not impair the moral sense or induce habits of immorality or de- bauchery. The excessive use of ganja induces laziness, it deadens the intellect, and makes men excitable, and sometimes produces insanity, tem- porary and permanent. The patients are easily irritable. Insanes confess to the use of ganja. 46. Mentioned under question No. 45. 47 and 48. No; it is not hereditary. It does not affect children. 49 and 50. Ganja is not used as an aphrodisiac. The use of ganja or siddhi does not produce im- potence. The excessive use of ganja produces impotence. 51. About 50 per cent. of the bad characters are habitual consumers of ganja. No connection with crime. 52. The excessive use makes men irritable and induces them to commit offences against the per- son. 53. Excessive use of ganja makes men irrit- able and may lead to violent crime. No case came to my notice. 54. No, not here; but it is used in big towns, where there are hardened criminals. 55. Not done here. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced without admixture with dhatura, 56. No admixtures are made here. Ganja is sometimes prepared with rose-water to make it mild. No dhatura is used here. 57. It is sometimes eaten with bhang and sometimes with sweetmeats. Its effects are very intoxicating. These are used by habitual excessive consumers. 58. I am well acquainted with the present system of excise administration. It is capable of improvement. 59. The consumption may be decreased if the duty on ganja is raised and the license fee lowered. This will improve the finances as well. No duty is levied on bhang. Some sort of duty ought to be levied on bhang, which would be very low at first, say, 1/16 of the average duty on flat ganja. This will make the system more regular and analogous to the system of selling ganja. 60 and 61. None produced here. 62. I think the cultivation of the hemp plant for bhang ought to be controlled. It will be feasible, though not all at once. Licenses on payment of fees may be granted for the cul- tivation of bhang plant within certain areas. Persons on whose lands bhang plants yielding more than four chataks of bhang will be found may be prosecuted. This will bring the system gradually within the scope of our detective officers. Bhang plants will then have to be destroyed by Excise officers. To levy duty on bhang will be the next step. The goladars of ganja receive a good profit. Twenty-five per cent. of the same ought to be paid as license fee. 63. For bhang see question No. 62. For retail vend of ganja see question No. 59. For retail sale of bhang see question No. 62. 64. None. 65. Taxation of ganja is reasonable. No duty on bhang is levied, vide question No. 62. There is no duty on liquor here. 66. There should be different rates of taxation on different kinds of ganja, as at present; for flat ganja has twigs, which chur ganja has not, and it will not be expedient to levy the same rate for both. I do not know about ganja cultivation elsewhere. 67. Objections about ganja and bhang mention- ed before. 68. There are no houses where they may be con- sumed on the premises, nor would any be suitable, for most of the drug is consumed at the houses of the consumers106 45. Evidence of BABU DINA NATH DÉ, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Nadia. 1. As an Excise Deputy Collector of Nadia, Howrah, Chittagong, and other places I had opportunity of studying this subject. 2. Yes; they are known by the names men- tioned above. 3. Nadia, Rangpur, and Bankura. It is abun- dant in Rajshahi. 4. Ganja, siddhi, subji, and bhang. 5. Moist climate helps to the growth of the wild hemp plant. 6. Dense. 7. No. 8 and 9. Not known. 10. Can't say. 12. No. 14. No. 15. Not known. 16. Can't say. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping. Yes, after two or three years; they keep good for one year with ordinary care. Exposure to air and damp is the main cause. If kept in tin-lined air-tight boxes, they can be preserved for a great length of time. 19. Yes, as far as I know. 20. Generally the lower and working class use ganja. Charas is used by some gentlemen also The smoking is not confined to particular locali- ties. 21. Both round and chur are preferred in this district. The former is in greater demand than the latter. Chur is preferred in the Kushtia sub- division and parts of Meherpur, and round in other places of this district. 22. Native charas brought from Calcutta is chiefly used here. 23. Yes, rarely. It is not confined to particular localities or classes of people. When ganja is not available, siddhi is smoked; but this, too, is very rarely used. 24. I do not know of any who eats bhang, but a large number of people drink bhang. The people of the North-Western Provinces drink it copiously. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase, though very slight. It is displacing liquor to a slight extent. The lower class who can't afford to buy liquor do smoke ganja instead. 26. For ganja smokers only107 The lower class of people. I refer to moderate habitual and moderate occasional use. 42. Yes. My reasons are108 7. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) No. (d) No. The ganja is cultivated in a small tract of laud about sixteen square miles in area, lying within the three districts of Rajshahi, Dinajpur and Bogra. 8. Of late there has not been any increase or decrease in area. In 1891-92 there was some in- crease in the area under cultivation. The increase was due to the fact that in the year previous the crop on account of flood failed, and in consequence the price of ganja rose very high, which induced cultivators to extend the cultivation. 9. The cultivation of Naogaon ganja has been fully described in Babu Hem Chandra Kerr's report, paragraphs 38 to 52. Therefore any de- scription that I would give would be recapitulating Hem Babu's description. No change has since taken place in the mode of cultivation. 10. No. The ganja cultivators are of the same class as other agricultural cultivators. 11. No, so far as I am aware of. 12. Nowhere, so far as my experience goes, wild hemp is cultivated for the production of ganja. 13. So far as I am aware, the cultivation of ganja is restricted in Bengal Province alone. It is grown, as I have said above, to a limited area in the districts of Rajshahi, Dinajpur and Bogra. The cultivation of ganja was at the begin- ning confined to a few villages in the north of Rajshahi district. Gradually it extended to the tracts bordering the Rajshahi district, but locally situated in Bogra and Dinajpur. Subsequently, by Government order, the limit of the ganja tract was specified and cultivation restricted to that tract. Ganja could not be grown in low and marshy land. I think, for the proper growth of ganja plants, dry climate, mixed soil (sand and clay), high land and facilities for irrigation are necessary for producing ganja. I think it would be impossible to grow ganja in the districts bordering the sea and as well as in the high lands of the districts in the north and west of Bengal. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) No. In Naogaon ganja tract. From 7,000 to 9,000 maunds. 15. Only from cultivated plants, ganja is manufactured in Naogaon. The process of manu- facture is simple and indigenous. When the plants are mature they are cut and put in the sun from three to four days. It may be noted that the plants are cut into two or three pieces accord- ing to the size of the plant, each piece being about two feet in length. Three or four hours after, when the ganja leaves are dry and partly fall off, the cultivator selects the pieces which would produce ganja and rejects those that would not yield ganja. Thus far the process is the same for manufacture of both round and flat ganja. If the cultivator wants to make his ganja flat, he would take the selected parts and put them in a circle in one layer. A gang of two to five men stand upon the plants and press them down with their feet. This is done in the open field and in sunshine, the place, of course, being made clean beforehand. When the first layer is sufficiently pressed, another layer is put in. Thus the process is continued till the layers come up to the height of two feet. A cultivator who has a larger number of plants to manufac- ture will make pressing-places according to the quantity of ganja and the number of men at his command. The first day's pressing being finished, weights are placed on the heaps of ganja plants so pressed. A chatai or country mat is put on the top of the heap below the weight, in order partly to give uniform pressure and partly to protect from rain and dews. It is also noticed that the pressing men themselves sit upon the top of the heap and act as pressing weights. On the second day the plants are taken out from the heaps and again put in the sun for about three to four hours. When some of the leaves fall off again they are pressed in the manner described above. The pressing process is continued from three to four days. When the cultivator finds that the flower with small leaves has taken a flat shape and resinous matters sufficiently adhered together, the plants are spread over the field to dry; and when they are dry, they begin to brush off the remaining long leaves by means of their feet. The plants are then, at their convenience, made into bundles of about two seers in weight. The process of making the round ganja is almost the same as flat, with this difference, that the former is rolled down with hand and feet to give it a round shape. The chur ganja is not separately manufactured; the bits that drop down during the process of manufacture are collected and separately stored and is called chur. Recently, however, the culti- vators, in order to get a ready sale, take off the flowers from the flat ganja and sell them without the branches. (a) Naogaon ganja is only smoked. I am not aware of people eating or drinking it. The pro- cess of smoking is this:109 smoking. I am not aware of its being used in any other form. 20. Ganja is smoked generally by people of the lowest class, such as Bagdi, Dulia, Behara, domes. tic servants, groom, Behari darwan, Dosad, Chamar, Malla, Kairi, Domes, Nunia of Behar, fakir, sanyasis, jogi, Boistab, songster. Among these classes, 75 per cent. smoke ganja. Ganja is consumed in larger quantities in East Bengal and Behar. Patna, Mymensingh. Dacca, Champaran and Saran may be specially mentioned. Very little ganja is consumed in the tract where it is grown. 21. I do not believe that preference is given to any particular ganja, flat, round, or chur. The consumption of round ganja is confined to Calcutta and districts about it as well as Orissa division. In the rest of the districts flat ganja is consumed. The chur ganja obtained from round is consumed in the locality where the round is imported, and the flat chur in like manner consumed in the dis- tricts where flat ganja is imported. It is said that the smokers in or about Calcutta prefer round ganja. I do not think it has any meaning; for otherwise the large number of people of flat consuming districts residing in Calcutta would have demanded flat ganja had there really been any preference for any particular sort. 22. I have no knowledge. 23. I don't know of bhang being used for smoking. My experience is that it is used for drinking only. 24. As far as I am aware bhang is drunk or eaten by the people of Behar. The consumption is not confined to any particular class. The lower class consume more than the upper class. 75 per cent. of the lower class and 50 per cent. of the upper class either drink or eat bhang. 25. I have no idea of the consumption of charas or bhang. The consumption of ganja in the last decade is steady. Some twenty or thirty years be- fore the consumption of ganja was three times over, compared to the present consumption. The cause of decrease is attributed to the fact that there was very small duty on ganja before; with the gradual increase of duty and imposition of fee for selling ganja the consumption decreased. 26. The proportion of consumers of ganja, in my opinion, is as follows:110 side and thereby losing respectability. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion by any sects of the people. 34. I think it would be a serious privation to all classes of consumers to forego the consump- tion of ganja. The classes which consume ganja are the poorest and lowest classes of the society. Ganja, being the cheapest of all the intoxicants, is consumed by the poorest class. If they have to forego smoking ganja, they cannot possibly take to other intoxicating articles, because they are costly. If the consumption is stopped, they would take to smoking dhatura or some other deleterious drugs of wild growth. When I have said that the whole lot of consumers would feel the privation, I need not give the number. 35. I do not think that it would be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and bhang. The drugs would be consumed illicitly. I doubt if the pro- hibition could be entirely enforced. The nature of the country, the domestic arrangements of the people, the peculiar zenana system of the country, and the sympathy of the police and the excise offices with the consumers, and the cost necessary for the prevention, would, I am sure, thwart all our attempts to prohibit the consumption of ganja and bhang. The prohibition, I should say, will create discontent among the consumers who would naturally question the justice of the British Government about their freedom of action. I would not, however, anticipate any political dis- content, because, loyal as the people are, they would always bow down to the decision of the sarkar. The prohibition would be followed by recourse to dhatura or other drugs, but not to alcoholic stimulant. 36. I don't think that alcohol is being sub- stituted for any of these drugs. 37. I have no idea about the effects of charas smoking. 33. No, not at all. 39. I think that the smoking of any preparation of hemp plant is a less injurious form of consump- tion than drinking or eating. The reason is that any form of smoking is stronger and therefore difficult to consume more than drinking or eating it, which is easier. 40. I am not aware of these drugs being pre- scribed on account of their medicinal qualities by any school of native doctors. They are not used, so far as I know, in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of ganja and bhang may, in my opinion, be beneficial in its effects as a food digestive. The moderate use of ganja undoubtedly gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure and alleviates fatigue. Its use acts as febrifuge and preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. It is said that the use of ganja helps in concentrating thoughts. The few of the upper class who use ganja smoke it as digestive. All consumers of the lower class use it to give staying-power or to alleviate fatigue. Among the consumers whose ordinary pursuits make them liable to exposure, work in water or colliery, use it as preventive. Under advice of native doctors, some people are seen to get rid of chronic fever by smoking ganja. Seventy-five per cent. of these smokers use ganja for the above purposes. In the above, I only refer to the moderate occasional use of the drug. 42. The occasional moderate use of ganja is not only beneficial but also harmless, 43. Of all persons using intoxicants, one sort or other, the ganja smoker is the most inoffensive of all to his neighbours. 44. The moderate use of ganja invigorates the habitual consumers. It is no doubt refreshing. It exhilarates but does not inebriate. It allays hunger but does not create appetite. Its effect lasts about an hour. It is said that it has no after-effects. I do not think that the want of subsequent gratification produces any longing or uneasiness. 45. I do not think that the habitual moderate use of ganja produces any noxious effect111 improvement and some improvement may be sug- gested. 59. The following are some of the suggestions indicating the direction in which improvement is possible:112 consult or consider public opinion, as a ganja shop is not a nuisance. 70. I am not aware of the importation or smuggling of hemp drug from Native States into Bengal. In the ganja-producing tract of Naogaon, small quantity of ganja is used surreptitiously; cousequently no duty is paid on it. This cannot be prevented in a place where the drug is grown, and it is difficult to bring the consumers within the provision of law. There is no general use of untaxed drugs, so far as I am aware of. Oral evidence. Question 1.113 also while I was Deputy Inspector of Schools in the district of Rangpur, frequently to move in the interior, which helped me to acquire some know- ledge of the hemp, as I saw it grow there in a wild state. 2. Dr. Prain's definitions of ganja and bhang may be accepted as correct. Charas is a product of the North-Western Provinces and Nepal, and it is not used in this district. I have no personal knowledge of it; but, from what I have heard and read, I believe the definition thereof to be also correct. In this, as in the other districts of Bengal, the dry leaves of the hemp plant are known in- differently as siddhi or bhang. In the province of Behar they are known as bhang or sabji. Some Beharis call them patti, which signifies leaves. Charas is not used in this district, but in other districts of Bengal and in Behar. Where it is consumed it is known by that name. The local names of flat, round, and chur ganja which are evidently mere translations, are respec- tively chipta, gol and chur ganja. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in the districts of Rangpur, Champaran, Saran, Shaha- bad, and Chittagong114 but this is seldom, if at all, practised. As re- gards bhang, ordinarily a few grains of aniseed are mixed with it and pounded, and the paste so prepared is diluted with water and then drunk. Exceptionally in the preparation of the paste, milk, sugar, cucumber seed and other spices be- sides aniseed, such as black pepper, cinnamon, nutmeg, etc., are made use of. Aniseed and cucumber seed make the drug cool, milk and the other spices make it refreshing and flavorous, and the sugar heightens the strength. I am not aware of any bhang massala being sold in this district. 30. Ganja is smoked mostly in company. Bhang, which is not much used here, is consumed mostly in solitude. Ganja and bhang are mainly confined to the male sex. The habit is contracted in the prime of life and is seldom given up. It is not usual for children to use either of these drugs. 31. I believe the habit is not easily formed; but, when once contracted, it is very hard to break off. In the case of persons who indulge in these drugs for the sake of pleasure there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. The Hindus make offering of ganja and bhang to Siva, one of the Trinity of the Hindu mythology, it being supposed that he is best pleased with such offering. Bhang drink is pre- pared with milk, sugar, and spices, and poured on the phallus, which is the emblem for Siva. Of the quantity prepared either the whole or a part of it is poured on it. In the latter case the quan- tity left unpoured is drunk by the offerers. There is also a religious custom among the Hindus to drink bhang on the following days:115 impaired memory, though they preserve good health. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja is the partial obscuration of the vision, dryness of the throat, tongue and the lips and a feeling of drowziness, which are followed by cheerfulness of spirit and a proneness to loquacity. It is somewhat refreshing and produces intoxica- tion. It does not allay hunger. It creates appetite. The effect lasts three or four hours. The after-effects are languor and a longing for further gratification, and some uneasiness if the longing is not satisfied. Bhang does not produce instantaneous effect on the consumer. In about twenty to thirty minutes the consumer's throat, tongue, and lips begin to get dry, the eyes contract and turn somewhat dim. He becomes jolly and laughs often. It does not allay hunger, but pro- duces a ravenous appetite. The effect lasts about twelve hours. The after-effect is a feeling of weak- ness and a depression of spirit. For a habitual consumer there is a longing for further gratifica- tion, but for one who takes it for the first time there is a feeling of dislike for it. 45. Ganja produces noxious effects, physical, mental, and moral, but bhang produces noxious effects, only mental. Ganja impairs the constitu- tion, but bhang does not. Ganja or bhang does not injure the appetite. Ganja induces bronchitis and asthma as well as dysentery. Bhang does not do so. Ganja impairs moral sense and induces habits of immorality, but not so does the bhang. Ganja deadens the intellect, but does not produce insanity. Bhang does not produce insanity, but impairs the intellect a little. The evil effects of ganja do not operate on fishermen who use the drug moderately in pursuit of their callings. I do not know of any insane having no recorded ganja history confessing to the use of the drug. 46. Ganja produces all the noxious effects mentioned in Answer 45, and in addition, it is apt to induce insanity. Habitual excessive use of bhang does not produce any noxious effects on the consumers beyond what it produces on moderate consumption. 47 and 48. Habitual moderate as well as exces- sive use of ganja or bhang does not appear to me to be a hereditary habit, and does not affect in any way the children of the consumers. 49 and 50. It is said by many that some ganja- smokers make moderate or excessive use of ganja as an aphrodisiac, and that it is so used by some prostitutes. The use for this purpose must be more injurious, inasmuch as there is in this case the loss of vital fluid in addition, and the desire being very ardent, the loss the more. The habi- tual excessive use of ganja tends to produce impotence. I do not know of the bhang being used as an aphrodisiac. 51. (a) No. (b) No connection. 52. Ditto. 53. Excessive indulgence may incite to unpre- meditated crime. I know of no case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Not known in this district. 55. Not known in this district. Complete stu- pefaction can be induced by ganja without admix- ture when tried on a person unaccustomed to the drug. 56. The intoxicating power of ganja or bhang may be tempered by boiling the drug in milk, but this is not done by the consumers. The intoxicat- ing power of ganja or bhang may be increased by the admixture of sugar, opium, pumpkin root, and dhatura seed. Sugar is often used in the prepara- tion of the bhang by both moderate and excessive drinkers; but I have no personal knowledge of any consumer addicted to use ganja or bhang by admixture of the other ingredients. I know of no person using the admixture of dhatura for personal consumption or for administration to others. 57. I know nothing of this. 58 and 59. The present system of excise ad- ministration is working well. 60. Ganja is produced in the province; but having never been in the ganja-producing tract, I am not in a position from personal experience to answer this question. 61. Charas is not produced in this district, and I know nothing about it. 63 and 64. I have no objection. 65. I have no knowledge of charas; but I think the taxation of ganja and bhang with reference to each other and to alcoholic or other intoxicants is reasonable. 66. There should be, and in fact there exist at present, different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja produced in Bengal. The rates are as follows:116 49. Evidence of BABU BHAIRAB NATH PALIT, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Birbhum. 1. Having had charge of the Excise Depart- ment in more districts than one, I had opportuni- ties to collect information regarding hemp drugs. 2. The different sorts of the drugs are known here by their names as explained in their respect- ive definitions, viz., the dry leaves of the hemp plant are called siddhi or bhang; the resinous matter obtained from the hemp plant is charas, and the dried flowering tops of the same are known as ganja, transported from its producing districts, in three different forms, as flat, round and chur by which they are named here. 3 to 18. In this district there is no cultivation of the hemp plant, and I have no opportunities of staying in ganja-producing districts or sub- divisions so as to acquaint myself with the method of its cultivation and growth. 19. Ganja and charas are wholly and solely used for smoking. 20. Generally five per cent. of lower and agri- cultural classes smoke ganja in almost every part of this district. The consumption of charas is very little, and needs no remarks. 21. Round ganja is preferred by its consumers in the localities extending over tracts of the Sadar Sub-Division consisting of Thanas Suri, Dubrajpur, Bolpur, Labpur, Sakulipur; while flat and chur are consumed in the Rampur Hat Sub-division, consisting of Thanas Rampur Hat, Monreswar and Nalhati. 22. Charas imported from Amritsar in Punjab is only used here. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is chiefly used by up-country trad- ing classes residing at Rampur Hat, Murarai, Nalhati, Sainthia, and Bolpur and Suri. The proportion of consumers does not come up to more than 1 per cent. 25. The use of ganja is increased in this district on account of high prices of country spirit. There is also a slight increase in consumption of charas and bhang, which does not call for remarks. 26. Among ganja-smokers there are:117 42. Moderate use of these drugs is both bene- ficial and harmless, as their use lessens fatigue and thirst, and at the same time increases appetite and improves digestion. 43. In my opinion moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The habitual moderate consumers of all these drugs take them to give them stimulus in their day's work, and they feel their use refreshing during and after their labour. They do not produce any appreciable or harmful intoxication. They serve to create appetite, and have no after- effects on their habitual moderate consumers. 45. No such case comes to my notice, in which the habitual moderate use of ganja has produced any noxious effects. From enquiries I come to know that insanity is never produced by use of ganja in any shape, save and except the cases of eccentrics, who become insane when they use ganja in excessive quantity. 46. I am acquainted with some cases in which the habitual excessive and long-continued use of ganja produced dysentery, but the consumers who can afford to take milk are not affected with the disease. 47. I do not think the use of any of these drugs imparts any hereditary influence on the children of the consumers. 48. I don't know any case in which children of the excessive consumers of these drugs have been subjected to any specific disease or have necessarily inherited the habit of their fathers. 49. I have no doubt that moderate use of these drugs serves as an aphrodisiac to both sexes, and lower classes of prostitutes in rare cases use ganja as ordinary narcotic, instead of spirituous liquor. I do not think the use of ganja or siddhi tends to produce impotence. 50. The excessive use of any of these drugs has no such tendency to produce impotence. 51. The bad characters here are not, in general, habitual consumers of ganja. 52. No one of them is heard to be an excessive consumer. 53. No such case has come to notice in which by excessive use of these drugs any unpremeditated crime, violence, or homicide has been committed by their consumers. 54. In some rare cases of dacoity I heard the criminals used ganja before they set up for the purpose. 55. The criminals do not induce their victims to partake of these drugs to produce their stupor, with intent to facilitate their criminal action. Dhatura is generally used by thugs and dacoits for purposes of committing crimes of sorts; it is chiefly resorted to in North-West- ern Provinces and Punjab. A. AHMAD, Offg. Collector. 56. The smoking of ganja with tobacco leaves in moderation causes a mild intoxication, while its excessive use induces stupor and constipation. The effects of siddhi are almost similar. I have no information to lay down regarding the ad- mixture of dhatura. 57. Ganja and charas are not drunk. 58. The present system of excise administra- tion requires, in my opinion, some improvements in its working. 59. I would suggest that the improvements may be made118 50. Evidence of BABU JOGENDRO NATH BANDYOPADHYA, Brahmin, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Jalpaiguri. 1. I have derived my experience as the Excise Deputy Collector of the District and as a general enquirer of the subject. 2. These definitions can be accepted for this division119 41. Yes. (a) Digestive. (b) Gives staying-power under servere exertion or exposure and also alleviates fatigue. (c) Preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. The agricultural people and the ascetic classes use the drug for the above purposes. I refer to the moderate habitual use of the drug. 42. Yes; for the reason stated in Answer 41. 43. Yes. 44. It is refreshing. Yes; it produces intoxi- cation at first. It creates appetite. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing or un- easiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of the drugs produces, in some cases, noxious effects on our physical, mental or moral systems, but in the cases of the lower people and the sanyasis it does not. It slightly impairs the constitution in many cases. It sometimes injures digestion or causes loss of appetite. In some cases it causes dysentery, bronchitis, or asthma. It induces laziness, but does not impair moral sense or induce habits of immorality or debauchery. In some cases it dead- ens the intellect or produces insanity. 47. There are not numerous instances in which the habitual moderate use of these drugs appears to have descended to children. 51. A certain proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of these drugs, but the proportion is not very large. 52. But the persons, who are addicted to exces- sive use of any of these drugs, are generally of bad character. 53. An excessive indulgence in any of these drugs incites to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. 54. Such examples are very rare. 55. In very rare cases, criminals induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs, and so stupefy themselves. A complete stupefaction can- not be induced unless dhatura is admixed with it. 58. An increase in the license fees may reduce consumption of the hemp drugs, 66. It is necessary that there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja as chur is better in quality than round or flat, and round is better than flat. 68. No. 69. In the case of an opening of a shop for sell- ing these drugs, the wishes of the people are not consulted or considered at present. But in my opinion, local public opinion should be consulted and considered before a shop is opened. 70. There are no cases of importation or smug- gling of hemp drugs from Native States into our Division. Duty is really paid in respect to the ganja and other hemp drugs used, but by the sel- lers directly and by the consumers indirectly. Untaxed drugs are not generally used. 51. Evidence of BABU JAGA MOHAN BHATTACHARJYA, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector and Personal Assistant to Commissioner, Chittagong. With remarks by Mr. W. B. Oldham, C. I. E., Commissioner of Chittagong. 1. I was Excise Inspector of the Dacca Divi- sion for five years, and Excise Deputy Collector for the same period at Burdwan and Monghyr. (I have never had to specially study the ganja question.120 Tippera, where the Muhammadans are strict fakirs, and so obliged to refrain from all intoxi- cants, ganja is largely consumed.121 (d) Opium is said to induce impotence, but not hemp. 50. Ditto. 51. (a) Yes, in the sense that there is a large proportion of bad characters in the poorer classes who are the majority using these drugs, especially ganja. (b) None that I know. (Vide my notes to questions 20 and 45 as regards political offences.122 18. All the three drugs deteriorate by keeping. Bhang loses its effect in a day or two. It can be kept for twelve to twenty-four hours by covering and keeping it cool. Ganja loses its effect in time123 Ganja-smoking is held more disreputable than bhang-drinking, and a "habitual smoker of ganja" is a term of abuse in Uriya. 34. For the habitual smoker or drinker, the prohibition would be a serious privation for several days. This is due to the force of habit, parti- cularly habits in intoxicating drugs. For number see answers to questions 20 and 24. 35. In Orissa, Gurjat ganja was prohibited for nearly ten years, and numerous persons were con- victed, often heavily punished. But still the use of the drug could not be rooted out. Illicit im- portation was frequent, and is still going on from the adjoining Tributary States. If the use of the drugs be prohibited, and a sufficient staff be kept for watching, the occasional consumers mostly, and the habitual consumers largely, will give up the habit. The staff will have to watch chiefly along the western frontiers of Orissa. The prohi- bition would give rise to much discontent, but I do not think it would lead to any political danger. The bulk of the habitual ganja-smokers and drink- ers are not in so good repute as to move the general people. The prohibition may lead, in several cases, to the adoption of opium, but not certainly to alcoholic stimulants. 36. No; on the other hand, the high price of distillery liquors, and the rising price of toddy, have led several consumers to have recourse to ganja and opium; the lower classes using ganja, and the upper classes, opium. I noticed this parti- cularly in Puri District. 37. I speak with some diffidence on the questions of this chapter. I am a layman and cannot speak so fully and correctly as a medical expert. 40. Yes; a horse, after a bath, is sometimes given a pill consisting of patti, turmeric and molasses. 41. (a) Bhang in moderate quantities is diges- tive, acting as a cooling beverage in summer (b) Both bhang and ganja-smoking alleviate fatigue; ganja-smoking generally deadens the sensibilities, and thus enables a man to bear cold or heat, or to do hard continuous work for a time. (c) In Puri and the adjoining saliferous tracts bhang is believed to prevent the formation of mucus and dysentery. For the reasons (a) and (c) the Sebak Brahmins drink bhang. For the reasons in (b), bearers, boat- men and agriculturists smoke ganja. I refer to moderate occasional use, except that in (c) moderate habitual use is believed to act as preventive of dysentery and diarrh124 plantains, mangoes, jacks, etc., vijaya (ganja) can give power to do all acts. Taken with milk, vijaya gives all sorts of pleasures, is strongly stimulating, and prevents eye diseases. Taken with water, it removes indigestion. Taken with ghi (clarified butter), it strengthens memory, helps in subduing the goddess of speech, raises the fallen, and clears the intellect. Taken with honey, it cures all sorts of bodily illnesses. Taken with saindhab salt, it increases the fire of appetite. Taken with sugar or molasses; it removes stomachic spasms springing from acid-bile (amlapitta) humour, allays diarrhcea, puts a stop to cough and asthma, and prevents chronic dysentery rising from ambat. etc., etc., etc., etc., etc. For ganja-smoking, the only reference found is quoted below:125 3rd, the Chiefs of the Tributary States are to be induced to reorganise their Excise Estab- lishment (at present miserably kept), to restrict the indiscriminate cultivation of the plant, and to prohibit sales except under certain conditions. I am generally unwill- ing to make any suggestions about inter- fering with the liberty of action allowed to the Gurjat chiefs. But on moral grounds, for the benefit of their own people at least they might do so. Failing that, they may be persuaded to make over the Excise Administration in their territories to British Government, in consideration of annual grants. In Bombay Presidency this has been done and with apparent success. 5. I have no doubt that these arrangements, modified according to circumstances, will, in the long run, prove successful in Orissa. The changes, however, should be gradual; and the ill- success of a year or two's experiments should not discourage. Oral evidence. Question 1.126 broken to pieces. They are then husked by females. This much is done on the spot, and then the leaves are put in bags, which are brought and stored in licensed warehouses at head-quarters. This method of preparation of bhang from wild plants is for drinking purposes, and is very simple and cheap. 16. I have seen bhang being prepared generally on threshing ground called "khaliau." It can also be prepared in houses, i.e., baris. Bhang can be prepared from hemp plants wherever grown, but bhang of certain places is preferred, e.g., bhang of Thana Bihipur is said to be preferred to that of other places in Bhagalpur. I am not aware of any particular reason for this. The bhang goladars of Calcutta importing from Bhagalpur may be aware of such reason. I have seen ganja plants detected in Bhagalpur and Jangipur. From their twigs ganja as good in appearance as in Naogaon (the particular sub- division where ganja is cultivated under Govern- ment supervision) can be prepared, but it is alleged that the flavour is not so good as in those grown in Naogaon. 18. I speak of ganja and bhang alone in reply- ing to this question. Both ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping. Both lose their effect in time. Ganja is kept good for two years in tin-lined wooden boxes; on the third year too it can be sold for its purpose with diminished intoxicating power. After that no smoker considers it worth while to purchase. On the third year it produces something like powder, there being no cohesive resinous matter, which shows that it has deteriorated. Bhang is generally kept in gunny bags and keeps good for three or four years. I am not sure for how many years it is kept good in Lower Bengal. But I am aware that old bhang of six or seven years' stand- ing is used for medical purposes. Any inordinate exposure to heat, air, and moisture deteriorates ganja as well as bhang. Air-tight boxes like those intended for keeping stamps in trea- suries may enhance the period; but I think to prevent deterioration completely is impracticable, as the manipulation of ganja and bhang must ex- pose the same to air and heat. 19. Ganja and charas, so far as I am aware, are used only for smoking. 20. In answering the question, I speak of ganja alone. In North Gangetic Bhagalpur the Goalas abound, and they are hard, constant, and chief consumers of ganja. Next to them stand, I believe, the Rajputs. In South Gangetic Bhagal- pur the Goalas are hard drinkers of country-spirit and not of ganja at all. The Rajputs are the same all over the district. Ganja-smoking is pre- valent, more or less, in all classes of the people in Bhagalpur as in Lower Bengal. In Bhagalpur, Goal para, and Cooch Behar I have observed a peculiar similarity in the observance of a cere- mony, viz., the uncultivating portion of Goalas, who tend cattle, are the hardest smokers of ganja, and it is essential that ganja should be smoked to a very considerable extent at Bathan at the time of Kalipuja, i.e., Deuli. 21. Chur is preferred because of its containing less leaflets than in other kinds of ganja. Rolled kind of round ganja is not at all liked in Bhagal- pur (vide answer to question 2). 22. In Jangipur charas is imported from Mirzapur. 23. I have not seen but heard of bhang- smoking in Jangipur, but in very rare instances, and by men of low classes. Generally speaking, bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is not confined particularly to any class, except those generally known in Bengal and Behar by the term " Marwaris." It is used by all classes, and more, I believe, by the higher than the lower classes of the people. It is gen- erally drunk. The use is not particularly confined to any locality or district. In Central Bengal I hear it is customary, even among the higher classes of the people, to drink bhang on the Dasahara day. 26. In respect of ganja I think the proportion would stand thus127 smoking ganja and easy in case of bhang. Generally a moderate smoker of ganja becomes an excessive smoker in no time. Such tendency is strong in the case of ganja, but not so in the case of bhang. 32. The custom of smoking ganja at Deuli, as stated under question 20, is both social and semi- religious. There is another religious custom in some Lower Bengal districts called "Tinnath puja," when smoking of ganja is essential. Only one pice worth of ganja is prepared, and low class people of the village congregate and sing in honour of the god called " Tinnath." It is of late growth among low class people, and is performed at night when certain ailment is cured on the belief of that god. It is not unusual that ganja smokers smoke in that assembly ganja other than the pice worth offered at the puja; one pice worth of betel and betel-nut and one pice worth of oil is also offered. The other ceremony, Deuli, is performed in open fields, chars or jungles, where cattle, specially buffalos, of several owners are collected together. The owners of the cattle as well as those that tend the same, assemble and perform certain religious ceremony, wash the cattle, rub oil on their horns, and then sing and smoke ganja to their heart's content. It is done once a year at the time of Kalipuja. The use of ganja is essential in both the above- mentioned customs. The use of ganja in Tinnath puja is temperate, but in Deuli it is excessive. The former tends to initiate young men of low class to the use of ganja, but the latter is confined to confirmed smokers, and hence not much injuri- ous to them. 33. The consumption of ganja and charas is regarded by the society as a vice full of injury to the smokers directly and to his family indirectly. The smokers of these two drugs are certainly looked down upon, and shunned by the good members of the society. The epithet " ganja-khor " is applied in derision to a person of rash temper and prone to violence and indiscreet acts and words. Ganja and charas smoking brings neglect to business and pursuit, unnecessary burden and expenditure to the family, and purging of blood and turning of brain at the end; hence the social public opinion against the use of ganja and charas. The use of bhang is not fraught with so much injuries, and hence not held in so much disrepute. I am not aware of any religious opinion against ganja, charas, or bhang, or of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. To forego the consumption of any of the three drugs would be considered as a privation by habitual excessive smokers only, and not by other classes of smokers as classified in question 26. The other classes can forego it with a little effort. An habitual excessive smoker of ganja becomes eager for it when deprived of his daily dose, and seems to be restless till he gets it. But such rest- lessness is more imaginary than real; for I have heard even the most confirmed ganja smokers (e. g.,sanyasis) say that they can live without it for a fortnight or a month without any injury to health. Such religious devotees say that they smoke ganja only for concentrating their mind to one idea to the exclusion of others, and not for any other purposes. To forego the use of bhang is calculated to produce indigestion in habitual drinkers; but I did not try any particular case to watch the real result. I have no experience of any charas smoker. The number of persons feeling the disconti- nuance of ganja, charas, and bhang as a sort of privation will be very limited. 35. I think it is quite feasible to prohibit the use of ganja, charas, and bhang, except when bhang is required for medicinal purposes for pre- paration of medicines under the Ayurvedic system by kabirajes. Bhang will to some extent be used illicitly, as it grows wild. Ganja will not be available easily without detection. To detect illicit collection of bhang would lead to petty op- pression and unnecessary harassment; but culti- vation of ganja is widely known to be prohibitive, and can be severely dealt with. Preparation of charas is not, I believe, known to the people, and hence it will not be heard of after prohibition of importation. The prohibition can be effected only by legal force and strict supervision by an honest class of officers for at least a period of five years. I would not leave the supervision entirely to the police, but to a class of young, active, educated, and honest officers appointed in the Excise Depart- ment constituted as at present. I do not believe that the prohibition would occasion any serious discontent among the con- sumers. Certainly it would be absurd to believe that the temporary discontent, if any, among the limited number of smokers that are disliked and looked down upon by the vast numbers of the people who would hail such a prohibition, can ever amount to a political danger. It is an argu- ment that I should call ungenerous to the people at large and far-fetched on the part of those who advance it. The prohibition may create a pleas- ing grumbling among the smokers, similar to what was observed on the re-introduction of distillery system in the town and enhancement of retail price of liquor both in town and in the interior, which caused many poor drinkers of liquor to be thrown out. The majority and better classes of the people will bless the Government and sym- pathize with its action. The ordinary habitual and occasional smokers among the ignorant mass will consider, as usual with all Government measures, that the benign Government of the Queen has taken this step for their benefit; and the few murmurers will lament in solitude. But the public sympathy will be lost; nay, the public will certainly advocate the use of the drugs, if prohibition of ganja and charas be followed by a cess or tax on the innocent. The prohibition may be followed by having re- course to alcoholic stimulants to some extent and not to other drugs. In my opinion bhang should be left unprohibited and taxed higher than at present, so that on the prohibition of ganja, hard habitual consumers of the same may fall upon bhang if they like. 36. 1 have seen no instance of foregoing ganja, charas, or bhang for the adoption of liquor, and have no reason to believe that such a tendency of substitution of liquor for drug exists. I am aware of instances, though rare, of the same person taking liquor, bhang, and opium. 37. The effect of charas is produced slowly and by degrees; but that of ganja is quick and very sadden. Charas is said to be milder than ganja. 38. No, except that the " rolled round " (vide(b) in answer to question (2) is said, in Bhagalpur, to turn the head and make one feel giddy. 39. Nil.
128 40. Bhang is prescribed by kabirajes and quacks for its medicinal qualities. It forms one of the ingredients in many kinds of medicines prepared on Ayurvedic system. No mention is made, I hear, of ganja in that ancient work, "Ayurved"; the drug mentioned is siddhi. Probably siddbi was not then developed into ganja by cultivation. Bhang is used in the treatment of cattle dis- eases. 41. I am not aware of any instance in which charas or ganja is ever used129 (c) Malpractices can often be resorted to by the wholesale dealers by converting flat into chur and utilizing the same to make up the deficiencies in chur at the close of the year and showing deficiency only in flat and thus paying less duty. (d) For the purposes of comparing consump- tion in consecutive years, the comparison would be fairer than as shown at present if there be only one kind of ganja. For in a maund of flat the actual quantity smoked is much less than in a maund of chur, and it is misleading to compare one maund flat with one maund chur. (e) For the above reason the consumption in retail shops too cannot be accurately ascertained without an intricate way of calculation for fixing the upset price of shops and selling the licenses thereof. For the above reasons I would suggest the unification of the three kinds and fixing of one duty if it be feasible to effect this unification in the producing subdivision, Naogaon. 64. It seems to be unfair to charge for wastage under the existing rules when such wastage is more nominal than real,130 54. Evidence of BABU HIRA LALL BANERJEE, Brahmin, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Monghyr. 1. Experience gained during the course of my official career, and personal experience. 3. Bhang or siddhi grows spontaneously in the district of Monghyr. 5. I have seen bhang grow wildly in the South Gangetic tract, north of the hilly range in low fallow soil. 6. Ordinarily scattered. 15. Bhang procurable in the bazaar is cleansed of dust and the seeds separated. The dry leaves are soaked in hot water for about an hour or so, and then dried in the sun. A quantity of this is then pounded in a stone jar with the following ingredients by means of a rod of neem or lemon- wood into a clay-like consistency, and eaten either in pills, or after being mixed with water or milk with name of "Bom Mahadeo." The ingredients are one or more of the following according to the means and taste of the person who drinks:131 55. Evidence of MAULAVI ABDUS SAMAD, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Purulia, Manbhum. 1. I have been connected with excise adminis- tration since 1887 in my official capacity as Deputy Collector in the district of Murshidabad, Arraria subdivision of Purnea district, Satkhira subdivision of Khulna district, and Khulna dis- trict head-quarters and Manbhum district. In the district of Khulna I was Excise Deputy Collector and hold the same office in Manbhum. In the Murshidabad district I used to remain in charge of the district excise office during the special Excise Deputy Collector's absence on tours. In the subdivisions excise was one of the various departments falling within the ordinary jurisdic- tion of the subdivisional officer. 2. Charas.132 27. Ganja and bhang133 Not so bhang. Use of ganja, as above, makes the eyes sunken, the temples depressed, the cheeks thin, the neck slender, and altogether the whole system weak and powerless. Bhang not so. Ganja injures digestion and causes loss of appetite in the long run. Not so bhang. Ganja causes dysentery, bronchitis or asthma in the long run. It is said that ganja smokers generally die of dysentery. It does impair the moral sense, does induce lazi- ness and habits of debauchery and immorality. Immoderate use of ganja certainly deadens the in- tellect and is believed to produce insanity134 I consider the system is capable of improvement. My opinions relate to ganja only. I am not much acquainted with charas and bhang. 59. The system is capable of improvement in the direction of bringing it more thoroughly under the control of Government. As at present worked, the system is controlled by Government on the one hand and by the three outside factors on the other: viz., (1) the cultivator, (2) the wholesale vendor, and (3) the retail vendor. These three factors are more or less independent of Government control. They can each in his own sphere influence the final cost to consumers. The truth of the following proposition seems undisputed:135 3. The entire crop should be purchased by Government and then manufactured by its own paid servants. 4. The ganja when manufactured should be preserved in air-tight tin vessels like tea, say each to contain one, two, or more pounds. There should be only one kind of ganja manufactured, namely, chur ganja, from which all extraneous matter has been eschewed. To have three different kinds of ganja looks like having two holes in the door for a pair of kittens. 5. The ganja should be manufactured at Naogaon and at once despatched to conve- nient divisional centres for distribution to the districts. 6. At least two years' consumption should always be in stock. 63. I have very serious objection to the present system of wholesale vend of ganja. The whole- sale vendor exercises a great influence in the reve- nue of Government on the one hand and the cost to consumers on the other. (1) The wholesale vendor should be abolished. (2) The ganja should be issued by the treasury officer like opium to retail vendors. There will be no weighment. The tins will be simply handed over. As regards the retail vend of ganja, I would introduce the following system tentatively:136 (b) No. (c) Illicitly prepared in this district, but the quantity is very small. 15. Only from cultivated plants different sorts of ganja is manufactured. I do not know much about the preparation of ganja and charas. Siddhi or bhang is prepared illicitly from the wild plants. The leaves are removed from the plants when they are flowering and then dried in the sun. After the process it is powdered and drunk after mixing it with water, milk, sugar, and spices. Ganja and charas are only smoked, generally after mixing with tobacco. 16. (a) Prepared to a very small extent in this district. (b) Yes. (c) No. 17. Ganja is prepared by the ordinary culti- vators, both Hindus and Muhammadans. Siddhi is illicitly prepared by all classes of people who drink it. I do not know what classes of people prepare charas. 18. Yes, these drugs deteriorate by keeping, and quite lose their effect in time. Ganja and siddhi keep good for two to three years and charas four to five years. The evaporation of the nar- cotic matter is the cause of deterioration. If the drug is kept hermetically sealed in tin boxes, I thinkit might prevent deterioration. 19. Used only for smoking, as far as I know. 20. Charas used to be smoked by both the upper and lower classes of people, but now its use is almost confined to a limited number of the latter. The consumption of charas in this dis- trict is not more than thirty seers per annum and the number of smokers of this drug is not more than three hundred. Ganja is smoked generally by people of the lower castes who have much out- door work, such as boatmen, fishermen, and coolies, and a limited number of the upper class in the Barasat subdivision. 1 think about 75 per cent. of the adult population of the labouring lower class of people smoke ganja. 21. In this district round ganja is preferred. Flat ganja is not used at all. The consumption of chur is very little. 22. Foreign, Nepal charas, imported from Am- ritsar, is chiefly used. 23. Not as far as I am aware. 24. Bhang drinking is prevalent among all classes of people. It is specially used by the in- habitants of Behar residing in this district. I think about 50 per cent. of the people drink siddhi or bhang. 25. The annual reports show that the consump- tion of ganja is falling off year by year. The com- sumption of siddhi shows an increase. In charas the increase of consumption is nominal. The vendors of this district formerly used to ob- tain charas from Calcutta retail shops in small quantities, but now they are importing it direct from Amritsar and are selling it wholesale to the vendors of other districts. Ganj a. Sidd hi. hi. Char as. as. Mds. Srs. Mds. Srs. Mds. Srs. 1888-89 185 35 37 31 1889-90 163 19 43 9 1890-91 172 29 46 5 0 25 1891-92 177 2 56 29 0 31 1892-93 173 26 6 26 1 25 26. (a) 70 per cent. (b) 4 " (c) 25 " (d) 1 " 27. These are mainly taken from the lower castes who have a good deal of rough out-door work, such as Bagdi, Podh, Behara, Chamar, Malla, Dhangar, Dulia, Dome, Mehtar, Boistab Sanyasi, songster, Kaibarta, etc. They are gene- rally moderate consumers. Ganja. Charas. Siddhi. 28. (a) 2 annas weight, 3 annas weight, 1 tola. price 2 pice. price 11/2 annas. price 2 pice. (b) 1 tola, 1 tola, 21/2 tolas, price 4 annas. price 8 annas. price 5 pice. 29. (a) Ordinarily with ganja and charas pre- pared tobacco is mixed, and with siddhi spices, sugar and milk. (b) I am not aware of anything exceptionally mixed. I have heard that dhatura seeds are used with ganja to increase its intoxicating power, but I have not seen any one use it. In case of tobacco with charas and ganja to soften the narcotic effect and to give a better flavour. Spices, etc., are used with siddhi to improve the taste and also to increase its intoxicating effect. I know of no preparation such as bhang massala. 30. (a) Ganja and charas are smoked generally in company. No privacy is observed in case of drinking siddhi. (b) It is mainly confined to the male sex and not to any special time of life. (c) No. 31. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Not to the same extent as alcohol or opium. 32. The consumption of ganja and charas is not required by any social or religious custom. Bhang is drunk partly as a religious and more as a social custom on the fourth or last day of the Durga puja, as it is believed that success in life results thereby, and the name itself "siddhi" implies success. It is popularly believed to have been the favourite drink of Siva and is therefore given as an offering to him by devotees. The use is generally temperate and there is no likelihood of its leading to the formation of habit. 33. The smoking of ganja is held in disrepute, but such is not the case with siddhi drinking or charas smoking. The sentiment against ganja smoking is, I think, due to the fact that its use is confined generally to the lower castes. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion by any sect of people. 34. Yes. The labouring class of the population use ganja or charas as a stimulant to enable them to do hard work. They cannot possibly give up the practice without some substitute. Bhang, again, could not be given up by the habitual con- sumers without aggravating the complaints, to prevent which they had recourse to its use. About 50,000 of the labouring classes of this dis- trict use ganja as a stimulant for hard work. There are no less than 10,000 habitual consumers of siddhi, but the charas smokers are not more than 300 in this district.
137 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of charas, but not of ganja or siddhi. These two may be consumed illicitly; I doubt if the prohibition could be enforced with regard to them. The prohibition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, but that would not amount to a political danger. The prohibition would be followed by recourse to other deleterious drugs. 36. Alcohol is to a very small extent substi- tuted for these drugs amongst the better classes. As a stimulant, alcohol is considered as superior. The use of these drugs is gradually diminishing. Tari to some extent has taken the place of ganja among the lower class of people, for it stimulates and at the same time satisfies hunger, although a little costly. 37. Yes. The effect of charas-smoking is con- sidered to be milder than ganja-smoking. 38. No. 39. Siddhi-drinking is less injurious than smoking ganja or charas. Smoking produces a strong instantaneous effect, but drinking is de- cidedly an easier method of consuming a large quantity at a time. 40. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 41. (a) Believed to be both. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) The use of ganja is supposed to enable a man to concentrate his mind on a subject. Labouring class, 75 per cent. of them. The moderate use is referred to. 42. The moderate use is harmless as it has no after-effect on the system. 43. Yes. 44. (a) It invigorates and causes a pleasant feeling of intoxication. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) No. (e) Yes, it does when taken in the form of siddhi. (f) One hour in case of ganja and charas and three to four hours in case of siddhi, (g) No. (h) Produces longing in case of habitual con- sumers. 45. (a) No. (b) In case of intemperate use it does. (c) No. (d) Yes, in the case of intemperate use. (e) No. (f) The moderate use does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. It is said that adulteration of the drugs with other poisonous ingredients, such as dhatura, etc., produces insanity. (g) It has been ascertained that of the insane persons in the district, only nineteen are considered to have become so by the use of ganja. Of these nineteen, only one is reported to be violent. On sufficient enquiry, and as well as from the confession of the insane, it was elicited that in the majority of cases their insanity was due to other causes, such as family misfortune, etc., and some have taken to ganja after being insane. In four cases no other cause for their insanity could be ascer- tained except the excessive use of the drug. 46. Habitual excessive indulgence causes the peculiar frenzy which causes orientals to run amuck. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. (a) Yes. (b) It is used so by the lowest class of prosti- tutes who frequent melas or fairs. (c) I am not aware. (d) No. 51 to 55. No. 56. I have no personal knowledge of the ad- mixture of other substances than what I have already noted. 57. I do not know that ganja and charas are eaten or drunk. 58. The excise administration in respect of hemp drugs is working well, and I am not pre- pared to suggest any improvement. 60 and 61. I think that there is sufficient con- trol and have no suggestion to make for the modification of the system. 62. I would not suggest any changes in this respect. 63 and 64. No. 65. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 66. Yes; for flat and round have twigs which the chur has not. Each kind of ganja should be taxed in proportion to the narcotic matter that each is found to contain. 67. Yes, as remarked above 68. There are licensed shops for the sale of these drugs, but ordinarily they are not smoked or drunk on the premises. The shops are not disreputable. Generally mudi shopkeepers are the licensed holders of these shops. 69. Ordinarily the wishes of the people are not consulted or considered when a shop is opened in any locality. On the application of vendors and local inhabitants licenses are granted after due enquiry at the auction settlement held with the sanction of the Board. I do not think it is ne- cessary to consult or consider public opinion as these shops are not a nuisance. 70. There are no facts regarding importation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States. Yes; duty is paid in respect of ganja and charas, but not of siddhi. The latter is used to some extent illicitly, but the use is not general. 58. Evidence of BABU PROKASH CHUNDER ROY, Excise Deputy Collector, Patna. 1. My connection with the Excise Department runs from 1878, when 1 was appointed as Excise Inspector of the Patna Division. In 1885 I was appointed as Excise Deputy Collector. In both these appointments I had ample opportunities to obtain information on hemp drugs. From my own experience, from statistics collected and from inquiries made, the following replies are recorded. 2. The definitions given by Dr. Prain may be accepted for this province (Bengal). X
138 The local names of the different kinds of hemp are as follows:139 TABLE (Vide REPLY TO QUESTION No. 20). Statement showing the percentage of different classes of ganja and bhang smokers in the Municipality of Patna. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 Drugs. Gawalas. Kahars. Kurmis. Brahmans. Musalmans. Rajputs. Koeris. Kayasths. Fakirs. Sonars. Mullahs. Babhans. Telis. Hajjams. Bannias. Kalwars. Mehtars. Barhis. Halwais. Dosadhs. Tamolis. Sundis. Kandus. Lohars. Dhobis. Chamars. Mushars. Naniars. Malis. Bunodhias Bundelas. Pasis. Bunpars. Dhanakhs. Gurairies. Marwaris. Khangars. Kaseras. Kumhars. Khatris. Ganja 11 10 9 7 7 8 5 5 4 3 3 2 2 2 1.3 1.2 1 1 1.6 1.2 1.6 1.6 1.5 .3 .5 .3 .8 .8 .4 .3 .3 .4 .3 .4 .8 .1 .1 .8 .1 Nil Bhang 18 14..9 7 10 2.5 7.6 5 9 6 1.2 9 .6 1.2 2 .6 .6 .6 1.2 .6 2 2 .6 This statement is made up from statistics collected in the shops within the municipality. 21. Flat (chipta) ganja is preferred for smok- ing. The preference generally depends upon the duty fixed for each kind and the price demanded thereof. 22. Chavas is not used in this district. Good charas is said to be imported from Herat. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Bhang is used by all clases of Hindus, especially Babhans and Marwaris. In a hundred consumers there are fifty Babhans and ten Mar- waris. It is generally and mostly used in towns, because bhang very rarely sells in the mufassal. 25. The consumption of ganja has decreased owing to the increase of duty. Particulars for charas are not known. The consumption of bhang appears to be on the increase owing to the fact that there has been no increase in the rate of duty on this drug, while duty on ganja has been raised considerably from time to time. 26. GANJA. BHANG. (a) 48 per cent. 10 per cent. (b) 23 " 15 " (c) 17 " 50 " (d) 12 " 25 " These informations have been recorded from statistics collected in the ganja shops and from enquiries made of ganja vendors. 27. In reply to No. 20 I have given the castes which use ganja. They are mostly poor men and day-labourers, who either from religious prejudices or on account of want of sufficient means cannot use liquor. This and also reply No. 20 are made from statistics recorded by the vendors and from enquiries made by me. 28. GANJA. BHANG. Allowance. Costs. Allowance. Costs. (a) 8 grains 1/4 anna. 45 grains 1/8 anna. (b) 64 " 2 annas. 90 " 1/4 " These figures have been obtained by enquiry. 29. In ganja, khaini or dry leaf of tobacco is ordinarily used. In exceptional cases, if the con- sumer can afford it, attar is used. With bhang, anise and pepper are ordinarily used. In excep- tional cases, milk, sugar, and spices are used. It is said anise and pepper give taste and flavour to bhano, but milk and sweets make it more effect- ive. Dhatura is rarely used. Ingredients of bhang massala are given below:140 36. There is no reason to believe that alcohol is used in lieu of these drugs, because the latter are cheaper. 37. The effect is the same, but the smell of charas is sweeter. I have smelled both. 38. The same effect. 39. Ganja smoking is less injurious than eating or drinking the same, because the whole quantity of smoke drawn cannot be retained. In smoking, a portion of the intoxicating power is wasted in the fume thrown out, and another portion is burnt, while the whole power acts within when eaten or drunk. 40. Old bhang is often used by hakims and baids for diseases of the stomach Bhang is often used for cattle diseases. Ganja is sometimes used as a medicine for skin diseases, but majum and charas are never used as medicines. 41. (a) Moderate use of ganja and bhang after meals is said to be beneficial as a digestive to those who have made it a habit. (b) Moderate use is considered by the consumer to give staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, and also to alleviate fatigue. (c) Ganja is said to be a preventive of fever in marshy places. (d) Bhang is often used as a preventive of diarrh141 under-proof strength will cost at least one anna, and this quantity of liquor is not considered enough for a moderate drinker, So that if the tax on ganja and bhang is doubled, and the selling price is made twice as high as it is now, these drugs will still be cheaper than country liquor, and there will be no danger of driving the consumer to the use of country liquor. 64. Nil. 65. Half a pice worth of bhang is sufficient for a moderate consumer of bhang, while one pice is necessary as regards ganja and four pice as regards liquor. So that it is possible to raise the tax on bhang and ganja to twice as much as shown in reply No. 63. 66. Formerly one rate was in force, but in 1864-65, in order to equalise the incidence of the tax on the exciseable portion of the drug, the present system of charging different rates of duty was introduced. This is necessary, or else flat ganja would not sell. From one seer of flat ganja the vendor can sell only 9 to 11 chhattaks, and from one seer of round ganja 14 to 15 chhattaks. The saleable ganja varies according to the produce of the year and the quantity of twigs in the ganja. 67. None. 68. No. There is nothing, however, to prevent people smoking ganja or consuming bhang in the shops where they are sold. As the public do not object, I have nothing to suggest. 69. When an application for a new shop is made, local enquiry is made by the excise subor- dinates and by the Excise Deputy Collector, if necessary. It is not necessary to consult public opinion as regards the localities of these shops, as they are considered perfectly harmless. 70. I had two cases in Champaran where Sadhus had brought with them small quantities of ganja from Nepal, where the drug is very cheap. But these were rare cases, and I do not think any extraordinary measure is necessary to prevent this sort of smuggling. A little more vigilance on the part of the Frontier Police and our excise de- tectives will put a stop to them. Very little of any untaxed ganja is used in this province, but such is not the case with bhang, which grows wild and can be had without any difficulty. 59. Evidence of BABU PRAKASH CHANDRA SINGHA, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Chandpur, Tippera. 19. In this district, as far as I know, ganja is used only for smoking. 20. Lower-class Hindus, such as Charals and Kaibartas, in Tippera smoke ganja. 27. In North Tippera, some years ago, some ganja smokers introduced a kind of worship called "Trinath's puja." Smoking some ganja was an essential part of the worship. This became a favourite amusement of the low-class Hindus, and I knew many lads learn ganja smoking in this institution. The institution is now becoming un- popular. 30. Smoking ganja is mainly confined to the male sex. It is not usual for children to consume ganja. 31. When the habit has once been formed it is difficult to break it off. I had some tenants who took to smoking and got into the habit. They tried to break it off, but were unsuccessful. 32. Answer given in connection with question 27. In the worship of Trinath, smoking ganja is essential. 33. With the higher classes all forms of narcotic, except tobacco, are in disrepute. 34. As smoking ganja does not do anybody any good, I do not think there would be any serious privation to any class of consumers to forego the consumption. 35. I do not think the prohibition would lead to any political danger. It is only the worthless among the community that use the drugs. 45. Yes, it does. I know two lives which I studied. They were both moderate smokers of ganja. One was a strong man and the other of a weakly constitution. As the strong man went on smoking he gradually became idiotic and idle, and lastly he died vomiting blood. The weaker of the two preserved his intellect till he died, but he too died vomiting blood, probably due to disorder of lungs caused by ganja smoking. 46. Moderate use produced the effect noted in answer to question 45. It took some time to pro- duce the effects noted, and excessive use is likely to produce them in a much shorter time. 47. Not hereditary in either of the two in- stances noted (45). 48. Excessive use can produce in a shorter time the evils noted in answer to question 45. 51 and 52. As far as I know, there is no connec- tion between the two. There are more criminals amongst Muhammadans than among Hindus; but I think there are more ganja smokers among Hin- dus than amongst Muhammadans. 53 and 54. None has come to my knowledge. 69. In these matters local public opinion should invariably be obtained. I knew of places where opening such shops was considered objectionable by the higher classes of people. 60. Evidence of BABU SURENDRANATH MOZOOMDAR, Brahmin, Special Excise Deputy Collector, Monghyr. 1. Experience gained from personal observa- tion, personal knowledge and inquiries instituted through subordinate agency in the Excise Depart- ment. 2. Dr. Prain's definition may be accepted for bhang. I have no personal experience of the manufacture of charas and ganja, but, as far as I know, the definitions are correct, Bhang grows wild in the district of Monghyr, and both male and female plants are collected under that name. Bhang is locally termed here for siddhi, subji, patti, etc. 3. (Answer refers to bhang only.) I have seen bhang grow wild in the following districts (1) Muzaffarpur, (2) Bhagalpur, (3) Monghyr. It is abundantly grown in the last- mentioned districts. 4. Bhang. 5. Districts of Monghyr and Bhagalpur. The climate is temperate, soil alluvial with basaltic rocky formation in the southern portion of the districts. The growth is scanty in the latter
142 part. Rainfall ordinary. Elevation above sea- level slight. I do not consider any special con- ditions are necessary for the growth of bhang. 6. Scattered. Ditches, earthen boundaries and fallow lands being the ordinary places where it grows. Germinates generally in October and is ready for use in six months. 14. (Answer relates only to bhang.) Bhang is prepared here (Monghyr district) annually to the extent of 300 maunds. 15. Bhang is prepared here from the wild plants. In April or May the plants are cut off and left to dry in the fields for about a week. The leaves are then shaken off the twigs (stem) and collected. The seeds are separated as far as possible. The dried leaves are then carried to warehouses as being fit for the market. Preparation for eating.143 29. With ganja.144 any fever. This may be accidental, because I have seen people getting fever who take ganja. I only refer to moderate occasional use. They are all labouring classes; and, I think, 50 per cent. of the male adult population in particular tracts of this class use ganja. Bhang is also considered when habitually, but moderately, used as suppress- ing cravings for lust. In this way it is used by darwans, sepoys, and constables, who are bache- lors, or, being married men, do not meet their wives often. 42. Ganja and bhang.145 only to fix the tax and also the retail price. By properly tracing these the consumption can be checked within the described limits, the license fees being fixed with reference to the probable consumption of each shop. 62. Bhang.146 14. In the three districts mentioned in question 7? to a considerable extent. 18. Yes, all these drugs deteriorate by keeping; not quite, but to some considerable extent. Said to keep good for two years. Exposure to damp is the cause of deterioration which might be prevented by preservation of the drugs in air-tight rooms, unexposed to damp, and in tinned boxes. 19. No. Ganja, boiled with mustard or cocoanut oil, is used as an external application to sores and ulcers. It is a splendid cure for the itch. The oil is rubbed externally in cases of dropsy with good effect. Ganja is smoked for curing gonor- rh147 lower classes that smoke ganja, a respectable mem- ber of society found to indulge in it is at once considered to have degraded himself to the level of the lower classes. 34. Yes, to the Saivas (sanyasis), bairagies, day-labourers (palki-bearers), and fishermen if they have to give up ganja-smoking. The reasons can be found in the answer to question 27. In the Bangaon sub-division of the Jessore district, there are no less than 3,000 men of this class. 35. (a) No. (b) Possibly, but not to any great extent. (c) By legislative enactment. (d) The discontent in Bengal would not be serious. (e) Certainly not in Lower Bengal. (f) The lower classes would take to "tari" and the higher to liquor. 36. Yes, among the higher strata of society in Lower Bengal. This is due to the fact that the habit of ganja-smoking is considered as degrad- ing and humiliating, while that of drinking is literally believed to be ennobling among the half- educated classes. Besides, there is a difference in the nature of the intoxication produced by ganja and liquor. Ganja never produces that exuberance of animality that is produced by liquor, and young, well-to-do people delight in this state of intoxication. People who have taken both ganja and liquor say that since the outstill system was established there has been very little difference in the amount of intoxica- tion purchasable for one anna as between ganja liquor, and yet the intoxication of liquor is of a superior kind. The proof is that I have known personally some two dozen men who have given up ganja for country liquor. 37. Yes; smokers say that the intoxication of charas is "in the eye," of siddhi "in the memory and the imagination," of ganja "in the brain and the nerves." I understand that charas produces a mild form of intoxication, which does not com- pletely permeate the system or break down the constitution in the same way as excessive ganja- smoking does. 38. In degree only, not in kind. Chur intoxi- cates most, round next, and flat next. It is said this difference in degree is due to the quantity of intoxicating material present in the three varieties, chur costing most and flat least. 40. Yes, vide reply to question 19. 41. (a) Yes, as regards all three drugs. (b) Yes. (c) Ganja alone has this property. (d) Ganja-smoking has been known to nip an attack of cholera in the bud. I have heard an old planter say that where no other medicine was available the moderate smoking of ganja cured no less than 60 per cent. of the men attacked with cholera. The moderate habitual use is referred to in case of (a) and (b); the moderate occasional use in (c)and (d). 43. Certainly. 44. (a). The immediate effect is an increase in the circulation of blood and exhilaration of spirits. (b) Yes, it is. (c) It does. (d) I do not believe that moderate use of any of these drugs allays hunger. On the contrary, it in- creases hunger. Excessive use deadens appetite. (e) Yes; each of these drugs creates appetite if used moderately. (f) The effect lasts for an hour or two. (g) No after-effects. (h) No long- ing or uneasiness except in the excessive use. The effect of ganja in producing exhilaration of spirits is instantaneous. That is why ganja is called "Turitananda" (instantaneous pleasure- giver). 45. (a) to (e) No. (f) No. No instance known in which insanes who have no recorded ganja history have confessed to the use of the drug. 46. Yes, to the six questions of 45. The in- sanity is temporary. No case of permanent in- sanity due to ganja-smoking has come to my knowledge. The insanity is of the violent type; the man becomes a raving maniac. Yes, the symptoms are induced by use of the drug for some time after liberation. Can't tell if any of the symptoms can be called typical. Yes; in my opinion the use of the drug by persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease to obtain relief has been sufficiently con- sidered. No; I don't think there is any evidence to in- dicate that insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is defi- cient in self-control through weakened intellect. I.148 III.149 other. Each gola should have its capacity fixed and each individual shop likewise. In sub-divi- sions the same arrangement, on a minor sale, should be effected. The stringent conditions of the license are, I know, nowhere followed, and the Board of Revenue have seen fit to relax rules in regard to poor natives for breach of such con- ditions. Some of these rules should be entirely left out. Each gola should be taxed. The Ex- cise Deputy Collector should have under certain limitations, power to disallow the renewal of the lease of a gola. These things done, it might be said that trade in ganja is sufficiently controlled by authorities. 65. (a) Yes. (b) Vide reply to question 36. 66. Yes; in proportion to their relative intoxi- cating value. There is no other safe test. 68. I have no knowledge of shops licensed to sell ganja or its preparation or any of the other drugs for consumption on the premises. But as a matter of fact, shops holding the license to retail ganja are used for smoking purposes. 69. Yes, in that vague, undefinable way in which the agency of the police is capable of being employed for such a purpose. The thana office is asked to consult the wishes of the people. A notice is posted up in the thana, perhaps a drum is beat, and possibly the friends of the thana officer are in a few cases consulted. Practically there is no consultation. Genuine local public opinion, such as is to be found in the villages, is considered, even by police subordinates, to be beneath notice. 70. Actual occurrences of smuggling are very rare. " Smuggling " of evidence to prove smug- gling is, according to my experience, much more common. A cry of smuggling once raised is hard to quell. It affords excise subordinates op- portunities of securing many convictions on weak, insufficient, and even worthless evidence. It also enables plausible explanations being offered to superiors, and accounts for a great many days of touring, where no touring is actually made. Duty is paid, and there is certainly no general use of untaxed drugs either in the districts bor- dering Hill Tippera or the Orissa Tributary States. Oral evidence. Question 1.150 His mother was distantly connected with our family, and so I learned all about him. He once travelled as a mendicant from Calcutta to Cuttack. I gave him money to return to Calcutta, but instead of returning he smoked ganja and was found nearly dead in the streets. He had not drunk liquor then. I took him home and he was examined by a Hospital Assistant, who said that he was at the point of death from the use of ganja. The Hospital Assistant gave this opinion in answer to our questions. 62. Evidence of BABU KANTI BHUSHAN SEN, Baidya, Special Excise Deputy Collector of Cuttack. 1. I was placed in charge of the Excise Depart- ment, Cuttack, on the 26th September 1891, and have since made a series of enquiries relating to ganja which grows in the Gurjats or Tributary States of Orissa and is commonly known as Gurjat ganja. 2. The definition of siddhi, bhang, subji or patti, as given by Dr. Prain, is correct. The term commonly used in the Cuttack district for it is patti. There is no charas shop in the district, and charas is not known to be used here. I have no special knowledge about it. The definitions of the different varieties of ganja as given by Dr. Prain, apply to the ganja pro- duced in Rajshahi. The Rajshahi ganja is used here, and the varieties are known here under the same names. It has been stated by Dr. Prain that " the formation of seeds is prevented by the de- struction of all male plants." A very large quan- tity of seeds is found in the bales of ganja, im- ported from Rajshahi, so the formation of seeds does not appear to be successfully prevented. A very curious fact has been noticed peculiar to these seeds found in the Rajshahi ganja. I have been assured by those who raised plants from these seeds in the Cuttack district that they uniformly found them to produce male plants, and if they at all produced female plants they were abortive in their flowers, so that only patti and no ganja could be obtained from them. 3. Hemp plants grow in some parts of Bengal spontaneously, from which siddhi or patti is ob- tained. I have seen them in the districts of Jessore and Faridpur. In the Tributary States of Orissa they, specially the female or ganja- producing plants, grow more spontaneously than in Bengal. I have found them abundant in the Tributary State of Khandpara. 4. In Bengal they are known by the name of siddhi or bhang plants, and in Orissa as ganja (female) and patti (male) plants. The siddhi plant of Bengal and the patti plant of Orissa appear to be identical. 5. The wild plant of Orissa generally grows towards the close of the rains, and thrives well in a mild climate and loamy soil. Sandy and very moist soils are unsuited for its growth. Usual rains at intervals promote its growth. As regards elevation above sea-level, I have seen it grow on hill-tops as well as in the plains. So long as the soil is moderately dry and loamy, and the climate not very hot, the elevation above sea-level does not appear to affect its growth. 6. Generally scattered. 7. Ganja is cultivated in very large quantities in the Rajshahi district. But, as I have no personal knowledge of its cultivation in that district, I shall confine my further replies to Gurjat ganja and patti referred to above. (a) Yes; in the Tributary States of Orissa. (b) No. (c) Yes; in the Tributary States of Orissa. (d) No. As my enquiries relating to Gurjat ganja were confined to about three miles of the frontier in the Gurjats, I cannot say to what extent it is produced. But the quantity is sufficient to meet the local demand as well as the demand of the consumers in the British territory who live along the frontier. Besides this, a few maunds are imported into the district of Puri and elsewhere. 8. I think there has been some increase in the area under such cultivation in the Gurjats. In Government of Bengal Order No. 165-T., dated the 19th October 1878, the cultivation of Gurjat ganja in the Tributary States within three miles of the frontier was prohibited. But subsequently this prohibition was withdrawn in Government of Bengal Order No. E. 1.-G./2 4, dated the 6th Sep- tember 1889; since which the cultivation in the Tributary States appears to have been on the in- crease, as is known by the falling off in the con- sumption of Rajshahi ganja from 141 maunds 7 seers 12 chittacks in 1889-90 to 112 maunds 21 seers 9 chittacks in 1892-93. The last year's incidence on account of duty and license fees per seer of Rajshahi ganja is about Rs. 15, while in the Tributary States no such license fee or duty is realized, and ganja is usually sold from Rs. 2-8 to Rs. 4-8 a seer. A portion of the falling-off is, no doubt, due to the high incidence of Rajshahi ganja. As there is no licit consumption of Gurjat ganja in the Cuttack district, a great quantity is being smuggled into the British territory alongthe frontier. Twenty-three cases of such smug- gling have been detected during the half-year ending 30th September 1893. 9. The plants (Gurjat ganja and patti) grow spontaneously from the preceding year's seeds, and are also cultivated within the enclosed premises of the people of the Gurjats. The plants grow towards the close of the rainy season, and take about six months before the flowers are sufficiently matured. The plants are then felled, and left to dry for three to five days, after which the twigs contain- ing the flowers are collected and tied into bundles. This is Gurjat ganja. The leaves of these plants (female) as well as those of the male plants are also collected and used as patti. 10. In the Gurjats, i.e., the Tributary States of Orissa, almost all the consumers grow ganja plants, and as men belonging to the different castes from the Brahmin to the Pan (a very low aboriginal class) are found amongst the consumers, the culti- vation is not restricted to any special class. 11. Yes, in the Gurjats. 12. Yes, in the Gurjats I have found them in the Tributary States of Keonjhar, Dhenkanal, Atgarh, Tigriah, Baramba, and Khandpara. As to the extent, vide latter portion of my reply to question No. 7. In the Gurjats the male plants are not extirpated.
151 13. I have no personal knowledge about the cultivation of ganja in the Rajshahi district. As regards Gurjat ganja, 1 beg to refer to my replies to questions Nos. 5 to 12. 1 think the cultivation of ganja in tracts of country along the sea side in Orissa, where the soil is very sandy, will not be successful, unless the soil is specially prepared for its cultivation. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. In the Tributary States of Orissa. As regards extent, vide my reply to question No. 7. 15. The particulars about the preparation have been given in my reply to question No. 9. The cultivated and the wild plants are treated similarly. (A) Gurjat ganja is smoked as well as drunk as patti. In one particular instance I have seen Gurjat patti smoked. The man, a fakir, resorted to it on account of high price of Rajshahi ganja. The drug is mixed up and well compounded with a little of tobacco leaves and smoked. (B) Majum, a sort of confectionery, is prepared with sugar from the decoction of ganja (both Rajshahi and Gurjat) or patti and is eaten. I have seen a man to chew ganja and to swallow it. (C) Patti as well as Gurjat ganja is drunk with the addition of certain spices and sugar. For particulars of the spices used152 on account of its high price, they would smoke, without it, with ganja or the kernel of the seeds and the root of the plant known in Bengal by the name of kalika and in Orissa as kaniar (Thevetia neriifolia), which is known to be a poisonous plant. Patti or bhang.153 (2) 1 pice worth of betel-nuts and pan for the use of the people assembled; and (3) 1 pice worth of ganja, which was divided into three parts and smoked in three chillums after the text had been read out. The so-called mêla was introduced for the first time some fifteen to twenty years ago, and is said to be dying out gradually. I learn a similar mêla has been recently intro- duced in parts of Orissa (Jajpur and Bhadrak), where ganja is smoked as a part of the semi- religious observance. 33. The consumption of siddhi or patti is not generally regarded as a pernicious habit, and is in no way regarded as degrading. There is thus no public opinion (social or religious) against it. This is probably due to (1) the sanction of re- ligious Shastras; and (2) the rather comparative harmlessness of the drug. The same remarks do not apply to the smoking of ganja. There is a decided public opinion against its use among the educated classes, and the ganja-smoker is looked down upon in society. This opinion is based upon (1) the fact of its being primarily an in- toxicant of the lower classes who, when willing, can ill afford to pay for wines, etc., and are thus obliged to be confined to this cheap drug; and (2) the fact of its suspicious demoralizing effect. The fakirs, as a rule, smoke ganja, and this habit of theirs is not, however, regarded as in any way degrading or otherwise injurious by even the edu- cated classes. The lower classes have no opinion either in favor of or against its use. The hemp plant is never worshipped either in Bengal or in Orissa on any occasion by any sect of the people. 34. It will positively be a serious privation to the habitual consumers of both ganja and patti. The habit cannot easily be broken off, and un- easiness is necessarily felt by consumers who have acquired the habit. That it is so, is proved by the fact that many persons deprived of ganja are said to have resorted to the smoking of the more deleterious dhatura, kuchila and kalika seeds in lieu of ganja. Those who have acquired the habit of daily drinking potions of patti fall vic- tims to some diseases endangering their life when they are deprived of it. I cannot give any idea of the probable number of such people. 35. Considering all sides of the question, I do not think it would be feasible to prohibit the use of either ganja or patti. Even if the prohibition were enforced by rigorous law, it would be im- practicable to prevent smuggling of the same from the Native States. It, however, any at- tempt be made to prohibit the cultivation of the hemp plant in these Native States, the people will surely resent this interference on the part of the British Government, and thus might lead to a political danger. Moreover, as the drugs appear to have obtained something like a religious sanc- tion, the total prohibition will probably cause an irritation in the mind of the masses, which might lead to unpleasant results. Another potent factor standing against any effective prohibition lies in the fact of the easiness with which the plant can be safely grown in any bit of laud within the secluded enclosure of the zenanas. The cost of strict supervision and detection in these cases, if adopted, would be enormous and almost prohibitive. The consumers would also, no doubt, be seriously discontented, when their only luxury of an in- toxicant which they indulge in amidst their pover- ty is removed from their reach. As regards Orissa, alcoholic stimulants are never drunk by any genuine Uriyas of high caste. The alcoholic liquor is mainly confined here to the low class Muhammadans and the lowest classes of Hindus (Hinduized aboriginal classes), such as Pans, Kandras, etc. The Uriyas being mostly Voishnabas, strictly follow religious injunctions in this respect, and are thus debarred from an in- dulgence in liquors. Hence it may safely be in- ferred that the prohibition of ganja and patti will not likely be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. But I think the habitual consumers (when thus circumstanced) will be driven readily to resort to other drugs, which are plentifully indigenous in this province. Even the compara- tive high price of ganja is reported to have led many habitual consumers to the use of some of these more deleterious drugs (dhatura, kuchila, kaniar, etc.). 36. In Orissa154 43. Yes. 44. The effect of smoking ganja on the habitual consumers is instantaneous. It is refreshing, pro- duces slight intoxication, does not allay hunger, creates appetite, and the effect lasts from two to three hours; after-effects not noticeable. Those habitual consumers who have stated periods for gratification, feel longing and uneasiness, if they do not satisfy it at those periods. When taken in excess, ganja-smoking seems to allay hunger, as is seen in fakirs. As regards patti, the effects on the habitual consumers are the same as those of ganja-smok- ing, excepting that intoxication begins not in- stantaneously, but after the lapse of about an hour or so. The intoxication is milder in nature, but lasts longer than that produced by ganja. 45. Ganja.155 56. Patti.156 decidedly more harmful and stronger than the Rajshahi drug. In fact, the difference between the Rajshahi and the Gurjat ganja is the same as is found between the cultivated and the wild variety of the same plant. Consumption.157 I caused some smokers to smoke before me, and I supplied them with Gurjat and Rajshahi ganja. The old smokers of Rajshahi ganja said the Gurjat ganja produced a burning sensation in the pit of their stomach, and also that it would produce dysentery and similar pain if they are unaccustomed to it. Those accustomed to Gurjat ganja do not feel these ill-effects. There were ten smokers, four of whom were old smokers able to distinguish the two kinds of ganja, and the above was the opinion of these four. The general opinion is that Gurjat ganja is the stronger and the more harmful. Question 45.158 It grows abundant all over Bengal. 24-Parganas.159 (b) No charas. (c) There is no cultivation of bhang, but the growth is fostered in some cases. The cultivation is resorted to primarily with the object of growing ganja; if it fails, the leaves are used as bhang. Bhang grows spontaneously all over Bengal, and its cultivation is rare. Illicit cultivation is generally decreasing through the vigilance of Excise and Police officers. (d) It is not cultivated solely for its fibre or seeds. The formation of seed cannot entirely be prevented by the destruction of the male plants, as there are seeds in the Rajshahi ganja exported, and the seeds of the Rajshahi ganja are used for the cultivation of ganja plants in the ganja mahal. The wild hemp grows wild from the seeds of the wild hemp. Ganja plants are illicitly reared from the seeds of the Rajshahi ganja. 8. The area of the ganja mahal is not decreas- ing, as the following figures will show:160 The cultivation was flourishing in Jessore in 1843, and was continued down to 1875, when it was stopped under the orders of the Board. About 1722 A.D., ganja was for the first time cultivated in the village of Balubhora, in the district of Bogra, and in that of Muradpur in Rajshahi, which adjoins it, the seeds having been imported from Kushtea, where there were shops for the sale of the drug. The cultivation proving remunera- tive was gradually extended to several other villages. I cannot say why the districts of Rajshahi, Bogra, and Dinajpur were selected. Ganja can be cultivated in every district in my jurisdiction (where wild bhang grows) if not restricted; but the quality of the ganja will not be so good as that grown in the ganja mahal. Even the ganja cultivated and manufactured in the Sibpur Experimental Farm was not so good in quality as the Rajshahi ganja. (b) For special conditions necessary for the cul- tivation of the hemp plant for producing ganja, vide answer to question 5. Ganja can be culti- vated in places where wild hemp plant grows. (c) There is no part of Bengal where its culti- vation would be impossible. 14, (a) Ganja, yes (vide answers to questions 7 and 8). (b) Charas, no. (c) Bhang.161 persons. Upon the ganja burning charcoal cakes or tika (slow fire) is placed. The smoke is in- haled thrice. It is carried to the stomach with the third pull, where it is retained for a minute or so. It is then allowed to escape through nostrils (keeping the mouth shut). Old and habitual smokers can retain the smoke longer in the sto- mach, and beginners can retain it for a few seconds only. The ganja is covered over with dried tobacco leaves. Tobacco is used to render it mellow. After washing, it is cut, pressed, and smoked. Dr. O'Shaughnessy also gives a descrip- tion of ganja-smoking in his Dispensatory, Vol 1, page 583. Charas smoking.162 temperate in their habits, and do not use any narcotic at all; but the ordinary run of orthodox Hindus, accustomed to have their little excite- ments, use bhang for the purpose without incur- ring any opprobrium attached to the use of spirituous liquors. Bhang is the up-country people's favourite drink. Classes163 Bhadralok for intoxicating purposes drink bhang paste (prepared from bhang, aniseed, black pepper, cucumber, and melon seeds, milk, sweets, attar, rose- water, and cocoanut water) diluted in water. (b) Pandas and Mahantas at Baidyanath and Tarakeswar. (c) By all classes on festive occasions and pujas. On the last day of the Durga Puja it is religiously offered to every guest and members of the family, and those who do not like to take it put a drop of it on their tongue (by way of acceptance). For increasing the digestive power and appetite bhang is drunk. Sometimes eaten by young people for aphrodisiac purposes in the form of pastry (kachuri), ice cream, and sometimes drunk. (d) Habitual moderate drinkers sometimes drink excessively on festive occasions. Charas.164 leaves with the ganja before smoking for greater intoxication. But this is rarely done by sanyasis. Rich people add rose-water and attar for fragrance. (2) Those who are unable to pay for their adequate dose cut supari (betelnut) in very small pieces and mix with ganja. It is then washed and cut, pressed and smoked, as in the case of ganja. (3) Ada (ginger) is cut in small pieces, and is then mixed with ganja. and then rub- bed, cut, and prepared like ganja, and then smoked in chillum. This form is supposed to be a preventive against cough and bronchitis. (4) Ganja and charas are mixed together, and smoked as ganja to produce greater intoxication. (5) Ganja and opium are mixed (each three pie worth) and smoked as ganja to produce greater intoxication. (6) Ganja and bhang are mixed together and eaten by poor men, who cannot pay for the high price of ganja for their adequate dose. (7) Young mango leaves and ganja are mixed and pressed together and smoked. It is said to produce greater intoxication. (8) Dadhi (curdled milk), attar, rose-flower and powdered dhatura seeds are also mixed with ganja and then smoked. (9) Ganja is immersed in dadhi (curdled milk) and smoked. (10) Ganja and ghi (clarified butter) are chewed, and swallowed by sanyasis. Gurjat ganja is drunk by the pandas at Puri, Bhubaneswar, and Satyabadi. (11) White sandal wood is sometimes cut in very small pieces and mixed with ganja for imparting to it a good fragrance. Bhang, ordinary165 quantity of ganja, and can stand its effect. He is of robust constitution, healthy, of good temper, of lively spi- rits, can work very hard, is willing and obedient, and is always cheerful. (2) Among lower classes and among jatra- walas (music party) children of eight or ten years sometimes learn to smoke from their fathers and elders, who themselves smoke ganja. The father smokes the ganja, and the child gives one or two pulls when the chillum is kept aside. Among lower classes (mis- tri, carpenter, coolie, etc.), father, son, and grandson smoke tobacco together. Children learn to smoke tobacco when very young. Chandra Nath Mistri of Akna, near Nasirabad, smokes ganja with his sons. 31. (a) The habit of consuming ganja, bhang, and charas is easily formed as with other intoxi- cants. (b) It is difficult for habitual consumers to break off the habit. I have seen people sent to jail break off the habit after a restraint for some time. It is very difficult to break off the habit of smoking ganja and charas, but it is easy to break off the habit of drinking bhang. (c) There is no tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive, but it may, as in other intoxicants, even in tobacco. But poor people cannot afford to pay for the high price, and they cannot, therefore, become excessive smokers. Even people who can afford do not smoke excessively for fear of being looked down. 32. Bhang consumption. Social custom166 District a mela is held; it is known as Nangal- band Astami Snan mela. People bathe in the Brahmaputra river on that day. Bairagis and Sanyasis meet and people offer them ganja to do them honour and to have benedictions pronounced upon them. (3) Among the bairagis in Baul mela and mahatsub, the bairagis are received with chillums full of ganja. (4) People visiting Akras (monasteries of Baish- navas) are given ganja for smoking. For con- centration of thought sanyasis and bairagis smoke ganja. It is said thoughts are directed strongly to one direction. Religious.167 (2) On the Chaitra Sankranti day (on the last day of the Bengali year) in Dacca and Mymen- singh some green bhang plants are hung up in front of the cowshed. Bhang plants are also kept on machans in the cowshed. It is popularly believed that it purifies the atmosphere of the cowshed, and gives health and strength to the cattle. I have not seen a bhang plant worshipped. I am told that ganja or bhang plants are worshipped by some people as Mahadeber jata (cluster of hair of the god of gods), and that bhang plants are worshipped in Tipperah. Charas.168 are unaccustomed to it, it produces a dizzy intoxi- cation. In the case of those accustomed to its use, it produces a marked suffusion of the conjunctiva. Ganja.169 Jati phaladya churna.170 Charas171 52. Any large proportion of bad characters are not habitual excessive consumers of any of these drugs. The excessive use of the drug has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 53. Excessive indulgence in ganja and bhang may incite to unpremeditated crime, violence or otherwise. I do not know of any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. Mr. Gopal Hari Mullick (District Superintend- ent of Police) was examined, and he cited two cases in which violent crime was committed on sudden impulse by habitual excessive ganja- smokers. The excessive ganja smokers do not listen to friendly advice. (1) One of the adopted sons of the Rai- chaudhory family of Nowpara in Jessore used to smoke ganja in excess. Babu Debendra Nath Rai Chowdhory, his uncle, a respectable zamindar, used to remonstrate with him for his smoking ganja, and there was an altercation. One evening in 1887 the young man attacked his uncle with a sword and hacked him to pieces. The murderer was sentenced to transportation for life. (2) Brother of the late Babu Gopal Chandra Sen, Deputy Magistrate of Burdwan, used to consume ganja in excess. One morning his child (a baby) was crying, and he at once took hold of a hatchet, and with a single stroke severed the head of the child from its body. The man was acquitted by the Judge on the ground of temporary insanity. 54. These drugs are not generally used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a pre- meditated act of violence or other crime. But alcoholic stimulants are so used. Those who are in the habit of smoking ganja generally smoke it before engaging in any work; not generally for committing a crime. Those that smoke ganja or drink liquor, and who are habitual criminals, or who have by nature a tendency to commit a crime, do so. 55. Criminals, in order to further their design, rarely induce their victims to consume ganja, bhang or charas, and so stupefy them. Ganja and charas are not so used. Bhang is rarely used as drink or in the form of majum given without the knowledge of the victim. In old days Thagis used to do it. I know of cases in which dhatura and strychnine were mixed with liquor to stupefy prostitutes in order to kill them or to rob them of their ornaments. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced by bhang alone without admixture with dhatura seeds. If taken in a very large dose by a novice, it is possible; but the victim will not drink so much willingly. 56. For admixtures, vide answer to question 29. Moderate consumers do not use any admixture, except with172 of purchase through middle men. There should be direct dealing with the cultivators. (8) Selling to goladars on credit by cultivators should be stopped. (9) Ganja should be placed on the same foot- ing as opium with regard to possession. The person in possession must account for the posses- sion. The possession of ganja up to one powa, ¼ seer, is objectionable. The limit of possession should be reduced to half the existing quantity allowed. 61. Charas is not manufactured in Bengal. I have no experience about its manufacture, etc. 62. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang in Bengal. Wild bhang grows spontaneously all over Bengal, and control over its cultivation and manufacture would not be feasible with the pre- sent police and excise establishment. The cultivation of bhang may be controlled partially by awarding liberal rewards to chauki- dars, panchayats, and villagers. I do not mean wild bhang; its extirpation will be attended with great hardship to the people in general, and will cause serious discontent. 63. I have no objection to the present system of wholesale or retail vend of (1) ganja, (2) charas (3) bhang or majum. But I must here make the following observation:173 cultivator in the Gurjats is a ganja vendor. The Gurjat men now require very little ganja to buy, for almost all of them cultivate ganja for their own use. Every ganja cultivator within the prohibited area sells ganja freely, which is opposed to Government Order No. 0./103.5, dated the 8th February 1889, and should therefore be stopped by again prohibiting the cultivation of ganja within three miles of the frontier. A wholesale prohibition of the cultivation of ganja is out of the question in a tract where the plant is indigenous, and where there is neither the will on the part of chiefs nor the establishment to enforce such a prohibition. Balasore.174 by the river Mahanadi into the town of Cuttack from Bodh. The best Gurjat ganja in all the Tributary States grows in Bodh, Khandpara, and Athgarh. I.175 by Muhammadans in East Bengal). I hang a broomstick at the door of those who call me a stupid ganja smoker. The wife of the man who feels uneasy and restless after smoking ganja shall give birth to children in secluded places (that man shall be a cuckold, as he richly deserves to be, being devoid of manliness, and his children shall be illegitimate). Hail to thee Kali and Sada Siva ! VII. The fair in the Kali Juga of Trinath (a god worshipped in Dacca by both Hindus and Muham- madans), who can be seen by an offering of a pice worth of ganja. There is the delicious ganja, and the disciple sits with the ready chil- lum. He cries out bom, bobom bom ! and smokes ganja. Betel and betel-nut worth one pice and without any other spices. Let us all smoke the chillums of ganja, and drive away all cares and pains. When my god Trinath goes to any house he causes three chillums to be made ready with a pice worth of ganja. Good brother ! cold, fever, and headache fly from the man to whose house my god Trinath goes. 64. Evidence of BABU GOBIND CHANDRA DAS, Baidya, Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Malda. 1. I am Deputy Collector in charge of the Excise Administration of the district of Malda, and as such have had opportunities of obtaining in- formation regarding these matters. 2. I have not had the advantage of seeing Dr. Prain's report, but the definitions seem to be fairly accurate. Round ganja is prepared also by being rolled with the hands, and is locally known as golganja. Round ganja prepared by being rolled un- der foot is locally known as pakhri ganja. Flat ganja is locally known as dali ganja, from the fact of its containing a considerable quantity of useless wood or twig. Both flat and round varieties come under the common appellation of chipti gan- ja. Chur is the local name applied to the third variety of ganja. 3. In Bengal bhang grows wild in every dis- trict. It is particularly abundant in the districts of the Rajshahi Division. In Kuch Behar also it is abundant. Here in Malda the village sites, spare spaces in people's homesteads, and roadside waste lands are often seen covered with a dense growth of bhang. 4. Bhang is known by two other names, siddhi and sabji. I am unable to state if any botanical distinctions exist between them. But the names are indifferently applied. 5. I have nothing more to say on this point than what is contained in Watt's Dictionary of Economic Products of India. It is, however, worthy of remark that sufficient observations and experiments have not yet been made on this point to get correct ideas. 6. The growth of wild bhang is very dense. We often call it a bhang jungle. 7. (a) Ganja is grown in a compact tract of country with a radius of about sixteen miles lying in three districts, namely, Rajshahi, Dinajpur, and Bogra, but the largest portion of it is situated in the first named district. The following table shows the result of the cultivation of ganja for the last five years:176 occupation, and therefore likely to attract more land and labour towards it. 9. I have nothing to add to the particulars given on this point in Watt's Dictionary of Eco- nomic Products. Babu Hem Chandra Ker's re- port deals with the subject at length. 10. I understand from my enquiries that there are no special classes who cultivate the ganja plant at Rajshahi, but the Muhammadan cultivators preponderate over the Hindus. 11. This is not known to be ever done in Bengal. 12. In Bengal there is no reason to suppose that hemp is anywhere cultivated for the produc- tion of ganja, except under Government supervi- sion at Rajshahi. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is restricted in Bengal to a compact tract of country with a radius of about sixteen miles lying in three districts, namely, Rajshahi, Diuajpur, and Bogra. Prior to 1853 the cultivation of the hemp plant seems to have been under little or no restriction. Wild hemp grew everywhere; but it was found that hemp, producing ganja, grew only in the Rajshahi Division. Hence in 1854 rules were framed for putting the cultivation of ganja under proper control. The fact that though there was no restriction in its cultivation, and that though its cultivation was a profitable undertaking, still the ganja-producing hemp grew only in Rajshahi, shows that soil and climate have an important effect on its growth. Sufficient observations and experiments do not appear to have been yet made to study the conditions of climate and soil best suited for the cultivation of the ganja-producing hemp plant. The only broad fact is that the nar- cotic properties of the plant are developed when it is grown in the plains, whilst in the hills the plant is deficient in narcotic properties, but is valued for its fibre. Wild hemp grows everywhere in Bengal, and 1 think, if the male plants are destroyed in time, the female plants could be made to yield ganja. But I do not think the quality of the ganja will be as good as that at Rajshahi. In fact, the experi- ment at Sibpur for the cultivation of ganja-pro- ducing hemp under the supervision of experts has not proved a success, only one collector under- taking to sell this ganja at R10 per maund only. 14. See answer to question 7. The cultivation and preparation of ganja are conducted at the same place by the same persons. 15. See answer to questions 5 and 9. 16. Bhang is prepared by the people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. 17. I am unable to answer this question. 18. I am unable to speak about charas and bhang. But the periodical inspections of the ganja golas under my charge show that ganja is very quickly deteriorated by damp. Otherwise ganja keeps well for a year or more. The practice in this district is to destroy by fire on the 31st of March every year all ganja more than a year old. To prevent the effects of damp, I would construct the golas with corrugated iron with wooden walls and floors. In brick-built golas there should al- ways be apertures for the admission of light and air. 19. I can only speak about ganja. Besides being used for smoking, I am informed from some ganja vendors that some individuals eat ganja with betel leaves and that others drink ganja by making a beverage with milk or water and black pepper. These are, however, said to be very rare, and no special locality can be mentioned where they are prevalent. 20. Speaking only about ganja, I do not know of any special caste or tribe specially addicted to this drug in Bengal. The sanyasis, the bairagies (mendicant Baisnavs), and the Gir Gosains are, as a rule, addicted to ganja smoking. The sanyasis or religious ascetics are spread all over India, and are too well known to be described here. The bairagies are also well known. With regard to them, it is to be noted that their females also freely smoke ganja. The Gir Gosains are a peculiar class of people to be found in this district, and also, I believe, in Muzaffar- pur and Darbhanga. They observe lifelong celibacy, but are in all other respects undistin- guishable from ordinary house-holders. Alcohol is strictly forbidden amongst them. Almost all of them, however, are in the habit of consuming large quantities of ganja. Their number is very small in this district, not exceeding, I think, about 100 souls. The broad distriction, however, to be made as regards those who consume ganja and those who do not, is that, as a rule, ganja smoking is confined to the lower classes of the people, and is extremely rare amongst the higher classes. It is the day- labourers, artisans, cultivators, boatmen and such like that consume the greatest amount of ganja. The boatman of East Bengal are conspicuous for ganja smoking and have been referred to else- where. In this district the cultivators of the Barindra (see Mr. O'Donnel's Census Report Volume III, page 2) are very much addicted to ganja. They seem to think that ganja is capable of averting malarial fever. The notion, however, seems to be erroneous, as the females of this tract are remarkably healthier and robuster than the males. It is the males who consume ganja. The females are not addicted to ganja smoking. The question as to what proportion of the people consume ganja is, I think, almost impossible to answer, even for a limited tract of country. In Malda we have at present 60 ganja shops dotted over the whole district. There is nothing to show that the localities of these shops have been selected with reference to the number of consumers to be supplied from each shop. The consumption of ganja no doubt varies from shop to shop; but beyond that we have got no other data to show the number of persons who take their supply from any of these shops. Again, in making an estimate of the number of consumers, we must bear in mind that ganja is always consumed in company, and that for each person purchasing ganja from the licensed shop, we have generally two or three others who do not come to the shop at all, and who often do not have to pay anything, but are able to satisfy their taste for ganja by the liberality of their wealthier companions. The only way that suggests itself to me for determining the number of persons who consume ganja in any locality is, first, to ascertain the average daily consumption of ganja of a ganja smoker and the average consumption of ganja from the licensed shops of that locality. Thus, taking the district of Malda, I have tried to shew in my answer to question 26 that it would be as near the truth as possible to take the daily average consumption of a man to be two pice worth of ganja. In a month, therefore, he con-
177 sumes a rupee worth of ganja, and in a year he has to spend R12 for the drug. Now the retail price of ganja in this district is about R20, and the average annual consumption of this drug in this district for the five years ending 1891 was 81 maunds. Consequently the number of ganja consumers in the district is 81 x 40 x 20/12 = 5,400 or, say, 5,000 in round numbers. Now, the population of this district, according to the last census, was 814,919, of whom 399,917 were males and 415,002 were females, and 188,368 were boys whose age did not exceed fourteen years. Accordingly, we find that in this district for every 1,630 persons one is a ganja smoker, and for every 423 adult males older than fourteen years one smokes ganja. 21. The following table gives the consumption of the three varieties of ganja in the different divisions of Bengal for five years:178 contain a large amount of useless wood, so that if a man purchases a seer of flat or round ganja he really consumes 12 or 14 chittacks, throwing away the remaining 4 or 2 chittacks as useless wood. To find out whether the consumption is increasing or decreasing, we must reduce these figures into the terms of one variety, say, chur, by our knowledge as to the quantities of ganja and wood contained in flat and round ganja. I think it would not be far from the truth to take a seer of flat and round ganja to contain 12 and 15 chittacks of ganja respec- tively, so that to reduce to the chur kind we must multiply by 12\16 and 15\16 the figures respresenting, respectively, the consumption of flat and round ganja. After making these corrections, we shall have further to deduct from the results the quantities of ganja exported into Nepal and the North-West from the districts of the Patna and Bhagalpur Divisions, for they do not represent consumption in Bengal; whilst an increase or decrease in the export may so alter the figures as to cause misap- prehension with regard to consumption so far as Bengal is concerned. It is not, however, possible to apply the cor- rections for the different kinds of ganja exported, for the published reports give only the total quantity exported every year, without distinguish- ing the different varieties. The revenue derived from the export of ganja into the North-West has, however, been given for every year. This, divided by the prevailing duty on a maund of chur ganja in that year, will give, as approxi- mately as possible, the chur equivalent of the ganja exported into the north-west. But even this plan cannot be followed in the case of ganja exported into Nepal, for no figures are available to show the revenue derived from this source. The following table shows the quantity of ganja exported into the North-Western Provinces, the revenue derived from them, the rate of duty on chur ganja, and the chur equivalent of ganja so exported:179 Applied to the particular drug (ganja) of which I am now speaking, the above test is rather diffi- cult of application. For if we discard the quan- titative test (i.e., the test of regarding one to be moderate who consumes so much ganja, and one to be excessive who consumes more than that quantity), we can have no means of determining what proportion of ganja smokers are moderate, and what proportion excessive, without a detailed inquiry into the habits and circumstances of each particular individual. In fact, without the assist- ance of some quantitative test, we may, so far as this particular case is concerned, arrive at some manifestly absurd conclusions. Ganja smoking is a habit seen rarely amongst the higher classes of the people of this province. Its use is confined to the lower orders. Now, moderation is a virtue for which the lower orders of no country is conspicuous. In fact, they are conspicuous for the opposite quality, i.e., extra- vagance in expenditure with regard to marriage, drinks, and other intoxicants. It will not be far from the truth to say that a man belonging to the lower orders will spend in his drink or habitual narcotic as much as he can conveniently afford, i.e.,a man of his class will consume as much of his favorite intoxicant as his means will allow. Consequently we arrive at the conclusion that ordinarily a ganja smoker will set no limit to his use of the drug, except that which will be impos- ed by his resources. He will, therefore, be glad to consume the drug as often and as much as his means will allow. Judged by the test of moderation set forth above, every such man should be regard- ed as an excessive consumer, for he is always ready to consume the drug, and is only prevented from doing so by want of means. As a matter of fact, however, a large number of people have so little to spare after satisfying the first necessities of life, that what little they spend in ganja can hardly be said to make them excessive consumers in any sense of the term. On the other hand, there are people possessed of better means, who, though they may be in the habit of consuming the drug only at stated hours of the day, consume it at those hours in such a large quantity that they cannot be called moderate in any sense of the term. Here then ultimately we shall have to fall back on a quantitative test if we wish to distinguish moderate from excessive consumers. I have taken some statistics on this point. The ganja shop at this town of English bazar sells ganja at the rate of R20 a seer. I inquired of a large number of persons who come to purchase ganja, at this shop as to their daily consumption of the drug. Altogether 378 persons were ex- amined. Of these, 247 persons stated that they spent a pice a day on this drug, 106 persons gave two pice as their daily expenditure on ganja, whilst only 13, 7, 1, 3, and 1 stated their daily consumption to be three, four, five, eight, and ten pice, respectively. I am sure most of these men understated their consumption to a very consi- derable extent. But looking to the fact that purchasers of ganja are not the only persons who consume the drug, and that a large number of persons who consume ganja do so at the expense of their richer companions, I think it is safe to say that the majority of ganja smokers do not spend more than two pice a day upon ganja. The retail price of ganja in this district is about R20, so that two pice can fetch a man only one eighth tola of ganja. This is not sufficient for more than three chillums, I think it cannot be con- sidered as excessive. On this datum it can be said that the majority of the ganja 'smokers are moderate consumers. Beyond this, however, it is not possible to fix any proportion between moder- ate and excessive consumers. As regards occasional consumers, all that can be said is that their number is [extremely small. In fact, it is impossible for a man to consume even a pretty large quantity of ganja unless he is a habitual consumer and has kept up his habit by daily use. 27. I have already mentioned that the upper classes of the people very rarely take ganja (my answer has reference only to ganja). It is only the lower classes that are mainly addicted to it. In general two broad divisions may be made amongst the ganja smokers180 30. Speaking only about ganja, I think the drug is rarely consumed in solitude. In excep- tional cases, such as in the course of a journey, a habitual consumer may be compelled to take the drug alone, but ordinarily one never smokes ganja without his chosen company. Several ganja smokers with whom I discussed this question were surprised at my enquiries as if it was absurd to even suppose that a man can smoke ganja in soli- tude. One ganja smoker who spends 4 annas per diem for the drug assures me that he would not be able to consume a pice worth of ganja if he had not his two or three chosen companions to smoke with. The same men assure me that the number of persons who pay for the ganja is at most half of the number consuming the drug, so that the quantity of the drug one purchases often represents the requirements of two or three persons. Except prostitutes and Baisnavis, no other females consume ganja. Children below 14 rarely take to this drug. 31. The habit is easily formed. Example of older persons leads the young to smoke the drug first as a pleasure. Soon the habit becomes con- firmed, and the victim finds it difficult to give it up, even if he is willing to do so. It is possible to give up the habit if one really wishes. The consumption of the drug, however, has a tendency to lead to an excess. Excess is only checked by the means and circumstances of the consumer. Often he is led to commit theft to satisfy his crav- ings for the drug. 32. The only such custom I am aware of is that which is sometimes observed by young people dur- ing the Durga Puja. This custom is, however, fast dying out. It is rather a pleasure indulged in by youngsters on the last day of the Durga Puja than anything else. It is certainly not a religious custom. Nor would I call it a social custom. The youngsters of the family, and some- times of the neighbourhood, make a beverage of bhang and drink it. Excessive laughing is in- duced, and a man who takes the drink for the first time becomes more boisterous than the others, and thus becomes an object of laughter and merriment for his soberer companions. This seems to be quite an innocent recreation, but is fast dying out. 33. The use of these drugs is always in disre- pute. No respectable person would associate with one who indulges in ganja, bhang, or charas. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. But in East Bengal the fair of Trinath is very frequently held by the ganja smokers181 20 of the previous year's report. It is most em- barrassing to find that the two sets of figures are wholly discrepant, and there is nothing to indi- cate which of them are correct. Taking, however, the later figures to be correct, it is possible to put them side by side with the consumption of ganja in these districts for the corresponding years, and thus ascertain whether increased consumption of the one has been accompanied by decreased con- sumption of the other. In doing this, however, we must note, as I have already pointed out, that a seer of flat and a seer of round ganja contains about 12/16 and 15/16 parts res- pectively of real ganja, and the remaining parts of useless wood. We must, therefore, take into ac- count this difference, and in expressing the con- sumption of ganja, flat and round ganja consump- tion must be reduced to the chur kind on the basis of these proportions. Making these calculations, we have the consumption of ganja and liquor for Rajshahi Division with Malda and Purnea as fol- lows:182 In the preceding year Mr. Grant had delivered himself as follows on the subject:183 Mentally, the use of ganja makes the con- sumer irritable and incapable of bearing contra- diction. It sometimes produces insanity. It invariably produces laziness and unfits the con- sumer for doing any work which requires sus- tained efforts. Excited by his smoke, he may be induced to do something which others would not venture to do; but when the excitement is over, he becomes the most indolent of the indolent, and will not be roused to action till again excited by a fresh smoke of his favourite drug. Morally, it makes the man capable of anything, however heinous. He is generally in want, and when he has not his pice to procure his favourite ganja, he will commit theft, house-breaking, robbery, and every other offence. 46. In the above question, I have not dwelt on the effect of ganja-smoking in producing insanity, because I do not think moderate use of ganja tends to any great extent to produce this malady. Excessive use of it, however, is a fruitful source of insanity. I think, however, it is a mistake to ascribe to ganja the cause of insanity because insanes are found addicted to its use. Persons of defective intellect and idiotic turn of mind, through inability to control tempt- ations, fall into evil company and contract the habit of using ganja, and thereby lose whatever intellect nature has endowed them with. It is not insanity for which ganja-smokers are noted. But irritability of temper, eccentricity and want of control over temper are their characteristic vices. 47. I do not think so. But, as in the case of alcohol and opium, a beginner learns the smoking of ganja from others with whom he comes into contact. There seems to be a greater chance of contracting this habit for young men whose parents happen to be addicted to this drug. 48. The above remarks apply also to this question. 49. I am not aware of such practice, and can- not, therefore, speak of the effects of such a prac- tice. Like other stimulants, the use of ganja, bhang and charas is supposed to cause temporary excitment, followed by a corresponding depres- sion afterwards, and in the end to cause debility and loss of manhood, if not actual impotence. 50. The above remarks apply to this question also. 51. It is difficult to say whether a large pro- portion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs. It can, how- ever, be asserted that ganja-smokers are, as a rule, regarded as of a disreputable character and as being persons to be avoided by all respectable gentlemen. In civil and criminal courts, to shake the credi- bility of a witness, it is a frequent practice to ask him if he is a ganja-smoker. Similarly, in pro- ceedings under the Code of Criminal Procedure for requiring a person to furnish security for his good behaviour, it often becomes relevant to en- quire whether the person is a vagabond and asso- ciates himself with ganja-smokers. 52. Remarks made in answer to the preceding question apply in this case also. 53. I do not think in sober moments we have any reason to apprehend any violence from a ganja- smoker, even if he be addicted to an excessive use of the drug. But when under the influence of the drug, it is extremely dangerous to irritate him or contradict him, or do anything to provoke him. If so provoked, he would be capable of commit- ting the most heinous crime. Several years ago there lived a man, named Radhai Haldar, within the Madaripur Sub-division of the Faridpur District. This man was an in- veterate ganja-smoker. He had a son, named Prosonno, and a mother who was unable to move about on account of paralysis. Unfortunately the man lost his son Prosonno. He one day, after his son's death, held a fair of Trinath (see page 29, Bengal Excise Administration Report, 1874- 75, where the details of this entertainment, which is also very prevalent in Dacca, Faridpur, and Backerganj, are given; the god is not Srinath, but Trinath, i.e., the Hindu Trinity of creator, des- troyer and preserver) at his house. Having imbibed a strong smoke of ganja, he fancied that Trinath came to him and restored his son to life. He ordered his paralysed mother to get up and go to the place where the remains of his son Prosonno were burnt, and bring Prosonno home from that place. The mother being too much afflicted with her own disease, scolded her son, whereupon the son, with a wooden mallet, with one stroke com- pletely smashed out her brains, and thus put an end to the life of the unfortunate woma n. This man was perfectly sane before this atro- cious deed, and though he afterwards feigned madness whilst in jail before trial, he tried to commit suicide, which shows that his subsequent madness was feigned, and that, repenting of the horrible crime he committed, he tried to escape the gallows by himself putting an end to his existence. 54. I do not think so. 55. I have not heard of any such case. It is not easy to induce complete stupefaction by a small quantity of ganja or bhang. 56. See answer to question 29. 57. I cannot speak of charas but I have heard that even in this district there are persons who eat ganja with betel leaves or drink them like siddhi. Their number is, however, extremely small, and they consume the drug in this way in secret. It is said, however, that only those whom even an excessive use of ganja in the ordinary way does not satisfy take to the practice of eating or drinking the drug in secret. 58. It is, in my opinion, working well. But I am not prepared to say that it does not admit of improvement. 59. The expression "a maximum of revenue with a minimum of consumption" is, after all, I think, the most beautiful and succinct way of describing the avowed policy of Government in matters of excise. I understand the' expression to mean in the first place that consumption should be a mini- mum, i.e., it should be restricted as much as possible, without interfering with the legitimate requirements of the people, and without driving them to abandon one form of exciseable article and to take recourse to another more injurious form, In the second place the expression means that, subject to the above conditions of minimum consumption, and in our endeavour to bring about this desired result, the greatest possible amount of revenue should be raised for the State, regard being had to the fact that restriction carried too far tends to defeat its own object by driving people to illegal prac- tices, such as smuggling, etc. Let us now apply the above conclusions to the case of ganja. From these conclusions, we see that
184 we shall be justified in advocating restriction so long as we do not interfere with the legitimate requirements of the people, and so long as we do not incur any risk of illicit dealings or of driving people to have recourse to more injurious intox- icants. Revenue consideration is at once thrown out of our consideration. For, according to the theory I have enunciated above, it is merely an accident that Government derives a revenue from excise. The imposition of the duty is merely a weapon for restricting consumption. Now, let us take up the first point we have to consider185 valuable nor more in demand than opium. So the incentive to ganja smuggling will not be greater than what at present exists with regard to opium. If, therefore, we are able to successfully cope with opium smuggling, there is no reason why we should not be able to do so with regard to ganja. Mr. Money, in 1871, says on this point (videpage 31, Bengal Excise Report, 1870-71):186 of ganja, the most deleterious of the drugs to which the excise law applies, is much to be regretted." (2) Page 13, Bengal Excise Administration Report for 1874-75187 Then, I think, a provision should be made in the existing law, creating a legal presumption, to be held conclusive until the contrary is proved, that bhang plants found growing on land in the possession of a person have been grown and culti- vated by him. Such a provision in the law will be sure to in- duce people to extirpate wild bhang wherever found growing. To prevent hardship the operation of this provision may be brought into effect, say a year after it becomes law. When by these means wild bhang will be ex- tirpated, it will be easy for Government to bring the cultivation of bhang under such control as is now exercised with regard to the cultivation of ganja. 63. I have already indicated these in answers to questions 59 and 62. The improvements are to be effected not so much in the system, but in its working. 64. I have already stated that duty should be levied in the producing districts instead of in the selling districts. 65. I have dealt with this question at length in my answer to question 59. 66. The three different varieties of ganja must necessarily bear different rates of duty in propor- tion to the quantity of useless wood that each variety contains. The effect of imposing the same duty on all the three varieties will be to altogether drive out of the market the flat and the round varieties. It is not, however, easy to say what proportion the three rates should bear to each other. The rates in 1892-93 were R5-6-4 and R7. From the current year the rates have been fixed at R6, R7-4, and R8. The effect of this change has been in this district to create a strong demand for chur ganja. It shows that it has now become more profitable to sell chur than flat or round ganja. The three varieties of ganja that are ordina- rily sold here have been carefully examined by me with reference to the woody substance that each variety contains. If chur ganja be taxed at R8, the round ought to be taxed at R7-8 and the flat at R6. These rates are practically the same as are now in force. Though these rates have stimulated an increased demand for the chur ganja, still, I think, the change is one for the better; for in the sale of the flat ganja much room exists for the commission of fraud from the large quantity of useless wood it contains. It may not be out of place to note that it would be a distinct advantage if the ganja pro- ducers at Rajshahi were induced to prepare only one kind of ganja, the round variety. The frauds that are now committed can then be entirely re- moved. 67. None. 68. No prohibition to this effect exists under the existing rules in Bengal. I do not think any considerable number of the consumers consume their drug on the premises of the vendor. There is nothing like ganja or bhang dens existing in this province. 69. I do not think this is ever done. What is done is that the officials in their tours and in the course of their inspections enquire from the people if they object to any site where a shop has already been established. If the people have any objection to make, it is duly considered. Expe- rience, however, shows that a shop already opened in an objectionable place is difficult to be removed elsewhere. On this account I think local opinion ought to be consulted before the opening of the shop. 70. I have no experience of districts bordering on Native States. Oral evidence. Question 1.188 result from excess in liquor, such as physical and domestic ruin. I have seen actually more cases of ruin from liquor than from ganja, but as the con- sumers of liquor are far more numerous the pro- portionate injury would tell against ganja. Question 45.189 be sorry (probably the ancients were sincerely sorry) and pensive, and they take to the mild intoxicant siddhi for gaiety and buoyancy of spirit. This is the religious origin of the custom which has now become more of a social nature. Friends gather together in the evening and they indulge in the siddhi drink. Females and males alike do it. Now-a-days the religious savour has evaporated from the custom, and people indulge, and they can do it only once in a year, in a mild intoxicant for the sake of its intoxicating power on the pretext of religion. The custom of drink- ing siddhi is not always essential on such occa- sions. There is only a small number of old men who take a sip of the drink or only touch it and put a drop of it on the tip of their tongue for the sake of observing the religious custom. The habit with the former class not unfrequently runs to excess; that with the latter is rather under temperate. Men of weak principles have been found to acquire a habit from the occasional use. 33. The consumption of ganja and charas is always looked upon with an hateful eye, though siddhi is not so regarded. There is a native adage to the effect: "The use of siddhi improves the intellect; but the use of ganja ruins the man," which carries with it the sense of all men and women. The one public opinion, social and religious, against the use of charas and ganja is that it is bad. Ganja and charas smokers are always feared and regarded as destructive of sanity in the smoker and safety of others. They are always of a rude and rough mood. They are never trusted. Ganja and charas are consequently in disrepute. 40. I have often seen siddhi given to the horse as medicine. 66. Evidence of BABU NOBIN CHANDRA KAR, Excise Deputy Collector, Bhagalpur. 1. Serving in the capacity of an Excise Deputy Collector in this district for two years. 2. Yes. They are known as bhang, charas, and ganja; but charas is not smoked in this district. Ganja is again known as flat, round, and chur. 3. Only bhang grows wildly in this district. In the beginning or middle of the cold weather, when water that collected over lands dries up, bhang plants begin to appear. In a couple of months time, when the plants attain a height of two to three feet, the bhang goladars of this dis- trict go out to the producing tracts with a hukum- nama and cut the plants, and let them lie on the fields to dry up. If the sun is very bright, the leaves dry up in one day, and then they are beat- en with a stick, by which process the leaves are separated from the twigs. They are then gathered and cleared of dust, and bhang is formed, 4. Siddhi and bhang. Yes, they refer to the same plant. 5. Alluvial land has been found as the best soil for the growth of wild bhang. 6. Dense in places I have seen. 7. No cultivation of any kind of hemp plant. 8. No area under cultivation. 9 to 12. Not known to me. 13. The cultivation is, no doubt, restricted to certain districts, but not to this district. 14. Bhang is prepared in this district out of the wild plants. The average production is 200 to 300 maunds a year. It should be observed that all bhang that grows is not prepared, but only a part of it. 15. The method of manufacturing bhang from the wild plants has been fully stated in reply 3. When the plants have attained a height of two to three feet, they are cut and left to dry. When they are sufficiently dried, they are beaten with sticks by which process the leaves are separated from the twigs. The leaves thus cleared of dust and twigs form bhang. As regards bhang, the preparation is one and the same for eating and drinking. I have never known bhang being smoked. 16. (a) Prepared by bhang goladars in the fields. (b) Yes. (c) Can't say. 17. No special class. Those who generally deal in excisable articles do this. 18. Ganja and bhang have been known to dete- riorate by long keeping. They dry up and lose their power of intoxication. They are said com- pletely to lose their power in the sense that they fail to produce intoxication, but I hardly believe this. For one year or a year and a half at most they keep good. Dampness and length of time are the causes of deterioration. Can be kept long if protected from dampness. 19. No charas is consumed in this district. Rare case of ganja being chewed by ascetics has been known. Ganja taken in this state has caused vomiting in some cases. Oil is extracted from ganja and is used as medicine. 20. The labouring class generally consume ganja. Men of the gentlemen class also have been met with to smoke ganja. Women who have cut off all connections with worldly affairs and have taken to lives of austerity are to be classed among these. 21. To the consumer the distinction is un- known. He goes to the shop and asks for ganja. He never says that he wants this, that, or the other kind of ganja. All kinds of ganja are converted into chur by throwing away the twigs, and are sold to consumers. The retail vendors prefer chur to any other kind. 22. No charas is used in this district. 23. Not known. 24. Kayasths, Brahmins, Khatriyas, and Mar- waris have been known both to eat and drink bhang. It is taken with food. But bhang is generally taken as a drink. Ice cream is also made of it. 25. On the decrease, not because people are giving up taking narcotics, but because they can- not afford to pay for such things. The statis- tics of the district for the last three years show this. 26. The number of habitual moderate con- sumers is the largest. 27. From the poor labouring classes who have to undergo hard manual labour and who are given up to habits of wandering. 28. (a) Four annas and four pice of ganja, and half chhattak and three pice of bhang. (b) One bhari and two annas of ganja; one chhattak and six pice of bhang. 29. (a) Kheni or dry tobacco with ganja; and sugar and water with bhang.
190 (b) Some kind of scent (essence) besides dry tobacco with ganja; and milk and various sorts of spices, which are usually used with betels, in addition to sugar and water, with bhang. No use of dhatura with either ganja or bhang known. Its use by itself is known. The object of the admixture is to make it palatable and to impart to it more of intoxicating power. No preparation as bhang massala. 30. Bhang is consumed in company, and so is ganja also. People of the gentlemen class who consume ganja do it in solitude. The consump- tion of ganja is principally confined to males, with whom the habit begins when adults. Females have also been known to smoke ganja. Fe- males who have become widows when very young have been known to smoke ganja as a means to lead a pure life. Their idea is that by smoking ganja they would overcome their animal passions. 31. Yes; and when formed, it is very difficult to abandon it. There are cases of moderate con- sumers who have been moderate consumers all along, but moderate consumers have also become hard smokers. 32. Sivratri, Fagua, Dasahra, and Muharram. During all these festivals, with the exception of Muharram, the consumption of bhang also is very brisk. On the occasion of certain melas (fairs), the consumption of these drugs also increases. 33. On the occasion of Sivratri and Dasahra, the consumption of ganja and bhang is considered customary. Those who take them as mere obser- vance of the custom are temperate, but many take such occasion as an opportunity, and indulge ex- cessively in these drugs. Such occasions being rare are not likely to lead to the formation of habits, and the immediate effect of excessive con- sumption has been known to be injurious. 34. Consumption of bhang is not regarded with so much hatred as consumption of ganja. The public opinion is that ganja is generally consumed by the lowest class of the people. The use of all sorts of narcotics is held in disrepute, and this being one of them, is also held as such. No such custom as worshipping the hemp plant is known. 35. Hard ganja smokers say that if they are deprived of the use of ganja they will die. Mo- derate consumers say that they would perhaps take to some other narcotics. There is every like- lihood of its being consumed illicitly. The pro- hibition can be enforced only by abolishing all ganja and its cultivation. The prohibition would certainly cause serious discontent amongst in- veterate consumers, but its leading to political dis- content would depend upon the number and nature of the consumers. Hard consumers will not be satisfied with anything but ganja. Moderate consumers say that those who can afford might take to drinking. 36. No. 37. No charas smoking here. 38. None. 39. No preparation of ganja or bhang is smoked here. Ganja by itself is smoked, but not so bhang. 40. Bhang is used in medicine by kabirajes. Oil prepared from ganja is also used as medicine by kabirajes. Bhang is given to cattle as medi- cine when suffering from cold. 41. (a) Bhang. (b) Both ganja and bhang. (c) Ganja, especially in damp climate. (d) No other effect known. As regards (a), it is the moderate and occa- sional use. As regards (b), moderate habitual use. As regards (c), moderate regular and not habitual use. 42. Moderate use has not been known to work any serious mischief in the system. 43. Yes. 44. (b) Bhang and ganja both refreshing. (c)Do not produce intoxication. (d) and (e) Do not allay hunger, but create appetite, especially bhang, and when taken occasionally. (f) An hour or so. (g) None. (h) Ganja produces uneasiness. 45. Bhang fails to create hunger, and ganja unnerves the system if taken habitually. Ganja would impair the constitution if the smoker does not get sufficient food to eat. No habit of lazi- ness or immorality or debauchery is induced by moderate use of either ganja or bhang. Gives power to the memory. Moderate use does not produce insanity. No such instance known to me. 46. Excessive use of bhang or ganja benumbs a man's powers. He is quite unconscious of all that happens about him. Excessive use of ganja has sometimes resulted in the consumer's death from dysentery, and sudden excessive use has made men insane. 47. No. 48. Excessive use is also not hereditary. 49. No. Prostitutes do not use it for this pur- pose. 50. No. Excessive use of ganja has the ten- dency to check passion. 51 and 52. No. Those addicted to ganja smok- ing sometimes commit little pilfering if they can- not secure pice to pay for ganja. It is not taken as an inducement to commit heinous crimes. 53. No. 54. No. Bhang or ganja taken in any quantity never makes a man violent. 55. They do it sometimes with ganja mixed with dhatura. But liquor is frequently resorted to for such purposes. Complete stupefaction may be effected by the use of ganja in those who never used it. Opium is also sometimes mixed with it for the purpose. 56. Not known. 57. Ganja eaten very rarely. It causes throw- ing out. 58. Working well. May be improved. 59. Can't suggest any for the present. 60. Not produced. 61. No charas produced. 62. Cultivation of bhang should not be con- trolled. It would not be paying to cultivate bhang. 63. The only objection which I can see is that there is no use of manufacturing different kinds of ganja, such as flat, round, and chur. Ganja is ultimately to pass into human consumption, and for this purpose flat and round are all rendered into chur. The manufacture of flat and round ganja should be abandoned. 64. Exports to other province should be allowed. 65. I think it is fair.
191 66. There need not be different kinds of ganja. Let it be chur only. 67. No. 68. Yes; but consumers should not be allowed to smoke ganja in the shop, as this may lead to a large gathering of people in one place, and is likely to prove a source of nuisance. If each takes away ganja from the shop and consumes it in his own house, there is no probability of any one being annoyed. 69. The people of the neighbourhood are gen- erally consulted, and I think this is sufficient. The general public need not be consulted. 70. Yes. Nepal ganja is smuggled into this district, and affects the sale of ganja here. This should be stopped. The bordering shops suffer very much from this. Oral evidence. Question 1.192 67. Evidence of BABU RAJANI PRASAD NEOGY, Excise Deputy Collector, Mymensingh. (With marginal notes by Mr. A. Earle, Collector of Mymensingh.) 1. Experience as Excise Deputy Collector for one year and nine months. 2. The definitions may be accepted. I have no experience about charas. The definition may be accepted, but I may here note that seeds are found in all the varieties of ganja sold in this district. Flat ganja of small twigs is known as round ganja in this district. Charas is not used in this district. Bhang is also known by the name siddhi. Ganja is not gene- rally known by any other name. I agree. A. E. 3. Bhang grows wild in many parts of this district. It grows abun- dantly in the Kishorgunj, Jamalpur, and Netrokona sub-divisions. 4. It is known by the names bhang and siddhi. 5. A dry climate, moist and low soil, and scanty rainfall are favourable to the growth of the bhang plant, but the plant grows on fertile soil if left fallow, whether it be high or low. 6. It is ordinarily scattered, but the growth is dense on low and moist soil. 7 to 13. There is no cultivation of hemp in this district. Hence I am unable to supply any in- formation on these heads. 14. (a) and (b) Not prepared in this district. (c) Almost all over the district for home con- sumption and for medicinal purposes. It is gene- rally kept in small quantities, as the possession of more than a poah of bhang is illegal. 15. The preparations of bhang are always from (b) wild plants in this district, The branches of the plant are cut and dried in the sun. The detached leaves are then stored. (A) Bhang is not generally smoked. It is only used as a make-shift when ganja is not available. The immediate preparations for smok- ing are the same as those for ganja The bhang leaves are steeped in water for some time and then made into a ball by pressing them between the palm of the hand and the thumb. The ball is then enclosed in a tobacco leaf and cut into very small pieces. They are again pressed into a ball and again cut until the whole is reduced to a very fine powder. It is then smoked. (B) Bhang is boiled with milk, sugar, and cocoanut to the consistency of a paste. It is then made into balls and taken on the occasion of certain Hindu religious festivals. Another pre- paration for eating bhang is made by frying the green leaves in ghi (clarified butter). The fried leaves are taken with sugar. Powdered bhang also enters into the constitution of certain sweet- meats, which are taken for producing intoxica- tion. (C) For drinking bhang is made into a solu- tion with salt and water and sometimes with milk and sugar. Spices are also mixed with the above solutions. Ganja is generally smoked. The immediate preparations for smoking are exactly those de- scribed for bhang. I am not aware of ganja being eaten or drunk. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja cannot be so prepared. I have no experience about charas. 17. There are no particular classes of people for making preparations of bhang, but the con- sumers make the preparations themselves (videanswers to questions 23 and 24). 18. Ganja and bhang both deteriorate in their intoxicating properties by keeping; but bhang, which has been in store for one year, is said to be best in its medicinal properties. They do not quite loose their effect in time. With ordinary care bhang keeps good for a year and ganja for a year-and-a-half. Exposure to heat and mois- ture are the principal causes of deterioration, as the resinous constituent is dissipated thereby. Bhang is also generally eaten away by worms whose growth it is rather difficult to prevent. The deterioration may to a great extent be pre- vented by keeping the drug in tin-lined boxes. 19. Ganja is generally used for smoking. On enquiry I have come to learn that ganja is some- times eaten with sugar and sometimes drunk in solution with bhang, sugar, and milk, but such practices are extremely rare. 20. The following classes of the people smoke ganja. The proportion of each class is also noted against it. Per cent. Boatmen and fishermen 25 Chandals 12 Malis 50 Dhobis 12 Bhadralok 6 Sudras or serving classes 25 Muchies 50 Banias 12 Bagdis 50 Sanyasis 95 21. Round ganja, as defined by Dr. Prain, is not liked in this district. The other varieties are used indiscriminately throughout the district. I agree. A. E. 22. Charas is not at all used in this district. 23. Bhang is smoked very rarely by habitual consumers of ganja if the latter drug cannot be procured with the utmost endeavours. It is only so used by the lower classes of consumers who happen to be very poor. 24. The following classes (a) eat bhang193 The drug is taken all over the district. No particular locality can be mentioned. I agree as far as this district is concerned. In Jessore, where I was last year, I found the sale of ganja on the in- crease owing to the price of spirituous liquor (country) having in- creased. Apparently ganja was cheaper than the liquor, and as those who required stimulants resorted to the cheaper article. A. E. 25. The use of ganja is on the decrease, as will appear from the statistics of the trade in this drug in Chapter IV. The reasons for the decrease are (1) the increase in the retail price of ganja consequent on the increase in duty and license fees, (2) the gradual in- crease in the price of food- grains, which has the effect of leaving very little in the hands of the poorer classes of people for luxuries. The quantity of bhang consumed is also on the decrease. The reasons are194 it is regarded with indifference. Habitual indul- gence in the drug makes a man useless and untrust- worthy. It makes him irritable and hot-tempered. This is the reason why the use of the drug is held in disrepute. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. Consumption of bhang is gene- rally regarded with indifference. There is no social public opinion against it. There is a general practice of consuming the drug on the occasion of certain religious festivals, as noted in answer to question 32. 34. It would be a serious privation to sanyasis (religious devotees) as well as to boatmen, chan- dals, and other labouring classes to forego the con- sumption of ganja. The sanyasis or religious devotees are able to bear exposure to the inclemen- cies of the weather owing to the excessive con- sumption of the drug. They also consider the drug to be useful in concentrating their thoughts and subduing their passions. They would thus consider it a great hardship to be deprived of the drug. Men of the labouring classes who have contracted the habit of using the drug will not be able to work as hard as they are now able to do if they be not allowed to indulge in the drug. The probable number of each class in this dis- trict likely to be affected by the prohibition is as follows:195 49. Yes, ganja is used as an aphrodisiac by prostitutes advanced in years. The moderate use for this purpose is not injurious. Bhang is not used for this purpose. 50. Excessive use of ganja as an aphrodisiac is more injurious than its use as a narcotic, as it produces great excitement for the time being, but causes dullness afterwards. I am not aware if the use of hemp produces impotence. From my experience as a magistrate for eleven years, I am not prepared to say that there is any general connection between crime and the use of ganja, either moderate or excessive. My experience merely amounts to knowing of an occasion- al insane in jail whose madness was attri- buted to the excessive use of ganja. A.E. 51 and 52. Only a propor- tion of bad characters are habitual mo- derate consum- ers of ganja and bhang. There is no connection of moderate use of the drugs with crime. 53 and 54. No. 55. I do not know of any instance in which criminals, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of ganja or bhang. Complete stupefaction can be obtained by bhang. 56. The effects of bhang used in (a) moderation, and (b) excess, are much intensified by admixture with sugar and milk. Tamarind destroys its effects. The effects of ganja are not much modi- fied by the tobacco leaf with which it is taken. It only improves the flavour. I am not aware of dhatura being mixed with ganja or bhang. 57. I have no experience as to the effects of eating or drinking ganja. 58 and 59. I would refer to my answer to question 35. From a financial point of view, I quite agree with the Ex- cise Deputy Collector, viz., that Government is needlessly losing a source of revenue by employing middlemen. A. E. 58. The present system of Excise Administration in respect of hemp drugs is, on the whole, working well; but it is still capable of some improvement. 59. The retail vendors cannnot often get their supply of ganja in due time owing to the gazetted officer who is to issue ganja being out on tour. This may be obviated by permitting some responsible ministerial officer to issue ganja. The ministerial officer may be required to furnish a reasonable security. Another remedy would be to permit the goladars to pay at once the duty on the entire quantity of ganja imported, so that they might store and issue ganja just as they would do in and from a wholesale imported liquor shop. The wholesale dealers of ganja make a consider- able amount of profit. Their profits often exceed 50 per cent. on their outlay. The system of having these middlemen can easily be abolished, and ganja sold from treasury like opium. The supervisor of ganja mahals can, with a small ad- dition to his establishment, purchase ganja from the producers and send the drugs to all districts. The procedure for storing and issuing would be exactly the same as at present, and no extra establishment will be required. If the Govern- ment be prepared to make this outlay, I think a fair return will be obtained on it. 60 and 61. No experience. I think the eradication of the wild hemp is un- called for, if not im- practicable. A. E. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should be controlled. The only means of attaining the end seems to be to enact that it shall be the duty of every person on whose holding the plant may be growing to eradicate it. If such a law be passed, I think the wild growth of bhang may be effectually checked. 63. Vide answer to question No. 59. 64. No objections. 65. (a) The duty on bhang is small in com- parison with the duty on ganja. One-fourth of a tola of bhang suffices to produce into intoxication. The duty on this quantity is three tenths of a pie. One-sixteenth of a tola of ganja would, however, produce the same degree of intoxication. The duty on this quantity is nearly 11/5 pie, so I think the duty on bhang should be R2 if the present rates continue for ganja. (b) Any increase in the price of ganja would pro- bably lead to increased consumption of spiri- tuous liquor or opium. A. E. (b) The taxation of ganja is low in com- parison with country liquor. One powa of country liquor of 20°under-proof is required to produce intoxication of the same degree as would be produced by 1/16 of a tola of ganja. The duty on these quantities are 2 annas and 11/5 pie respectively. But as ganja is generally consumed by the poorer classes of people and liquor by the well-to-do, I would not, on the above ground, recommend any increase in the duty of ganja at present. I agree. A. E. 66. There should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja (such as the flat, round and broken ganja), as they contain different pro- portions of branches in them. These branches have to be rejected as useless at the time of sale. No ganja from any other locality except Rajshahi is sold in this district. I agree. A. E. 67. No objection. I agree. A. E. 68. Ganja is consumed to a certain extent on the premises of all license shops, but the shops do not appear to be nuisances. I agree. A. E. 69. Yes. The Excise Sub-Inspector and the Excise Deputy Collector make enquiries on the spot. Local public opinion ought to be considered before opening any shop. 70. I am not aware of any smuggling of ganja from any Native State into this district. Bhang consumed in this district is gathered from the hemp plant, which grows wild. No duty is paid in respect of the drug. There are a few licensed shops of bhang in this district, but there is practically no sale in them. So long as the wild growth of bhang is not checked by express legislation as suggested in answer to question No. 62, no revenue can be expected from bhang. There is very little to be said in favour of the drug as a narcotic. The intoxication produced lasts for a very long time, and complete stupe- faction can be obtained by it. In the view of the above facts, it is not desirable to allow any untaxed drug to pass into consumption. 2 E 2
196 68. Evidence of GHULAM LILLAHI, Excise Deputy Collector, Ranchi, District Lohardaga. 1. I have been in the Excise Department for about seven years, and have acquired some know- ledge of the matters in connection with the hemp drugs. The information which is given in my answers was obtained in the course of the dis- charge of my duties. But I do not remember the sources from which I got any particular inform- ation. I am not acquainted with the cultivation and rearing of the plants, and so the questions which are related to their cultivation are left un- answered. Questions requiring medical opinion are also left untouched. 2. These definitions may be accepted. The dry leaves of the hemp plant are known by the name of bhang in this district. Charas is not consumed here. The names of ganja are the same in this district as are given in the definitions, viz., chipta (flat), gol (round), and chur. 3. In Monghyr and Bhagalpur districts the hemp plant, of which bhang is made, grows spon- taneously. In the latter it grows abundantly. In this district, Lohardaga, one or two plants are occasionally found scattered here and there. In the Political States it is said ganja and bhang grow spontaneously. But I have never been in those places, they being beyond my jurisdiction. 4. The same names as are given in the defini- tions, vide question 2. They refer to exactly the same plants. 5. I am not fully acquainted with the conditions;but this much I have heard, that rich and damp soil is favourable for its growth. 6. In this district, scattered. 7. It is extensively cultivated in the district of Rajshahi, but I have no personal knowledge of the district. 12. No. 13. The cultivation of the plant for ganja is restricted to Rajshahi District. It is selected because the soil and climate is favourable to the growth of the plant. Rajshahi ganja is said to be less injurious than those grown in other localities. 14. In Monghyr and Bhagalpur bhang leaves are gathered and exported to other districts. Five or six hundred maunds are annually exported from these districts. The leaves are gathered from wild plants. No ganja or bhang plants are cultivated in those districts. In this district (Lohar- daga) the drugs are neither cultivated nor pre- pared from wild plants. 16. Illicit preparation of bhang by persons in their houses was three times noticed in this district, and the offenders were brought for trial. Bhang can be prepared from wild plants wherever they grow. As regards the preparation of charas, I have no personal knowledge. 17. No preparation in the district. One or two cases of illicit preparation of bhang, in which the offenders were Koeris by caste, were brought to light. In one case the offender was by caste a Teli. 18. Charas is not consumed here. Bhang and ganja deteriorate by keeping. When they are two or three years old they are rejected by con- sumers, and the wholesale dealers destroy them. But in three years, if kept with ordinary care, they do not lose their effect completely. I think in five or six years the drugs lose their intoxica- ting power in consequence of the glutinous mat- ter being fully dried up. Deterioration can to some extent be prevented by keeping in air-tight boxes. 19. Charas not consumed here. Ganja is used only for smoking. 20. Ganja is smoked by Brahmins, Chhatries, Agarwalas, and Sadhus. Other classes, both Hindus and Muhammadans, also indulge in this, either alone or along with country spirits or other intoxicants. Kols (aborigines) are seldom found to smoke ganja. No female has ever been found to smoke ganja. Charas not used here. The proportion of the consumers of the people is not ascertainable. 21. Flat ganja is generally preferred to round in this district. It is said that the former is less heating than the latter. Round ganja is used in Panch Parganas in this district, where the habit and custom of the people are like those of the Bengalis. 22. Not consumed here. 23. Not in this district. 24. People of the same classes as smoke ganja (vide answer 20), and also Marwaris, drink bhang. Those who do not like to smoke ganja drink bhang only. Many persons use both ganja and bhang, the latter drug specially in hot season. Females also use bhang in the form of sherbet or majum. The proportion of the people is not known. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is not on the increase, as the following statistics of this district will show:197 given up easily. The moderate habit in either case has a tendency to develope into the exces- sive. 32. In Durga Puja festival the Hindus, male and female, drink bhang. When going from one country to another (jatra), a little quantity of this drug is tied in cloth. Offering is also made of bhang and ganja to Mahadeo (Hindu god). The use of bhang is essential. It is temperate. It is not likely to lead to the formation of habit. 33. Ganja and bhang are used by the Hindus and low class Muhammadans. In case of Hindus there is neither religious nor social objection. In the case of Muhammadans the use of these drugs, though religiously objectionable, is tolerated by the class among whom it prevails. It is generally believed that ganja-smoking makes a man dull, and hence this drug is in disrepute among persons of higher order only. Hemp plant is not wor- shipped in this district by any class of people on any occasion. 34. I think there can be no privation to forego the use of bhang, as the habit can be easily broken off. But in the case of ganja, great inconvenience would be felt by the habitual smokers. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs, as in that case some people will resort to illicit practices. The prohibition would occasion discontent among the consumers, but there would be no political danger. If prohi- bition is enforced, most of the consumers will, of course, take to other stimulants. 36. I do not think that these drugs are to any extent substituted by country spirits. 37. Nil.198 Western Provinces and Amritsar in the Punjab. It is said that charas is import- ed from Central Asia. (c) For use as bhang in Monghyr and Bhagalpur. (d) No. The tract of land upon which ganja is cultivated is a circle with a radius of about sixteen miles. The extent of bhang cultivation is not fixed. 8. Neither considerable increase nor decrease. 9. I have heard that the ganja lands are ploughed and levelled by the months of Chait and Baisakh; that seedlings are raised during the rainy season, after which transplantation follows. By about Pous and Magh the plants flower, and in Phalgun the flowers are cut and manufactured. 10. No; they are of the same class as other agricultural cultivators. 11 and 12. No. 13. (a) Yes; to Rajshahi, Dinajpur and Bogra, because the soil of this tract is especially favourable to the growth of good ganja. The cultivation of ganja is not common to all districts. (b) Damp lands not very low are especially suited for its cultivation. (c) I do not think there is any district in Ben- gal where the cultivation of ganja would be altogether impossible. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. Ganja is prepared in Rajshahi. Nearly 7,000 maunds of ganja are raised in a year. Bhang is raised in Bhagalpur and Monghyr. 15. Three sorts of ganja are in use in this province199 28. (a) Four pice worth of ganja, i.e., about 1/4 of a tola, is sufficient for a moderate consumer. (b) Three annas worth of ganja is generally consumed by the excessive smoker. The cost to the siddhi drinker is half that of the above cost. 29. Tobacco is generally mixed with ganja and charas to make the smoking milder. Bhang is generally mixed with sugar when used for drink- ing. The object is to increase intoxication. I have never heard of dhatura being mixed with any of these drugs. No particular preparation called bhang massala is sold in the bazar. But various kinds of spices sold in an ordinary spice shop are mixed with bhang to add to its flavour and per- haps to increase intoxication. 30. Ganja is generally used in company and siddhi in solitude; charas is also used both in company and solitude. It is confined to the male sex between the ages of twenty and sixty. Women of ill fame in rare instances resort to these drugs. Children never use these drugs, but young men of the age of sixteen or eighteen sometimes use it. Children sometimes use bhang as a medicine for indigestion or bowel complaints. 31. It is not very easy to contract the habit of smoking ganja or charas. But when the habit is once formed, it is very difficult to break off. The habit of drinking bhang is easily formed, but it is also very easy to give up this habit. There is always a tendency to develop the moderate use of these drugs to excess. 32. It is customary with Hindus to use siddhi on the Bijaya Dasami day, or the immersion day of the Durga Puja festival. But the custom is not binding. The use in this case is temperate. This sort of use is not likely to lead to the form- ation of habit, and is not likely to prove in- jurious. I do not know of any such custom with regard to ganja or charas. 33. The consumption of bhang is regarded by the public in an indifferent manner, but that of ganja and charas is looked upon with great dis- favour. There is a public opinion in regard to the use of these drugs, and it is against the use of these drugs. The use of the narcotic is held in disrepute because in the long run it may work the ruin of a man. 34. It would be a serious privation to forego the use of ganja and charas to the smoker of these drugs. But the consumers of bhang may give up their habit without any serious inconvenience. Those who use ganja and charas consider the use of these drugs as necessary for giving them strength to carry on their several professions. It has also been practically found that if they are not allowed to use these articles for some length of time, they lose their usual health. I cannot say definitely the probable number of each class. 35.The use of charas may easily be dispensed with, but it would not be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and siddhi. I think the drug will be consumed illicitly. I do not think prohibition can be enforced in any way. Legislation would be very hard upon the consumers who would be quite useless members of society. The prohibition would certainly occasion discontent among theconsumers, but it won't be so serious as to amount to a political danger. The prohibition is certainly to be followed by recourse to alcoholicstimulants, or to the other drugs such as opium. 36. There is every reason to think that alcohol is to a certain extent being substituted for hemp drugs. Using alcoholic drinks is considered to be more respectable than smoking ganja or charas or drinking bhang. The use of ganja compels the consumer to use many other things such as milk, while the use of liquor does not require any other thing. Hence drinking liquor is considered to be more easy than consuming ganja, charas or siddhi. By making local enquiry, I have found that several consumers of hemp drugs have taken to drinking alcohol. 37. The effects of charas last for shorter time than those of ganja. The intoxication from charas lasts for about an hour. The smoker feels a kind of dryness of the tongue and heaviness of the head. He requires something to lean his head against. Ganja smoking affects the brain gradually. The effects are not so acute as those of charas, and last for over two hours. 38. No. 39. I have never heard of any preparation of ganja or charas being eaten or drunk. Siddhi drinking is certainly less injurious than ganja or charas smoking. The latter injures the brain and dries up the whole constitution, while the former is comparatively harmless. 40. Bhang is often prescribed by kabirajes and doctors. The qualities of bhang are mentioned in Hindu books of medicines. But there is no men- tion of ganja or charas in those books. I have never heard of any of these drugs being used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) The moderate use of bhang may be beneficial in its effects as a digestive. (b) Said to be so by the habitual consumers. (c) I have never heard of this. (d) Not known. The lower classes who have to work hard and the religious mendicants who have often to bear fatigue and exposure, use the hemp drugs for the purposes indicated above. A beneficial effect can only be produced by a moderate occasional use. 42. The moderate use of these drugs (ganja and charas) is not harmless. The health of the consumers suffer considerably as compared with the health of the people who do not touch the drugs. 43. Yes. But they generally get an irritable temper. 44. The moderate use of any of these drugs produces more or less intoxication on the habitual consumer immediately after taking the drugs. It is refreshing to some extent to the habitual con- sumer. It produces partial intoxication. Ganja and charas allay hunger. Siddhi creates appetite. The effects of ganja and siddhi last for about one hour. The after-effects are to make the head dizzy, and to weaken the constitution. The want of subsequent gratification produces a great deal of uneasiness. 45. Excepting siddhi, the other two drugs cer- tainly produce noxious effects200 weakens the intellect. I have heard of people be- coming temporarily insane by the excessive use of ganja, but I have not personally seen any man who has become insane on account of excessive indulgence in ganja. The use of ganja is said to produce temporary insanity which can be cured by taking immediate steps and by restraint from the use. The symptoms may be re-induced by using the drug again. The typical symptoms are (1) the man becomes boisterous, and (2) also gets a menacing look. I have not seen any insane person confessing the use of the drug (ganja). I can't answer the last two paragraphs of this question. 46. The remarks in answer 45 apply to this question also. This line between habitual moder- ate use and habitual excessive use is very thin. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. I have heard that persons who use the drugs habitually do not often get children. 51. A large proportion of bad characters use ganja. People who commit crimes harden them- selves by the use of ganja. 52. The same remarks as in 51. 53. No. 54. Yes. Criminals who are addicted to ganja, fortify themselves to commit a crime by taking ganja. 55. I have heard that a class of criminals once infested the Grand Trunk Road, who used to induce their victims to take these drugs in order to rob them. Their existence in these days is not known. To effect a complete stupefaction, the drugs are made powerful by an admixture of the dhatura seeds. 56. I have heard that the veteran ganja smoker sometimes uses one or two seeds of dhatura to im- prove the strength of the drug. I do not know whether any of the hemp drugs is mixed with dhatura for administration to others. 57. I have never heard of ganja or charas be- ing eaten or drunk. 58. The present system of Excise Adminis- tration in respect of hemp drugs appears to be working well. But I still think it is capable of further improvement. 59. The duty on ganja, charas, and siddhi is still capable of being raised. If, with the increase in duty, there be appointed a good preventive force to detect the illicit cultivation of the drugs and smuggling, there will be the highest revenue ob- tained, and there will be the least consumption. 60. I think the cultivation and preparation of ganja are sufficiently controlled. 61. Charas is not produced in this province. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should also be controlled. Such control would be feasible. It is already an offence under the law to grow the hemp plant. Where it grows wild the owner of the land may be ordered to extirpate the plant. Government alone should cultivate the plant where the soil is favourable. 63 and 64. No objection. 65. (a) Bhang appears to be not adequately taxed. (b) With reference to alcoholic or other stimu- lants, the tax upon ganja and charas appears to be sufficient, but it is still capable of further increase. There would be the highest revenue and the lowest consumption if the tax be raised. 66. Yes. There should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja. Broken ganja should have a higher rate of tax, as there are no twigs attached with the ganja. Flat and round ganja may have the same rate of tax. Other ganjas, if inferior in quality, should be lowly taxed. 67. I do not see any objection to the present method of taxing. 68. The drugs are not consumed on the pre- mises of the houses licensed for sale. Such a house would be a public nuisance. 69. Yes. Under rules the opinion of munici- palities is asked and local enquiries are held by excise officers when new shops are opened. Local public opinion should be considered. 70. I do not know of any facts regarding the importation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States. I think duty is really paid in re- spect to the ganja and other hemp drugs used. I do not think that untaxed drugs are used. 70. Evidence of BABU BRAJENDRA NATH RAY, Excise Deputy Collector, Puri. Oral Evidence. I have been three years in the Government service, and have been Excise Deputy Collector of Puri since December 1892. I have the whole excise of the district. I am stationed at the head- quarters, but go out on tour. I have a minimum touring period of sixty days, but was eighty days on tour this season. I do not go to the States. I have only been one day in one of them. There is considerable consumption of ganja and bhang in the Puri district. In the past ten months of 1893-94 there have been over 72 maunds of Rajshahi and over 17 maunds of Gurjat ganja consumed in the district. Nearly the whole of the Gurjat ganja is consumed in the town of Puri and comparatively little Rajshahi. The total consumption of ganja in the town is about two maunds per month. The greatest consumption of Gurjat ganja is in the pilgrim months of March and July. There is smuggling of Gurjat ganja into the district of Puri to a very large extent; but we have not caught many cases. It is chiefly in the Khurda sub-division, which borders on Rampur and Naiagarh States. The average of cases de- tected in the district for the last seven years is ninety per annum. The average for the last four years is sixty-five. This is in my opinion about sixty per cent. of the cases that have occurred since the withdrawal of the prohibition against import. We have not succeeded in detecting many cases among the pilgrims. It is also difficult to detect cases of bringing in small quantities for use, and there are few cases of smuggling for profit. I believe that the most of the smuggling is by Khurda or Puri people and not by pilgrims: I believe that because we have discovered few cases among the pilgrims. I do not think that Mr. Taylor's statement is correct that only about one- twentieth of the cases are discovered. Cases dis- covered are now less numerous than in former
201 years, but then the withdrawal of the prohibition against import will have reduced smuggling. The statement I have prepared shows that the average quantity found in each case was three- quarters of a seer. The total average amount seized per annum was fifty seers taking the total of the cases in which the amount was recorded. I believe that formerly twenty maunds were smuggled in, and the detections were therefore only one-sixteenth of the cases. But I think we are better now as the establishments are im- proved. I think our success is much greater. I see that in 1889 only forty-five seers were seized, which is near the average. But I think that we have got hold of a greater proportion of cases now; and that our figure for seizures, though not higher, represents a far higher proportion of the cases that occur. Of course my figure is only a rough estimate; but I adhere to it that we catch fifty or sixty per cent. of the cases that occur. I do not think that the smuggling now under the present system exceeds five maunds in the year in the Puri District. There is no bhang used in the Puri District. No licenses are given. The Gurjat ganja is used as bhang. It is not much smoked in Puri town. The Pandas and others drink the stuff. It may be smoked near the border to a considerable extent where the people get it from the States. There were bhang licenses before. When I speak of Gurjat ganja being drunk I speak of the licit ganja. I have been told that Gurjat ganja is smoked only when Rajshahi ganja is not available in the place. I have myself never seen ganja smoked, so as to know what was being smoked, except in shops where Rajshahi ganja alone was sold and on one or two occasions when I was mak- ing experiments as to the effects of ganja. There- fore I know personally nothing of the effect of the smuggling of Gurjat ganja on the use of the Raj- shahi stuff. But if what I have stated above as being told to me is true, the effect is little. I am told that in the years when there was no bhang and Gurjat ganja was also prohibited, some of the Pandas took Rajshahi ganja in their drink. But the great bulk of what they use must then have been smuggled in. They are large con- sumers. Very nearly the whole of the licit Gurjat ganja imported into the district is consumed in Puri town as drink. The Rajshahi ganja is said to be weaker than the Gurjat ganja. I asked some old smokers and licensees who say that the Gurjat ganja is stronger than the Rajshahi and produces dysentery and bowel complaints. I have no knowledge of this subject apart from this. 71. Evidence of BABU ROY BRAHMA DUTT, * Kayasth, Excise Deputy Collector, Darbhanga. 1. Being a resident of Behar, and having served as an Excise Officer in all the districts of the Patna Division, I have had an opportunity of obtaining information regarding matters connected with hemp drugs in regard to which my answers are framed. 2. The three narcotic articles are locally known by their district names of ganja, charas, and bhang respectively; the last being recognized also by the names subji, patti, buti and thandai. The definitions of the first two of these three articles, as given by Dr. Prain, may be accepted for this province; but that given for the third does not wholly apply to it, because by bhang the people here understand leaves of bhang plant only and not those of ganja plant also. 3. I know by personal observation that the hemp plant grows wild in Saran, Champaran, Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur, in which last it does abundantly. 4. Bhang and phul bhang are the names of the plant which grows spontaneously in those districts. Yes, they refer exactly to the sameplant. 5. I have ascertained from a work on materia medica in the Persian language that the plant grows both in plains and mountainous lands. I understand by experience that it grows spon- taneously in Balsumbhi or Balsundar (mixed or sandy soil) land; and it is, I infer, from the character of this kind of soil, that both the ganja and the ganja-producing tract in Rajshahi are designated bálu-char (balu meaning sand, and char meaning alluvial land); and also in saliferous soil, which is deducible from the fact that the plant grows wild more or less in all the salt-producing No, certainly not: witness its luxuriant growth in Assam in its wild state? H. C. W. No. H. C. W. districts in this division and in those of Bhagal- pur and Rajshahi and in several such other dis- tricts in Bengal. It re- quires moderate climate for its growth; extreme moisture is prejudicial to it. It does not thrive in marshy land, nor does it require too much rain. High sandy and salifer- ous soil is necessary for its growth. It is both. H. C. W. 6. Yes, the growth of the wild hemp is ordina- rily dense. 7. There is no licensed cultivation of the hemp plant in this division, nor does any illicit cultiva- tion of it, as far as I know, now exist in any of its districts. 8. See the above. 9. While employed as a Special Divisional Excise Inspector in Behar, I detected a number of instances of unlicensed cultivation of bhang and ganja in some of the south Gangetic districts in which, I know by experience, the plants do not grow wild. In Gundi, in the Shahabad District, I found bhang cultivated in poppy fields. This was in the month of January 1882. The plants were seen scattered but growing promiscuously with poppy on the ridges and in the beds prepared for the latter. They looked very healthy, because they were regularly watered along with poppy plants, which would not otherwise thrive from the nature of the soil of that district. The drug produced in Gundi was, I was informed, reputed for its strong narcotic effect, and it was so because the hemp plants were nurtured and allowed to grow with poppy plants. In the following month I discovered a number of cases of similar cultivation * With marginal notes by Mr. H. C. Williams, Collector of Darbhanga. 2 F
202 both of bhang and of ganja in mauza Bilap in the district of Patna. There they were found growing in poppy fields and also in small beds prepared for them in a garden, and on both sides of a raised aqueduct made for conducting water from a well to adjacent fields. These plants also seemed to have been regularly watered to help their growth. The reason why the hemp plants in this part of the country, whether growing wild or illicitly cultivated, as also those in the Nepal territory, do not produce ganja such as that imported from Rajshahi, is, I apprehend, that the people here do not know the secret that the formation of seeds in female plants is prevented by the destruction of all the male plants,* nor are there "Parkhias" or ganja doc- tors in these places, who can distinguish the male plants and destroy them in favour of the ganja- producing plant. A single plant growing wild or cultivated has sometimes been found producing ganja; and this must be, I think, owing to an absence of male plant from the locality. An illicit cultivator of one or two plants of ganja adopts (though very rarely, and never detected) a method illustrated below, which not only cloaks his illicit proceedings, but also makes the plant yield, it is said, ganja of a superior quality. Illustration.203 subsequently scraped from it and gathered. This is called charas. 16. Yes; bhang is prepared by the people generally in their houses. Yes, it can be pre- pared from the hemp plant wherever grown. My Assam experience agrees with this. H. C. W. 17. Ganja and charas, as far as my experience goes, cannot be prepared from the wild plant wherever it may be grown. 17. Ganja and charas are, as far as I know, prepared by the cultivators in the place where the plant is cultivated; but the preparation of bhang is not confined to any particular class or classes of the people. Wherever it grows wild, any one, who likes, prepares it for his use. 18. As charas is not consumed in this district, I have no idea as to how long it can be kept good and when it deteriorates. But, as it is a resinous substance, I think it can be kept good for a longtime. Ganja begins to deteriorate after two years and loses its effect after three years. Bhang begins to deteriorate after one year if not carefully kept, and if carefully kept, it loses its effect after two years. These drugs deteriorate soon if kept in a damp and dark place. Insects eat them up. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. The difference in Assam is most marked. In the Surma Valley of that prov- ince ganja is very largely consumed especially by the Sylhet Muhammadans; there no opium is used. In the Assam Valley on the con- trary, where opium is large- ly used, ganja is hardly con- sumed. But in the latter valley there is a great deal of bhang growing wild. H. C. W. 20. Charas is not consumed in this district. The use of ganja is not confined to any particu- lar class or classes of the people, nor to any parti- cular locality or localities. It is chiefly consumed by Bairagis (religious as- cetics), sanyasis (religious mendicants) and various other Hindu fakirs; and by such people or class or classes of the people who totally or of whom most abstain from drinking tari and spirit (as forbidden drinks); and also by lower orders of the people. I do not at all agree with this answer. I have had some experience (having been Excise Commissioner for Assam ) and find that as a rule certain localities pre- fer different kinds of ganja. Of course the amount of profit made on each by the vendor to a certain extent regulates the kind con- sumed. H. C. W. 21. All flat and round ganja transported from warehouses to retail shops are reduced to chur be- fore they are sold. There is no difference in the narcotic powers of these three descriptions of ganja, and therefore one is not preferred to the other for smoking. 22. Charas is not manufactured in this or in any other district in the division, nor is foreign charas imported and consumed in this district. 23. As a rule, bhang is not used for smoking. Very poor people addicted to the use of ganja, if unable to obtain it, reluctantly gratify their desire for smoking by having recourse to bhang. Bhang- smoking is rare and not confined to any particular locality or any particular class of people. The smoking of bhang produces severe headache. 24. Bhang is consumed in various forms which will be described further on. The consumption of the drug as an intoxicant is very limited in this district and is not confined to any particular class or classes of the people, nor to any particular loca- lity or localities. It is chiefly consumed by Hindu mendicants, ascetics and high classes, who abstain from using tari and spirit, except Soti Brahmins who, without exception, do not use any kind of intoxicating drug. Of this limited con- sumption of the drug, a large portion is shared by the Samastipur Sub-Division in which the population of Rajputs, Bhuin-hárs, Sakaldipi and Kánkúbjya Brahmins is considerably large; a little portion by the Darbhanga Rosera and Madhobuni Municipalities and an insignificant portion by the rest of the district. 25. Charas is not consumed here. The con- sumption of bhang which is very limited is neither on the increase nor on the decrease. From the statistics showing the quantity of ganja annually consumed since 1874-75, when the district was formed, it will be seen that the consumption has been fluctuating and that it decreased last year compared with that of 1887-88. The decrease is attributed to the enhancement in the rate ofduty. 26. There are no statistics in the office from which the proportion of the consumers could be ascertained. The following may give an approxi- mate idea of it:204 29. The following is a list of the ingredients used with bhang:205 India, of whom a very large number must be using the drugs, specially bhang, and during the summer season as thandai, for being mostly Rajputs and Brahmins, they cannot use tari or spirit, which they, from religious notions, consider as forbidden drinks. (3) The higher classes of the people, speci- ally Rajputs and Brahmins, of whom a considerable number consume the drugs, and who, for the reason given above, consider spirits and tari as forbidden drinks. (4) Men suffering from maladies of which the drugs are remedies to the use of which they have therefore been ad- dicted. (5) Persons who offer the drugs to their deities. (6) Besides those mentioned above, persons of other classes who have some way or other taken to the use of the drug and cannot give it up. An idea of the bulk of the classes of the con- sumers of the drugs can well be conceived from what has been stated above. 35. (a) No; it would not be feasible to prohi- bit the use of any or all of these drugs. (b) Yes; experience has shown, that strict pro- hibition of the use of any intoxicating article results in its illicit consumption. (c) and (d) No; because we have not a large detective force surely. Men who from their religious notion cannot use tari or alcohol (being as forbidden drinks), nor can, therefore, find suitable substitute for the drugs hitherto used by them, and also those who either offer the drugs to their gods or have been using them as remedies for certain maladies, would find it very hard if deprived of their use. Certainly it would occa- sion serious discontent among the consumers. (e) Taking into consideration the classes whom the privation would affect (Hindu mendicants, sepoys, Rajputs, etc.) it is very probable that the discontent might amount to some such danger. I agree with this, except with the last. If the use of ganja, a curse as it is to the country, were stopped, the majority of its consumers would infallibly turn to something else. A few would restrain themselves. H. C. W. (f) No; because the bulk of the consumers are men who abstain from drinking alcoholic stimulants and would not have recourse to opium, both on account of its nature and the high price at which it is sold. I quite agree. The use of alcohol, on the whole, is not on the increase, though more information is known about it. H. C. W. 36. For the reason above stated, that the bulk of the consumers from this religious notion consider alcohol as a forbidden drink, and also from the statistics relating to the consumption of ganja during the last many years, I think,206 42. It is stated in a materia medica in Persian that ultimately the drug does harm. But in Bháo Prakásh it is stated that the moderate use of the drug does no harm. It is observed, however, that the use of the drug does no harm (specially bhang) when the consumer lives upon nutritious and rich food. For example, the Chow- bays of Mathra, who live on such food, and who, notwithstanding that they are excessive bhang drinkers and noted for such drinking, are always seen healthy and robust. On the contrary such people, addicted to the use of these drugs, as have no means to live, or who do not live upon good food, are generally seen emaciated. 43. Yes, moderate consumers of the drugs are seen inoffensive to their neighbours, unless the former are naturally wicked. 44. I have heard from the consumers of the drugs that they find the drug producing a pe- culiar kind of intoxication, attended with ex- hilaration of the spirits and hallucinations gene- rally of a pleasing kind, refreshing and creating appetite. The effect of bhang lasts about six hours and that of ganja for about an hour or two. They have after-effects (said to be unpleasant). Want of subsequent gratification is alleged not to produce any longing or uneasiness. It is probably on account of the drug produc- ing hallucination that in Persian the bhang has the name of falak sair falak taz, both meaning roaming through the sky, or having the power of making one roam through the sky. 45. In a book on materia medica, it is stated that the use of the hemp plant ultimately produces noxious effects, both physical and mental, viz.,dimness of sight, insanity, loss of appetite. In Bháo Prakásh it is stated that the exces- sive use of the drugs results in producing únmád(madness) and kasasswás (asthma.) As regards dysentery and bronchitis, my in- formation is that the plant is a remedy for these diseases. With reference to the first disease, I recollect instances in which persons suffering from it have been cured by using bhang. I myself know no instance of any person na- turally of good habit turning to be immoral or debaucherous by being addicted to the drugs. Of course, persons have been seen and are seen becoming immoral, not by drinking bhang and smoking ganja alone, but when they join bad company. Such persons, by way of contempt, are said to be "bhangeri" and "ganjeri." Too much use of these drugs certainly induces laziness. * i.e. permanently, I con- clude. Temporary insanity is a common result. After giving up ganja for a time, a return to it again brings on temporary insanity. H. C. W. I know instances in which persons used to the excessive drinking of bhang and smoking of ganja have become lazy and have turned stupid; but I know no instance in which excessive or moderate consumers of these drugs have turned insane.* I wonder how it is that the Chowbays of Mathra, of whom there are some here also, and can be found in every large town, do not become stupefied and get these diseases, although they are habituated to excessive drinking from their childhood. It might be, as I have stated else- where, that these drugs, like opium, require rich nutritious food, and the Chowbays have, without exception, been seen living upon good food. I do not know in the case of ganja; but in the case of opium I know of whole families from the youngest child, who have been opium consumers. H. C. W. 46. Vide the answer given above. 47 and 48. Yes. Instances have been and are found (but not as a general rule) in which children inherit the habit of using the drugs. Instances have also been found and are found in which the habitual use (but specially when excessive) affects the children of the consumer of these drugs. 49. Yes. It is moderately used as an aphro- disiac. Big persons get a certain quantity of bhang boiled with a certain quantity of milk, or with water mixed with ghee and extract ghee from it. This ghee becomes narcotic and is used in several kinds of aphrodisiac. I think prostitutes drink tari or country spirit instead of bhang or ganja. In books on therapeutics in Persian it is stated that the plant, warming effect as it has, increases virility but ultimately brings on impotence. I do not quite agree with this. A regular ganja- smoker must have ganja, and he often prefers stealing the wherewithal to buy it than to working for it. In As- sam statistics of consumers of opium who found their way into jails used to be kept. They would throw some interesting light on this subject "quasi opi- um.'' H. C.W. 50. Excessive use has a like effect in a greater degree, 51 and 52. No. I find by experience that a large proportion of bad characters are men of lower and the lowest order; while a large propor- tion of the consumers of these drugs are men of the higher classes (this is so for the reason I have explained above). It follows, therefore, that a larger proportion of bad characters are neither habitual moderate nor habitual excessive consumers of these drugs. The moderate or ex- cessive use of these drugs has, in my opinion, no connection with crime in general, except that, as cases have been observed, the consumers, if stupe- fied by the use of these drugs, are deceived and deprived of their property. The Deputy Collector is here quite wrong. Innumer- able cases of homicidal frenzy have been due to excessive indulgence in ganja. There was a case in Calcutta lately where a sowar of the Maharaja of Darbhanga was concerned. H. C. W. 53. No. From the quality the drugs possess, as is given in materia medica and is stated be- low, I do not think, nor have I ever seen, exces- sive indulgence in any of these drugs inciting any one to a premeditated or unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. I do not know of any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. "Indian hemp produces a peculiar kind of in- toxication, attended with exhilaration of the spirits and hallucination said to be generally of a pleasing kind. These are followed by narcotic effects, sleep and stupor." I think they are. H. C. W. 54. No, as far as my experience goes. Very common, of course. H. C. W. 55. I have experience of only such instances in which persons addicted to the excessive use of these or any of these drugs have been so stupid as to sign documents extinguishing the right in their property conveyed thereby, which a man of common sense would not do without taking con- sideration for the same. I do not think complete stupefaction can be induced by these drugs with- out admixture. I have heard of criminals having given some sort of drink to their victims (which made them senseless) on the false representation that the drink was made of subzi.
207 56. The effects of hemp used (a) in moderation are modified by eating sour things, and (b) in ex- cess, by either vomiting with warm water mixed with cow's ghee or by taking strong sour drink. I have seen a man (very strong) boiling his bhang with capsules of dhatura to make the drug strong- er in effect. 57. I have never come across a man eating ganja or charas; but I have heard of a Hindu mendicant doing so. For the reasons I have given above, the effect of eating these drugs must be very injurious to constitution. I agree as far as hemp drugs are concerned. H. C. W. 58. As far as my experience and opinion go, the system of excise ad- ministration in this dis- trict, as also in other districts of the division in respect to hemp drugs, is well worked. Cha- ras is neither manufactured, imported, nor con- sumed in the district. Ganja is sufficiently taxed. Last year the quantity of all sorts of ganja con- sumed in the district was 157 maunds 18 seers 2chittacks with duty and license fee amounting to R34,143, R16,545, against 159 maunds 35 seers 2 chittacks with R16,938 license fee and R33,989 duty in the previous year; the tax, therefore, on the drug amounted to above R8 per seer. Bhang, of which consumption as intoxication is limited in this district, escapes taxation for the reasons fully contained in this office letter No. 531-E., dated 20th January 1893, an ex- tract from which is given below for easy refer- ence. I. Name of district. Total excise receipts of district in 1890-91. Total ganja revenue in1890-91. percentage of contri- bution of ganja reve- nue to district re-ceipt. R R R Gaya 3,75,672 38,321 10·2 Patna 5,53,293 1,15,888 20·9 Muzaffarpur 1,83,076 41,748 22·8 Saran 2,90,260 70,955 24·8 Darbhanga 1,67,886 50,977 30·3 Shahabad 2,53,300 88,092 34·7 Champaran 1,86,813 70,187 37·5 "The Special Excise Deputy Collector, Roy Brahma Dutt, who has had an experience of all the districts in Behar, attributes the following causes for there being no sale of bhang, and con- sequently of no revenue derived therefrom in this district:208 I think this will mean a great deal of undue inter- ference, which is much to be deprecated here just at the present time. I would, however, punish people for regularly cultivating it, i.e., when it is not growing wild, to show we discourage it and do not recognize the right to grow it. H. C. W. to sub-divide the district into a certain number of vend-farms, and put up to auction each farm with a fixed number of ganja retail shops at fixed localities under the present system; and with a right to gather and sell bhang within the limits of the farm, for which no duty, except a monthly fee, will be levied. "This will be an amalgamated system of ganja retail shops under the fixed duty or the present system and bhang vend-farm." This will, it is expected, create competition among the present ganja dealers, while each vend-farmer will serve in his own interest as a detective against illicit possession and sale of bhang and ganja in his farm. After the system has worked for a few years, the people, who now gather bhang, will cease doing so, as they will find both the danger of illicit possession of the drug, and the facility of obtaining it from a licensed farm. 63. I find nothing against the system in force as regards wholesale and retail of ganja and charas. With reference to bhang the objection is that, under the circumstances as they now exist, it is difficult and not feasible to manage this branch of excise in the districts in which bhang grows spontaneously and can be had every- where, and for which I have suggested a system explained above. They could easily find the money; but I do not think any necessity for this has arisen. H. C. W. 64. I have no objection to the existing regula- tions governing the export and import of the drugs. I find, however, that the wholesale deal- ers have given no security, and if they sell their ganja while in transit, or anyhow clandestinely dispose of it and run away, how would Government realize the duty due upon the drug? I think they may be required to give a cash security of R100 and deposit it by instalments in the saving bank if they find it difficult to pay it in a lump sum. Ganja being such a much more harmful drug than opium, I do not think there should be such a difference between the two. Duty on the former should he gradually raised. H. C. W. 65. I have no charas sale in this district. With reference to bhang, I have already discussed the question of its taxation. As regards ganja, the incidence of duty per seer last year amounted to above R8, while we levy duty on distillery liquor at R2 per L. P. gallon and our incidence of duty on outstill liquor per proof gallon last year was R1-15-7, which much exceeds the tax levied on tari. The tax levied on ganja with re- ference to the taxation of the above articles is reasonable. It falls short of that levied on opium by 50 per cent., the duty on the former (see above) being R8 per seer, while Government sells the latter at R16 per seer in this district. Certainly, because of the different amounts of the drug contained in a seer of each. If you look at a seer of each, you will at once see the difference. In flat a fourth is stalk only.H. C. W. 66. Yes, it is necessary to levy duty at different rates on different sorts of ganja. 67. No, I have no objection to the present method of taxing ganja. Bhang has been discussed above, and charas is not sold. 68. Charas is not sold. For bhang there is no shop here, for the reasons explained above. The ganja consumers, it has been observed, take their ganja with them either to smoke it in solitude or in company. Rarely a customer has been seen smoking ganja at a licensed shop. There are no houses in this district intended for ganja smoking. 69. The wishes of the people are consulted and considered before a new shop is opened, and with reference to all the shops when they are visited by the inspecting officers. 70. There are no cases worth notice regarding the importation of hemp drugs from Native States. Petty cases of illicit possession of ganja by persons (ignorant of excise laws), being con- sumers and not smugglers, are detected on the British-Nepal frontier in the district, and they are dealt with according to law. 72. Evidence of BABU BANKU BEHARI DUTT, Excise Deputy Collector, Backergunge. 1. Excise Deputy Collector of Backergunge for about one year and general experience. 18. I have no experience of charas. Bhang does not seem to deteriorate much, if kept with ordinary care, for one year. Ganja appears to deteriorate by keeping, but it remains good for a year with ordinary care. The cause of deterioration seems to be the loss of resin in case of ganja. I think protection from damp and ex- cess of heat may tend to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja is also used for preparing majum. I have come to know of two persons in this district, one of whom intoxicates himself by keeping a bit of ganja in his mouth and taking the juice thus extracted, and the other using it with betels, just as tobacco leaves are sometimes used in this country. But this use is very rare. 20. Ganja is smoked generally by boatmen and labourers in this district, sometimes also by gentle- men class. 21. We have not here round ganja. Flat ganja (the vendors say) is prepared for smoking in this district. 23. The Sadar Sub-Inspector was telling me that when ganja smokers are in need of ganja and can't afford to get it, they semetimes use bhang for smoking. 26. Ganja.209 seem to be few occasional consumers. In fact no body could tell me that there are voluntarily occa- sional consumers of this drug (ganja). Bhang.210 of the Tributary Mahals. This only refers to those that border on Angul. The hemp plant is grown on the homestead lands. I have never seen more than two or three, or four, plants together. I do not find hemp in all villages, only in one-third perhaps; and there it is not in every house, but only in certain houses. I have never seen it wild in the jungles. I have often been in the jungles. I have never seen it cultivated in fields. In Angul and the neighbouring States sufficient ganja is prepared to meet the requirements of the local smokers. There is little export. There is sale of the drug among the people themselves: they bring it to bazars and markets in bundles to sell. This is not done to any great extent. Most depend on their own growth; but some (chiefly outsiders) have to buy. It is brought only in the season. At that time it is brought regu- larly to the markets and may be said to be commonly sold in the markets. The stocks brought are small; they are done up in bundles. I should not say that there is large consump- tion. It is decidedly small. The consumers are as a rule agriculturists and day labourers. The consumption is also moderate. There is no ex- cessive consumption. There is more use of ganja than opium, but much more use of liquor than of ganja. I see no increase or decrease, as far as I can judge, in the use of ganja. I think there is increase in the use of both opium and liquor. I cannot give any explanation of these facts. I merely judge from the fact that I see very few consumers of ganja at all211 (b) Mixed with milk, sugar, fruits and spices into a sweetmeat or majum of green colour. (c) Made into an infusion or pounded with spices and then drunk as a heverage or sherbet, (d) It is also used as medicine for cattle. 16. Yes, but I cannot say if ganja or charas can be prepared from the wild bhang. They are generally male plants. 17. By the agricultural classes. 18. Yes, they do deteriorate if kept carelessly or exposed to damp or moisture. With ordinary care it keeps good for a year. If kept in air- tight receptacles and dry places they don't dete- riorate and keep well for a year. 19. Yes; only for smoking. 20. Almost all classes, especially ascetics, fakirs, mahants, and bairagies and religious mendicants. I am sorry I cannot give the pro- portion, but very few smoke charas. 21. All three kinds of ganja are used for smoking; generally flat ganja is preferred. 22. No native charas is used, but charas im- ported from Nepal or the North-Western Prov- inces. 23. Yes, by the lower and poorer classes and persons addicted to ganja when they cannot get it in time, but not to any marked extent. 24. Brahmins, Babhans, Rajputs, ascetics, fakirs, mahants, bairagies, and the agricultural class of Hindus and some Musalmans drink bhang. Other classes and well-to-do people sometimes eat majum or bhang sweetmeats. I cannot give the proportion, but the number of consumers who eat bhang is not much. 25. I have no statistics, but, so far as one can see or hear, the use of ganja seems to be on the increase. 26. Cannot give the proportion. 27. Ascetics, fakirs, mahants, bairagies are generally habitual excessive consumers of ganja and bhang from their wandering habits. It also enables them to devote much of their time in un- disturbed contemplation of their gods. Brahmins, Rajputs, Babhans, agricultural classes, who abstain from drinking alcohol or to whom alcohol is prohibited by religious and social rules, are moderate consumers. 28. (a) One to two pice (ganja). (b). Two to four annas (ganja). Bhang is cheap and does not cost much. A moderate consumer can use a pice worth of bhang for two or three days. I should think that some wild bhang is collected by the agricultural classes. 29. With ganja is mixed dry tobacco. Dhatura is sometimes used with bhang by confirmed drinkers when their object is to render themselves perfectly reckless or delirious. Bhang massala is also used. It consists of the following, viz.:212 habitual moderate consumers, but I do not think the moderate use of these drugs is connected with crime in general; but excessive use of ganja some- times produces furious delirium and renders the consumer reckless. 52. Vide above. 53.Not that I know of. 54. Yes; I should think so. 55. No, unless stupefying drugs, such as dha- tura, be mixed; and sometimes criminals, in order to further their designs, administer such admix- ture to their victims. 56. The effect of bhang is sometimes modified by the admixture of cooling ingredients. 57. I have no knowledge under this head. 58. I consider it to be working well. 59. I have no improvement to suggest at pre- sent. 60 and 61. Cannot answer. 62. We cannot control it, for bhang grows wild. The present excise rules for possession, license and supply of bhang are sufficient checks so far as possible. 63 and 64. None. 65. Yes, the taxation is reasonable. I do not suggest any alteration. 66. Yes; if they differ in quality. 67. I have no data before me, so cannot make any suggestion under this head. 68. There are licensed shops, but, so far as I am aware, these drugs are not consumed on the pre- mises in the same way as liquor. Do not consider it right to allow these drugs to be consumed on the premises. 69. Generally not. It is only when objections are raised by the people of the locality that any enquiry is made or notice taken. I think local public opinion should be considered. 70. None that I know of. 75. Evidence of BABU RASIK LAL GHOSE, Court of Wards' Manager, Dinajpur. 1. I have had opportunities of consulting with certain up-country people and people of this dis- trict, specially with those who are accustomed to, and are supposed to have taken, either of these drugs. I have also consulted with the local shop- keepers of ganja, etc. 2. Yes; these definitions may be accepted for this part of the district. They are known as bhang, ganja and charas, as named in the ques- tions. 3. The plants from which bhang is produced grow spontaneously, but very rarely in this part of the district. 4. It is known by the name of bhang or siddhi. 5. It grows generally on high land. 6. The growth of wild hemp (or bhang) is generally dense. 7 to 10. No such plants are cultivated in this part of the district. 11. The seeds found with the exported ganja leaves do not germinate. 12. I am aware of no such cultivation in this part of the district. 13. No such plants are cultivated in this part of the district. 14. Dry leaves of wild hemp (bhang) are kept by a few people for using as medicine, both for men and cattle, but very rarely for intoxicating purposes. 15. The dry leaves of bhang are crushed or powdered with spices and sugar, and mixed with water for drinking purposes. 16. Leaves taken and dried from the places where the wild hemp grows spontaneously. The drink referred to above is prepared at home. 17. Bhang is prepared and taken up by the up- country people for luxury; by common country people as medicine, both for men and cattle. 18. Both ganja and bhang deteriorate in time. They are kept good for about two years. 19. Ganja is only smoked here. 20. Ganja is smoked by the low classes of people such as fishermen, mehtars, haris, up-country coolies, and by men of debasing immoral character, but very rarely by the cultivators or other classes of people. 21. Round ganja is not sold here. Flat and chur ganjas are taken by the people. 22. Charas is not sold or used at this locality. 23. I don't know if bhang is ever used in smoking. 24. It is drunk (vide answer 17). 25. It is believed that the use of ganja is on the decrease on account of the increase of price. 26. Ganja213 unlikely that from moderate habit one would go to excess. 32. Bhang is taken by the up-country people on Dol Jatra or Holi days, and by others on Dasami and Kali Puja days. They take bhang on the Puja days generally and temporarily. This may lead to a habit, but habitual drinker of bhang is very rare in this part of the district. 33. Consumption of bhang on the Puja days is considered religious. Hence it is called siddhi, i.e., one's wishes are satisfied who takes bhang on the Puja days. I am not aware that hemp is worshipped anywhere. 34. There will be no serious privation except to the ganja-smokers, as the number of consumers of other drugs are very few in this part of the district. 35. Prohibition from taking ganja will cause a serious inconvenience to the consumers, but no political disturbance can be expected. It is not likely that the prohibition will be generally fol- lowed by recourse to other drugs, as the effects are different; but some people of the labouring class, as indicated in answer 20, may take to country wine as an alternative measure. 36. Ganja is now rarely taken by the middle classes of the people, as it is considered more in- jurious than alcohol, and, in fact, ganja-smoking is looked upon by them with contempt and degrad- ing to the society. Lower class people scarcely substitute it for alcohol; in the first place, the latter is more expensive; and, secondly, it is not suited to their taste. 37. Charas is not known in this part of the district. 38. Neither round ganja nor charas is sold here. 39. Cannot say. 40. Bhang is used in cattle diseases. 41. It is said that the moderate use of ganja and bhang does not injure health, but rather exhilarates the tired and the depressed low class people of labouring classes. (a), (b) and (c) Yes: they are reported to be so. A habitual ganja-smoker may use the drug for the above purposes, but not one who is not ac- customed to it. 42. It is said that the moderate use of ganja and bhang is harmless, as it keeps up one's spirit and makes him more active and capable of under- going much fatigue and troubles generally. 43. Yes; they are inoffensive. 44. Immediate effect of ganja is refreshing to a consumer. It produces in him slight intoxi- cation, increases hunger and creates appetite. The effect lasts for about half an hour. Its after-effect is relieving to him. Want of such gratification to a habitual consumer causes un- easiness, dyspepsia, want of appetite, lethargy, weakness and inaction. 45. It is said that habitual use of ganja does not produce much noxious effect if the consumer gets sufficient quantity of milk for drink and substantial food. But its effect is generally exciting. It excites passions, and may affect mental power when taken in excess like all other intoxicating substances. But when the consumer goes to excess by intemperate habit, for want of proper food, and by debauchery and immorality, he is subjected to all sorts of diseases, but not otherwise. It is sometimes reported that excessive use of ganja may be one of the causes which leads to insanity, but certainly not in all cases. 47 and 48. I don't think that use of ganja is a hereditary habit, or that it affects the children of moderate consumers. 51. Except criminal tribes, I don't think other bad characters are moderate consumers. They generally go to excess in every respect, and com- mit theft and burglary to meet their want. It is generally found that poor ganja-smokers and opium-eaters commit theft when they are other- wise unable to meet the expenses of their habitual drugs. But the moderate use seldom, if ever, induces one to commit theft or crime in general. 52. Charas is not sold in this part of the district. Bhang is very rarely taken, and appears to be inoffensive in its nature. 53 to 55. I have no experience to answer these questions. 56. I have nothing more to add than what I have already stated regarding moderate and ex- cessive use of ganja. Dhatura is sometimes used as medicine. 57. Ganja is only smoked at this locality. Charas is not sold here. 58 and 59. I am not prepared to answer these questions, as I have very little experience regard- ing excise administration, and have had no occasion to study the subject carefully. 60. Ganja is not produced in this part of the district. 61. Charas is neither produced nor sold in this part of the district. 62. I don't think that spontaneous growth of hemp plant for production of bhang should be controlled. It appears to be inoffensive in its nature, and is very rarely used in this district for intoxicating purposes. 63 to 67. I am not prepared to answer these questions, as I have no knowledge on the subject. 68. There are shops for licensed vendors of ganja, etc. Ganja is sometimes smoked publicly on the premises of the shops, which may be dis- continued and not exposed to public view; but this may, however, be allowed in private compart- ments of the shops to be set apart for the pur- pose. 69. No new shop has been opened at this local- ity. I don't know whether the wishes of the people were consulted when the existing shops were opened. 70. I am not aware of smuggling or importation of hemp drugs from Native States in this locality. The drugs are sold by licensed vendors.
214 76. Evidence of RAJA TENDUK, Manager, Government Estate, Kalimpong, District Darjeeling. With reference to the questions sent to me for answers regarding the use and effects of ganja, I have the honour to state that I have very little experience on the subject, and it is only within the last few years that I have known it to be an intoxicating drug. The plant grows in abundance in this district at an elevation of 1,000 to 4,000 feet, but its use is almost unknown in the interior amongst the Bhuteas and Lepchas; but there is a sect amongst the Nepalese, called sadhus, who indulge in the use of ganja. But whenever I have come across these smokers, I have always found them to be somewhat eccen- tric in their opinions and somewhat cracked in their brains. I believe it is deleterious to health to some extent. 77. Evidence of BABU GOUR DAS BYSACK, Retired Deputy Collector, Calcutta. 1. As Deputy Collector I had charge of the Abkari in several districts of Bengal during my incumbency of 28 years. 2. Whatever definition Dr. Prain might have given of the drugs, they are known in Bengal by the name of ganja, charas, and siddhi or bhang. 3. The Rajshahi District is the only district in Bengal in which the hemp plant is cultivated and grown under Government protection. It also grows in other districts, such as Bhagalpur, Mirzapur, and Ghazipur, but to what extent it is impossible for me to say. Several police cases of illicit cultivation of hemp in certain districts came before me for trial. From this it may be pre- sumed that the soil of Bengal throughout the country is adapted to its spontaneous growth. 4. As far as I am aware, the hemp plant goes by the name of "ganja gach." 5. It seems that moist alluvial soil is suited to its growth. 6. In two or three districts, the names of which I forget just now, I was shewn some wild plants of hemp which were scattered about, but whether cultivated or spontaneously grown, I could not ascertain. 7. In Bogra and Dinajpur the hemp plant is also cultivated. 10. The cultivators of hemp do not form a spe- cial class. 14. All the products of hemp are prepared in the district of Rajshahi. 16. Bhang is prepared by the people in their own houses. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant. 18. These drugs deteriorate in time; for in- stance, ganja, when fresh from Rajshahi, is pre- ferred by the smokers to old ganja. I am under the impression that, if kept air-tight, the drug would not lose its intoxicating power. 19. Yes; but ganja and siddhi are also used for the worship of Siva throughout India. Charas was not known to Siva: it is a modern prepara- tion. 20. In Calcutta ganja and charas are used mostly by the Hindustanis, who mostly live in and about Bara Bazar. It is very difficult to ascertain the exact proportion, but, as far as I can gather, ganja is smoked by about 50 or 60 per cent. of low classes of Hindustanis, Marwaris, specially Marwari Brahmins, Kahars, Kurmis, and other low classes. The exception among the as- cetic fakirs and sanyasis is one to 100 souls. As a general rule they all smoke ganja, but not charas, which is not so strong, nor so very cheap. As regards the Bengalis, the people of Bag Bazar were at one time notorious for ganja-smoking, but their number in other parts of the town was much smaller. Compared to other castes, the proportion of the Bengali smokers of ganja and charas was and is considerably low; but the use of ganja is gradually increasing, because it is less expensive than alcohol. Charas is consumed by about 10 per cent.: it is mostly confined to well- to-do people of the above classes. Percentage is about one. 21. Generally the natives who smoke ganja hardly know any difference between the three forms. 22. The charas imported from Nepal, Thibet, is chiefly used. It is also imported from Kabul or that direction. 23. I am not aware that bhang is anywhere used for smoking. 24. Bhang is invariably taken in a liquid form and is never eaten; but it is sometimes swallowed by habitual consumers when travelling by rail. It might be said that it is eaten with the food, when it is used as a condiment in the preparation of dishes. A capital native cuisine de chef, with- out our knowledge, prepared some dishes with bhang that were more than ordinarily toothsome, and were highly relished by me and my friends; but the effect after the lapse of an hour or so was painful; we felt giddy and restless till the next morning. The proportion among Bengalis is about one per cent. 25. Ganja was largely smoked some years ago by the Bengalis of Calcutta, notoriously by the inhabitants of Bag Bazar, but it decreased while alcohol began to spread its sway. It has begun to increase again, because alcohol has become more expensive. No appreciable fluctuation in the use of charas and bhang is visible. 26. Of the 50 or 60 per cent. of the Hindus- tanis, Marwaris, and others who are addicted to ganja, about one-tenth may be taken as habi- tual excessive consumers and the rest moderate. Of the occasional consumers the proportion is larger, but they do not smoke excessively215 habitual. The proportion of ganja and charas smokers among the Bengalis is infinitely small, but the rates fluctuate between the high, middle and low classes of Bengalis. As regards bhang, about 80 per cent. of the Hindustanis are supposed to be habitual consumers, of whom about 10 per cent. are excessive drinkers and the rest moderate. There are also habitual consumers among the Bengalis, though the exact figure cannot be ascertained without local enquiry. Bhang is occasionally taken by every Hindu: it is essential on certain festivals, such as on Bejaya Dasami day in Bengal and Holi in the North- West. Among the Bengalis the occasional drinkers may be taken at about one per cent. 27. The first part of this question has already been answered above. There is nothing in the habits of life which leads to the practice; occa- sional indulgence is not without the reactionary effect which bring on repetition. Constant use of each of the three kinds of drugs gradually grows into a habit. In respect to bhang it should be remembered that it is sometimes a religious observance. 28. For one pice, a chillum of ganja may be obtained, and among the very poor, four to six persons manage to have a pull, or virtually one pice worth of ganja satisfies four poor moderate smokers per diem. The average allowance to moderate habitual smokers, irrespective of their circumstances, is two or three chillums per diem. In the case of excessive comsumers the quantity is by far greater216 their friends, or of old respectable persons, ganja or charas, in fact the huka or albola, is not touched openly and freely. It is attributable to no other sentiment than that of reverence for the seniors, associated, as it is, with the innate wish to appear as a puritan in their eyes and those ofthe public. I am not aware that hemp plant is worshipped anywhere. 34. Yes; very serious privation it would be. The reason is apparent: the result would be the same as that of the prohibition of beer or tobacco in England. 35. Prohibition is not feasible nor expedient: it would produce serious and universal discontent and dissatisfaction217 57. I know nothing about eating or drinking ganja or charas. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant should not be controlled. It would hardly be feasible. 69. The wishes of the people are never consulted before opening a shop; but a shop is hardly ever opened at a place where the consumption is ex- pected to be nil or next to nothing. 78. Evidence of MR. W. SARSON, retired Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collec- tor, formerly Abkari Superintendent, Chittagong. 1. My experience has been in the districts of Backergunge, Mymensingh, Faridpur and Chitta- gong, where ganja is not cultivated, and charas and bhang not used; hence my answers to numerous questions must be nil and otherwise limited. 3. As stated above, I have never been in dis- tricts in which ganja is grown; hence I cannot answer this and the following questions. 7. There is a wild species of hemp to be found in this district which the natives call bhang; it is self-sown. It does not grow extensively, the reason being, perhaps, that the Excise officers do not permit it to grow; always have it cut down; at least they did so in my time. 12. It has never come to my knowledge. 13. No ganja is cultivated in the districts of Backergunge, Mymensingh, Faridpur and Chitta- gong. 18. Ganja deteriorates after a year. The old ganja is always burnt under the Board's rules. In a couple of years I should say it would be per- fectly useless. No charas and bhang are brought to this district for sale. 19. As far as my knowledge extends, ganja is used only for smoking. I have no knowledge of charas. 20. All classes of the people smoke ganja, especially the lower order of them, such as coolies, chamars and fishermen. 21. I have only knowledge of the flat in my time, and that was the kind used by all classes. 23. I have heard that the wild bhang mentioned above is used by the natives for smoking and drinking when they had the chance. It is not restricted to any particular class or locality. 24. See above answer. 25. I believe the use of ganja has much de- creased of late owing to the high rate of duty and price of the drug, and not from any disinclination on the part of the consumers if they could afford to purchase it. 26. I am sorry I cannot answer this question. I have no data to go upon. 28. This depends entirely upon one's means. A native will spend as much as a rupee a day for ganja, while a poor man will content himself with a few pice worth. 29. I know nothing about this. 30. A ganja-smoker generally likes to have his friends around him, who are also ganja-smokers. I have not heard of women or children smoking ganja. 31. The habit is easily acquired, but it is diffi- cult to break off. It grows upon one. 32. I am not aware of any such customs. 33. I do not believe that the use of ganja lowers one in the social scale among his own class. I have never heard of the hemp plant being wor- shipped by any seet. 34. It would be a serious privation if a ganja- smoker did not get his ganja. 35. I do not think it would be wise to deprive a ganja-smoker altogether of his ganja. As it is, the high price of the drug has limited his con- sumption. This rule would apply to opium and consumers of other narcotic drugs also. Perhaps the prohibition would lead to alcoholic stimulants. 36. I am not aware of this, 37. Charas is not used in this district; at least it was not so in my time. 38 and 39. Cannot say. 40. I have heard of ganja being administered to cows for certain diseases. 41. To a ganja- smoker the use of ganja is beneficial to keep him in health. 42. It is beneficial. 43. I believe so. 44. It is good to him in every respect. It exhilarates him, and makes him enjoy his food. He has to take several smokes during the day to keep him up to the mark. I refer to ganja- smokers. 45. I do not believe that the moderate use of ganja, spirits, opium, or any other drug can, or does, produce any harm to anybody. It is the abuse of these things that harms one. Speak- ing for myself, I found that tobacco-smoking did not agree with me, and I have left it off with much benefit. 47 and 49. Am not aware of it. 58. I am not acquainted with the present sys- tem of excise administration, so cannot express any opinion. 79. Evidence of MR. W. M. SMITH, Retired Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Sonthal Parganas. 1. I have been in charge of the Excise Depart- ment of the Sonthal Pargana district, and also of the excise of some of its sub-divisions; lately of the sub-division of Deoghur. 2. Yes. 3. I have only seen it growing in one place, a deserted indigo factory in the Rajmahal sub-divi- sion. 4. I forget the local name. 5. I have no information. 7 and 14. No. 18. All deteriorate, and perhaps quite lose then effect in time. Ganja more than a year old is hardly saleable. I don't know what are the causes 2 H
218 of deterioration. Good storing is the only feasible plan. 19. I have never seen either used. Ganja is said to be smoked only. 20. Poor people are said to smoke ganja. 21. In Dumka flat ganja was mostly used, in Deoghur round. 23. I have only heard of its being drunk as a sherbet. 24. The Deoghur priests are the principal con- sumers of bhang known to me. 25. In the Sonthal Parganas the consumption of ganja is on the decrease. 26. I can't say. 34. I know that the Deoghur pandas are loud in their complaints if from any cause there is stoppage of the supply to them. 36. I have heard the contrary asserted, i. e.,that when the supply of spirits is checked resort is had to ganja. 37 and 38. I can't say. 44. I only know that there is a craving for bhang. 53. I have known cases in which frenzy has been ascribed to ganja, but it was not enquired into. 59. In the Sonthal Parganas the supply of ganja is greatly restricted, the shops are few, and besides the duty on the drug there is a heavy license fee. 80. Evidence of BABU HEM CHUNDER KERR, Kayasth, Retired Deputy Magistrate and Deputy Collector, Sub-Registrar of Sealdah. 1. In 1876-77 I was placed on special duty under the orders of Government of Bengal, to enquire into and report on the cultivation of, and trade in, ganja in Bengal, and the result of this enquiry is embodied in the printed report submitted by me on the conclusion of my labours. I had thus the special opportunity of studying the minutest details of matters connected with hemp drugs. 2. The definitions are generally correct. These are the names by which these products are ordinarily known in Bengal (vide my report, paragraphs 26, 27 and 28). Flat ganja, which is called in vernacular chapta ganja, is of two varieties, mota (large twigs) and mihi (small twigs). Round ganja is known as gol ganja, but in some parts of Bengal it is called the mihi ganja. Chur or broken ganja is also called rora. 3. The wild hemp plant may be seen in almost every district in Bengal, and it generally grows in such a state spontaneously. It is abundant in the districts of Bhagalpur, Monghyr, and North Behar. 4. For a list of the different names by which hemp is known I may refer to paragraph 10 of my report. The names do not, I think, in every case refer exactly to the same plant. 7. (a) For the production of ganja, the hemp plant is cultivated in the Ganja Mahal of Naogaon, which comprises parts of the three ad- joining districts of Rajshahi, Bogra and Dinaj- pur. In the Gurjat Mahals of Orissa also culti- vation of the hemp plant for ganja is carried on on a small scale. (b) The hemp plant is not cultivated in Bengal for the production of charas (vide paragraph 27 of my report). (c) In Monghyr, Bhagalpur, Shahabad, Cham- paran, and Patna, and particularly in the first two districts, the hemp plant is cultivated for the use of its leaves as bhang. It is also culti- vated for the same purpose in some parts of Dacca and the Tributary Mahals of Chota Nagpur. (d) I am not aware of the real hemp plant being cultivated for its fibres or seeds alone. But the fibres and seeds are utilised for various domestic purposes where the plant is cultivated for its leaves or for its flowers. 8. At present I am not in a position to definitely ascertain the increase or decrease in the area under cultivation. The information on this point which is available from the official reports is in fact based on mere guesses, and no actual measure- ment of the area is made annually. I am, how- ever, disposed to think that, with the increase of duty and the influence of education and culture, the consumption of the preparations of the hemp plant is diminishing, and hence the cultivation is also declining to the same extent. 9. See paragraphs 38 to 60 of my report, for a detailed answer to this question. 10. There is no special class of hemp culti- vators, but they are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators (vide paragraph 88 of my report). 11. No. 12. I am not aware of any such cultivation. 13. Yes, it is so cultivated only in a limited tract of country known as the Ganja Mahal of Naogaon, which extends over the borders of the three adjoining districts of Rajshahi, Bogra, and Dinajpur. This tract was, however, not at first specially selected for the restriction of the culti- vation, but the outturn in this tract being su- perior to that of the other parts of Bengal, in course of time the cultivation came to be restrict- ed to this part of the province alone. 14. See answer to question 7. 15. For a full account of the method of the preparation of ganja, which is used for smoking, from the cultivated hemp plant, see paragraphs 61 to 78 of my report. Charas, which is also used for smoking, is the pure resinous matter which exudes naturally from the flowers or leaves of the hemp plant. The collection of this exudation is made in various ways, generally from the leaves and flowers of the cultivated female plants in the Himalayan and Trans-Himalayan regions, This substance is, however, never collected by the hemp cultiva- tors of Bengal. Siddhi or bhang, which is used for drinking, is prepared by drying the green leaves of the hemp, plant. It is prepared from either the culti- vated or the wild hemp plant. A preparation of siddhi mixed with sugar,
219 butter, etc., is called majum. It is used for eat- ing as a confection by the dissolute. 16. Yes. It can be prepared from the leaves of the hemp plants grown only in the plains and also in the lower hills. In cold countries the narcotic passes away into the resins which exude through the leaves and the flowers. The wild plants do not yield ganja. Charas can, however, be obtained from the wild plant. 17. By the ordinary agricultural classes. 18. Ganja, retains its narcotic qualities for about a year, after which it begins to deteriorate and becomes absolutely inert after two years. Ganja is a substance which is peculiarly amenable to atmospheric influence, and its narcotic property loses more or less according to the quality of drug, the state of the weather, and the length of the time it is kept in the godown. It is mainly to the influence of the atmosphere that the de- terioration caused to ganja is due. The deteriora- tion may be prevented to a certain extent by min- imising the risks of exposure to sun and air. (Vide paragraph 122 of my report.) 19. Ganja is almost solely used for smoking, but it is occasionally used for medicinal and reli- gious uses. As a medicine it is used in cases of itches and some other cutaneous diseases, and an extract prepared from ganja on the scientific method by the medical authorities of India is also used, I understand, in case of malarious fever, etc. Offerings of ganja are sometimes made to the tombs of Muhammadan saints or Pirs. Charas is used only for smoking; never for any medicinal purposes. I understand that it is sometimes drunk, but I am not personally aware of such a practice. 20. As a rule, the hemp is not smoked by the agricultural classes; the artisan class and the syces, sweepers, and palki-bearers, and a few persons of the middle class, as well as mendicants, make use of the drug. To my estimation the actual total of smokers in the Lower Provinces and the North- West may be reckoned at about two lakhs of persons. Habitual charas-smokers are very few in Bengal. Charas is taken by ganja-smokers to whip up the effect of ganja. It is difficult to ascertain the number of charas-smokers. 21. See paragraph 23 of my report for answer to this question. 22. Native and foreign charas are used, but the Himalayan charas is preferred and fetches a higher price. Foreign charas is imported from Central Asia, Ladakh, Yarkand, Turkistan andHerat. 23. Bhang is now very seldom used for smoking. 24. Up-country people, such as darwans, etc., generally drink bhang. In Bengal the habit was at one time very prevalent, but it is now fast disappearing. 25. The use of all kinds of hemp drugs is steadily decreasing. The habit is looked upon as a low one, and the effect is considered to be very baneful, hence the decrease of consumption. 26. It is very difficult to make an estimate of such a proportion. Generally the ganja-smokers are habitual moderate consumers, but the jogis, sadhus, and mendicants may be classed as habitual excessive ganja-consumers. Siddhi and charas consumers may be classed as occasional moderate consumers. Very few cases are to be met with of excessive consumption of these two drugs. 27. The people who take the hemp drugs gen- erally belong to the classes who have to earn their bread after a considerable manual labour. The drugs are used by such people as food acces- sory, refreshing, stimulant, or occasionally for intoxication. 28. A habitual moderate consumer of ganja smokes on an average a drachm of the drugs per diem which costs him about two pice, while a habitual excessive consumer can smoke an ounce or more a day, and the cost proportionately increases. Habitual moderate consumers of siddhi general- ly take from half to two tolas a day, while an ex- cessive consumer's dose varies from three to five tolas. 29. Ordinarily the drugs are taken by them- selves, except bhang, which is mixed with aniseed, pepper, sugar, etc. Dhatura is mixed with bhang or ganja to pro- duce uncontrolled intoxication for the purpose of committing some violence. The drugs are also mixed with other dangerous drugs, such as nux vomica and strychnine, etc. 30. The consumption of hemp drugs is generally confined to adult males. Children and women are seldom found to take these drugs. 31. Yes, the habit is easily formed. In my experience, I have found that the habit is difficult to break off. Yes, I think there is a tendency to develop into the excessive habit. 32. The only social or religious occasion on which siddhi is taken in Bengal is on the last day of the Durga Puja, when friends, relatives and guests are offered a drink of siddhi, and it is essential that every one should at least put a drop of it on his tongue. Yes, this use is essential. It is temperate generally. No, it is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit. 33. The consumption is generally regarded with great disfavour. The practice is looked upon by the society as low and disreputable. The sentiment is attributable to the injurious effects of the drugs by their abuse. I do not know of any such custom. 34. Yes, it would be to a certain extent, as the people who are in the habit of taking such drugs must have to satisfy their longing for intoxicating substances by other costly exciseable articles, such as alcohol, etc., or by equally or more deleterious drugs prepared from wild plants (paragraph 133 of my report). 35. (a) No. (b) Yes. (d) Yes, to a certain extent. (e) I do not go so far as to think that the prohibition will lead to a political danger. (f) Yes. 36. My reference leads me to believe that alcohol is not being substituted for any of these drugs. 37. The effects of the two drugs are almost the same, though I am positively of opinion that charas is much milder than ganja. 38. In kind the effects of these drugs seem to me to be the same; they are only different in degrees. 39. Ganja and charas, if eaten or drunk like bhang, is decidedly far more injurious than the usual form of taking them by smoking. These drugs, when taken internally, have a very strong physiological effect. The habitual moderate use 2 H 2
220 of the siddhi drink, however, produces no percep- tible effect on the human system. 40, Bhang is recommended by native phy- sicians to persons suffering from long protracted chronic diarrh221 81. Evidence of BABU KALI DAS MUKERJI, Sub-Deputy Collector and Superintend- ent of Distillery, Serampore, Hughli. 1. From my experience as an Excise Officer for a period of about seven years in several districts of Bengal. 2. Dr. Prain's definitions of ganja, siddhi and charas are substantially the same as given in the Bengal Excise Manual of 1891, and also corrobo- rate the statements of my informant, who works some months every year in the ganja field of Nao- gaon at Rajshahi. Ganja, siddhi, and charas are known as such in Bengal proper. Siddhi is some- times known as bhang, but I have never heard of its being called sabji or pati in any Bengal district. 3. Murshidabad, Pabna, Hughli, Khulna, Jessore, and Mymensingh. In Mymensingh and Jessore the wild hemp plant is comparatively abundant. 4. The wild hemp plant known as siddhi or bhang and referred to in paragraph 3 is exactly the same plant and does not refer to any other plant. 6. Often dense, rarely scattered. 7. There is cultivation of the hemp plant under Government supervision in Bengal. Ganja is cultivated at Naogaon, and bhang or siddhi in Monghyr and Bhagalpur. The quantity produced is sufficient to supply whole Bengal. 12. No, I know no such case, nor have I any reason to believe the existence of such cultivation or production. 13. The cultivation of hemp plant for ganja is restricted to Naogaon in the district of Rajshahi. 14 and 15. Siddhi does not require manipula- tion like ganja. It is enough for a man to cut some full-grown wild hemp plants and dry them. The leaves when dried are taken off and stored in for consumption. No other process is necessary, whether the drug is intended for drinking, smok- ing or eating. 16. Bhang is sometimes prepared by the people in their own houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever it grows. I do not believe that ganja and charas may be so easily, and there- fore safely, prepared as bhang. I know no case in which ganja or charas has been so prepared from the wild hemp plant. This is probably due to the ignorance of the people in general as to the art of preparation or manipulation. 17. Bhang is prepared generally by the lower and middle classes of the people from the wild hemp plant. 18. Ganja and bhang usually deteriorate at the end of a year, though kept with ordinary care. The drugs lose their effects in time, and at the end of two years, calculated from the date of storage, are almost sure to lose their narcotic property. 19. Ganja and charas are generally used for smoking only. To grind ganja into a paste and then dissolve it into some liquid for the purpose of drinking is very rare. I have seen only one case in which an Uriya Brahmin in Murshidabad used to grind ganja and drink it after dilution. As for the medicinal use of these two drugs (ganja and charas), native physicians rarely, if ever, use them. I am not sure if medical science of the west (hom222 positive intoxicating drug auxiliary to drinking pleasures. It is used by the travellers, as well as by the fakirs and friars, as a safeguard against disease in malarious tracts. Charas closely follows ganja in this respect. Siddhi is usually used by the higher and middle classes as a digestive, pleasure-giving, invigorating drug and purifier of blood. It is successfully used by some persons as a precaution against costive- ness and commencing acidity. The Hindu friars and jogis are said to use it to help them in their religious contemplation by increasing the powers of concentration. Specially from this point of view siddhi is preferable to liquor. 28. The average cost of ganja or charas for a moderate consumer is 3/4 of an anna per day, and that of siddhi 1/4 of an anna. Habitual excessive consumers have to spend nearly double the amount. 29. The ordinary ingredient mixed with ganja and charas is tobacco soaked in molasses In ex- ceptional cases both these drugs are kept in rose water for hours before consumption. This is said to be done for the sake of flavour only. Siddhi is usually ground into a paste with some black pepper and anise, and then dissolved into water. This is the general way followed by 75 per cent. of the consumers. The object of this method is to secure the good effects of the drugs as described in paragraph 27 of this report. The most well-to- do sections of the consumers use milk and sugar instead of water, and the object of such a mixture is to make the drug more palatable and more intoxicating. I know no case of dhatura being used with any of these drugs. 30. Unlike liquor and madak, ganja, charas and siddhi are generally consumed in solitude, though there are occasional cases of consumption in com- pany. Ganja and charas are confined to the male sex, and siddhi occasionally extends to the other sex, though such cases are rare. These drugs are, how- ever, generally consumed both by the young and the old. I know only one case in which a Brahmin boy of fourteen years of age used to smoke ganja. 31. The habit of consuming all these drugs may be formed in a month or two if taken daily or at regular intervals. But I do not think that it is very difficult to give up the habit. Jail prisoners accustomed to these drugs before convic- tion are, as a rule, compelled to give up the habit after admission into the jail. But they do not appear to suffer much by the change, and most of them improve physically within a short time. I have reason to believe that the moderate use of these drugs, like all other intoxicating articles, has a tendency to develop to excess. 32. There is only one socio-religious custom in many parts of Bengal, so far as the consumption of siddhi only is concerned. It is generally after sunset on the Dasahara day that many Hindu households in Bengal prepare a good deal of siddhi to drink as well as to entertain the neighbours who meet on this occasion for reciprocal blessings and good wishes. Siddhi is considered on this occasion as a symbol of success for the year next ensuing. I do not think that the use of siddhi on this occasion is essential, nor have I ever heard of any pundit justifying its use on this occasion by any formal religious injunction or reliable text from the Shastras. Dasahara con- sumption is, however, temperate, and in some eases formal, and does not lead to the habit. 33. Consumption of siddhi is generally regard- ed as innocent, and no disrepute is attached to it. Bu the habit of smoking ganja has been stig- matized by public opinion both from social and religious points of view, and I think very justly, in the majority of cases. A ganja smoker is phy- sically weak, morose and melancholy in temper, moving dry sticks in appearance, looking more like an apparition than a human being. It would be very difficult, if not. impossible, to find out a dutiful son, a loving husband, an affectionate father, a trustworthy servant or a reliable officer from the rank of ganja consumers. As members of society they are generally useless and disagree- able, and are looked upon by the public as worth- less specimens of humanity. This picture of the class applies only to the confirmed ganja smokers who have gone to excess. But it should be borne in mind that moderate use, as already remarked, gradually develops into the excessive. I had opportunities to observe more than fifteen ganja smokers of various classes in different districts of Bengal, and the above description is justly appli- cable to most of them. I should record here two cases which differ widely from others which have come under my observation. I know a Bengali official of high rank (Sub-Judge) who used to consume ganja moderately, and a sanyasi (friar) who consumed both ganja and siddhi as often as he liked. But the Sub-Judge is said to have done his work very satisfactorily in spite of ganja, and the sanyasi, whom I had ample opportunity to observe for more than a year in my native village in Jessore, was an excellent man. He was physically strong, humble and amiable in manners, intelligent, pious, and thoroughly devotional. But these are isolated cases, and it would be an imperfect generalisation to draw any inference from such insufficient data. 34 and 35. As these two questions are closely connected to each other, I take them for one and answer accordingly. Siddhi.223 (b) Native physicians do not, so far as I know, want this drug for its medicinal property, if any. (c) If Western medical science, as now practised in India, cannot do without it, a very limited quantity may be cultivated in some Government botani- cal gardens to supply the demand of the medical department only. (d) Prohibition of consumption would cause privation to consumers for some timeonly. For they are almost sure to take recourse to other exciseable articles. It would create discontent among the ganja smokers. But their number does not exceed one-half per cent. of the total population, and Government will have the sympathy of the remaining 991/2 per cent. Secondly, Government have very little to apprehend in shape of poli- tical danger from the proverbially worthless men of the ganja-smoking class. (e) The reasons usually put forward in favour of ganja consumption are as follow:224 Bhang is more or less prepared in every district. The ganja prepared gives supply to the whole of Bengal, besides export to other provinces. Bhang is prepared in small quantities for pri- vate consumption, and, under licenses, when re- quired to be prepared in large quantities for sale. 15. [a (A) ] The ganja seeds are sown in a wet ground and when the seedlings grow they are transplanted. They are cut after four or five months. The male plants are weeded out by experts, employed for the purpose. After a little drying, the leaves and flowering tops are pressed with foot or rolled, and ganja for smoking is prepared. Ganja is sometimes smoked by being mixed with tobacco leaves. [a (B)] The dried leaves of both the male and the female plants are either made into pills which are swallowed or mixed with sweets called majum or [a (C)]; they are powdered and mixed with water and the mix- ture is again sweetened by addition of sugar and milk for drinking. The resinous matter at the flower tops of the plant is charas, and is smoked with ganja. [ b (A. B. C.) ] Wild plants are sub- jected to the same process. In this district, however, the Nepalese people who alone are ac- quainted with the use of this plant use it always in smoking and do not know the preparations for eating or drinking. 16. Bhang is often prepared at home. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. Charas is not prepared from the wild plants as they are never so vigorous as the cultivated ones. Even ganja cannot be prepared from the wild plants unless the plants are taken care of and tended. 17. Muhammadans are said to be mostly en- gaged in ganja cultivation, but the business is not confined to them. 18. Yes. Ganja, charas and bhang will keep for eight or nine months. It will, however, take some years for them to be entirely devoid of their intoxicating properties. Dampness is the agency which primarily deteriorates the properties of the hemp preparations. The storage of the articles should be made on a certain elevation from the ground and should be protected from damp as much as possible. 19. Yes, only for smoking. 20. A very small fraction of the people only smoke ganja and charas, and charas is still less used than ganja. In some of the districts, for instance in Darjeeling, charas is entirely unknown. But ganja is used in every district in Bengal; ganja is pre-eminently the thing of the poor and is mostly in use amongst sadhus, jogis, fakirs, bhakats, lower class labourers, mehtars, dhobis. Up-country people are more addicted to it than people of Lower Bengal. 21. Flat ganja is generally preferred. 22. Nepal charas was generally preferred but latterly Bengal obtains its supply of charas from Amritsar and Mirzapur in the North-Western Provinces. 23. No. But the Nepalase people do not know the preparation of bhang as in Bengal or the North-West. They prepare a crude sort of ganja which they call bhang and this they always smoke. 24. Bhang is used throughout the province, more or less amongst all classes of the people. The eating of bhang in pills or sweetmeats is a matter of fancy and convenience, but the drinking of bhang is the ordinary method of its consumption. 25. In Bengal the use of ganja, charas and bhang among the Bengali population is fast decreasing owing, among the upper classes, to a change of taste by the influence of English edu- cation, and among the lower classes, to an influence of the example of the upper classes. No percep- tible diminution of its use among the up-country people. 26. Out of every 100 consumers are225 37. The former are more acute than the latter. 38. No marked difference except that the flat ganja is a little more powerful. 39. The smoking directly affects brain, while drinking affects the whole system in a milder form; for the former acts through the smoke that does not pass to the lower parts of the body but has a tendency to go upwards, while the quantity drunk or eaten goes down to the stomach and after dilution there acts through the system. On the other hand, the effect of the smoke is less durable than the effect of the article itself assimi-lated into the system. 40. Ganja is used as a medicine for itches and in treating cattle diseases. Bhang leaves for treating eye diseases. The Nepalese use bhang extensively for the treatment of their cattle. 41. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Not known. (d) Not known. Occasional use is referred to. 42. The moderate use of bhang is not injurious though not altogether harmless. The other forms are certainly injurious. Even in bhang the habi- tual moderate drinker may be singled out from a company on account of a certain vacancy in his demeanour. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect of smoking ganja is stupefaction for a few moments, and then a pleasurable sensation in the system owing to in- toxication. The effect lasts for an hour or so. Those who are habitual and hard smokers, feel an excessive longing for it after the lapse of a few hours. The use of bhang is more refreshing at first and lasting in its effects. With occasional drinkers the intoxication continues for two to three days. There is a tendency to excessive laughter which oftentimes betrays the drug one has used. After a few hours the thirst for water is simply parching and the pain excessive. Both ganja and bhang excite hunger. Both have after-effects to occasional consumers and per- manent effect on the constitution of habitual con- sumers. A ganja-smoker can be singled out by the appearance of his eyes easily from a crowd. This shows the affection of the brain. 45. (a) Yes. It makes one dull and somewhat crazy. (b) Yes, to some extent. (c) It excites hunger at first and afterwards causes loss of appetite. (d) I have heard of such cases but have not known any. (e) Yes, laziness. It excites passion during intoxication. (f) Insanity is induced in some cases which becomes permanent unless the habit is checked at the beginning. The symptoms may be re- induced. I do not know of any specific case. 46. Same as in question 45. 47. No. 48. I have known of no such case. 49 and 50. Yes. It is generally used by the male sex for sustaining their manly powers. Sometimes used by prostitutes. Use of the drugs for this purpose is more injurious than as an ordi- nary narcotic, as under its influence the consti- tution is made to undergo greater exertions than nature would warrant. 51 and 52, Ganja and other preparations of the hemp plant have less connection with crime than alcohol. They are not in the way of exciting people to crime. 53. I have not known of any such case. 54. I do not think they are, except for purposes of debauchery. 55. If any one is willing to effect this he would most easily do it by opium, and I do not therefore think ganja is administered to any victims of criminals. 56. Bhang is mixed with sugar to increase its power of intoxication and with sugar and milk to give taste to it. Dhatura is used by hard drinkers only for personal consumption. It is administered to others only in cases of bad motives. 57. I have not known any such case. 58. The excise administration in respect of the hemp drug has been working well. 60. I don't think any change necessary. 61. I do not know much about charas. 62. I do not think that any attempt at control- ling the cultivation of the plant for the production of bhang, any more than at present, would be feasible. 63. I think the limit of retail sale might with advantage be reduced to one chhattack instead of one poa as at present. The high limit of a poa is quite unnecessary. A man consumes four-anna worth of ganja in a day at most and one poa is worth R5 at annas 4 a tola. 64. No, they are working satisfactorily. 65. These articles seem to me to be sold very cheap, in consideration of their power of intoxica- ting, as compared with alcohol. The duty might with advantage be raised even higher than at present. Relatively amongst themselves the tax- ation is reasonable. 66. Yes. If the same rate were applicable to all kinds, every kind of ganja would be required to be reduced to the same form, viz., to chur. The twigs make the difference in weight, and so long as the twigs exist the different rates must exist too. 67. Vide question 65. I think the tax should be increased. 68. Yes. I do not think they should be allowed. The consumption on premises should be prohibited on the same principle that the consump- tion of opium is prohibited. 69. Shops are generally opened in a locality by a request from the people of the locality for meeting their wants. I think there is no harm in the local public opinion being taken by official notice of an ordinary kind. 70. No. There is very little of importation of the drugs from Native States into Bengal, except smuggling from Nepal to some extent, The drug in general use, without tax, is bhang, which is generally prepared by people at home and consumed without payment of duty. The quan- tity of bhang sold in licensed shops forms but a small fraction of the total quantity consumed. Shops for the sale of bhang might, with advantage to the revenue, be multiplied very largely, 2 I
226 Oral evidence. Question 1.227 19. Used only for smoking, as far as I know. 20. Charas used to be smoked before by both upper and lower classes of people; now its use is confined to a limited number. The consumption of charas in the district of 24-Parganas is not more than 30 seers per annum, and the number of smokers is not more than 300. Ganja is smoked generally by all labouring class and a limited number of upper class. I think about 75 per cent. of the labouring class use ganja. But the percentage of upper class of people who use ganja is not even 5 per cent. 21. In 24-Parganas round ganja is preferred;but in other districts where I have worked flat ganja is preferred. There is very little consump- tion of chur on account of its price being higher than these two. I do not think there is anything special in any of them for which preference is given. It is only a matter of likeness to the taste. 22. Foreign. Nepal charas imported from Amritsar. 23. No. 24. Bhang drinking is prevalent among all classes of people. It is specially used by the in- habitants of Behar. I think about 40 per cent. of the people drink siddhi or bhang. 25. The use of licit ganja, charas and siddhi is on the decrease. Many lower class of people, specially in 24-Parganas District, who can afford, have taken to tari, as it both stimulates and satis- fies hunger. I believe also many of the upper class people who used to smoke charas and drink siddhi have now taken to wines and spirits, as they consider them better in exhilarating effect. 26. (a) 70 per cent. (b) 4 per cent. (c) 25 per cent. (d) 1 per cent. 27. These are mainly taken from lower class of Hindus and Muhammadans, such as Bagdi, Podh, Behara or Kahar, or Chamar or Muchi, Mallah, Dome, Dhangar, Dulia, Mehtar, Boistab, sanyasi, musician, Koiborta. They are generally moderate consumers. Hardship and a life of asceticism are the principal causes which lead to practice. 28. Ganja. Charas. Siddhi. (a) Two annas weight, Three annas weight, One tola, price price two pice. price one and half anna. two pice. (b) One tola, price One tola, price eight Two-half tolas, four annas. annas. price five pice. 29. Ordinarily with ganja and charas, pre- pared tobacco is mixed, and with siddhi, spices, sugar and milk. I am not aware of anything exceptionally mixed. I have heard dhatura seeds are used with ganja to increase its intoxicating power, but I have not seen any one to use it. In case of tobacco with ganja and charas to soften the narocotic effect and to give also a better flavour; spices, etc., are used with siddhi to improve taste, and also to increase its intoxicating effect. I do not know much of bhang massala. 30. (a) Ganja and charas are smoked generally in company, ordinarily consisting of two. They are practised by very few in solitude. I think the percentage of. consumers who practise in com- pany is. not less than 90. No privacy is observed in case of drinking siddhi. (b) It is mainly confined to male sex and not to any special time of life. (c) No. 31. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Not to the same extent as alcohol or opium. 32. The consumption of ganja and charas are not required by any social or religious custom. Bhang is drunk as a religious, and more as a social, custom on the fourth or last day of Durga Puja, as it is believed success betokens the drink, and the name itself implies success. It is popularly believed to have been the favourite drink of god Siva, and therefore used as an offering to him by the devotees. It is not essential that bhang should be drunk in connexion with an invariable custom. The use is generally temperate, and there is no likelihood of its leading to the formation of ahabit. 33. The smoking of ganja is held in disrepute but such is not the case with charas smoking or siddhi drinking. It is popularly believed that Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, leaves as soon as one begins to learn ganja-smoking. The sentiment, I think, due to the fact of ganja-smokers being generally rough, mean and shabby in appearance. I am not aware as to any custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion by any sect of people. 34. Yes. The labouring class of the population use ganja or charas as stimulant for hard work. They cannot possibly give up the habit without some substitute. Bhang again could not be given up by the habitual consumers without aggravating the complaints to prevent which they had recourse to its use. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of charas, but not of ganja or siddhi. These two may be consumed illicitly. I doubt if the prohibition could be enforced with regard to them. The prohi- bition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, but that would not amount to a poli- tical danger. The prohibition would be followed by recourse to other deleterious drugs. 36. I believe alcohol has to some extent super- seded the use of siddhi and charas amongst the better classes. I attribute this because as stimu- lant alcohol is considered to be superior to both. The use of these drugs is gradually diminishing among the upper classes. For instance, on the last day of Durga Puja, siddhi is not generally taken, but instead of it some youngsters take liquor. Tari to some extent has taken the place of ganja among lower class of people, for it stimu- lates and at the same time satisfies hunger, although little costly. 37. Yes. The effect of charas smoking is con- sidered to be milder. 38. No. 39. Smoking, I think, is less injurious than drinking. The reason is that smoking produces a strong instantaneous effect, and much cannot be used at a time in this form; but drinking is de- cidedly an easier method of consuming a large quantity at a time. The effect of smoking does not last long, but that of drinking continues for hours. 40. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 41. (a) Believed to be both. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Concentration. Labouring class, 75 per cent. of them. The moderate use is referred. 2 I 2
228 42. The moderate use is harmless, as it has no after-effect on the system. 43. Yes. 44. (a) It invigorates. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) No. (e) No. (f) One hourin case of ganja and charas, and three to four hours in case of siddhi. (h) Produces longing in case of habitual con- sumers. 45. (a) No. (b) In case of intemperate use it does. (c) No. (d) Yes, in case of intemperate use. (e) No. (f) The moderate use does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. It is said that adulteration of the drugs with other poisonous ingredients, such as dhatura, etc., produces in- sanity. During the course of my inspection of ganja, etc., shops for the last ten years, I fre- quently met several insane persons who are in the habit of smoking ganja. Their object of frequenting the shop is to beg ganja from the purchaser. The general impression is that their insanity is due to ganja smoking. In most cases I found on enquiry that their insanity was due to family misfortune, etc., and some have taken to smoking ganja after being insane. In only few cases no cause could be ascertained, and their insanity may be ascribed to the excessive use of the drug. All the insane persons I met were temperate, and they could tell their cause of insanity to some extent. I am of opinion that persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease use the drug to obtain relief. I know of one insane whom I lately met at Ghugu- danga shop. This man was a station master before; but having had some family misfortune he became insane, and now has indulged in the use of the drug. 46. No remarks. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. (a) Yes. (b) It is used so by the lowest class of prosti- tutes, who frequent mêlas or fairs. (c) I am not aware of. (d) No. 51, 52, 53, 54 and 55. No. 56. I have no personal knowledge of admixture of other substances than what I have already noted. 57. I do not know that ganja and charas are eaten or drunk. 58. The Excise Administration of Bengal with respect of hemp drugs is working well; but I consider it still capable of improvement in some respect. 59. The following are some of the suggestions indicating the direction in which improvement is possible:229 Oral Evidence. Question. 1.230 84. Evidence of BABU SIR CHUNDER SOOR, Satgope, 1st Assistant Supervisor of Ganja Cultivation, Naogaon, Rajshahi. 1. My past services as clerk and surveyor in the late ganja inquiry of 1876 under Special Deputy Collector, Babu Hem Chunder Kerr, whom I attended at the several inquiries and different experiments made by him for ascertain- ment of the various items of information men- tioned in his report, and my present service as Assistant Supervisor of ganja cultivation, ex- tending over a period of about fifteen years, have afforded me opportunities of obtaining informa- tion regarding the matter connected with the hemp drug (ganja), and with the help of this information I frame the following answers. 2. The definitions given by Dr. Prain may be accepted for Bengal. Bhang is locally called bhang, siddhi or patti. Charas is called charas. But it is not prepared in the ganja mahal. The resinous matter that sticks to the hands and feet of the persons at the time of reaping the plants and manufacturing them into ganja is not col- lected but washed away, the quantity being so small that it seems hardly worth collecting. Dr. Prain, whom I attended at his experiments, made an attempt towards this direction, but in vain. Ganja.231 make the surface firm. The plants are trimmed of their lowest twigs and branches. They are examined and the males destroyed. The land is irrigated. December.232 each other over the mat. The seeds and the crumbled leaves fall off. The bundles are then placed in a layer on one mat, and they are pressed and trampled as before and a new stack is formed from the first. It is, as before, covered now with mats and weights placed thereon. After some time some mats are spread on the chatar yard, and bundles taken out from the stack are laid out on them in a line, and the men com- mence, with their one foot, pressing the bundles from the bottom to the top of the twigs, holding the same with another. The process is repeated several times. The twigs are turned upside down, and pressed and trampled as before. When the trampling is finished, the twigs are kept in rows in a slanting posture over a bamboo placed hori- zontally on the yard (chatar) and covered over with mats for the night. 3rd day.233 The increase of duty from time to time did not affect consumption. It therefore seems that it is capable of being taxed still higher. 26. I cannot give the proportion of the ganja smokers, as I could not gather statistics. (a) More. (b) Less. (c) More. (d) Less. 27. (a) The habitual moderate consumers are generally of the class of people called udasins, sanyasis, jogis, bairagis, tapasis, syces, fishermen, artizans, chamars, etc. Their number is the largest. (b) The habitual excessive smokers are seen among the above classes as well as among the middle and lower classes of people. But their number is very few. (c) The occasional moderate smokers are taken from the lowest classes of people, such as Dome, Bagdi, Kaora, Dhangar, Nunia, etc., as well as from the middle class people. Their number is not very large. (d) The occasional excessive smokers are bairagis, mendicants, vagabonds, etc. Their number is very small. The keeping of company with ganja smokers, a desire to increase lust in youth, an attempt to kill the hard labour of the day, and to ward off exposure, or the use of it as medicine, leads one to the practice of ganja-smoking. 28. The average allowance of ganja per diem to a habitual moderate smoker is about two annas weight. The cost of it is two pice. That per diem to a habitual excessive smoker is one tola, and the cost of it is four annas. 29. The ingredient mixed with ganja is ordi- narily tobacco leaf. Dhatura is not used. The object is to make the smoke sweeter and stronger. I do not know of any preparation of bhang or ganja massalas. 30. Eighty-five per cent. of the smokers smoke ganja in company of two or three persons, and 15 per cent. in solitude. It is mainly confined to the male sex; but women of ill-fame of the lowest classes use it too. It is generally smoked by young men of the age of eighteen to forty-five. It is not usual for children to consume it. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is easily formed. It is not difficult to break off. The moderate habit tends to develop into excessive in some cases. 32. Ganja is not consumed under any social or religious custom. But bhang is drunk on the Bijaya Dasami day of Durga Puja. It is pound- ed into a fine paste, diluted with water, and drunk by all Hindus. Those who do not drink make a phota of it on the forehead, or where the two eyebrows meet. It is looked upon as a success- giving thing; hence its very expressive synonym is "siddhi," "the success, etc., giver." People carry a leaf or two of it when they start for any enterprise. It is refreshing. It is generally temperate. It is not likely to lead to the formation of habit. 33. The smoking of ganja is regarded with disrepute by the people, but not the drinking of bhang. There is no social or religious public opi- nion in regard to the practice. The use of ganja is generally in disrepute, because it makes the smoker generally of irascible and hot temper, and because it is used by the lowest classes of people. I am told it is customary with the low class people of East Bengal to worship hemp plant on the occasion of the Trinetro melâ. 34. It would be a serious privation to all classes of consumers to forego the smoking of ganja. The ascetics and mendicants, who always remain exposed to sun and dew, and low classes of people who are obliged to work in rain, sun and dew, will feel the most. Many will have recourse to more deleterious drugs. About seven-eighths of the total number of consumers of all classes will feel the privation. 35. I think it would not be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and bhang entirely. The drugs would be consumed illicitly. It could be enforced by enactment and entertainment of a number of excise officers. But the cost of Government would be large, and the harrassment and oppres- sion on the people by excise and police officers great. It would occasion serious discontent among the consumers. I do not think that such discon- tent will amount to a political danger. The people of Bengal are very loyal and submissive, and they are always law-abiding. 36. I do not think that alcohol is now being in any way substituted for ganja or bhang. 37. I have no idea of the effects of charas and ganja smoking, so I am not in a position to state the difference. 38. The round sort of ganja contains more resin and it is possible to give greater intoxication to its consumers. 39. The smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant is a less injurious form of consump- tion than drinking or eating. I think the eating of ganja produces flatulency, and causes purging at last. I saw a man eat ganja, and he felt the above effects. Smoking of ganja gives instan- taneous intoxication, whereas eating gives intoxi- cation, I believe, after six hours. The said man got giddiness after six hours. 40. Bhang is used on account of its medicinal qualities by native doctors. Both bhang and ganja are used in the treat- ment of cattle diseases. I myself used ganja as an ingredient in preparing certain medicine for my pony. 41. The moderate use of ganja may be benefi- cial in its effects234 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja on the habitual consumer is cheer- fullness of mind. It is refreshing. It produces slight intoxication. It does not allay hunger. It creates appetite. The effect lasts for about six hours. The consumer feels his body light and dry. The want of subsequent gratification does not produce any longing or uneasiness. 45. (a) The habitual moderate use of ganja does not produce any noxious effects, physical, mental or moral. (b), (c), (d) No. (f) It does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. I am of opinion that persons suffering from mental anxiety obtain relief in smoking ganja; but whether persons suffering from brain disease get relief or not by smoking ganja I do not know. I do not know of any instance of a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect having ever become insane by indulgence in the use of ganja. 46. The habitual excessive use of ganja pro- duces effects contrary to those stated in the pre- ceding replies. 47 and 48. The habitual moderate use of ganja does not appear to be a hereditary habit. It does not affect the children of the moderate con- sumer. 49. The moderate use of ganja is practised as an aphrodisiac. It is so used by some prostitutes. I think its use for this purpose is not more injuri- ous than its use as an ordinary narcotic. The use of hemp (ganja) does not tend to produce im- potence. 50. The excessive use of ganja produces effects contrary to the above. 51. Among the habitual moderate consumers of ganja, I think the proportion of bad characters is not large. It does not appear to me that the moderate use of ganja has any connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 52. I do not know that the excessive use of ganja did ever lead any smoker to commit crime of the above nature. 53. I think not. I do not know. 54. I have seen latials smoke ganja, perhaps to fortify themselves to fight in an open affray (danga). 55. I am not aware of any such case. I think complete stupefaction cannot be possibly induced by smoking ganja without admixture. 56. The effect of ganja is modified by the ad- mixture of ingredients, viz., the admixture of dhatura and other narcotics heighten the power of the drug, whereas rose-water, etc., diminish the power. I have no knowledge of the admixture of dhatura for personal consumption or for administration to others. 57. I do not know anything about the effects of eating and drinking ganja. I saw a man eat ganja and get flatulency and purging after seven or eight hours. 58. I am acquainted with the present system of excise administration in respect of the ganja pro- duced in Naogaon. I consider it is working well, but it is capable of improvement. 59. The following are my suggestions for im- provements:235 ganja (flat, round and chur produced in Naogaon), and that grown in other localities, such as Gurjat in the Tributary Mahals, in Orissa, accor- ding to their narcotic strength and the wood they contain. The present rates of duty on the Naogaon round and chur ganja are disproportionate. They might be raised to R8 and R10 respectively. 67. I have no objection to the present method of taxing ganja. 68. There are some licensed ganja shops in the ganja mahal for the vend of ganja. The quantity of ganja sold is partly smoked in the shop and partly consumed elsewhere. I have no objection to persons smoking ganja in the shop. 69. In opening a ganja shop in any place, the wishes of the people are not consulted or consi- dered. I think it is not necessary to consult or consider local public opinion, as the shop is not a nuisance. 70. I have no knowledge as regards the im- portation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States into Bengal. Petty ganja smug- gling goes on in the ganja tract, and it cannot be suppressed. Duty is paid in respect to the ganja used. There is no general use of untaxed ganja. 85. Evidence of MR. E. R. HENRY, Inspector General of Police, Bengal. I have the honour to state that I forwarded copies of questions 51 to 55 set by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission to all the District Su- perintendents in the Lower Provinces for report. I have now received their replies, and forward summaries of the information collected. 51. The general opinion is that no large propor- tion of bad characters are habitual moderate con- sumers of these drugs, and that the moderate use has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. Bad characters are said to use these drugs in Howrah, Puri, Dinajpur, Tippera, Bankura and Pabna, but there is nothing to show that they do so to a greater extent than the ordinary population of the lower classes. In some places petty thefts are reported to have been committed in order to obtain the means of pur- chasing the drug. Beyond this form of crime no others can in any way be directly connected with the moderate use of the drugs. 52. The consensus of opinion is that the exces- sive use of these drugs has but little connection with crime. There is considerable divergence of opinion regarding the excessive use of these drugs. Some few consider that the excessive use of the drugs has an enervating effect, producing in- capacity, while a larger number report that it has been known to induce madness, excitability, assaults on females, suicide and murder. 53. As regards this question, opinion is also divided. Some District Superintendents are in- clined to believe that the excessive use of hemp drugs does lead to the commission of unpremedi- tated crime, while, on the other hand, several officers hold the contrary opinion. There seems, however, little doubt but that the excessive use of ganja makes a man irritable; and there are cases on record in which murders and murderous assaults have been committed under its influence. 54. It does not appear that hemp drugs are generally used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit premeditated crimes. Several officers, however, report that they are used by lattials (club-men) and dacoits (gang robbers) to stimu- late their courage when setting out on fatiguing and hazardous expeditions. 55. The general opinion is that the drugs are not used to stupefy victims preparatory to the commission of crime. There do not appear to be any instances in which these drugs have been used alone to produce stupor, and in the few cases in which its use is reported, it has been mixed with dhatura, when stupefaction is produced. Possibly the drug administered to excess will cause com- plete stupefaction, but it seems doubtful whether insensibility, such as is necessary for criminal pur- poses, can be caused by hemp drugs alone to intended victims without detection. Oral evidence. I joined the Bengal Civil Service in 1873. Practically all my service has been in Bengal. I have been three years Inspector-General of Police in that province. Question 51.236 theft and burglary. The bad characters are exclu- sively connected with offences against property. There is no note as to whether the consumption of these drugs or intoxicants is to excess or in moderation. In inquiries which police make, and in the reports they submit, they never discriminate between excessive and moderate use. Not in any reports I have seen. Their attention has never been drawn to this by rule. All I see in such reports is merely a statement that a man is addict- ed to the drug. From this I cannot judge whe- ther he is a habitual moderate consumer or a dissolute wreck from the drug. In general, I am unable to connect professional crime (theft, burglary, dacoity) with hemp drugs in any way. I wrote on this subject to Mr. Harris, District Superintendent of Police of Gaya, an officer of twenty-eight years' service, whom I regard as having special powers of observation and special knowledge of the language and habits of the people. He says: "One hears of a madaki chor,but never of a ganja chor. I cannot call to mind any case of any kind in which it was alleged that the offence had been committed in consequence of the use of ganja, bhang or charas." I concur in this in respect to the general statement, that there is no established connection in the way of cause and effect between hemp drugs and professional crime. Question 53.237 8, 9 and 10. No cultivation to my knowledge in Bhagalpur. 11. I never heard of this. 12. No reason to suppose this. 15. I never heard of any one using the wildIn Bhagalpur I know that a slightly intoxicating drink is made from steeping the leaves in water, and I know that some prepara- tion of the resinous substance is used in sweet- meats by the better class of Hindus. 16. I never heard of any one using the wild bhang for smoking. 23. No, not to my knowledge. 24. They drink it in Bhagalpur. See my answer 3. 25. I should say not. 29. No, I do not know bhang massala. 42. From what I heard at Bhagalpur I was led to the belief that the preparations of bhang for drinking and for the sweetmeat majum are quite harmless and very mildly intoxicating. 43. No. 51. I should say it does not influence crime one way or the other. I mean concerted crime. 53 Excessive use of ganja may incite to unpre- meditated crime. 87. Evidence of MR. W. C. FASSON, District Superintendent of Police, Bogra. 1. As District Superintendent of Police of Bogra, in parts of which ganja is cultivated, in which also the wild bhang grows; by enquiries from Police officers and Babu Kasi Chunder Guho, Officiating Inspector, who has long experi- ence of Bogra District; and by enquiry from cultivators. 2. Flat ganja is called "chepti"; round ganja is called "gol". The formation of seeds is not entirely prevented. Seeds may be seen in the manufactured article, and cultivators say they get a sufficient quantity each year for the next year's sowings. Round ganja, after being rolled under foot, is squeezed by hand; and it is not dried so long as flat ganja. Yes, the definitions may be accepted, but charas does not appear to be produced, or rather preserved, separately; and chur, locally, is only accidentally produced by breakage. 3. In the south of Dinajpur District ganja is cultivated (e.g., Mahadebpur Thana) and in the Nawabganj and Adamdighi thanas of Bogra dis- trict. The wild hemp grows generally in sandy soils in these districts. 4. Bhang, sidhi and patti appears to be the names used. I gather that the wild plant so called is the same as that which is cultivated, but is different in appearance, because, probably, of the extirpation of male plants among the latter. 5. A sandy soil is necessary, and excessive rain- fall is injurious. Both wild and cultivated plants appear to require these conditions, for the former is not to be found in clay or sticky soils. 6. I am informed that it is dense. 7. In this district it is cultivated for the pro- duction of ganja only. The wild hemp is used for bhang. 8. I have no information. 9. The land used for ganja must be repeatedly ploughed between Falgun and Bhadra months; it must be sandy; it is only used once in four years for ganja, sursa being the only advantageous alternate crop; and it is manured with cow-dung and the refuge "sursa" plant in Choitra and in Bhadra. The above refers to the land on which the plants are raised from seed. Sowing takes place in Bhadra, and in Assin. When the plant is about six weeks old, it is transplanted into land that has been well ploughed, but not manured. Manure is scattered over this ground after the transplanting is effected. Flowers appear about the month of Paus, and, in* Magh, the "poddars" visit the lands to pick out "bhang from ganja," as the villagers put it. Any wild hemp found growing near the land is at once exterminated. 10. They are not a separate class. 11. The villagers say that they collect the seeds which fall in the process of manufacture, for the next year's sowing. 12. I have no such information, 13. In this district. It is restricted to the thanas of Adamdighi and Nawabganj. Other parts of the district would be suitable, but are more distant from Naogaon. 14. Ganja and bhang are used and prepared in Bogra, but ganja only from the cultivatedplant. 15. The methods of preparation in use are (1) for flat ganja; (2) for round ganja; and (3) for bhang or siddhi. (1) The cultivated ganja, having flowered, is cut down close to the ground (i. e.) stalks, leaves and flowers are taken in Falgun. It is then arranged in circular heaps (each plant radiat- ing from the centre of the circle, the flowers being near the circumference) upon a bamboo mat; and another mat being placed on the heap, weights are placed on it, or the members of the cultivator's household sit on it, so that the heap of plants is subjected to considerable pressure for one day. (The above process is adopted after one day of sun drying). The heap is rearranged, each plant being turned upside down, and is again pressed (on the third day) between the two mats. The resin is washed off the mats, and then the plants are arranged in long shallow heaps (on a series of mats), and over these the cultivator, his family, and any friends he can impress into his service, walk up and down, treading the plant into the flat con- dition which makes it "chepti" or flat ganja. (2) Round ganja is only dried for half-a-day, is not pressed between mats, and, instead of; being trodden on and flattened, is rolled under foot and then compressed in the hands. In both cases the leaves remain on the stalks till the process is complete, and are * Some villagers said that the poddars could do their work in Kartik.
238 then picked off as valueless. In the flat ganja long stalks are allowed to remain, but in the round ganja they are cut off just below the flowers. Both these perparations are said to be used for smoking only in this district. No use is made of the resin which exudes during process of manufac- ture. (3) Bhang or siddhi is made by boiling the leaves of the wild hemp with milk. 16. Bhang is generally prepared for home con- sumption wherever the plant grows wild. It is not reported that bhang, siddhi or patti (as the wild plant is indifferently called) is used for manufacture of ganja. 17. The use of ganja is characteristic of indivi- duals rather than classes, but it is extensively used by cultivators, and almost invariably by bairagis, fakirs, sanyasis, and other religious mendicants. 18. They are reported to degenerate and lose their effect, by exposure, in time. Dryness ap- pears to be an essential condition of preservation. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking and medi- cinal purposes. 20. The proportion of people who smoke ganja in Bogra is large, but impossible to estimate. It is said the consumption is greatest in the neigh- bourhood of ganja tracts, but I do not know that this is a safe assertion. 21. Flat and round ganja are both used, but flat, being cheaper, is probably most used. 22. None, it is said. 23. No; it is said that it is used only fordrinking. 24. It is said that is not eaten. It is drunk in most parts of the district, but not, it is said, habitually. The fact is that people do not care to admit its use, but I am told that nearly all prostitutes and their clients drink it. 25 to 27. I have no information. 28. The average allowance is estimated by the Inspector of Police at half a tola or 2 annas' worth for moderate consumers, and one tola or 4 annas for excessive consumers. 29. (a) Tobacco is mixed with ganja, as it makes it burn slowly. Milk, pepper, dhania, salt and water, and sugar are used with bhang. (b) Dhatura seed is mixed with ganja to im- prove the flavour and render it more intoxicating, and is also supposed to strengthen the powers of digestion. 30. It is estimated that three-fourths of the consumers take it in company, and one-fourth in solitude. It is chiefly used by males, but nearly all prostitutes use it. Children do not. 31. The habit is not said to be easily formed; but once established, it is difficult to break off, and moderation generally leads to excess. 32. I am told that there are such religious customs, etc., but I have not learnt anything specific in this connection. 33. The ganja smoker is generally looked on with contempt; and among the more respectable classes, public opinion (social) condemns the habit; but this does not affect the uneducated labouring classes, to whom it is in. a sense a necessity. A knowledge of the general develop- ment of results is a sufficient reason for disap- proval of ganja-smoking. It is almost invariably adduced by village people (as also by Police officers) as a reason for believing any suspected character capable of any kind of crime; but this is because it leads first to sexual incontinence, and then to excessive expenditure, which becomes imperative to supply an irresistible and increas- ing craving for the drug. No worship is spoken of. 34. Religious mendicants, whose long journeys and constant exposure render the drug a necessity, and the class of agricultural labourers who have become dependent on it by constant use, would find its loss a serious deprivation. These are estimated as about one-quarter of the population. 35. Prohibition would in all probability lead to illicit cultivation and to the use of other drugs or stimulants. It could only be actually enforced by extermination of the plants, both cultivated and wild. It is unlikely that political disturbance would follow, as no powerful class would care to identify itself with the consumers. 36. I have no information to this effect. 37. Charas is not used in Bogra. 38. The difference is in degree only, as far as I can learn. 39. Drinking bhang is supposed to be the least injurious method of consumption, which is pro- bably due to the admixture of milk and to the slight intoxicating effects. 40. It is prescribed by Kabirajes and also in cattle disease. 41. The use of ganja is said to be beneficial: (a)in moderate use as a digestive; (b) in habitual use to support severe fatigue or exposure; (c) and in both cases as a febrifuge and preventive of gout; (d) it is also said to produce a fleeting kind of courage when occasionally used. It is not said that constant increase of the daily amount is required for these results. 42. It appears to be harmless in all cases when the consumption is moderate and when the effects are worked off by legitimate labour, etc. 43. Yes, it is said so. 44. To the habitual consumer the effect is stimulating, pleasant, and refreshing. It creates appetite, and the effects are said to last about two hours. There are no after-effects at the time. Moderate consumption need not produce intoxi- cation, and the habitual consumer will be uneasy and lose health if he cannot obtain his usual supply. 45. It is said to produce sexual excitement. In moderate use it is not said to produce any of the bad effects named, but it is admitted that, unless nourishing food is also taken (and especi- ally milk), that ill-health does follow, and also, that death from dysentery is very commonly the ultimate fate of ganja-smokers. Laziness follows deprivation with habitual smokers. 46. The excessive use of ganja is almost always accompanied by sexual excess. If sufficient and good food is not taken, dysentery, asthma, bron- chitis ensue. Insanity is generally temporary when induced by ganja smoking, and generally takes the form of imbecility; but there are hopeless cases, and I can quote at present the cases of Hura Chaukidar of Dupchanchia in this district, in whom unusual robustness for his age is accompanied by imbecility. This year a sad case of violent insanity induced by ganja smoking came under notice, in which the
239 madman, Thakur Dass, killed his own child and attempted to commit suicide. There was no evidence in either case of insanity prior to the use of the drug, but the ganja smokers, who have come under my notice, have generally been men of a low type of intellect. Habitual smokers sent to jail generally admit thehabit. 47. No. It is not supposed to be hereditary or to affect the children in any way. 48. No. It is said to be the result of associa- tion with others, and not to communicate itself to children. 49. Nearly all prostitutes keep either ganja or siddhi, both for their own consumption and for their visitors. It is not said to produce impotence. 50. Impotence is not reported as an effect of the drug at all, though sexual excitement is one of its first and prominent effects. 51. Yes; a large proportion. But this is attri- buted, first, to debauchery and evil companionship resulting from the use of the drug; and, second, to the additional expenditure incurred in obtaining the nourishing food which is a necessity to a ganja smoker, and which impells him to theft, etc. 52. The same answer applies á fortiori to the excessive use of the drug; but ganja smoking as a direct cause of crime is not very commonly heard of in these districts. 53. I have mentioned the only case that I re- member in my reply to question 45. 54. There is no specific information on this point, but it is supposed to be a fact in the case of dacoits and gang-robbers. 55. I do not know of any instance. 56. I have noted above the fact that dhatura is so mixed with ganja, and that it increases the intoxicating and other effects; but I have no specific information on this head. 57. This does not apply to Bogra, where it is said that charas is not used, and ganja is only smoked. 58. I am imperfectly acquainted with the system. 59. Thefts of ganja are common. Bairagis seem to be the principal offenders. 60. Charas is not produced. 61. Bhang is in this district made from the wild plant, and is said to be practically harmless, and its extermination would be more trouble than it is worth. 88. Evidence of MR. F. H. TUCKER, District Superintendent of Police, Dinajpur. 1. I have had to consult some native officers on various questions, and the views noted are gene- ral. 2. Yes, but siddhi, bhang, subji or patti are different names applied to the dry leaves of the male hemp plant. Each of these products are locally known by the name of bhang, charas and ganja. There are three varieties of ganja, flat, round and chur. 3. Male hemp plants grow spontaneously in the district of Purnea, as well as in this and many other districts in Bengal. 4. Bhang. Yes. 5. Humidity and sandy nature of the soil and copious rain. 6. Dense. 7. Yes, to a small extent (a) for the production of ganja, in thana Mahadebpur bordering on the district of Rajshahi, where it is cultivated under Government supervision. 8. Normal. 9. Nil. 10. Of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 11 and 12. No. 13. Yes, it is cultivated under Government supervision in the districts of Rajshahi, Bogra, and Dinajpur in limited localities, where soil is good and suitable. 14. Yes, in the district of Rajshahi, Bogra, and Dinajpur(a). 15. I am unable to do so. 16. (a) No, for restrictions imposed upon it. (b) Yes, can be prepared. (c) Yes. 17. No particular class. The ordinary cultivat- ing (ghirist) people do it. 18. Yes, it does lose its effects if kept over a year. It can be kept in tolerably good condi- tion for a year or so with ordinary care. The resinous matter becomes dried up owing to atmos- pheric influences. Deterioration can to a certain extent be prevented by storing the articles in tin- lined boxes. 19. Yes, only for smoking, except in the case of majun, which is sold in the town of Dacca and Calcutta; majun is another preparation from ganja left out by Dr. Prain. The following is the mode of preparation of this article:240 25. The use of ganja is on the increase, especi- ally in those districts where the outstill system (cheap liquor) is not in vogue, and where people are comparatively poor and cannot pay the high prices of liquor. 26. (a) .5 (b) .1 (c) .3 Ganja and bhang. (d) .1 27. Ganja is indulged by the lower classes of the people and bhang by the middle classes of the gentry, especially during the time of festivals, such as Bijaya and Sivaratri. Fishermen and boatmen, etc., who are generally exposed to the inclemency of the weather, take to ganja. Charas and majun are taken by those shame- lessly intemperate persons of the middle class, whose pleasure it is to amuse themselves with all sorts of drugs and drinks. 28. (a) 3 pies per diem. (b) 1 anna per diem. 29. Nothing is mixed with ganja or charas. Milk and sugar is exceptionlly mixed with bhang to make it more intoxicant. I don't know any- thing of bhang massala. 30. Ganja and charas are smoked in company, whilst bhang is drunk in solitude. Mainly con- fined to the male sex. Bhang is mostly drunk at declining age when men become susceptible to attacks of diarrh241 52. Yes, ganja makes a man irritable and head- strong, and leads the excessive smoker to any sort of rash doing. 53. Yes, excessive indulgence in ganja incites a man to unpremeditated crime, the effects of rashness and violence of temper caused by smok- ing it. 54. No. This might be said of liquor. 55. (a) No. (b) No. 56. Nil. 57. Unheard of. 58. Working well, but requires the supervising staff to be a little more strengthened. 59 and 60. Ganja is cultivated only in the dis- trict of Rajshahi, chiefly in the Naogaon sub- division. The chief local administration of the ganja mahal now rests in the hands of the Subdivisional Officer of Naogaon in addition to his other duties. There should be a Special Excise Deputy Col- lector for the ganja mahal, who will be able to devote his undivided attention to the manage- ment of the ganja mahal. The supervising agency is very weak, having only a supervisor of the rank of a Sub-Deputy Collector, with one assistant of the rank of a Kanungo. They cannot properly keep up strict supervision over the cultivators, etc., owing to the extensive field of the work and the multifarious nature of the duties they have to attend. They are, therefore, compelled to entrust some of their subordinates with many responsible duties, such as weighment of ganja during storage and ex- portation. This is quite objectionable, and subor- dinates being not above temptation, the weigh- ment of ganja when taken, during storage, at the gola in the importing districts, is invariably found to disagree considerably with the quantity noted on the pass from the exporting district, giving every allowance for dryage on transit. There must necessarily be something rotten at the bottom. To obviate this, some responsible officers must actually remain present during weighment, whether for storage or for exportation. So the staff of the supervising responsible officers must be strengthened242 4. The general name is bhang. I believe it to be exactly the same plant everywhere. 5. I can't say what conditions of climate, &c., are necessary to the growth of the wild hemp, but I found it growing in elevated lands abundantly. It appears to require sun, free ventilation and a well drained soil. 6. The growth of the wild hemp was found to be dense. 7. There is cultivation of the hemp plant in the Naogaon subdivision in the district of Raj- shahi and in the adjoining districts of Bogra and Dinajpur, within an area of about 20 square miles:243 28. The average cost of ganja per diem to (a) Habitual moderate consumers may be one anna at the least, (b) Habitual excessive consumers may be at the most 8 annas or a tola's weight= 4 annas. The cost of bhang to either of those classes is nominal. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja to adulterate it. I do not know if anything else is exceptionally mixed with this drug. I do not know also if dhatura is ever mixed with it If it is at all mixed, it must be by ascetics, who are habitual excessive smokers. Some spices and a little salt is mixed with bhang. Tobacco is mixed with ganja, as I am told by a ganja smoker, for the purpose of preventing the ganja being burnt to ashes quickly. As a rule, ganja cannot be prepared for consumption without mixing tobacco. Bhang massalas are of various kinds, according to the choice of the consumers of different locali- ties. In Calcutta bhang massala is sold in the bazaar, but I cannot say what its ingredients are. 30. I have already said I have no knowledge of charas. It is the habit of the ganja smokers to take it in company. But people of the upper and middle classes generally take it in solitude. Females of ill-fame almost all smoke ganja in moderation. It is not restricted to any time of life. Boys below ten or twelve scarcely ever take a drug like ganja. But among the ascetics this is not uncommon. It is not at all usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. I do not think the habit of smoking ganja has to be acquired slowly, but when it is once formed, it is difficult to break off. Habitual use of bhang can be easily formed and easily broken off. There is a great tendency in the case of ganja for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive, but fortunately the price of this drug having been raised from Rs. 4 to 16 or 20 per seer, the people can hardly afford to smoke in excess. I know many men who care very little to provide necessaries to wife and children, or even to himself, but spend all their available means in purchasing ganja. 32. I know there is a religious custom among the lower classes of Hindus of Eastern Bengal who worship an ideal god named Tinnath, in which ganja is absolutely necessary. Boatmen, culti- vators, labourers, or menial servants of Hindus, after the day's labour and after supper, meet at one place and each purchases one pice ganja, one pice betel, and one pice of oil. There they smoke this ganja, and chew betel, and sing songs in the name of that god till the oil is burnt. Though only one pice of ganja is required for the religious custom, men consume more ganja and induce others to get into the habit. I am told that of late this custom is disappearing. 33. Bhang is not very much used in Lower Bengal; in Behar it is much used; it is not in disrepute. Ganja is the worst sort of intoxicating drugs, and it is very much in disrepute. All societies of Bengal (except the ascetics) hate it as most disreputable, and think that it is only, if at all necessary, fit to be taken by the meanest of mankind. Such a sentiment is due to the fact that people who use it become as a rule hot-tem- pered, violent and ugly. I have already mentioned before that certain low class Hindus require ganja to worship a god called Tinnath; but I am not aware that ganja itself is worshipped by any class. 34. It will be certainly a serious privation to forego the consumption of ganja244 boiled in mustard oil, and this oil applied to itch on children. I am not aware that ganja or bhang is used in treating cattle disease. But I have used it for mules and horses suffering from asthma and cold. Camel-drivers also use it, I believe, as medicine. 41. (a) The moderate occasional use of ganja or bhang is beneficial as a digestive. (b) Habitual moderate use of ganja is bene- ficial for the prevention of exposure and alleviation of fatigue. (c) I certainly think that it is beneficial as a febribuge or preventive of disease in malarious tracts. I saw it used with marked effect in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and in Naogaon. It is also said that, owing to cultivation of ganja, there is much less malaria than in adjoining places. About 25 per cent. of the labouring class, I be- lieve, use ganja to alleviate fatigue, and nearly 75 or 80 per cent, of the ascetics use ganja to counter- act exposure, and the rest use bhang for the same purpose. I am not aware what particular class use ganja for digestive purposes. 42. The moderate use of bhang appears to be harmless. Those who use bhang are never violent like ganja smokers. 43. Generally the moderate smokers are not as offensive as those who go to excess, yet even they occasionally become offensive to their neighbours, and especially to the members of their family, and when he is in need of means to purchase ganja, he will sell off or pledge the household uten- sils to purchase ganja. 44. The immediate effect of the moderation of ganja on the habitual consumer is certainly re- freshing. It produces intoxication. I do not think it creates appetite, if it is taken habitually. It rather kills hunger by habitual use. To habitual excessive smokers its effect lasts for a short time; to moderate habitual smokers it lasts perhaps up to the time fixed for taking another dose, and to occasional smokers its effect may continue for twenty-four hours or more. Subsequent want of gratification produces longing and sometimes great uneasiness to habi- tual consumers. 45. Habitual moderate use of bhang is, as I have already stated, harmless in every respect. (a) Ganja reduces the body to a skeleton, unless ghi, butter, or milk is taken with nutritious food, but such things can rarely be obtained by most ganja smokers. It is, I believe, for this reason that the better classes can take ganja for years without harm. Habitual moderate smokers remain healthy. (b) I think by habitual moderate smoking of ganja a man loses his ordinary appetite. (c) It often causes dysentery to those who cannot provide for good diet. I have not seen any case of bronchitis or asthma caused by moder- ate habitual use of ganja. (d) It scarcely induces immorality or debauch- ery, but it induces laziness. (e) It deadens the intellect, according to the quantity of ganja consumed by each smoker, and I believe it produces insanity to those who go to excess and cannot afford rich food. Liquor bright- ens the intellect; ganja deadens it. I have not seen one drunkard insane, but I have seen many ganja smokers subject to it, especially those who take two different drugs, or liquor and drugs. The type of insanity is generally of a violent type. There are again some who become morose and will not speak. Some were found to be better some time after giving up the habit, and others were permanently insane. I cannot say whether any of those ganja smokers, whom I have known to be insane, had or had not mental anxiety or brain disease prior to their acquiring the habit of using the drug. 46. I have already said that habitual excessive use of ganja produces the evils enumerated in the above paragraph to a greater extent. 47. I do not know that the habitual moderate use of any of these drugs can be hereditary, or that it affects in any way the children of the moderate consumer. I believe not. 48. Now and then it is said that children of the habitual excessive smoker of ganja are bad- tempered and violent, but in a very few instances. 49. I have heard that ganja is sometimes taken moderately by men indulging in debauchery as an aphrodisiac, and it is also so used by some prosti- tutes. I cannot say whether the use of ganja for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. Hemp used in this way would tend to produce impotence. Generally those who are excessive smokers are not at all prone to debauchery, like those who indulge in drinking. 50. This is answered in the latter part of the above question. 51. There is not a large proportion of bad characters who are habitual moderate consumers of these drugs. They may have some connection with hurt cases and sometimes with petty thefts to enable them to purchase ganja. 52. Some of the habitual excessive smokers of ganja are occasionally known to commit culpable homicide or grievous hurt. 53. Excessive indulgence in ganja does incite to violent crime. I know of a case where a smoker suddenly murdered a vendor because he would not supply him with more ganja. 54. I have heard of ganja being used to fortify the courage of criminals about to commit premedi- tated acts of violence. 55. I do not know that ganja was ever used to stupefy the intended victims by criminals. I have known cases where it has been mixed with dhatura seed for purposes of crime. This is generally practised on prostitutes prior to rob- bing them. 57. There is danger of unintentionally taking too much by taking ganja internally. 58. I believe that there is much smuggling and room for much improvement, but it requires money. 59. I would insist upon closer and more frequent inspection of stocks. The cultivators do pretty well what they like at present. 60. The control is very weak. I would put the whole business on the same footing as opium, make advances, buy up the crop, store it in godowns, and issue it under passes to Collectors of districts. 62. No.
245 63. A wholesale vendor has numerous shops for retail sale either in his own name or benami, and he also advances money to the cultivators for growing ganja, and in some cases he is virtually a partner of the cultivators. This combination of three different interests in one person should be prohibited or discouraged as far as possible to prevent smuggling. At present a retail vendor can sell 20 tolas or one powa of ganja to one man. I think that this should be restricted to 5 tolas or one chhattack, like opium, to prevent smuggling as well as excessive use of ganja by the con- sumers. Names of buyers should also be registered, and consumption on the premises prohibited. 64 I do not think there is any objection to the existing regulation governing the export and import of ganja or its preparations. 65. The taxation of ganja is too low still. 66. Certainly there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja. The chur or broken ganja being without thick branches should be taxed at a higher rate per maund or seer than flat ganja, which is sold with the thick branches. I cannot say much about round ganja, except that it has also no very thick branches like the flat. This round ganja is preferred only by the people living in Calcutta and neighbouring districts. 67. I do not think there is any objection to the present method of taxation. I would not tax bhang. 68. In many places I have seen retail shops of ganja crowded with smokers all day. I have al- ready given my opinion that no person should be allowed to smoke on the shop premises. 69. I am not aware that the wishes of the people are consulted or considered in any way before a shop is opened in any locality. I would not consult the people; it is impossible to get any but interested opinions. Excise officers, often for their own credit, create a shop at their option where it is not at all required. I would place it in the hands of very high authority to sanction the establishment of shops. Of course, if the people themselves move in the matter, their wishes might be duly considered. 70. I believe there is much smuggling of ganja from the Native States about Chota Nagpur, particularly Surguja. Oral evidence. Question 45.246 Note (on records of cases submitted by MR. WARD) by the Commission, appended to Mr. Ward's evidence. 1. Empress vs. Hanif Shaha.247 27. Men of all classes of the people are in the habit of smoking ganja, drinking bhang, etc. The fakirs, baisnabs, sanyasis, and other classes of men, who are almost homeless and have no friends, generally smoke ganja or drink bhang. Several middle-class people, who could afford to pay for drinking before, owing to backward cir- cumstances or for want of means, when they be- come poor, generally become ganja smokers or bhang drinkers at last, and lead a life of misery. School-boys who have a tendency for music take first to moderate ganja smoking and then go to the excess and fall in life. 28. (a) Two annas a day for each moderate. (b) Eight annas a day for each excessive. 29. Tobacco leaf is ordinarily mixed with ganja for smoking. To make the bhang drink strong sometimes dhatura seeds are mixed with bhang, but is done by the sanyasis. Bhang massalas are248 16. (a) Yes, by the bhang consumers. (b) Yes. (c) Yes, with regard to ganja. 17. By all classes and castes, Hindus and Muhammadans. 18. Does deteriorate; yes, decidedly loses its effect. Would be almost useless after about two years; exposure is the cause of deterioration. If kept in a cool and moist vessel and air excluded as much as possible, might be kept for two years. 19. Ganja is smoked, also used medicinally with other ingredients, spices, sugar, etc., and taken as a pill. It is thus used medicinally for bowel complaints and various other diseases. 20. Cannot say. Careful and lengthy enquiry would be necessary to obtain this information with anything like accuracy. 21. Flat ganja. 22. I know nothing about charas. 23. Yes; can't say to what extent, but only, I think, as a substitute for the ganja when the latter is not obtainable. 24. I cannot give figures. 25. I cannot give any opinion. Reliable natives tell me that the habit of ganja-smoking is increasing, but their views are, in my opinion, founded on no data. 26. Could not say. 28. (a) About 2 to 3 pice per day. (b) About 5 to 6 pice per day. The local price of a bud is one pice, and one bud would suffice for two chillums or two smokes. A heavy smoker will want 10 to 12 chillums per day. 29. For ganja, tobacco and spices; for bhang, see answer to 15. Yes. Contains usually, pepper, nutmeg, cloves, cucumber seeds, cinnamon and cardamoms, sugar or molasses. 30. Practised in solitude as well as in company. Quite exceptional for women to smoke ganja or drink bhang, but youths, boys of fifteen or sixteen, take to it, and these become the confirmed ganja smokers. 31. Yes, to all three queries. 32. I know of no social or religious custom which entails the consumption of ganja or bhang. But confirmed smokers will make a visit to these Hindu temples an excuse to consume an extra quantity. 33. (a) Respectable Hindu as well as Muham- madan society regard confirmed ganja smokers and bhang drinkers with distrust. (c) Not that I am aware of. 34. Yes, to the same extent as it would be to deprive the habitual toper of his dram. Can give no figures. 35. (a) Not in the Gurjat Mahals. (b) Yes, and with ease. (c) Only at a cost which would be prohibitive. (d) Yes. (e) No. (f) Probably to both, 36. No. 37. Know nothing about charas. 38. Can't say. 39. To smoke ganja and inhale the smoke is more injurious than simply to smoke it. Ganja smoking is said to be more injurious than bhang drinking. These ideas had been obtained from ganja smokers and bhang consumers. 40. Yes; both ganja and bhang. The latter is supposed to contain cooling properties, and is occasionally given medicinally to women. 41. The question is one for a medical man. I am not prepared to give any opinion. 42. The bhang drinking, if not carried to excess, appears to me as harmless as the moderate con- sumption of opium. This is only an opinion. Ganja smoking stands on a different footing, and I am doubtful if the habit once acquired could even be moderately indulged in. 43. Yes, so far as my experience goes. 44. (a) and (b) Refreshing. (d) Yes. (e) Yes to the beginner only. (f) An hour or two. (g) Listlessness. A feeling of general inapti- tude to do anything. A craving for another chillum or smoke. (h) Yes. But in considering these answers omit the word moderate. 45 and 46. I am not prepared to answer this question. 47 and 48. Yes, apparently so, judging from the information consumers have given me. 49 and 50. Can't say. 51 and 52. (a) Can't say. (b) None to my knowledge; but it stands to reason that the habitual ganja smoker is no more reliable than a habitual drunkard; both habits blunt the moral sense. 53. Under the influence of both ganja and bhang serious crime has been known, though none such have come under my personal notice. 54. Habitual smokers and drinkers would, of course, resort to their favourite beverages before committing any crime or act of violence. This indulgence would give them the necessary amount of Dutch courage. 55. (a) None such have come under my per- sonal notice. Have heard of this being practised of pilgrims. (b) Yes; especially if given to those not used to either drug. 56. Can't say. 57. Have given in previous questions all in- formation I can supply on these points. 58. In the Gurjat Mahals each Raja or Chief follows his own system as regards excise adminis- tration, and I am not aware that in any one State there is any restriction placed on the cultivation of the hemp plant. Those chiefs being independent, no special control over their excise administration from outside or by the British Government is ex- ercised. In fact, the licensed storekeepers and retail sellers of ganja in the Mogalbandi or Regula- tion Districts of Orissa draw their supplies of ganja from many of the Native States I allude to with the sanction of the Mogalbandi authorities. I, like, I imagine, most British officers, would like to see the cultivation of the hemp plant and the preparation and sale of ganja under some kind of control in these Native States, and this under
249 existing circumstances is for political reasons not possible. I am not thoroughly acquainted with the excise system in the Regulation Districts, but there the cultivation of the hemp is, I believe, interdicted, while arrangements exist for allowing confirmed ganja-smokers and bhang-consumers to obtain their favourite drugs from licensed sellers. I would restrict the wholesale as well as retail sale of ganja as much as possible, leaving the district officer to decide what the safe limit is. 64. No ganja is imported into the Gurjat States from the Mogalbandi Districts, but both hemp and ganja are freely exported under passes granted by the Regulation District officers from these Native States. Were I a native chief. I should raise the export duty on these consignments to the highest payable limit. At present, and to my knowledge, none of the chiefs collect any such export duty, and ganja is therefore much cheaper than it should be. I have no objections to the existing Mogalbandi regulations. 65. Not knowing what the rates of taxation in the Mogalbandi are, I can give no opinion. 66. I see no reason to suggest differential rates of taxation. 67. See answer to 65. 68. None to my knowledge in the States under the administration of these chiefs. 69. See above. 70. In the case of a plant or drug so easily reared and prepared, practically without restriction in Native States in Orissa, there must be con- stant smuggling, on a small scale, into the adjoining Regulation Districts. The actual harm done is, however, so infinitesimal, and to such a very small proportion of the Orissa population, that any more stringent measures than now exist appear to me uncalled for and unnecessary. 92. Evidence of Mr. W. R. RICKETTS,* Manager, Nilgiri State, Tributary Mahals, Orissa. 1. As a member of the Provincial service, I have had charge of the Excise Department both at the Sudder Station and Sub-Division, and for the last nine and a half years 1 have had entire charge as Manager of the Excise Administration in the Native State of Nilgiri, one of the Tributary States in the province of Orissa. 2 The definitions are correct as regards siddhi or bhang or ganja (round, flat and broken). Bhang is commonly known in this province by the name of "patti." Charas is not used in Orissa, except by visitors from the north of India and Behar. 3. In north of Balasore and in the Native States of Maurbhanj and Keonjhar, the hemp plant grows spontaneously, but not in very large quantities. In Nilgiri very few cultivate the plant in their kitchen gardens, but only use it as patti. No ganja is cultivated. 4. It is only known as ganja here. I don't know of any other name being applied to the plant. 5. It requires damp, loose soil, and mostly grows spontaneously near the sea and close to rivers. 6. Where it grows, it is dense. 7. In North Balasore, Maurbhanj and Keonjhar it is cultivated only for bhang The little ganja is of a very poor quality. Proportionately speak- ing, it is grown in a small quantity. The fibre is not used, nor does any exist. Some few keep seeds for cultivation. 8. There has been a decided decrease in the area under cultivation, mainly due to the article which can be purchased being much superior and consequently preferred by consumers. 10. They belong to all classes in this province. 11. Wild hemp as a rule won't produce ganja; when it does, the quality is very inferior. 12. I don't know of any such district. 13. Ganja cultivation is restricted in Orissa in all districts, but not in the Tributary States. In the latter, a very small quantity is cultivated, but, as I have said before, of a very inferior quality. The cultivation of ganja requires very heavy dew, which does not fall here. It would be impossible to cultivate good ganja in Orissa. 14. Inferior ganja and bhang, both in small quantities. Ganja is prepared only in the Tri- butary States; bhang in the Tributary States and in the district of Balasore. No charas is prepared in this province. 16. Bhang is usually prepared in this province by the people in their own houses from the wild hemp wherever it grows spontaneously. Ganja can be prepared from the wild plant, but the qua- lity is inferior. 17. In Orissa and the Tributary States bhang and inferior ganja to a small extent are prepared by all classes 18. Both ganja and bhang deteriorate by keep- ing. After about eighteen months they quite lose their effect; they keep good with ordinary care for about a year. The resinous substance evaporates, The measure usually taken to preserve ganja and bhang is to exclude it as much as possible from the air. 19. In Orissa and the Tributary States ganja is mostly used for smoking mixed with prepared tobacco; it is also to a small extent eaten with pan and drunk. For drinking purposes it is mixed with a concoction prepared with water, black pepper, and hot spices, to which sometimes sugar is added to make it stronger, Ganja is drunk principally in the Puri District, but it is smoked all over the province. 20. Both the high and low classes of people in Orissa smoke ganja, but I should say a small number in proportion to the population. 21. Round ganja is always preferred here for smoking, and is usually used for this purpose in all parts of the province and the Gurjat States. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking in Orissa or the Native States here. 24. All classes in all localities in Orissa and the Native States drink and eat bhang, but by far the larger number of consumers drink it, as I have already described. 25. I should say the use of ganja and bhang is decidedly on the increase. The drugs are becoming more popular, as they are within the means of all * Was summoned to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but was unable to appear. 2 M
250 classes, and the Brahmins and people of higher caste now use it to a great extent, and their example is being followed by the people in ge- neral. 26. Ganja251 (c) Neither ganja nor bhang are considered a febrifuge, but the lower classes believe it to be a preventive of malaria; but I don't think this is the case. (d) It is commonly believed that ganja or bhang drives away snakes, but this I consider to be pure fiction. My above remarks refer to habitual con- sumers, but I don't think they use ganja or bhang for these purposes; they generally contract the habit and it grows on them. 42. I don't believe even the moderate use of ganja and bhang to be harmless; they both cause a gradual failure of health and strength, and they certainly weaken the brains. This I have noticed in those who take the drugs, and who may be recognized by the redness and dilation of the eyes, and their veins invariably stand out prominently. 43. Ganja smokers are generally avoided by their neighbours; they are of very uncertain temper, and the term "ganja smoker" is used as an abuse. 44. The immediate effect of both ganja and bhang is refreshing, and produces slight intoxica- tion if taken in moderation. They do not allay hunger, though they may give temporary or, I should say, merely momentary relief. Ganja creates appetite. The effect of ganja smoking lasts three or four hours; eating and drinking ganja or bhang ten to twelve hours. The after- effects are depression and reaction, and also a craving for more. 45. Bhang and ganja produce noxious effects, physically, mentally and morally. They gradually impair the constitution, though helping digestion and creating appetite. The moderate use of these two drugs does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. Smoking ganja is used as a remedy for asthma. They certainly induce lazi- ness and habits of immorality and debauchery, and gradually impair the intellect, but moderate use does not produce insanity. 46. A prolonged excessive use of ganja pro- duces insanity, and a case of this kind was pro- minently brought to my notice when in charge of the Bhadrak Sub-Division in the Balasore Dis- trict. The man I refer to was totally insane and belonged to the middle class, and had been serving Europeans in the capacity of Sirdar Behara, but on enquiry I found he had been brought to the condition in which I found him by the excessive use of ganja. About six months after, he came to me at Nilgiri asking for service and apparently quite sane, from which instance, I conclude, insanity produced by ganja is temporary. The typical symptoms are great violence, insensibility to pain, and irritation of the skin. No ganja smoker rendered insane will confess to its use;the mere mention of the drug nearly drives himwild. I don't think insanity tends to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs unless the person has pre- viously been accustomed to take them. The habit of consuming these drugs is an acquired one and gradually grows on one. The taste at first I believe is anything but pleasant. 47 and 48. The habitual moderate or excessive use of ganja or bhang does not appear to be here- ditary, nor does the habit affect in any way the children of the moderate or excessive consumer. 49. The moderate use of ganja is practised to excite venereal desire, and is known to be employ- ed for this purpose by prostitutes. When so used, it is certainly more injurious than as an ordinary narcotic, as the injurious effect caused by the drug is more permanent. The use of hemp decidedly produces impotence. 50. Excessive use merely produces greater im- potence, and is more injurious. 51. There are very few criminals among the moderate consumers. I should say moderate con- sumption of ganja or bhang has no connection with crime generally, or crime of a special cha- racter. 52. Excessive consumption of both ganja and bhang leads in all probability to crime, the con- sumers not being responsible for their actions owing to the intoxicating effects. Usually crimes of a daring nature, and those attended by violence, are committed by ganja consumers. 53. Yes; the slightest provocation would incite acts of violence wholly unpremeditated. I know of no case in which excessive indulgence in these drugs has led to temporary homicidal frenzy; but, of course, insanity caused by excessive consumption of ganja produces the disease, invariably attended with great violence. 54. Yes; such cases have been known. 55. Yes. I have heard of such instances though none have come under my own observ- ation. Complete stupefaction can be induced by bhang if taken in sufficient quantity. 56. Moderate consumers of ganja and bhang hardly ever use any admixture, except tobacco which is essential to smoking ganja. Those who take the drugs to excess frequently mix dhatura with both, more especially with bhang. In cases of criminal drugging, bhang is often mixed with dhatura, which causes almost immediate and com- plete stupefaction. 57. The results from eating and drinking ganja are pretty nearly the same as from smoking the drug. Only in the former the effects last much longer, and consequently are more injurious. 93. Evidence of MAHAMAHOPADHYA MAHESA CHANDRA NYAYARATNA, C. I. E., Brahmin, Principal, Government Sanskrit College, Calcutta. 1. I have very little information and knowledge regarding the hemp drug. The sources of my in- formation on the few questions I have answered will appear under each question answered. 2. These definitions may be accepted. The local names are siddhi or bhang, ganja and charas. Other names are samvida and bijaya. The Sans- krit lexicons give other names also, e.g., matangi, chapala, ajaya, ananda, harshini, jaya, etc. 4. I have heard of the plant being called the ganja plant or the siddhi plant, but never as the charas plant. 20. Ganja is almost invariably smoked by sanya- sis. Hackney carriage and cart drivers, mecha- nics, day labourers, and Brahmin cooks engaged by the day are often found to have contracted the habit of smoking ganja. Some Uriyas smoke ganja with tobacco and other leaves. 2 M 2
252 24. Up-country darwans generally drink or swallow pastes of bhang prepared with other in- gredients according to taste. 26. As for bhang or siddhi, few are excessive consumers. I have, however, heard of one or two hard drunkards having left the bottle to take to massive doses of siddhi every day. Most people who drink siddhi for exhilaration do so occasionally and in moderate quantities. Ganja smokers are generally regular consumers, and many are exces- sive smokers. Of charas consumers I have no information. They are believed to be habitual consumers. 27. It is company and association that lead to the practice of taking ganja and charas. Another cause of these two drugs being in use among the poorer classes and amongst ascetics (sanyasis) is the cheapness of the drugs. Their effect in producing intoxication being almost in- stantaneous, may be another reason for their use. The sanyasis regard the use of ganja as essential to preserve health. It may be that it temporarily wards off the effects of exposure to wind, rain and sun. Habitual drinkers of siddhi take it as a mild and inexpensive intoxicating drug. 29. Sugar, spices and fragrant leaves, such as rose leaves and sometimes rose water also are mixed with bhang. Ganja is generally smoked alone or with tobacco leaves. Dhatura is some- times mixed. 31. I believe that the habit of smoking ganja and charas cannot be easily shaken off. I know of a man who was a ganja smoker, and whose father, being apprised of the fact, kept watch over him. On the second day the man felt very unwell, and was only relieved by ganja being given to him. 32. Siddhi is drunk in Bengal on the Bijaya day, on which the goddess Durga's image is thrown in to the river. This seems to be a social custom. I have not met with any weighty religious authority in the matter. Siddhi is also offered to Bisweswar (the most sacred image of Siva) at Benares daily, and may be offered to Siva by his worshippers. Siddhi is drunk generally very moderately on the Bijaya day. Many people merely touch it, and some merely apply a drop to their lips. This custom does not seem to lead to the formation of the habit of drinking siddhi. Bits of dry leaves of siddhi are taken by people starting on a journey, as being of good auspices. 33. Taking siddhi is not considered as objection- able as drinking wine. A Sanskrit verse says that "(in kali-yuga) siddhi (should be) preferred to wine." It runs thus:253 this obligation to take siddhi as a preliminary to Devi worship, but declares it indispensible for Khatriyas, Vaishas and Sudras if spirituous drink is not available. The Prantoshini quotes a text which declares it a duty on the part of Brahmans, Khatriyas and Vaishas to offer siddhi to Devi. The use of siddhi under religious injunctions is almost always moderate, and is therefore not likely to be injurious. 34. Those who take siddhi for medicinal or re- ligious purposes would feel it as a serious privation to have to forego its use. 35. Prohibition would cause discontent among consumers. Prohibition of the use of siddhi would cause widespread discontent. Oral evidence. Question 1.254 temper. No custom of worshipping hemp plant obtains here. 34. Yes; it would be a serious privation in case of ganja. 35. It will not be feasible, neither advisable. The drug will be consumed illicitly. It will cause serious discontent. It may not amount to a politi- cal danger in a place like Kuch Behar. Yes; the prohibition will be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. There is reason to think that to a certain extent alcohol has been substituted for these drugs. This is due to a desire on the part of the people to imitate the Western nations. The proof is to be found in the decrease of the consumption of these drugs and an increase in the consumption of alcohol. 37. There is no difference in kind, but in degree. 38. No difference in kind or degree. 39. Smoking is less injurious. In smoking, the fire destroys some of the intoxicating matter. 40. Ganja and siddhi are prescribed by some schools of native doctors in the treatment of cer- tain diseases, such as chronic dysentery, skin diseases, etc. 41. They are digestive and give staying-power in severe exertions or exposure, to alleviate fatigue; also as a febrifuge in malarious, damp, and un- healthy tracts. It is the moderate habitual use. 42. I do not know. 43. Yes. 44. It is refreshing and intoxicating. It sti- mulates hunger. The effect lasts for about three hours. There are no after-effects. Yes; want produces longing and uneasiness. 45. They do not impair the constitution if the consumers are well fed; otherwise ganja smoking impairs the constitution and produces dysentery. It does not generally impair the moral sense or induce laziness. In several cases ganja produces insanity. It produces insanity sometimes of harmless type. It is at first temporary; but if the habit is indulged in, it becomes permanent. The symptoms may be reinduced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. Drinkers of siddhi or bhang generally talk too much to themselves and laugh. Yes; they gen- erally confess. Mental anxiety and weakness of the brain induce insanity when followed by use of the ganja. No instances occurred to me. 46. The excessive use leads to the effects re- ferred to above. 47. I do not think it is hereditary. 48. The above reply will apply. 49. I do not know. It does not produce im- potence. 50. I do not know. 51 and 52. (a) No. (b) No connection. 53. No. I do not know of any such case. 54. No. 55. Yes; they do it occasionally. I do notknow. 56. I cannot say. Confirmed smokers some- times mix dhatura to induce sufficient intoxi- cation. 57. Have no experience. 58. The present system is working well. 59. No improvement is suggested. 60. Ganja is not produced in the Kuch Behar State. 61. Charas is not produced here. 62. No; should not be controlled. 63. No. 64. I am for doing away with all restrictions. 65. Yes, reasonable; but it would be better if there were no taxes at all. 66. If there be any taxes at all, it is necessary that the rates should be different, inasmuch as they contain the intoxicating elements in differ- ent proportions. 67. No objection. 68. No. Such houses should not be opened. 69. The people here are consulted before any new shop is opened. Yes, local public opinion ought to be considered. 70. There are no facts regarding the import- ation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States. The duty is really paid. Wild bhang is not taxed here, nor is it sold in the bazar. 95. Evidence of BABU GIRINDRA MOHAN CHUCKERBUTTY, Brahmin, Munsiff, Comilla (Tippera). 1. Very little, I will therefore answer those questions only for which I am competent. 3. I thought it so; grows in Rajshahi, Bhagal- pur, and Monghyr. 7. (a) Ganja. Naogaon sub-division, Rajshahi district. (c) Bhang. Bhagalpur and Monghyr. 13. Naogaon (Rajshahi). 14. (a) Ganja. Naogaon sub-division, Rajshahi. 20. Poor labouring classes, especially the Banias (aborigines settled in the Lower Provinces). 27. Those who are accustomed to hard manual labour. 31. (a) Easily formed. (b) Difficult to break off. (c) Not necessarily. 32. At Durga Puja time or Bijaya Dashami day, as a religious custom in many Bengal districts, bhang is drunk in small quantities. Thereby no habit is formed. It is regarded as an essential custom in those districts. 33. The consumption of ganja and charas is regarded as a very bad habit, except in the case of religious mendicants. The reason for the dis- repute is the bad after-effects thereof. 34. Yes, in many cases. 35. (a) No. (b) Yes. (f) Yes, (a) in many cases. 43. Not always. 51. Habitual poor ganja smokers are in many cases found addicted to theft from sheer necessity. 53. It does sometimes. 58. So far as I know, I think the system is working well in Bengal.
255 96. Evidence of BABU SREENATH CHATTERJEE, Brahmin, Cashier, Public Works Department, Darjeeling Division. 1. Occasional association with sadhus and chelas (Neophytes), of different sects of Hindu religion, who generally use either ganja, bhang or charas, and my personal knowledge of the district, for a long period. 2. By the names of ganja, bhang, siddhi and charas. 3. District Darjeeling in the lower portions of the Rungit and the Teesta Valleys. They are wild hemp. 4. Generally known by bhang. 5. The elevation of the valleys above referred to is between 500 and 1,200 feet above sea-level. Soil256 56. The admixture of dhatura is used occasion- ally for personal consumption and for administra- tion to others. A Brahmin leper of my native village used dhatura for personal consumption. 57. I do not know. 66. In my own opinion I prefer different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja, according to the qualities. 97. Evidence of BABU HARA GOPAL DUTTA, Kayasth, Retired Excise Daroga, Mymensingh. 1. I have served in the Excise Department for about thirty-two years. The whole period of my service has been spent within Mymensingh district. 2. Ganja and, bhang are not produced from thesame plant. Seeds are seen in all the varieties of ganja sold in this district. With the exceptions noted above, the definitions may be accepted. 3. Bhang grows spontaneously in Mymensingh district. It grows in abundance here. 4. Bhang. 5. I cannot answer. 6. Scattered. 7. (a) At Rajshahi, but to what extent I am not aware. (b), (c) and (d) Nil. 8. I am not aware of any increase or decrease. 9 to 12. No information. 13. The cultivation of hemp plant for ganja is restricted to the Rajshahi district. The district was selected as its soil was specially adapted for the growth of ganja. Dry and elevated soil is necessary for the growth of the plant. I am not aware what climatic conditions are required. Ganja loses much of its intoxicating properties if there be any shower in Pous and Magh, i.e., just before reaping the crop. I am not aware if the cultivation of ganja would be impossible in any district. 14. (a) and (b) In Rajshahi district; but I am not aware to what extent it is prepared there. (c) Wild bhang is gathered to a small extent in this district. 15. The ganja plants are cut. They are then trodden under foot or rolled, as the case may be. The small branches are then made into bundles. I am not aware how ganja is prepared from the wild plant. The resinous matter of ganja adheres to the feet of the labourers when they tread on ganja. This resinous matter is collected and forms charas. The wild bhang plants are cut and their leaves gathered. They are then dried in the sun. There are no different preparations of these drugs for smoking, eating and drinking. 16. Bhang is prepared by the people in their own houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. I do not know if ganja and charas can be prepared in the same way. 17. No information. 18. Ganja and bhang both deteriorate in their intoxicating properties by keeping. I am not aware if they quite lose their effect with time. Ganja keeps good for a year and a half and bhang for a year. The resinous matter in the drugs gradually dries up. This is the cause of deteriora- tion. If the drugs be kept in air-tight boxes and exposed to the sun occasionally, the deterioration may to a great extent be prevented. 19. Ganja is generally smoked; but when an excessive consumer is very much eager for taking the drug, and cannot afford to wait till the neces- sary preparations for smoking are made, he some- times eats ganja, and when his craving is thus to a certain extent satisfied, he proceeds to make the preparations for smoking. I have no experience about charas. 20. Cannot answer. 21. Flat ganja is preferred in this district. In Calcutta and Jessore round ganja is preferred. 22. Charas is not used in this district. 23. The tops of bhang plants are sometimes smoked when ganja cannot be obtained. No parti- cular localities can be mentioned where this prac- tice is in vogue. It is so used by the poorer classes of consumers, who may not have the means to purchase ganja at the time. 24. Cannot answer. 25. The total quantity of ganja consumed is on the decrease, but the number of consumers is on the increase. The increase in the duty of ganja is the principal cause of the decrease in consumption. The number of consumers has increased with the increase in population. 28. (a) One anna or one-sixteenth of a tola; its price varies from 3 to 4½ pice. (b) half a tola; its price varies from 2½ to 3 annas. 29. (a) A leaf of tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja. It destroys the bad smell of ganja. (b) Dhatura is mixed with ganja occasionally by excessive consumers to increase the intoxicating properties. (a) Bhang is ordinarily drunk with black pepper. (b) Other spices are also occasionally mixed with it. 30. Ganja and bhang are generally taken in solitude and rarely in company. Ganja is taken by both sexes; but I have not seen any female take bhang. Ganja and bhang are generally taken by adults and old men. It is not usual for children to take ganja or bhang. 31. The habit of consuming ganja and bhang is easily formed. It is difficult to break off the habit when once formed. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. Ganja is required for Troilokya Nath's mela and Tinlok's sinni. A number of ganja con- sumers are assembled on such occasions and a pre- scribed story is repeated and ganja is consumed. Sweets are also taken. The use of ganja on these occasions is compulsory. The consumption on such occasions is generally excessive, and may lead to the formation of the habit. 33. The consumption of ganja is generally re- garded with contempt. The public opinion is unfavourable to the consumption of the drug. It makes people irritable and hot-tempered. This is the reason why people look down upon the
257 consumption of the drug. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the drug. 34. It would be a serious privation to those classes who live by manual labour. They would not be able to work as hard as they are now able if they be not allowed to indulge in the drug. I can give no idea as to the probable numbers of each class. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and bhang. Many of the ganja consu- mers would be attacked with various sorts of dis- eases. Bhang is in many cases used for its medi- cinal properties, so the use of the drugs cannot be prohibited. If the use of the drug is prohibited there would be illicit consumption. It would be impossible to enforce the prohibition. The prohi- bition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, but such discontent will not amount to a political danger. The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to any other drugs. 36. No. 37. I have no experience about charas. 38. Flat ganja produces a greater amount of intoxication than either round or chur. 39. Eating ganja is less injurious than smoking. The heat of the smoke gives the body a more dried and parched appearance. 40. Ganja and bhang are both so prescribed. 41. Ganja is beneficial258 As to the names of bhang, I may add the follow- ing:259 25. If by the increase of the use of the drugs is meant an increase of their consumption, I think I may safely say that the use of these drugs is on the increase. The drugs are resorted to by two sets of people. With one it is an adjunct to plea- sure, and with the other it is a stimulating neces- sary, which increases staying-power under severe exertion and exposure, which the nature of his vo- cation demands. Those who resort to those articles simply for pleasure may change their taste and take to alcoholic drinks. But the cheapness of the products of Cannabis indica is an inducement which people of the other class cannot withstand. No other stimulant is quite so cheap, and there- fore so accessible, to those of limited means than ganja and its congeners; besides, ganja is so im- mediate in its effects. With the development of trade and increase of the earnings of the labourer the use is increasing, for the number of labourers is increasing with the increase of trade. I have already stated that with certain classes ganja and its congeners are articles more of necessity than of luxury. Add to this the religious scruples against the use of alcoholic drinks, which go a great way. A mendicant who does not belong to the Aghori sect or to the Tantrik liturgy would not touch wine, and with him, therefore, the only cheap in- toxicating principle is ganja. Charas is more expensive than ganja, and there- fore is not quite so commonly used. Bhang is the cheapest of all, and, being mixed with some other condiments, is fancied to be a cooling draught, and has not therefore that ignominy attached to it which ganja and charas have. 26. Bhang, Out of 1,000 consumers. Habitual. 200 Occasional. 800 Moderate. 175 Excessive. 25 Moderate. 775 Excessive. 25 Ganja and Charas.Habitual. 95 Out of 100 consumers. Occasional. 5 Moderate. 70 Excessive. 25 Moderate. 2 Excessive. 3 27. Bhang.Habitual. 200 Occasional. 800 Moderate. 175 Excessive. 25 Moderate. Excessive. 775 25 I. Hindustanis and Marwaris (150) I. Mendicants (20). Almost all Hindus. Pleasure-seekers. 1. Shopkeepers. II. Pleasure-seekers (5). 2. Traders. 3. Brokers. 4. Darwans. 5. Sepahis. 6. Palwans (athletes). 7. Priests. 8. Bankers. II. Uriyas (15). III. Bengalis (10). Ganja.Habitual. Occasional. Moderate. Excessive. Moderate. Excessive. I. Labourers. I. Mendicants. I. Labourers. I. Mendicants. 1. Cart and hackney carriage II. Perverted bhadralok. II. Pleasure-seekers. II. Perverted persons. drivers and syces. 2. Boatmen and fishermen. 3. Coolies, carriers, and bearers. 4. Hindustani, etc., traders, shopkeepers, and brokers. 5. Darwans. 6. Factory workmen. 7. Carpenters and smiths. 8. Masons. 9. Stone-workers. II. Mendicants. III. Perverted bhadralok (i.e., people of the gentleman class). Charas.Habitual. Occasional. Moderate. Excessive. Moderate. Excessive. I. Mendicants. Pleasure-seekers. Labourers. Pleasure-seekers. II. Pleasure-seekers. 2 N 2
260 29. Ordinarily black pepper and anise-seed are used in the preparation of bhang for drinking purposes. Those who can afford add kasni seeds and lesser cardamoms. Dhaturá seeds are added by those who require exceptionally strong potation; the ordinary ingredients mentioned above are mixed, some for giving a flavour to the drink, and the black pepper to give a taste. I do not know of any preparation known as bhang massálá, but I do know of a collection of certain ingredients sold in the bazar as bhang massálá. They generally consists of:261 that they have been discriminating between the effects of the two, but because of the two the alcoholic drink is fashionable, and has a kind of eclât attached to it which the indigenous drug has not. The tinkling of glass, the sparkling of liquor, and the dish of fruits displayed on a table with ice and sodawater has not only a European look about it, but is quite so decent, so neat, and so nice. Compare the above scene with a couple of lotas, a thick stick and a sandstone bowl, the paraphernalia of a bhang-drinker; or if the con- sumer has a luxurious inclination, his luxury cul- minates in the addition to the drug of a handful of sugar and a cupful of milk, the total cost of all which never exceeds the value of a bumper toast. Of the ganja-smoker, his greatest luxury consists in soaking the ganja for about an hour or so in a little rose-water. The chillum, the little earthen funnel-shaped utensil, remains all the same, a millionaire draws his puff of blue smoke or a faqir finishes his pull by a flash from the chillum. The second cause of this alcoholic substitute is the greater accessibility of the article. Retail shops of alcoholic liquors have been opened almost in every quarter, and the article has been brought temptingly to the door of the buyer. 40. Yes. Bhang enters into the preparation of several native medicines, and is frequently used in veterinary treatment. Ganja-smoking is pre- scribed in asthmatic complaints. 41. (a) Bhang is frequently used in small doses as a food accessory and digestive, and it has been seen to cure certain dyspeptic and diarrh262 labour on land as well as in water and find relief after such work. 28. As stated by the vendors, the average cost in the case of a habitual moderate consumer is one or two pice a day, and in the case of a habitual excessive consumer about four pice with regard to the ganja drug only. 29. By almost all the classes tobacco or doktais mixed with the ganja to make it more agree- able. Tobacco or gurak tamak is mixed with charas for the same. In preparing majum, a kind of sweetmeat, con- sisting of milk, sugar and siddhi or bhang, a little dhatura or dhuntara is sometimes mixed to make it strong. 30. All these drugs are sometimes used in company and sometimes in solitude, according to the circumstance; the greater number in company. It is generally confined to the male sex and seldom to the female sex. There is no limit of age. Rare cases are seen amongst children to use any of these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming each of these drugs is easily formed. No doubt it is somewhat difficult to break off when a man once gets into the habit of using any of these drugs, but it is not so diffi- cult as in the case of opium. There is some tendency in case of each of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive but not as a rule. 32. It is the custom amongst the Sanyasis or votaries of Siva to smoke the ganja and some- times to drink the siddhi, It is considered to be essential. It is generally excessive. It forms a habit, but not so injurious in their cases. 33. The use of ganja is regarded as a bad habit by the public, because its effects are sometimes injurious. 34. It would be no doubt a privation, though not very serious, to the consumers amongst the lower labouring class of men to forego the consump- tion of the ganja they use, because they require it after hard labour for relief. Their number, however, is not very great. 35. I do not think that it would be feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs, specially ganja. If prohibited, the consumers will try, if possible, to consume illicitly. I do not know in what way it could be enforced. The prohibition no doubt would occasion serious discontent among the con- sumers. I do not think that such discontent would amount to a political danger. The prohibi- tion no doubt would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 37. The difference between the effects of charas smoking and that of smoking ganja, is said to be this263 service. I do not think I have seen a ganja case for twenty years. I saw some cases in the early years of my service; but I have no notes of them. I think that a man's memory ought not to be trusted after twenty years. My evidence would therefore be hardly worth recording. I have only two cases in my mind. The one was in 1865 and the other in 1870 or 1871. My practice since then has not brought any case before me. My statement before the Opium Commission, that to turn from opium to ganja or alcohol is a very much worse state than the first, was based on the impres- sion that a man under the influence of the excessive use of opium was quiet and only wished to be let alone, while the man under the influence of the excessive use of ganja was liable to become irritable and, according to the great bulk of authority, liable to become insane. As I have never had charge of an asylum, I cannot speak of this from my own experience; but I have lately been making inquiry and find that in a large number of the cases in which ganja is put down as the cause of insanity the only evidence has been a statement by the police that the man was addicted to ganja. The result of my inquiry has been rather to shake my previous belief, which was founded not on expe- rience, but on authority, on books. 101. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL C. J. W. MEADOWS, Civil Surgeon and Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Berhampur. Oral evidence. I have had twenty-four and a half years' ser- vice, all but two years being in civil employ. I have been in charge of the Dacca Asylum for four years, of the Patna Asylum for one year, and of the Berhampur Asylum for three years. I was on leave in 1891-92. I had no special experience of insanity at home. I cannot say that I have made insanity a speciality in this country. It is very difficult for the ordinary practitioner to make anything a speciality here. He has too much work to do of all kinds. I have found no literature on the subject of insanity from hemp drugs. I searched in vain last May when writing a report. The General Register is filled up by the Deputy Superintendent, Mohendro Nath Rai, who has been twenty years in this asylum in this capacity. He has no medical qualifications. He fills it up all in his own handwriting. There is no entry by anyone else for twenty years. He fills it up from the descriptive roll. Whatever is in the descrip- tive roll is copied out accurately. There is no deviation from the descriptive roll if that docu- ment gives information. Only when the descrip- tive roll is blank is any entry made in the re- gister differing from it. He assures me that this is his invariable practice. And no alterations are ever made in his entries. When the descriptive roll is blank in any particular, he is allowed to fill in that blank when he can get information from the lunatic or from what I have noted in the case book. Sometimes the blank cannot be filled up at all. The information he gets is as a rule from the lunatic. Sometimes it is from relations or friends who may come to see him, but that is very rare. Most of the lunatics have no friends, or they do not come to see them. The friends are never kept for me to see. We never refer to the Magistrate for further information. The entry in column 9 ("Mental disease") is copied from the case book. That is filled in as soon as the case is diagnosed or there are sufficient grounds to come to an opinion about it. It is not an easy matter. That is the only entry that is copied from the case book. The case book is wholly written up by me, including the abstract of the papers which is entered in each case. It is from the General Register that the annual statements are prepared. Statement VII is com- piled from column 11, "Alleged cause." This column 11 contains the entry in the descriptive roll if there is any such entry. If it is blank, then, if the Deputy Superintendent can ascertain the cause from the lunatic or his friends, he tills it in. If not, it remains blank. The Deputy Superintend- ent puts questions to the lunatic, such as, "Do you smoke ganja or take bhang?" or, "What is the cause of your insanity?" He puts such leading questions and tries to get a history out of him. He considers that he should fill in as much information as he can. We do not now accept the cause thus assigned so readily as we used to do. Since attention has been so much attracted to ganja during last year we are much more care- ful. I try to ascertain, before accepting ganja as the cause, that the type is like ganja, and that it was indeed the probable cause. I did not do that before my attention was thus specially drawn to the matter of ganja: formerly I should have been inclined to accept ganja as the cause if it was mentioned or the use of the drug was acknow- ledged. It seemed a reasonable cause, and there was considerable pressure to assign cause. I believe that it was the habit in this asylum to accept ganja in this way without going particularly into the matter up to last year. The Deputy Superin- tendent assures me that this was his experience. Up to last year the entries ragarding the cause of insanity have depended on the descriptive rolls and the inquiries made by the Deputy Super- intendent, except that if a case occurred where the entry of cause was evidently wrong, a note would no doubt be made. I can call to mind no such case. The Deputy Superintendent says he remembers no case of alteration of any entry on such grounds. No one thought these entries of any importance, or else more care would have been taken about them. Now I am endeavouring to be accurate about cause, in respect to ganja particularly. First of all I see the type of insanity, the behaviour of the man, etc., to see whether it is consistent with insanity produced by ganja. Acute mania with violence, raving, peculiar appearance of the eyes (a wild look difficult to describe, but once seen not easily forgotten), etc., is the usual type of hemp drug insanity These cases usually get well in a couple of months, often a fortnight. I think the general appearance is more typical than anything else264 continues much longer. The tendency in acute mania due to ganja is to recover when the man is kept away from the drug and kept quiet and pro- perly treated with sedatives. This is not as a rule the case with acute mania due to other causes. My attention has never been directed to transient mania, though I know scientists make this sub- division. I have not seen a case. I lay stress on the rapidity of recovery as a diagnostic mark of hemp drug insanity. It would tend to strengthen my diagnosis. As a rule these cases are due to a great outburst, a debauch. The man who takes ganja in excess for years does not always recover in this way. His case may go on to chronic mania. This is not a very frequent case, not so frequent as the other. I have never seen a case in India of acute alcoholic poisoning. I have at home. I think there would be an analogy be- tween these cases due to a ganja debauch and such a case. I do not see the analogy between ganja cases and advanced delirium tremens. They may be like the first day or two of delirium tremens,but I have not noticed in them the symptoms you find later in delirium tremens. I have never (as far as I remember) made a post mortem examina- tion of brains in ganja cases, nor heard of one. As Civil Surgeon I have had these cases of acute mania from ganja before me under observa- tion, but very seldom. I had only one last year. I remember also a private patient about twelve years ago. These are the only cases I can remem- ber as sent to me for observation. As a rule the cases coming to the asylum are still in acute stage unless they come from the jail or another district. The acute stage is generally past. It lasts from a fortnight to a month, more or less. I have noticed in the eyes the peculiar staring expression and glitter I have referred to. I have not noticed redness of eye; I am unable to say from memory anything about the pupils; I have never ex- amined the reflexes. When the acute symptoms have passed off any certain diagnosis is impossible. You cannot speak with any certainty, so far as my observation goes. I should then be guided by what the man said, checked by my record of the case. He is fit to give information. He generally says: "Some- body gave me a drug and I went mad," or some- thing of that kind. The lunatic (even when tem- porarily sane) varies his statement, however, on these subjects from day to day. There is an absence of typical symptoms; I do not remember any symptoms of ganja insanity visible in a chronic case. My view of toxic insanity is that it is insanity due to a toxic cause. If ganja is the cause, there- fore, the case should be shown as toxic insanity. I do not attach much value to the information we receive as to cause. The police put down any- thing they hear or think. Some of the descrip- tive rolls are utterly absurd. Some contain no- thing. Some contain absolute absurdity. As to the diagnosis or statements as to cause they are generally quite ridiculous. It is a most difficult thing to ascertain cause. We give cause too often ourselves, It is insisted on, and we are constrained to enter cause before it has been properly ascer- tained. The information we get and the state- ments of insane persons give too often no ade- quate ground for a statement regarding cause. It is just possible that two-thirds of the entries as to cause may be correct. Certainly that would be the outside. At least one-third of the entries are misleading. 102. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL W. FLOOD MURRAY, Civil Surgeon, Shahabad. 1. I have been for twenty-four years serving in India; had medical charge of Native regiments, jails, lunatic asylums. 2. In this part of the country the flat ganja of Dr. Prain is called jatta, the round is called kulli, and the broken, chur. The processes for making ganja described by Dr. Prain are more or less fol- lowed in this part of the country. 19. Besides being used for smoking and drink- ing both ganja and bhang are used as external applications to relieve pain by native baids (the ganja or the bhang is mixed with other drugs and put in a piece of cloth, then beaten and applied to the painful part). 23. Bhang is very seldom used for smoking purposes and only by those who, being habitual ganja smokers, happen by chance to be unable to procure their ganja. Bhang when used for smok- ing produces a weak kind of intoxication; is less intoxicating than ganja. 28. (a) Habitual consumers, moderate 1 anna: (b) hard consumers, 8 to 12 annas. 29. Generally tobacco leaf (the form of tobacco used for eating) is mixed with ganja, and some- times smoking tobacco. In this part of the country none of the drugs mentioned are mixed with ganja at the time of smoking. Many things are used with bhang, such as flowers of roses, melon seeds, etc., but I know of no preparation sold for the purpose. 30. A convivial party is not a necessity for the consumption of either ganja or bhang; they are both taken in solitude. The practice is mainly confined to the male sex and seldom indulged in by children, though I have met instances of young boys smoking ganja. 31. The habit of smoking ganja and drinking bhang is easily formed. If a man has a little determination, he can easily break off the habit. In my experience there is not the same tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the exces- sive as in other practices, though such, cases may now and again occur. 32. The use of these drugs has nothing to do with religion, and no ceremony, social or religious, enjoins their use. 36. I do not think so, certainly not in the mufassal. Whether it is so in large towns, such as Calcutta, I can't say. Many orthodox Hindus who use bhang would never touch alcohol. 39. The worst form is ganja smoking. According to the Sanskrit Vaidak, smoking ganja and charas is very injurious to the heart, lungs and brain. I have seen myself individuals who were suffering with asthma and weakened heart from the pro- longed use of ganja, and numbers suffering from insanity said to have been brought on by the same cause. In all such cases the drug was pro- bably consumed in excess. My reasons for suppos- ing that in most of such cases there had been
265 excess, is the number of people who indulge not only in bhang drinking but also in ganja smoking with apparent impunity. This morning in the Arrah Jail I took at random a gang of 48 prison- ers, and of these 10 were ganja smokers, 8 con- sumed bhang, and 30 were addicted to neither practice. Their state of health on admission to jail was recorded as follows:266 native hakim brought me one case of asthma and this case also had a weakened heart. I believe the man is dead since. I had only the history of the case from the native hakim. I had not the case under observation. I do not know how much the man consumed. But I believe he was a large consumer. I examined the man and found he had asthma; but I am not prepared to assert of my own knowledge that this was due to ganja. That was merely the history I got. If I had not been told that it was the result of ganja, I should never have known anything about it. There was another case. I do not remember who brought it. The circumstances were much the same. In this case also I was guided by the history. The general statement, as contained in my written answer, is a statement made to me by this hakim and others to whom I applied for information. My own experience in no way corroborates it. As to insanity, I would refer to my answer No. 45, which shows that my view is based on my asylum experience. I have no experience apart from that. I have never been consulted in any case in which I have been told that the man was suffering from the effects of ganja, either insanity or other illness. My general impression is that ganja is an exciting cause of insanity, as alcohol is. Probably in most cases there is a weak brain, which the ganja acted on, or a tendency to in- sanity. I cannot say that it may hot also origi- nate the disease. In fact, when taken in excess, I believe it does. I can do no more than state these general impressions. I may add that my general impression in regard to ganja is that, considering the numbers that use it, the injury it does is infinitesimal, and that, with good food, ganja in slight quantities never does harm. As to bhang, large numbers of people take it without injury hereabouts. 103. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. F. P. MCCONNELL, Professor of Materia Medica, etc., Medical College, Calcutta. 1. No special opportunities, only such as have arisen in connection with my duties as a Medical Officer serving in Lower Bengal for over twenty- two years. 2. Siddhi.267 specially sought for with the microscope. Mi- croscopic examination would be essential for the detection of these changes. Except that both alcohol and hemp drugs are exhilarants or inebriants, these two intoxicants are not analogous. It is in the objective symp- toms they produce that they are analogous. I understand that I am being examined exclusively about the medicinal and pathological effects of the drugs. I consider that physiologically they act in a different way. In the smaller doses both hemp and alcohol are exhilarant. The effects of larger doses of hemp are distinctly narcotic, whereas alcohol is not a narcotic, but induces a condition of coma when taken in large quantities. This condition is one from which an individual would be aroused with much difficulty, whereas the narcotic effects of Indian hemp are transient and of short duration. Here I speak of the medicinal use of the drug as a narcotic, not of the use of the drug otherwise. I am discussing solely medicinal effects. Alcohol would produce hyperæmia of the brain. This condition, if allowed to continue, gives rise to structural changes. Hyperæmia from any cause, if allowed to continue, will give rise to structural changes. I do not experimentally know what the structural changes produced by hyperæmia through hemp drugs are; but assuming that they are produced, I should say that it would not be possible to distinguish them from those produced by alcohol. 104. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL A. CROMBIE, M.D., Surgeon- Superintendent, General Hospital, Calcutta. 1. Chiefly as Superintendent of the Dacca Lunatic Asylum for seven years, and Member of Standing Committee for advising Government with regard to criminal lunatics. 2. I have no experience except with regard to the smoking of ganja. 3. and 14. I offer no observations in these chapters (II and III). 19. In Dacca and Eastern Bengal the use of hemp is confined almost exclusively to the smok- ing of ganja. 20. Ganja is smoked to a large extent by the boatmen, but also by the agricultural classes generally. 21. I believe flat ganja is mostly used. 23. I think not in Eastern Bengal. 24. Very few in Eastern Bengal do either. 25. I am not aware of any increase, but the statistics of the Eastern districts would prove this. They are not available to me. 27. The boatmen have very long hours. They work in the sun and rain from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M., snatching one meal at 11 A.M. They believe that ganja-smoking gives them the necessary en- durance. 28. I do not know. 29. I do not think it is much mixed. 30. Mostly in company. Mainly confined to males; never children. 31. Easily formed. I do not think there is much tendency for the moderate to extend into the excessive use. Not so much so as in the case of opium. 32. I cannot give any trustworthy evidence on this point. 33. I think it is generally regarded as harmless and its excessive use only as disreputable. I cannot answer the other parts of the question. 34. It would be regarded as a hardship. 35. I think it is not feasible on account of the growth of the wild plant. I believe the prohi- bition would lead to extended recourse to alcohol and opium. Alcohol is more harmful than ganja in all respects, but opium much less so. 36. I do not know. 37. I only know the effects of ganja-smoking. 38. I am not aware of it. 39. I have had no opportunities of comparison. 40. Yes; preparations of ganja are much used in the treatment of dysentery and asthmatic affections. 41. (a) and (b) These are the purposes for which it is habitually used. (c) I am not aware that it has any preventive or febrifuge properties. 42. In the vast majority of cases the habitual use of ganja produces no appreciable bad effect either bodily or intellectually. A ganja-smoker is not distinguishable from a non-smoker. 43. No; only exceptionally. 44. It is refreshing; it does not produce in- toxication. It enables him to do a long day's hard work on one meal. It is usually taken in repeated whiffs throughout the day, I have not seen any after-effects in these cases, and I have spent days in company with native boatmen habitually using ganja in moderation. 45 and 46. (a), (b), (c), (d) I am not aware of any, but if any were produced the use would no longer be moderate, but excessive. (e), (f), (g) When smoked in company by young men it may readily be a source of laziness, immo- rality and debauchery, but not so when smoked as by hardworking boatmen. Nearly 30 per cent. of the inmates of lunatic asylums in Bengal are per- sons who have been ganja-smokers, and in a very large proportion of these I believe ganja to be the actual and immediate cause of their insanity; but though I am not prepared to say that moderate use of ganja is never the cause of insanity, it is most frequently the result of long excessive use, and especially of occasional debauches with the drug. It has much the same relationship to insanity in India that alcohol has in Europe, and may be the cause of fierce maniacal excitement of short duration (as in delirium tremens) or of a chronic cheerful mania which is the characteristic insanity of Indian asylums. It has not the same tendency to lead to dementia, the result of tissue changes in the brain, as alcohol has. Like alcohol it will especially lead to insanity in per- sons of deficient self-control, who take to the drug as a relief from mental trouble. Both forms of ganja insanity, the acute and chronic, are distin- guishable by the symptoms (see separate memo).* 47 and 48. I have no means of forming an opinion on this question. * Appended. 2 0 2
268 49. I understand that it is used for this purpose, and is popularly believed to have this effect It is used by prostitutes, but I do not know if it is so used for this purpose. I am not aware that it leads to impotence. A Bengali metrical proverb, published by Dr. Morison, of Rajshahi, is to the following effect:269 nal lunatics. I was also the author of the rules drawn up by the Committee of 1888 regarding the disposal of criminal lunatics. I have no other experience of insanity apart from this and no special training in the subject. I have visited asylums at home, but never held charge of one. In my practice outside of lunatic asylums my experience is confined to very few cases270 use generally. I believe that the habit of using ganja moderately is absolutely harmless; but I think even the moderate use of alcohol is liable to produce tissue changes in the long run. Further, I here refer entirely to the native com- munity; and it is my observation that when a native takes to alcohol it is extremely difficult for him to remain moderate; and in life assurance work, of which I have a good deal, I always advise an extra premium in the case of any native who indulges in alcohol even in the most moderate way, and utterly refuse to accept a native life if there is evidence of the consumption of alcohol to any considerable extent, which would still be con- sidered moderate in the case of Europeans. This of course refers only to the upper classes who come for life assurance. But my experience leads me to hold the same view of the effects of alcohol on the lower classes. A native who takes to liquor is lost. This is founded on my hospital experience and my experience as a medical practitioner. I am decidedly of opinion that in Bengal alcohol is absolutely evil. I am aware of the large extent to which alcohol is used in Bengal. It is used probably more than ganja. It is difficult to say, because ganja is so much cheaper. As regards the excessive use, I would still place alcohol first. I regard it as most deleterious. This is a comparison of evils; and I think that the evils of alcohol seem to me to over-balance al- together the evils of ganja. I would instance my own darwan, who takes ganja or bhang in excess, but is always at his post and capable of doing his duty. If he took alcohol in excess to the same extent hewould be useless to me and utterly untrustworthy. Then I think also that the social evils of alcohol in excess are much greater. The excessive use of ganja in this country would never lead to the misery produced by the excessive use of alcohol, say, in Scotland or London. The effect of the excessive use of ganja may be to produce a sudden outburst of violence which would naturally lead to the incarceration of the man in an asylum. This is not the character and result of alcoholic excess. It leads to more chronic misery. Alcohol also produces disease of almost every internal organ and premature death. Dysentery is attributed to ganja; but I do not know of any good ground for that belief. There is no reason that I know of in the known physiological action of the drug to believe that it should cause dysentery. Chest affections are also attributed to ganja; but I have no reliable information to give on that subject. I know of no other disease which the drug causes. In regard to opium, I would distinguish be- tween opium-eating and opium-smoking, taking first opium-smoking. Like ganja, opium is smoked in company, and it is therefore an incen- tive to idleness, dissipation, and bad company, with all its results; and I believe that the habit of smoking opium obtains a firmer hold on the smoker than in the case of ganja. It is also very expensive, which ganja is not, and leads sooner to the ruin of the individual and his family. On the other hand, opium-smoking does not lead to the commission of violent acts, and apart from the individual and his family, leads to no general evil as regards the community at large. After his smoke he walks quietly home and does no harm. But the ganja smoker is liable to sudden outbursts of violence, which may lead to murder sometimes of a wholesale kind. My experience leads me to believe that ganja is generally smoked in com- pany. And my statement regarding outbursts of violence from ganja is based on my knowledge of cases which have been before the criminal courts. In regard to opium-eating, the opium- eater is as a rule a respectable, well-doing member of society, who takes his opium pills before leav- ing his house in the morning, goes about his busi- ness, and returns without any apparent effect from the drug. I think there is a respectable use of ganja corresponding to this271 also be remembered that it is difficult to examine a maniac's eyes. But the pupils are certainly not dilated as with belladonna, nor contracted to a pin point as with opium. In these cases of acute mania ganja may be the exciting cause with another cause as predis- posing. Transient mania cannot easily be dis- tinguished from hemp drug mania; but one gets accustomed to the physiognomy of a case of ganja intoxication, by which you recognize the case as one of more than probable ganja mania. The chief points are the extreme vehemence of the symptoms and the alert, excited appearance as of keen intelligence, which is very difficult to describe; and there is the history of ganja. Cases of transient mania occurring in Europe are, how- ever, characterized by extreme violence and homicidal mania; and I do not think there is any one symptom by which cases of transient mania could be distinguished from hemp drug mania. These cases in Europe are very often associated with the use of alcohol. They are attended with homicidal impulses. I am not aware of their occurring in any one class of society. There is in regard to hemp drug mania an ab- sence of any typical symptom. In any indivi- dual case the diagnosis would depend on the history of ganja; but in a series of cases you would anticipate the ganja history, that is, the experience of a series of cases would lead one to predicate ganja; but this would be more or less of an assumption272 lunatics admitted to asylums whose insanity is caused by ganja. But they may be fairly taken to represent the proportion which ganja-smokers bear to the rest of the population of the asylum. That is how I have regarded it. By ganja- smokers I mean people who have used the drug in any degree. What I mean is that as practically every smoker's insanity is attributed in the returns to ganja, the returns really show, not the number who have gone mad from using ganja, but merely the number of lunatics who are also ganja- smokers or have used the drug. That is all I find in the returns. To ascertain the effects of ganja in producing insanity it would be necessary to compare this proportion of ganja-smokers inside the asylum with the proportion of ganja- smokers in the outside population. That is, if the proportion of smokers outside was ten per cent. and the proportion of smokers inside was thirty per cent., then two-thirds of the ganja-smokers inside the asylum may legitimately be taken as insane through ganja. I could give no reliable idea whatever as to what is the proportion outside. That is a matter for native evidence mainly. Therefore I can give no reliable idea as to the amount of insanity really due to ganja. On the other hand, I believe myself that it is a cause of insanity in many cases. The only justification of the comparison of these proportions inside and outside the asylum is that ganja is an ascertained cause of insanity in a certain number of cases. In comparing these proportions we would have to remember the classes from which the lunatics come to our asylums. Taking now the records shown me of all the so-called ganja cases admitted in Dacca in 1887 (my last year) I find273 Faridpur with a certificate from the Civil Sur- geon, dated 19th June 1877. This certificate stated that he "has a vacant look, is slow and hesitating in his speech, does not sleep much, re- mains in one position quietly for hours together, does not speak to anybody unless questioned, and sometimes cries. In fact he has the look of a confirmed lunatic, although he had no fit of excite- ment while in this jail. He has been sent to jail for having killed six of his relatives in a fit of excitement." The Descriptive Roll, dated 6th June, signed by the District Superintendent of Police and forwarded with the lunatic, showed that he had been insane "two months"; that "pre- vious to arrest he was addicted to opium and ganja"; that the cause assigned for his insanity was "his mother's death, as well as addiction to ganja and opium"; and that the circumstances of the case were that "some time before the murders he became deranged in his mind on his mother's death, which, and his addiction to ganja, brought on a fit of insanity under which the crime was committed." In their letter No. 11 of 25th March 1878, the Visitors of the Dacca Asylum reported that the man "is now rational and fit to stand his trial." Under orders of the Local Government he was accordingly forwarded to Goalundo to be tried. He was acquitted on the ground of insanity, and readmitted to the Asylum under the orders of the Local Government, com- municated in Judicial Department letter No. 2947, dated 19th July 1878. In their letter No. 111, dated 27th June 1885, the Visitors reported to the Local Government that they "are of opinion that he continues sane as reported in January last, and beg to draw attention to their recommenda- tion that he be discharged." The Government ordered that he be employed in a jail as a work- overseer or servant on light labour. He left the Asylum accordingly. The records of the criminal case have also been perused. They show that this man was charged with having, on 23rd April 1877, caused the death of his father, grandmother, brother, and three sisters. The Naib of the village gave evidence that after receiving the information from the prisoner, and seeing that the house was burnt down with the six dead bodies in it, he asked the prisoner why he had done this. "He said, 'I did it because I chose. What will they eat?' * * I had heard that since prisoner's mother's death prisoner had been strange in his manner. He would not speak to people, but would sit still moping. On the day previous to this occurrence the father mentioned this fact to me. Up to the time of the mother's death the prisoner appeared to me perfectly sane and rational. * * I had heard that prisoner used to take both ganja and opium. His father several times told me of this. I do not know what prisoner meant by saying, 'what will they eat ?' His family are in comfort- able circumstances. I suppose prisoner meant that when his mother was gone who was to feed them; but I cannot tell." The next witness was a near neighbour, who said, "I knew Kailash well. He used to get drunk with ganja and opium. After his mother's death he became pagal, would not speak to any one, would laugh to himself, would not eat, and used to throw his uttari (mourning garment) away. He did not take ganja during this time. * * I went to inquire about the Shradh. I saw Kailash seated in his bari. He would speak to no one. I told him not to be downcast and pagal;it was his duty to look after the younger members of his family. He was very fond of his mother." A third witness said, "I used to see Kailash frequently. On the evening of the occur- rence, I saw the family. There was a commotion about the Shradh. Preparations were being made * *. After his mother's death, he used to speak to no one and to wander about and some- times throw his uttari away. Before, he was all right. He had stopped taking opium, but tookganja." Another witness, a priest, said, "Kailash is somewhat of a pagal. He has always been a bit of a pagal. Since his mother's death he has been mad. He did not do any of the acts which ought to be done by a person who has lost his mother. Every day I saw him after his mother's death and used to speak to him, but there was no knowing what he said. From his behaviour and acts I should say he had lost his reason. He had a wife. After her death (that was six or seven years before this occurrence) his strangeness in- creased. He was on the best terms with his family, with all of them. It is reported that prisoner used to smoke opium and ganja; but there is also a report that he gave it up." Two other witnesses corroborate this priest. One says, "Even before his mother's death Kailash was half-cracked. After his wife's death he was pagal for a month or so." The prisoner in his examination said he had no recollection of the burning of his bari or of the death of his father and other relatives; that he recollected "something about his mother's death, but not fully," and that he used to take opium and ganja, but had given them up latterly. The Civil Surgeon, Dr. Richards, gave evidence as to the prisoner's insanity. In answer to the Court, he said, "It is quite possible he may have become insane by smoking ganja; but there is nothing particular to show this." The Sub-Inspector of Police showed that the prisoner came and gave information himself, that "he was trembling and in a most excited state, and loudly called out the information which he had to give." He was violent and struck the village Naib for not believing him. He had not been arrested by that time, but was simply walking with the Police and others whom he had called to the bari, and talking over the matter. The Ses- sions Judge in his judgment said, "It is proved that for years prisoner has been peculiar in his behaviour. After his wife's death he was quite mad for a month; and since his mother's death again he has been behaving like a man bereft of his reason. His behaviour before and immediately after the occurrence shows conclusively that he was not responsible for his actions." He accordingly acquitted the prisoner on the ground of insanity. The Judge did not refer to ganja at all as the cause of insanity, or as in any way connected with the crime. 2 P
274 105. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL E. G. RUSSELL, Civil Surgeon, Darjeeling. 1. General observations and some experiments as to physiological effects. 2. Yes. 3. Kamrup, Assam. Fairly abundant. 4. Bhang. 5. None, 6. Scattered. 7. (a) (b) (c) None that I know of, except that in Rajshahi District275 stability probably frequently precede its excessive use, and conduce largely to mental disease. Excessive use of bhang is probably more dele- terious. 47. No. 48. None. 49. (a) Perhaps, of bhang, when used with admixtures of nux-vomica or cantharides. The same may be said of these two drugs if the bhang be omitted. (d) No. 50. (a) Ganja.276 papers contain an account of all that I have done in the way of experiment. Prain, page 65.277 immature (i.e., not arrived at flowering stage) plants used. All parts of the plant, except large stems, used, not merely flowering tops of female plants. 2. Influence of maturity and flowering stage. Compare directions for gathering plants used in medicine. (a) General directions.278 2. Two men were experimented on, Dhanoo, and Bihoo. Both men were habitual users of opium and of ganja. Both had been deprived of use of these drugs for a certain period preceding the time of experiment, viz.:279 In testing ganja and bhang, similar parts undersimilar conditions should be compared, i.e., female flowering tops of each. (4) As to intoxicant effects of ganja smoked compared with ganja drunk (as a fluid preparation), I should say, smoked: drunk :: 1 : 2 roughly. Maximum intensity of effect more quickly reached when ganja drunk. DETAILS OF EXPERIMENTS. DHANOO.280 Experiment 6; on 10th March, 1883281 107. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL RUSSICK LALL DUTT,* Officiating Civil Surgeon, 24-Parganas. 1. Personal observation and experiments and intercourse with persons addicted to hemp habits in Bengal. 2. These definitions are accepted by all. The names used, i. e., siddhi, charas, and ganja, are the local names in Bengal. 19. As far as I know, ganja and charas are only used for smoking. Cases are mentioned where charas has been used for criminal purposes, but no such cases had come under my observation in the course of twenty-two years' service in Bengal, 23. I have never seen bhang used for smok- ing. 28. Answers under respective heads, Ganja. Charas. Bhang or siddhi. (a) 60 to 180 grs. =1/3 tola to 1 tola. 30 to 120 grs. 180 to 360 grs. (b) Varies. 180 to 540 grs. 120 to 360 360 to 1,440 grs. I cannot give the average cost of these drugs, having no knowledge of the market prices. 29. Ganja and charas are ordinarily mixed with dried tobacco. The two drugs are rubbed together with a few drops of water in the palm of the left hand, which in ganja smokers leaves a characteristic brownish black stain, affording a means for detection. This mixture is smoked in pipes. Siddhi or bhang is used in the form of cold infusion in water generally, mixed with black pepper, cucumber, or melon seeds. Hindu- stanis take it in this form. Muhammadans and Bengalis add milk and sugar and rose water occasionally. Dhatura is not infrequently mixed to enhance its intoxicating properties. Siddhi or bhang is used also in the form of majum or sweetmeat with sugar, milk, and rose water. Dhatura is often added, especially by those who resort to crimes with its help. Nux-vomica is added to siddhi by Indian kabirajes or hakims mainly to obtain its aphrodisiac properties. I have never heard of cantharides being used in Bengal, though opium might be used. 30. Beginners smoke ganja or charas in solitude, often with one or two boon-companions. Con- firmed habituals generally resort to shops where they find company. Rich people consume it at home with a few of their companions. Siddhi is seldom used habitually by Bengalis. It is used habitually by Hindustanis, especially the Darwan class. The use of these drugs is very limited in Bengal. A few of the lower classes use it. I have seldom seen children consume them, except in cases where the parents are habitual consumers. Men use the drugs, and not infrequently women of loose morals. Young men between the ages of 15 to 20 begin its use; seldom grown-up adults. 31. It is easy to get into the habit of taking these drugs. There is an invariable tendency for the habit to become excessive, and it is difficult to break off the habit, especially in the case of ganja smoking. 32. On the last day of the Durga Puja, called the Dasami day, it is a social custom to consume the watery infusion of siddhi both among Hindu men and women in Bengal. It is not essential on religious grounds, and it is generally very tem- perate, and does not in the majority of cases lead to the formation of the habit. Latterly it has become the fashion among the men to substitute brandy for it. During the Holi festival all the three drugs are consumed in excess by Hindu- stanis; and as the festival lasts for some days, there is every reason to apprehend that the consumption may lead to the habitual use of these drugs. In my younger days I often observed inferior brands of brandy and rum substituted for hemp, siddhi, and ganja. Drunkenness prevailed among the English-educated people to a very considerable extent, due to religious indifference resulting from a secular education, and to the imitation of European habits. That there was excessive con- sumption of strong waters and meat among the Europeans which the natives followed will be shown by a reference to the reports and works of Drs. C. N. Macnamara and Norman Chevers. The imports of foreign spirits will support the statement I make. Within the last ten to twelve years there has been a reaction against the use of spirits, both among Europeans and natives, due to totally different causes; for while the Europeans consumed less from a knowledge of its deleterious effects in the tropics, the native in addition has been influenced by the revival of Hinduism, Brah- manism, and a purer form of Muhammadanism. Drunkenness still makes sad havoc among Native Christians and certain classes of Hindus. One proof of the abatement or decrease of drunkenness is the lessened prevalence of liver affections and liver abscess at the present time. 37. There is hardly much difference in the effects following the smoking of charas or ganja. Charas is burnt slowly, and takes a little more time for intoxication than ganja. Practically, however, the intoxication follows almost instanta- neously after a long pull or draught. In the case of siddhi taken as a watery infusion intoxication ensues in about half an hour, and is of a more cheerful character than in the other varieties, which from their concentration produce stupefaction and langour or laziness. 39. The smoking of these preparations affects the nervous system directly, and is hence more injurious than eating or drinking. In the latter case the drug is slowly introduced through the digestive system, and exerts its effects slowly. Smoking is more deleterious to the nervous system, and gives rise to emaciation and other well-known symptoms, including insanity, sooner than drink- ing or eating the same drugs. Here, of course, I take the quantity to be equal both for smoking or drinking or eating purposes. 40. Kabirajes and hakims use the drugs exten- sively in the treatment of human diseases. I know nothing of its use in cattle diseases, 41, Medicinal use is admissible only. (a), (b), (c). No. As an intoxicant it can hardly be said to be beneficial. 42. Its use is always harmful, as it tends to increased consumption, 44. In habitual consumers it at first relieves the craving, calms the nervous system, and pro- duces a mild inebriation of a cheerful kind, pro- * Was summoned to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but was unable to appear. 2 Q
282 moting mirth in merry makers, or concentration of the mind in religious devotees. It seldom produces the boisterous hilarity of alcoholism. It creates an appetite, and the inebriation lasts for three hours or so, followed by sleep. No after- effects are noticeable, but considerable uneasiness and discomfort follow the delay or the want in the supply of the customary drug. 45. As I previously observed, the habitual use of these drugs tends in most cases to excess. I have, however, seen several instances in hard- working and active men, where very moderate smoking of ganja or charas or moderate drinking of siddhi in infusion do not produce any appreciable effects. Among singers in Bengal, artizans, and mill workmen moderate habit entails no imme- diately injurious effects, but these moderate cases are seldom long lived. There is in them a slow and insidious undermining process going on in their digestive, respiratory, and nervous systems, which predispose them to acute diseases and cut their lives short. Among these moderate usersweak intellect and a dull moral sense are invari- ably seen. When imperceptibly moderation is exceeded, then symptoms of impairment of the constitution, digestion, and nervous system mani- fest themselves to the skilled observer. By habitual moderate use I understand a couple of smokes a day, or a tola of siddhi in infusion. Individual instances of slight impairment of body and mind I have seen, but I did not record. 46. The use of these drugs tends to excess as previously observed. The effects of siddhi drink- ing are slow, but ultimately merge into those arising from ganja or charas smoking. The smoker of ganja or charas is known by his ap- pearance and habits. He is generally emaciated, and walks slowly by the less frequented paths and parts of roads. He is generally taciturn, inoffen- sive, or skulking in his habits. His face has a sunken appearance, and his eyes are often blood- shot, especially after a smoke, with dilated pupils. Physically, he becomes a ruin; morally, depraved; and mentally inane or insane. Excessive ganja or charas smoking results generally in two series of disorders. In the young and nervous individuals acute mania, followed by dementia. In the con- firmed old habituals there is gradual deteriora- tion of body and mind, great emaciation, nervous disorders, great timidity, followed by impaired digestion, and, finally, an inveterate form of dy- sentery, cirrhosis of lung and liver. Ganja is a prolific source of insanity, curable in the young, but incurable in the old. 47 and 48. Not a hereditary habit, but if children associate with parents habituated in such drugs, they get into the habit. 49. These drugs are feeble aphrodisiacs, and are often used by immoral men and women as well as the upper classes of Muhammadans and Hindus, who from abuse lose their sexual powers. Medi- cinally it is not injurious, and as such it is gener- ally used. Excessive habitual use causes impo- tence. I have seen in more than a dozen in- stances. 50. The results of excessive use have been pre- viously discussed. 56. I have noted that dhatura enhances the narcotic effects of the different preparations of hemp, so does opium; nux-vomica increases their aphrodisiac property, and betelnut, containing a volatile narcotic, behaves like dhatura or opium, but to a very limited extent. 57. I have not seen any instances. 108. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL G. PRICE, Civil Surgeon, Burdwan. 1. During twenty-one years' service in India have frequently come across consumers of hemp drugs, and have conversed with them and with in- telligent natives on the subject. 2. Yes. Bhang or siddhi, ganja, and charas. 19. Ganja is sometimes eaten mixed with betel- nut. This is generally done by excessive smokers when they find that their pipe or two of ganja previously smoked has not produced sufficient effect. The eating of it increases and prolongs the effect. 23. I have been told by a Native Doctor that bhang is sometimes smoked by beginners, becauseit is considerably milder than ganja. Other in- telligent natives with whom I have talked on the subject, all say that it is never smoked. It certainly cannot be a common practice in Lower Bengal. 28. GANJA. CHARAS. BHANG. Amount Cost. Amount. Cost. Amount. Cost. (a) Habitual moder- ate consum- ers. 1/4 vori 1 anna. 1/40 vori. 1 pice. 5/8 vori 1 pice. (b) Habitual exces- sive consum- ers. 2 voris. 8 annas 1/10 vori 1 anna 21/2 voris 1 anna. Vori nearly equals a tola in weight. 29. Dry tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja when smoked, and betelnut when eaten. Moist tobacco is mixed with charas when smoked. Bhang, when drunk, is usually prepared with sugar and water, occasionally with bhang massala. The object of the admixture is to make them more tasty. Bhang massala contains:283 quantities than usual. It is no doubt likely to lead to the formation of the habit. 36. No, I have not heard that such is the case. I have heard of cases, where men formerly in the habit of consuming bazar liquor, have taken to the smoking of ganja, owing to the removal of distilleries from their neighbourhood, and the consequent rise in the price of bazar liquor. 37. The only difference in the effects of charas smoking and ganja smoking is that the former produces headache and the latter does not. The drinking of bhang differs in its effects from both, it produces hilarious intoxication, coming on in quarter to half an hour and lasting eight or twelve to twenty-four hours, whereas the effects of the smoking of ganja or charas are almost immediate, lasting two to three hours, and do not produce the same good-humoured hilarity, but rather more excitement and intoxication of a less pleasing description. 40. Bhang is prescribed by some for bowel and chest complaints. I do not know of any being used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (b) The smoking of ganja does give staying power under severe exertion. Babu Lolit Mohun Rai tells me of a chaprassi of his, who, after a couple of pipes of ganja, can run the whole distance between Burdwan and Chogdighee (twenty-five miles) in an unusually short time. 42. I do not look upon the use of any of these drugs as harmless. I think the tendency is for the habit once commenced to become excessive and harmful. 44. They are all refreshing, produce intoxication, do not allay hunger, but on the contrary increase the appetite. The effects of ganja and charas last about two to three hours, but those of bhang last much longer284 that it is usually imported from Mirzapur; but a better variety comes from Herat. 23. Is not sold for smoking here. 24. The same people who smoke ganja drink bhang; but, being cheaper, bhang is more used by the poor. The quantity of bhang consumed is said to increase in the hot weather, and that of ganja to diminish. This is on account of the cooling properties of bhang as a drink. (a) I cannot ascertain that bhang is eaten habitually here. (b) A large proportion of the lower classes drink it. I hear that all worshippers of Siva take bhang and ganja. 25. There appears to be no appreciable difference. This is stated by ganja sellers. Ganja. Bhang. 26. (a) 45 per cent. 70 per cent. (b) 25 per cent. 15 per cent. (c) 121/2 per cent. 10 per cent. (d) 121/2 per cent. 5 per cent. I cannot vouch for these figures. They are gathered from persons who take the drugs, and others, and can only be approximate. 27. An infusion of bhang is hardly looked on as an intoxicant, and is often taken, especially in the hot weather, by religious mendicants and their pupils, by sepoys, constables, jail warders, etc., and also by the general public. The use of these drugs by persons who are not devotees is probably more common among those exposed to the vicis- situdes of the weather or who have to keep guard at night. 28. Ganja. Bhang. Charas. (a) 2 pice. 1 to 2 pice worth. Not (b) Up to 4annas, 2 annas known. or in some worth. cases a rupee's worth. 2 pice worth is 1 pice worth about 20 is about 90 grains; 4 grains; 2 annas worth annas worth would be 160 is about 720 grains. grains. As regards the quantity consumed, I find by experiment that when ganja is mixed with a small quantity of Turkish tobacco and rolled into a cigarette, the smoke being inhaled into the lungs of a person who has never taken it before, it re- quires three grains to produce any recognisable effect, and five or six grains to produce a decided effect; ten grains produce intoxication. I think, therefore, that the quantities mentioned above are probably correct. 29. Ordinary ganja-smoking285 41. (a) Bhang increases the appetite. (b) Bhang and ganja are both taken for this purpose. (c) As above. Bhang is sometimes given in malarious fever. Soldiers, constables, kahars, field labourers, boat- men and others who work hard whilst exposed to vicissitudes of weather take bhang, or if ganja smokers, ganja. This refers both to moderate occasional smokers and habitual users of the drug. Bhang is the recognised native remedy for fatigue in men and animals. 42. Bhang taken habitually in moderation is harmless; but it is said that ganja taken habit- ually, even in small quantities, is apt to cause dyspepsia and weakness. Habitual smokers become emaciated and bad tempered. I can give no reasons. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect is stated to be refresh- ing, exhilarating, and to increase the appetite. The effects last from two to four hours. There appear to be but slight after-effects, and, unless among habitual consumers, no longing is produced. It is stated that the effects of bhang are more lasting than those of ganja. I experimented on myself and found that, in the case of a person not used to ganja, the smoking in cigarettes of 3 grains, the smoke being inhaled into the lungs, produced slight singing in the ears. The smoke of 5 and 6 grains inhaled into the lungs caused singing in the ears, feeling of heat and oppression in cardiac region, rapid pulse, and at intervals a feeling of apprehension of disaster. Visions of all kinds float before the eyes, changing rapidly, of bright or sparkling appearance. The hand was steady, and by an effort the visions, etc., could be dismissed from the mind. The inhalation of the smoke of 10 grains produced the same symptoms in more marked form, with decided hallucinations of hearing voices, bells, railway whistles, etc., some unsteadiness of hand and gait, forcible vomiting without any feeling of nausea; but even here the visions and sounds were under mental control, and could by an effort be dis- missed. There was great palpitation of heart. There were no after-effects. The intoxication is more curious than pleasant, and the dreams seem to lead up to a feeling of impending death or disaster, which is caused by the oppression in the cardiac region and the pal- pitations. This passed off and the visions com- menced again, leading up to another attack of palpitation and apprehension. This sensation is decidedly very disagreeable, not such as to en- courage a repetition of the experiment. 45. This answer only refers to bhang and ganja. The habitual moderate use of bhang appears to produce no ill effects, and in many cases that of ganja is equally harmless; but ganja-smoking, even when moderate, sometimes affects digestion and causes emaciation and bad temper. It causes a craving for food at first; but this effect is lost afterwards. I know of no case where it has caused dysentery, bronchitis, or asthma; but I have noticed hoarseness of the voice, probably due to some laryngeal irritation, among ganja smokers. I do not know of any case in which a previously energetic and moral person has become lazy and immoral through the use of hemp drugs. For insanity see further on. 46. The indulgence in hemp drugs does not seem to do much harm as long as the consumer is well fed, even when large quantities are taken. The question of the connection of hemp drugs and insanity is a very wide one, and in the absence of any one case in my own practice in which I can say that a sane person consuming these drugs, and with no hereditary taint of insanity has become insane after excessive indul- gence, and from no other cause, I can only state my opinions with diffidence. It appears certain that alcohol, opium, chloral, and perhaps some other stimulants and narcotics cause insanity, and there is no reason why Indian hemp should not do so too. At the same time it must be admitted that in some cases the three former may be taken in excessive quantities for prolonged periods without ever causing insanity, unless the craving for and indulgence in these substances is itself looked on as insanity, and I believe that this is true of hemp drugs also. We know that by administering certain quan- tities of alcohol, etc., certain effects may be surely produced, even among those addicted to their use; but it is not known that insanity is one of them. It only occurs in a certain proportion of cases, which are probably those in which predisposition exists, which might have developed insanity from other causes, and this is probably the case with hemp drugs. The fact that although hemp drugs are commonly consumed in India and are almost unknown in England, that the proportion of cases of insanity in India which it is necessary to place under restraint in the Government native lunatic asylums, which are the only asylums, as far as I know, in India, is infinitesimal as compared with the number of lunatics in public asylums in England and Ireland. In the whole of the Ben- gal Presidency, with a population of about seventy- one millions, there were only 951 native lunatics of all kinds so confined at the end of 1892. It is true that many lunatics are at large in India who would be placed in asylums in Eng- land, but the last census shows that the propor- tion of lunatics in Bengal is very much less than what it is at home; and of the 1,149 cases treated in asylums during 1892, only 227 cases are said to be caused by hemp drugs. This gives less than four cases per million of the population even if all the cases are admitted to be due to the assigned cause. In the Patna Asylum there were said to be 51 cases due to ganja and bhang out of a total of 289 insanes treated during the year. The proportion is large, but the actual number of cases small. The investigations of the Commission were limited to those cases of insanity said to be caused by hemp drugs and admitted during the year 1892. Of these, there were 8 cases out of a total of 38 cases admitted from all causes. It is perhaps unfortunate that this was the case, as I took over charge of the asylum in February 1893, and four of the cases had either died or been discharged before that time; a fifth was only twelve days in the asylum after I took charge; while a sixth case, which had recovered and been sent up for trial, had never been insane during my tenure of office. In these cases my opinion is based on the Superintendent's notes, the descriptive rolls and medical certificates, and not on personal observation. The other cases were seen by me. As regards the question, "Does it produce in- sanity (Nos. 45 and 46)?" I should say "yes
286 in some cases"; but the further enquiry that was made in the districts from which the insanes were sent throws doubt on the history sent up with the lunatics, and on the diagnosis in some cases. Taking the cases in the same order as the Commission: (1) Salik Patick. I stated, this is a doubtful case, as there is insanity in the family. Hemp drugs may have been the exciting cause. The report of a full enquiry conducted by Babu Bhawani Prasad Neogi and the Civil Surgeon of Saran, states "that the wit- nesses who were examined, including the mother, uncle and the next-door neighbours of the lunatic, agree in saying that Salik Patick never consumed ganja, bhang, alcohol, opium, dhatura, or any intoxicating drug whatever. They all attribute the lunacy to fright in a dream." The Deputy Magistrate supposes, that Lakhu Dosadh, the chaukidar who brought the lunatic to the authorities, is responsible for the statement that the lunacy was due to bhang. He has been unable to find Lakhu Dosadh and to take his statement. This is, therefore, a very doubtful case and depends on the descriptive roll, which gives bhang as the cause, and the statement of the lunatic, which gives ganja as the drug he used. The first entry in the case book is as follows:287 (6) Behari Runiar. I stated that there was no proof that this case was caused by hemp drugs. The report conduct- ed by the Joint Magistrate and Civil Surgeon of Darbhanga states that "He was addicted to ganja and to drink, but not in excessive quantities. He went to the Sonepur Fair in the best of health. He returned after a stay of seven to ten days com- pletely mad, and after staying a few days athome he disappeared. He was a wrestler." This is most likely a case of insanity caused by ganja. He, being already a ganja smoker, probably in- dulged in the vice to excess while at the fair. I hear that wrestlers often take ganja and bhang. (7) Ram Sarup Das alias Ramcharitar Thakur.An enquiry was held by Deputy Magistrate Maulvi Syed Karim, in consultation with the Civil Surgeon of Champaran. I thought that the insanity was due to ganja, because it is said that the man took ganja and because the symptoms disappeared rapidly. I had no evidence that the man took ganja except the descriptive roll. The report states that there is no family history of insanity, and that "he was not addicted to ganja smoking before or du- ring the time that he was insane, or to any other intoxicants, such as alcohol, opium, etc. Owing to certain reverses of fortune, he fell into great pecuniary difficulties and was obliged to sell his trees and mortgage his lands. These diffi- culties exercised a very injurious influence on his mind, and he became seriously ill with fever a year before he, turned insane. It is difficult to say why the insanity in the above case was ascribed to ganja smoking, the result of the enquiries con- clusively proving that it had no connection what- ever with the use of that drug." This case appears to have been due to mis- fortune. (8) Adit Missar. I stated that insanity may have been caused by ganja smoking, but there is no proof whatever that this is the case. He was recorded to have admitted ganja smoking, and he was a religious beggar. The report made by the same officers as in the last case (No. 6) states that "None of the relatives of Adit Missar could be traced, and consequently no further enquiries could be made in the case." The result of the more careful enquiry, therefore, is that the cases of Salik Patick and Siba Thakur are very doubtful; that of Ram Sarup Das is altogether contradicted. The cases of Kali Singh, Gajadhar Ahir, Behari Runiar, and Maghan Gir appear to be really due to hemp drugs; and that of Adit Missar has no further light thrown on it by the enquiry, and stands on his own admission, and the fact of his being a religious beggar or devotee. In a typical case I consider hemp drugs to be the sole cause, both exciting and predispos- ing; but where other predisposing cause exists, such as heredity, I think it only the exciting cause. The type of insanity is, in my opinion, most usually an active form of mania, with sleeplessness, restlessness, incoherence, chattering, destructive- ness, and sometimes violence. There may be delu-sions and hallucinations. There may, I think, be other forms besides mania. In cases of predisposi- tion to insanity, where ganja is the exciting cause, it might cause the kind of insanity to which the patient is predisposed. The tendency in a typical case is to recovery sometimes progressively, at others through a period of depression. The recovery takes place usually within six months, perhaps in two months. The typical mania is temporary. It may, however, last longer, and there may be relapses. Kali Singh's mental condition was much improved in a month when he was discharged. Gajadhur Ahir was much improved in 6 months, and he was cured in 7 months. Sobran Napit, admitted on the 15th April 1891 for toxic insanity, cause ganja: on admission, hallucinations, sees and converses with ghosts and imaginary persons at night. Incoherent, talkative, violent, assaults, dirty, destructive. Became much better in 6 months, but had a relapse after one year and did not recover till he had been 18 months in the asylum. The symptoms may be re-induced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. Gajadhar Ahir's is a case in point. He was admitted on 7th February 1888 as a case of toxic insanity, cause ganja; cured and discharged in eight months; was at home sane for about three years and five months; again took to ganja and was admitted on 13th March 1892 for the same form of insanity, and discharged cured after 7 months. Typical Symptoms.288 I often ask questions of insane people as to the ganja habit. When a man admits it, it is gene- rally true. I have, however, met with lunatics who accumulate all intoxicants and say they smoke them all. I have also met with lunatics who exaggerate the amount they take. I think the admission of the use may be accepted as true in respect to the mere fact of the habit, but not always as to the extent of the habit. As to a statement made by a lunatic in a lucid interval that he had gone mad from ganja, it might so far be accepted, that is, it might be accepted as to the effect of the drug on himself, putting out of account anything he would not know about pre- disposition. If the man were mad when he made the statement it would be of no value, If a lunatic said he took the drug in great quantities it might be accepted. I have not made a habit of going on to enquire the extent of use. Of course questions are asked, but satisfactory statements are not easily got. A Civil Surgeon or Superintendent of an Asylum has, as far as my experience goes, very little opportunity of seeing friends. In the majo- rity of cases friends never come owing to distance. If people of the town are brought in, their friends come to see them sometimes. But I rarely see them. I am not present when they come. I have asked friends whom I saw about the habits of the lunatics, and they give good information. But as a rule they speak to the overseer, and he tells me what they have said. Friends' state- ments as to the cause of insanity are quite un- reliable. Often they are influenced by superstition. They assign witchcraft. They are ignorant and have no idea of any cause that they do not see, except witchcraft. They give heat as a cause sometimes. I remember a case where I suspect- ed ganja. The man was a Government servant. He and his friends denied ganja, and said that he had become mad after a feast, but that there was no intoxicant. They said they did not know the cause. I suspected some intoxicant, probably ganja, because, among other reasons, of the speedi- ness of the recovery. The same symptoms might have been due to alcohol or opium, as well as ganja. Ganja is the most usual intoxicant; that is why I suspected it specially. I do not think I can differentiate between insanity caused by alcohol, ganja, or opium. Any intoxicant would produce, I think, the kind of insanity to which a man is predisposed. Besides police reports and the statements of lunatics and their friends, there are no further means of information as to cause open to us. It is impossible for us to go and make enquiries. I have only once done it in a Patna case. As a rule the returns as to the causes of in- sanity are based on the descriptive rolls, without any further enquiry on my part. The annual returns as to cause are extracted from the casebook, which, as a rule, contains entries as to cause, simply, copied from the descriptive rolls. I do not think that these returns give a satisfactory basis for a scientific theory of the relation be- tween hemp drugs and insanity. As I have said, I think they give an exaggerated view of that connection. I cannot say how great the exag- geration is, how high a percentage should be taken off the figures. It would be mere specula- tion to try to fix a figure. 47. It is not hereditary, but the habit may be acquired by imitation. Children do not appear to be affected. 48. As above. 49. Ganja is used as an aphrodisiac, and I hear that prostitutes use it in this way. I cannot say that its use for this purpose is more injurious than when used as an ordinary narcotic. I am not aware that it produces impotence, though the habitual excessive use may produce this effect as a part of general weakness. 53. In some cases it appears to do so. The following are found in the asylum books:289 25. I am informed by the shop-keepers that the use of ganja and charas has decreased somewhat of late. They attribute this to the increasing dearness of food. 26. (a) 85.0 per cent. (b) 2.0 ditto. (c) 12.5 ditto. (d) 0.5 ditto. 100.0 27. Muhammadans of the lower classes, Chamars and other low caste Hindus. 28. (a) 7½ to 15 grains per diem, cost 1 to 2 pice. (b) 60 grains per diem, cost 2 annas. 29. As far as I could discover, nothing (except in the case of bhang massala) is ordinarily or ex- ceptionally mixed with these drugs in Dacca. Dhatura is not so used here. Bhang massala is used for the purpose of mix- ing with. It is composed of290 49. I have been informed by certain shop-keepers that ganja is sometimes used in moderate doses as an aphrodisiac. Prostitutes use it sometimes, but not as an aphrodisiac. 50. I have seen cases in which impotence has been supposed to have resulted from the excessive use of ganja. 51. No; the great majority are respectable poor persons. None. 52. I am not aware that there is any connec- tion of the excessive use of these drugs with crime, except in the case referred to in paragraph 53. 54. I do not know. 55. I do not know. I should think if a large enough dose were given complete stupefaction might be induced by this drug without admixture. 56. Bhang massala disguises the smell and taste of the bhang, and is supposed by the natives of this country to increase its cooling effect. 57. I have no experience of these uses of ganja and charas. 57a. To sum up, I am of opinion that the moderate use of ganja is harmless, and in some cases beneficial, and that the use of this drug in small quantities has much the same effect on the mind and body as the moderate use of alcohol, that is to say, it is a stimulant, digestive, and mild sedative to the nervous system. In the vast majority of cases the drug is taken in small quantities, usually at social meetings, and is as harmless as a cheroot or a glass of sherry. It is difficult to state with any exactness the number of persons who are in the habit of using the drug in this manner; but I have endeavoured to estimate it by multiplying the average number of customers of each shop by the number of shops in the town of Dacca, and I have come to the conclusion that about 8 or 10 per cent. of the population are ganja (or charas) smokers. I am inclined to think that this estimate is not far from the truth, because the Manager of the largest jute business in Narainganj made a care- ful census for me, with the result that out of 3,000 coolies he found nearly 300 ganja smokers. If this estimate is correct, there are some 6,000 or 8,000 persons in the town of Dacca alone who are in the habit of using these drugs, and (as I have shewn in paragraph 26) only 2 per cent. of these are excessive consumers (see paragraph 26). Now with regard to the habitual excessive use of these drugs. I have no doubt that their use is hurtful both to the body and mind. They pro- duce a form of intoxication; gradually the con- stitution becomes impaired, the digestion fails, there is a disinclination for work of any kind, and a general enfeeblement of the body accompanied by bad temper and excitability of the mind. In most cases the ill-effects end here, but occasion- ally insanity results. This is of two kinds291 These two cases are samples of several that have passed through the Dacca Asylum. The second case is instructive as showing that Cannabis indica may be the sole cause of mania for292 Confinement of the patient with removal of the exciting cause generally brings about rapid cure. Delirium is a prominent feature. There are other general features which it is difficult to put into words, and which experience alone can teach one, just as one recognizes a face without knowing exact- ly why. One recognizes ganja insanity intuitively. All the symptoms I have described may be present in other kinds of insanity, but one judges by the combination of them. If the symptoms were present without any history, I should not like to make a certain diagnosis of toxic insanity; but I might make a probable diagnosis, subject to further information, and probably should be right, on account of my experience. It is essen- tial to have a history for a certain diagnosis. The attack of ganja insanity may last weeks or months; but it is common to find patients brought as raving lunatics recovered when they reach the asylum. If the attack lasted from 12to 15 months, the fact would shake my diagnosis, unless there were history of previous attacks and gradual degeneration from ganja. I have ex- amined brains in cases of hemp drug insanity, and have discovered no abnormal appearances, which could be attributed to the effect of the hemp. I cannot say that I should expect to find any such appearances in cases of temporary insanity. I do not remember to have made post mortemof any person permanently insane from the hemp drug. Such cases are very sure. The statement made by Ramesh Chandra Sib on the 19th instant has been read to me, and de- scribes accurately the procedure followed in the asylum in regard to cause. I do not approve of entering ganja as the cause of insanity merely on the ground that the insane is known to have used the drug, because it must be misleading when ganja is so commonly used. But this is an accu- rate statement of the procedure. Therefore the entry of cause in Statement VII of the annual report is based exclusively on the descriptive rolls. I do not consider that the descriptive rolls contain information which is reliable, but they help us in making up our minds. They do not afford a satis- factory basis for judging scientifically of the con- nection between hemp drugs and insanity. I have studied the cases admitted to the asylum in 1892, and I put in a note about them293 I base my opinion on the opinion of the Civil Surgeon of Cachar and on my own observation of the case. 14. Padai Ram.294 I disagree altogether with him as to his attri- buting insanity to ganja on the mere statement that the man uses the drug. I have no satisfac- tory evidence of cases of true permanent insanity due to the use of ganja. And in any case to put insanity down to the drug without knowing the amount used, the time during which the habit existed, and the previous history of the man is quite wrong. I quite agree with the Assistant Surgeon as to the great difficulty of satisfactorily ascertaining the cause of insanity in the cases we have to dealwith. I have no personal experience of the physiolo- gical action of hemp drugs on the human subject. The best account of the action of the drug I know is in H. C. Wood's "Therapeutics." It is an American work. I am not acquainted with any literature dealing with hemp drug insanity. I have had experience of hemp drug intoxication. I treated every case in the Medical College Hospital for about eight years when I was Re- sident Physician and Professor of Pathology. There were not very many. The symptoms I observed were analogous to alcoholic intoxication. But the excitement was more intense, the patient livelier (not so soon comatose as in alcohol) and the excitement lasted longer. Alcohol causes intoxication by poisoning the centres. They are first stimulated; and stimulation beyond a certain extent ends in exhaustion. Hence the comatose condition. Suppose the stimulation is frequently repeated by repeated doses of alcohol, you have an overgrowth of the coarser elements; and these coarser elements finally replace the highly organ- ised elements. The physical and mental effects following this alteration would be a dementia preceded by a period of irritation. This period of irritation would have as symptoms change of disposition, grandiosity in ideas, fits of depression alternating with fits of exaltation, and the other symptoms of alcoholic insanity. Chronic alco- holism may thus produce an overthrow of mental equilibrium. As to hemp drug intoxication, I suppose that in the early stages of hemp drug intoxication there is congestion of brain. This is my supposition. I have no pathological experience for that. I have not, personally, experience of the stimula- tion of the centres in alcoholism; but the condi- tion of the brain is well known. To a certain extent the condition of the brain in the early stages of alcoholism could be ascertained by naked eye inspection without the miscroscope. I have examined ganja smokers' brains. I examined the other day (since I knew that I was required to give evidence here) the brain of a man said to have been a smoker for many years. He died suddenly in a factory of phthisis and was sent in. The brain and the membranes were per- fectly healthy. I know nothing of the man except that the police reported that for many years he had been a ganja smoker. I made naked eye inspection and did not use a microscope. Against this I had a case of a man "addicted to drink for some years" whom I examined a month ago post mortem. In his brain the membranes were opaque, thickened, and the convolutions of the brain shrunken; and there was an excessive quantity of brain fluid. It was a typical drunk- ard's brain. There was no insanity. He had died suddenly of some other cause and was sent in by the police, as in the other case. I knew nothing of either this man or the other except through the police report. I knew nothing of the extent of the habit in either case except what the police said. I have no evidence of what the frequent stimu- lation of the brain caused by ganja would result in. I cannot argue by analogy with alcohol; for there is nothing that I know to show that ganja is an irritant of the same class as alcohol. The evidence wanting is pathological evidence founded on facts observed after the experimental exhibition of these drugs on the lower animals. The position I assume then is this, that I admit the analogy between alcoholic and ganja intoxi- cation as regards the general symptoms. These symptoms are due to the action of alcohol on the brain. It is possible, I admit by analogy, that the symptoms in ganja intoxication are produced by the action of the drug on the brain. In the case of alcohol it is well ascertained that the re- peated exhibition of alcohol leads to grave structural changes, which sometimes give rise to certain mental and physical symptoms. In the case of hemp drugs, I will not admit that repeated or long continued stimulation of the brain will produce any structural changes in the brain because there is no pathological evidence; and the facts are, as far as my experience goes, dead against it. I have examined the brains of many persons who were said to be addicted to ganja and have discovered no structural changes. I did not use the micro- scope, and can only speak to coarse structural chan- ges. As far as I have read, too, there is nothing about these changes in books on pathology. Hemp drugs are never mentioned among the causes of structural changes in the brain. In the case of insanity from grief or other so- called moral cause there need be no structural changes that are apparent in the brain. Such changes are found occasionally, but they are not found in many cases. But in respect to insanity following a physical cause, I should assuredly expect changes, and that they would be visible structural changes. The established physical causes are such as alcohol, syphilis, injuries. These are very few compared with the great mass of mental disease. I know nothing of dhatura as a cause of insanity. 112. Evidence of SURGEON-CAPTAIN J. H. TULL WALSH, Superintendent, Lunatic Asylums, Calcutta. Finding it somewhat difficult to reply to the questions given in Chapter VI, with sufficient fullness in the space allotted, I take the liberty of stating my opinions on some of the points raised in that chapter in the following report:295 thought that bhang drinking produces excitement and possibly a maniacal condition; while the action of ganja when smoked is slower, and pro- bably takes a long time to affect the intellect, producing then a stupid or melancholic condition. This opinion, however, requires confirmation. The effect produced by bhang is, it would appear, very like that produced by alcohol when taken in large quantities; it produces an intoxication more marked, but more transient, than does ganja when smoked. It must be remembered that these remarks apply either to beginners or to habitual drinkers or smokers who have exceeded their usual allowance. Bhang when drunk is generally mixed with water and sweetened. It is possible, that dhatura is sometimes added to increase the intoxicating effect, and to render the subsequent stupidity more prolonged. With regard to ganja I am of opinion that it is most frequently smoked with an admixture of tobacco and it is then probable that the exciting effects of the drug are modified by the narcotic powers of the tobacco. It is a well known fact, and one to which I shall have to allude again, that dhatura seeds are often added to ganja to increase the stupefying effect. This addition is not frequent, however, among ordinary ganja smokers who use the drug to promote a mild and exhilarating intoxication. It is confined principally to de- bauched fakirs, into whose morals it is needless to enquire and to gangs of thieves who rob their victims after stupefying them with dhatura in- troduced into a chilum supposed to contain ganja only. Of the truth of this statement the daily papers and police records afford numerous instan- ces. Judging from the effects of even large doses of the tincture of Cannabis indica used in medical practice for various complaints, it would seem that a moderate use of hemp drugs may be beneficial; at any rate such moderate use cannot be harmful. By moderate use, I mean used only occasionally296 were attributed to the use of ganja, bhang, opium and spirits; and that out of 48 cures, 39 belonged to the above class. "My Returns prove the same fact; out of 190 cases treated in 1865, 99 were attributed to in- toxicating drugs; and out of 75 new admissions, 44 were due to the same causes. "In each case, the percentage is very large. "Lastly, out of 363 new admissions in all the Asylums of Bengal, 329 were attributed to in- dulgence in ganja, bhang, opium, or spirit, i.e., 90.6 per cent. of all the cases. If these exciting causes were checked or removed, the asylums would speedily be depopulated." (Robert F. Hutchin- son, M.D.297 "We are aware of the powerfully deleterious effects of all parts of the dhatura (alba and fas- tuosa) when swallowed. The narcotic irritant effects of the seeds especially have for a long time been the subject of a study in Indian Jurispru- dence. But whether the habit of smoking parts of the plant, so highly recommended in bronchial complaints, has a further acting in disturbing the mind and predisposing to lunacy, is perhaps not so generally acknowledged. Natives believe firm- ly in its action in this respect. The question is an interesting one and worthy of further investiga- tion." (D. D. Stewart.298 the cost of their maintenance is recovered from them or their friends; but justice seems to demand something more than this, even though the diffi- culties of the law may stand in the way" (H. C. Cutcliffe, F.R.C.S.299 been admitted into the asylum, although they are very numerous in the city of Dacca. "An excessive indulgence in ganja, by those unaccustomed to its use, will generally be followed by insanity; but like dram drinking, as long as the digestion remains good, it may be taken daily, in gradually increasing doses, without much injurious effect. "A person who indulges in ganja, unless he be a religious mendicant, is stigmatized as a reprobate. The vice grows upon him; he neglects his family and his business, falls into irregular and disorderly habits, which alternate with periods of self- reproach and mental depression. "It is from among the labouring classes that the lunatic, mad from the effects of ganja, comes. "Of the 93 lunatics treated during 1872, and whose insanity was referred to ganja, 67, or 72 per cent. were Hindus, 25 Muhammadans, and one was a Native Christian. Sixteen of the 25 Muhammadans came from Dacca or its neighbour- hood. "I do not believe that ganja smoking is an incentive to crime. In the records of this asylum there is no mention of any crime having been committed while the individuals were under the influence of hemp. "In a special report forwarded to Government in December 1871, it was shown that of 99 crimi- nal lunatics admitted between 1861 and 1870, 39 had their madness referred to ganja smoking; but that in no instance was it alleged that the crime was committed while the individual was under the effects of ganja. "During the past year, four criminal lunatics were admitted whose insanity was referred to ganja smoking. They were all Hindus. One was charged with rape, one with theft, one with murder, and one with grievous hurt. "That many ganja smokers become criminals is not to be wondered at. "Few, if any, dacoits are to be found who do not make use of the weed to inspire them with false courage, but it is because they are thieves that they do so and not because being smokers of ganja they are thieves. The history of the use of the hemp corroborates this. It has invariably been used to nerve a man to perpetrate a deed which he has already resolved on doing, and, as the Ramawats hold, to impress on the memory a train of thought that has already been pondered over." (James Wise, m.d.300 cured during five years (1888-1892) varied from 3 to 10 months, and many of these were kept under observation for some time after they had been pronounced sane. Of the 108 cases admitted more than half recovered very quickly, and this points to some cause easily removable. These figures include a few re-admissions of persons previously treated for insanity, due to the abuse of hemp drugs (Ex. 9, 12, 16). With regard to the patients who do not recover, I think they probably represent, as pointed out by Dr. Wise (Ex. 10.), a number of insane persons who may or may not have used hemp drugs. As to my personal knowledge of the effects of hemp drugs, I have already given instances to the members of the Commission who visited the Dullunda Asylum on the 14th and 18th of August 1893. It would serve no useful purpose to quote the cases again. In conclusion I think it may be fairly stated:301 valves healthy. Liver weighed 35 oz; gall blad- der full of bile, normal. Spleen weighed 8 oz., slightly enlarged; right kidney 2½ oz., left kidney2½ oz., slightly congested; capsule easily separated. Bladder contracted and empty. Intestines: con- gestions all along both small and large intestines, except portions of upper and lower ends. Small intestines contained thin, yellow offensive fluid; large intestines thicker, darker and larger quantity of fluid than the small intestines. No worms. Lungs both adherent to chest walls; gorged with dark blood. 4. Bolai Chand Dey, aged 27; addicted to excess in ganja and alcohol for 18 months. Sent to the Dullanda Asylum 20th May 1893. Re- marks on certificate of lunacy:302 I should divide the effects of excess of ganja on the brain into these classes:303 inquiring might make a mistake about any fact about a lunatic. My opinion in regard to this would depend on a consideration of all the cir- cumstances under which the information was col- lected. My experience leads me to conclude that amongst the classes from whom the patients in our asylums are usually taken there would be no hesitation in admitting the use of the drug. My attention has been directed to hemp drugs ever since I have been in the asylum. My atten- tion was specially given to the matter of types some years ago. But my attention has been specially directed to the subject generally, and I have most carefully studied it, and my views have been formulated, during the last eight months. 113. Evidence of SURGEON-CAPTAIN D. PRAIN, Curator of the Herbarium, and Librarian, Royal Botanic Garden, Calcutta. 1. I was instructed by the Government of Bengal in February 1893 to submit a report to the Board of Revenue, Lower Provinces, on the cultivation and use of ganja. I was on deputa- tion for this purpose during the period 18th March to 17th June 1893. I had not, previous to this deputation, been specially interested in hemp; till then I had only possessed a fairly complete knowledge of the botanical and a general average acquaintance with the physiological and therapeutic characters of the plant and its pro- ducts. 2. The name ganja is in certain parts of the Western Himalayas applied somewhat differently. (See my Report, page 10.) 19. I have found great difficulty in meeting with any instance of the use of charas in Bengal. It may indeed be said not to be used in this prov- ince. My only instances have been among the class of 'Kabuli' merchants, and even among them its employment is rarely admitted; nor can I say whether its use is general among the class. I have heard of ganja being use for drinking in Calcutta, but never have met an authentic instance. 23. I do not know. It was 200 years ago so used on the Malabar Coast; it would be well perhaps to find if in this region the use still per- sists. I have been unable to find any instance of the use in Bengal. 28. My information on these points has been derived from enquiries, and does not result from direct personal observation, so far as excessive con- sumption is concerned; it therefore partakes of the nature of hearsay evidence, and is not admissible. Habitual moderate consumption of bhang may, I think, be put down at 1½ tolas per diem. Of ganja, at from 30 to 60 grains per diem. Of charas, I cannot state even an opinion. Excessive consumption, as I interpret the word 'excessive' (my Report, page 69), is unusual. 29. My knowledge of this part of the subject is derived from information obtained by direct enquiry, and is not therefore of the nature of directly hearsay evidence. It is contained in my report. Dhatura and opium are given to increase the known narcotic effect of hemp. Nux-vomica and cantharides are given to in- crease the supposed aphrodisiac property of hemp. Betel-nut (aniseed, pepper, and the other in- gredients of a simple bhang massala are used for the same purpose) is given to counteract the effects arising from the indigestible nature of the substance when taken internally. 30. (a) I have not given attention to this point, but I have seen so few cases of excessive use of the drugs that its importance did not occur to me. So far as moderate use of ganja is concerned, the point is of no importance; the substance is smoked when required, whether the smoker be alone or in company. The moder- ate use of bhang is essentially a "social" act. (b) The use of ganja is confined, I am told, mainly to the male sex, and is fairly general among grown men. The use of bhang is so much concealed, even when the use is moderate, that I cannot give an opinion as to whether it is used by women in Bengal. (c) It is not usual for children to smoke ganja or drink bhang, or even to eat majum. 31. (a) Apparently so. (b) Apparently not. (c) I believe that there is a tendency in the case of the use of bhang for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive; but that in the case of the use of ganja this tendency hardly exists. 32. My information on this point has been derived from friends of my own among the native gentlemen of Bengal, so that it is inadmissible as evidence. 36. My information here has also been derived from native friends, and is again inadmissible as evidence. It is contained in my Report already referred to. 37. The effects of charas smoking do not differ from those of smoking ganja. The differ- ences stated by many native authorities are imaginary. I mention this particularly, because it has become so much the habit to state these that some of my native friends, very intelligent men too, having been predisposed by what they have heard, actually think they have seen what they expected to see. Nor does bhang really produce 'different' effects from the other two forms of the narcotic; the same effects, excite- ment and narcosis, are in each case produced; in the case of charas and ganja (smoked), these occur more rapidly and pass off more quickly than in the case of bhang (drunk). 39. Yes; smoking ganja does not tend to de- velop into a habit of excess. It does not impair the digestive powers so much, if indeed it does so at all. I have not met with a single case in my own practice or experience where the use by either habit of any hemp preparation has produced in- sanity. I have, however, to point out that it is now some years since I have come in contact with medical cases, and that my medical work in India has been entirely with a military, and never with a civil population. 40. (a) I do not know. (b) I do not know. I have seen the fresh hemp
304 plant used as a medicine for cattle in Assam and in Bengal. 41. (a) Not directly, but indirectly by acting so as to allay fatigue and enable the natural digestive powers to act. (b) Yes. (c) I am unable to say. 42. Yes; I commenced my enquiry into the use of the plant with a preconceived idea, derived from copious assertion, that ganja was a pernicious drug, and that charas and bhang were harmless. I have found that charas and ganja are the same thing in reality, used in the same way, and that, therefore, general opinion was absolutely unreliable. I have been unable to find a single instance during three months' enquiry of any evil effects arising from the use of any of the three products of hemp. 44. Bhang appears in a moderate dose in a habitual consumer to act simply as a mild, pleasant sedative; it is not used with reference to the appe- tite for food; probably, if so used, it would allay hunger. [ The increase of appetite that follows the consumption of the substance by one unaccus- tomed to hemp is only observed after the first few doses.] The effect of an ordinary dose passes off in a few hours. A certain amount of heaviness continues for some time longer. I cannot say whether the want of subsequent gratification pro- duces longing or uneasiness. Ganja moderately used is refreshing; it does not produce perceptible intoxication; it does not so much allay hunger as fatigue; it does not appear to create appetite; in most cases there are no visible effects, but the staying-power induced by a dose lasts for some hours; the want of subse- quent gratification produces no uneasiness, unless there be a repetition of the conditions of exhaustion from exertion calling for a new dose. 45. I do not believe that the habitual moderate use of any of these drugs produces any noxious effects, physical, mental, or moral. I believe that it does not impair the constitution to smoke ganja, and I believe that the moderate use of bhang does so only very slightly. I think that, perhaps, the use of bhang does injure the digestion and impair appetite even when used moderately, but I am convinced that it neither causes dysentery, bronchitis, nor asthma. On the contrary, a pre- paration of hemp is very valuable in the treatment of dysentery. Bhang is said to impair the moral sense, induce laziness, and lead to habits of immora- lity and debauchery as well as to deaden the intel- lect and produce insanity. I do not believe that it does anything of the kind if taken in moderation, and am convinced that much confusion has arisen in considering this subject from the fact that the lazy, immoral, debauched, or criminal sections of the community are largely given to the use ofbhang. I have not met with any case of insanity in my own experience, which appeared to be due to the use of bhang or ganja. In the cases of insanity with a ganja history that have been considered by me, I have never been able to find out whether ganja or bhang was accused, and have been of opinion that the use of the drug by people whose minds were troubled, or perhaps even diseased, or whose minds were naturally deficient, has not been sufficiently considered. 46. Cases of the habitual excessive use of ganja are not known to me, except among the class of religious mendicants. Habitual excessive use of bhang does impair digestion and thus injures health. It does not cause dysentery or bronchitis, but an excessive dose of the drug often leads to carelessness on the part of the subject as to his clothing, and the chills which often result from this unconscious exposure give rise to the attacks. The impaired general health renders the constitution unfitted to combat bronchitis, and the "asthma" which accompanies chronic bronchitis is one of the results. That true spasmodic asthma is ever induced by the use of bhang, I do not believe. The sub- stance that is prepared from hemp which is of use in dysentery is an extract. The fact that this is useful in treating dysentery is of itself proof of the incorrectness of the idea that the use of bhang causes the disease. Once, however, dysentery has been induced by a chill, the use of bhang aggra- vates it in spite of the fact that extract of hemp is a remedy. This is because bhang is taken as an emulsion of the leaves themselves, so that the surface of the bowel is exposed to the passage of small solid particles of vegetable tissue while it is in a state of inflammation. The irritation that results more than counteracts the soothing effect of the resinous narcotic matter the leaves contain. 47 and 48. I am unable to give an opinion onthis point. 49. Ganja is not used moderately as an aphro- disiac. Bhang sometimes is. I cannot say if it is used by prostitutes themselves. I think not. But it is given by prostitutes to their clients. This use is more injurious than the ordinary use, be- cause, though the substance has not in itself any specific aphrodisiac effect, it undoubtedly tends to assist the subject in the abuse of the virile powers. This abuse, and not the drug directly, tends to produce impotence. 50. I have not met with any case where ganja has been smoked to excess as an aphrodisiac. I should doubt any statement to the effect that it ever is so used owing to the physical difficulties involved. The use of bhang and of majum in excess for this purpose is well known; but, as has been al- ready said, the effect is indirect, and not really attributable to the drug. 56. On this subject I regret I am unable to give any direct evidence. Most of the informa- tion I have received regarding this matter has been of the nature of surmise. 57. Ganja, used as bhang generally is (by drink- ing); produces, when given in physiological experi- ments, exactly the effects produced by bhang, only these are dose for dose more intense from ganja. A small dose of ganja causes effects like a large dose of bhang. I have not met with cases of habitual use of ganja in this way, but I should view any statement that the effects of drinking ganja differ from the effects of drinking bhang with considerable suspicion. Oral evidence. I have been in the service since October 1884. From that time with the exception of about a year in military employ, I have been in special civil employ in connection with the Botanical Gardens. Beyond the examination of specimens of plants sent to me by the Board, I had no interest in the hemp plant305 make in 1893. I have no experience beyond that acquired in the course of that inquiry. I have nothing to add now to what I have written in the Report. I have made no systematic inquiry since then. I wished to make further physiological inquiries on my return from leave; but I found Dr. Cunningham had been asked to conduct ex- periments. In regard to the chemical part of my report, I was extremely disappointed, as it was only partial and inconclusive. At home I tried to get the matter taken up. I have received a letter from Professor Dunstane suggesting further inquiry in a manner and at a cost he indicated. I recommended a reference to this Commission and said I would mention the subject also. I put in his letter with a strong recommendation that some such steps as he indicates should be taken to com- plete the chemical inquiry which I regard as very important, both practically and scientifically. It would have great practical importance in connec- tion with the use of the drug Cannabis indica,though not in connection with the questions be- fore this Commission. As to myself, then, my views regarding hemp drugs are contained in my Report and my written answers to the questions of the Commission. I have nothing which I desireto add. In page 62 of my Report I describe the effects of bhang (Chapter VI). I took bhang myself and observed the symptoms. The tendency to laugh was not marked. I was rather depressed, but this may have been because I was not well at the time. I experienced the thirst and increased appetite. I took the usual dose made in an emul- sion as described by Hem Chandra Kerr (but without the spices) about a tola and half of dry leaves. I was rather disappointed with the result. I have also seen the drug taken by natives, men habituated to it, and seen the effects. The experiments on monkeys and cats were conducted by me (page 64); but the difficulty of administering to the monkeys made the experi- ments unsatisfactory, so I recorded little about them. I have observed the condition of the pupil with human smokers, but have not seen dilatation with them; nor have I seen contraction. In regard to cats, it has to be borne in mind that they got very strong doses of the drug. Dr. Russell's experiments quoted by me at page 65 are, I understand, in addition to those conducted by him in Assam and quoted in the Assam Excise Report of 1881-82. My view in page 74 of my Report that a dose of ganja drunk is twice as strong as the same dose smoked, is based exclusively on Dr. Russell's paper quoted at page 65; for I have never inhaled ganja by smoking. My statement that ganja is five times as powerful as bhang is based on the quantity of resin obtainable. (Cf. also the remarks at the top of page 11; the remarks about charas there are quoted from Volume III of Dymock and Warden's Pharmaco- graphia Indica.) His experiments with pure charas from Central Asia showed 75 per cent. of 'resin as compared with 25 per cent. in ganja (vide Table X on page 32 of my Report). On page 75 the remarks about indigestion being traceable to hemp, especially bhang, are not based on the examination of many cases but on what I have heard of the common idea of people having pains and flatulence and so on and attribut- ing them to the drugs. If this is so, I fancy it is due to indigestion caused by using so much vege- table matter. I have sought to accommodate with the slight effects I had seen the stories told to me in perfect good faith as to the evils result- ing from the use of the drug. My comparison between the effects of smoking and drinking hemp on page 75 is not based on observation of cases, but principally on hearsay evidence. It is based on an attempt to accommodate what I have learned from others with what little I have seen. I have seen many ganja-smokers, but I have not seen the same cases often. I have not observed the history of cases so as to observe the effects. I have seen for the most part people who smoked when they were tired. I have also seen the fakirs who have smoked largely. I have as a rule seen no effects except suffusion of the eyes. I saw a man in a frenzied condition only once among a company of fakirs. He was supposed to be possessed. I was told that his state was attributable to ganja; but I cannot put any reliance on the case, as I had no evidence apart from that statement. My knowledge of bhang consumers enables me to say that the darwans take bhang to a considerable extent; but that is the extent of my experience: I have only seen it among these darwans. I have not been able to get any native gentleman to admit the use. The ordinary method of smoking ganja is inhaling from a chillum either direct or through the hands. I have neither seen a cloth used. The effort of inhaling is great. I was never able to inhale myself. A moderate smoker takes three whiffs at a time and that is all. That is the regulation dose. I have seen one man smoke by himself. I have more usually seen smoking in company. The three strong steady pulls are taken in succession by a man. He does not blow anything out till they are over. After his three whiffs he passes on the pipe to his neigh- bour. It does not come back to him again, so far as I have seen: the one set of three whiffs is all. Perhaps the reddening of the conjunctivæ is due to over-exertion in inhaling. I cannot say. I never saw any excessive consumers except a few fakirs. The excessive consumer smokes exactly like the others, but would take more than three whiffs and would take the chillum again and again. I have never seen tobacco inhaled in this way by natives. I have not been interested in this point. In my experiment with ganja, I used a chillum and took three whiffs, but could not inhale. There were no effects. What I used was unmixed ganja. In my written answer to question 45, I refer to cases of insanity. I discussed the cases with Dr. Walsh and other medical friends. I had not the cases nor the papers before me. APPENDIX. Letter from Professor Dunstane put in by DR. PRAIN. Dated 17 Bloomsbury Square, London, W. C., the 18th November 1893. From306 material which you kindly offer to supply. Moreover, there are no funds available here for chemical materials, apparatus or assistance. The very small endowment of the laboratory is entirely absorbed in carrying on the aconite research, in fact we are already in debt. I have discussed the subject of ways and means with many of those who are interested in pharmacological research and the suggestion has been made that the Govern- ment of India might be disposed to make a grant in aid of the special investigation, which is of so much interest and importance to the country. The work of ascertaining the precise mode of action on the body cannot be properly done until some pure chemical substance has been isolated. Perhaps you would be able to influence the Indian authorities to make some small contribution to the work. So far as I can judge, it would take about two years to complete the chemical work, assuming that I could have assistance with the purely routine work, and the cost could be defrayed by a grant of £500. Several well-known scientific men have offered to use their influence with the Indian Government to induce them to make such a grant, but before any steps are taken I should like to hear from you what the best steps to take would be, and what likelihood there is of success. I have been much interested in reading your voluminous report on the subject, which is of the greatest value to any one who is thinking of working on the subject. As regards the chemistry, the work is excessively difficult, and only those who have had special experience with such enquiries are likely to come to any definite con- clusion. Many of those who have already dealt with this side of the subject are evidently not qualified for the task. If you will kindly let me know what should be done, in conjunction with Mr. Huillon Dyer, I will take whatever steps you may recommend. It would be easy to get the Pharmacological Com- mittee of the Royal Society, of which I am Secretary, to make a representation on the subject. Its members are:307 though it came from the same field, and was of the same quality, lay for a few days of the dry weather untinned up during the time of its transit from Naogoan to Calcutta, where it was tinned up. The rapidity with which ganja takes up moisture in damp weather, and parts with it in a dry atmosphere, has been shown in my report on ganja; and the difference in this respect, produced by a few days' exposure to dry air, has been great enough to make the quite fresh sample completely valueless, and only to slightly alter the character and appearance of that which had an opportunity of parting with some of its moisture. This leads, therefore, to a re-consideration of the question of time of tinning, or of preparation beforehand of the ganja before tinning it. As already stated in my report, it seemed to be essential for the suc- cess of any plan of storage that no preliminary pre- paration should be required. For, besides the labour involved in rendering the substance abso- lutely moisture-free before placing it in tins, it is not impossible that the mere process of drying it might alter its quality and power. It certainly would decrease its commercial value, since one of the essentials in a sample of ganja from a dealer's point of view, is that it shall be sufficiently "sticky" to make into a paste in the hand before being used; ganja that is perfectly dry loses this stickiness. It is a common belief with ganja dealers that, as at present stored, the substance improves in quality during the first six months; it becomes, they think, less powerful when smoked, and im- proves, they think, in smell and flavour; after six months it deteriorates, still losing power till all is gone, and steadily diminishing in quality inde- pendent of its strength. Not improbably this opinion, which is founded on commercial experience, is sound; also from the physical and chemical point of view, though till the Chemical Examiner's re- ports are received, it will not be possible to say if it be absolutely correct. But correct or not, it is, simply because it is the commercial opinion, en- titled to attention if not to respect, and it there- fore becomes a question whether it would not be well to allow the drug to mature, so to speak, by becoming six months old before converting it into chur, making it into cakes and tinning it up. But this would defeat one of the main objects which the Board has in view308 29. Ordinarily tobacco with bhang or ganja. Dhatura is said to be used to increase the narcotic effects of bhang or ganja, but I have no personal knowledge. 30. I have never seen a female or a child as a consumer of ganja or bhang. 34. No privation whatever to ganja and bhang consumers. Those persons whom I have question- ed seem to use the drugs for no special reason. I suppose it is a habit acquired by seeing some friend or acquaintance use them or for some ail- ment, real or imaginary. 42. Three persons, ganja and bhang consumers, lately examined with the following results:309 ing about one anna (11 to 12 grains), forms the average daily allowance of moderate habitual con- sumers. 29. Ganja when used for smoking is mixed with bits of tobacco leaf, moistened with water, and kneaded in the palm of the left hand with the right thumb; then cut up and put in an earthen pipe (chillum), placed on a huka, and smoked. Occasionally dhatura seeds are mixed with ganja, chiefly for purposes of theft, by un- scrupulous men to render their victims helpless. Before smoking, charas is first enclosed in the middle of a little prepared tobacco (thick paste of powdered tobacco leaf and molasses), and gently heated over a fire (the fire of a chillum ready for smoking answers best). The charas is then taken out and mixed with the tobacco and smoked in a huka. The ingredients mixed with siddhi before pounding it into a paste are usually black pepper, poppy seeds, cardamom seeds, aniseeds, cucumber seeds, dry rose petals, and similar other spices. Occasionally dhatura seeds are used. The motive for such practice is almost invariably to facilitate the commission of crime or mischief. Sometimes the active principle of siddhi is extracted by being parched in hot ghee, which is subsequently strained and made up into cakes with sugar and dried milk. This preparation is called majum. It is used as a narcotic only. When siddhi is used for drinking, the leaves are washed and ground into a paste with spices, and made into a sherbet with sugar and water. I do not know if opium, nux-vomica, cantharides, or betel-nut is ever used with these drugs. 30. Smoking of ganja and charas is usually carried on in company. Siddhi may or may not be so taken. The use of the drugs is chiefly con- fined to the male sex. Children rarely use them unless when they are very depraved. 31. Prolonged use develops into a habit. Once contracted, the subject does not readily give it up; but, unlike opium, discontinuance of the use of the drug is not followed by any serious incon- venience. There is no particular tendency of the habit to develop into excess. 32. None with regard to ganja and charas. On the fourth day of the Durga Puja, after the idol has been thrown into the river, all the male mem- bers of a family take a little of bhang sherbet. The majority, however, take only an innocu- ous quantity, but some take advantage of this opportunity to take it to excess. The use of the drug on this occasion is considered essential. Even those who have an antipathy for narcotics, must put a drop of bhang sherbet on their tongues. The use of the drug on such rare occasions is not likely to lead to the formation of a habit, and is by no means injurious. The custom of taking siddhi on special occasions is probably because siddhi also means success. On all auspicious occasions the presence of the drug is considered essential. In making bazar purchases for such occasions, siddhi always heads the list of things to be purchased. 33. The habitual use of all is regarded as dis- reputable, with the exception of siddhi when used as medicine. Public opinion is against the habi- tual use of all of the three drugs, because they are narcotics and may produce evil after-effects. As far as I know, the hemp plant is never worshipped in Lower Bengal. 34. If a man is compelled to suddenly give up using ganja after prolonged use, he would cer- tainly feel it. The effect would be inappreciable in the case of charas and siddhi. 35. The total prohibition of the use of the drug would produce discontent, and may give rise to illicit manufacture of the drug. If habitual con- sumers are prohibited from using the drugs, they would most probably take to using alcohol or opium. 36. The drugs are cheaper than alcoholic bever- ages, and are never replaced by alcohol. On the contrary, those drugs are sometimes used when people cannot afford to pay for alcoholic drinks. 37. Charas is milder in its effects than ganja. 38. Chur is said to be weaker than round and flat ganja. 39. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing; siddhi for eating or drinking. Smoking of ganja is stronger in its effects than smoking of charas or moderate use of siddhi. Siddhi in suffi- ciently large dose produces intense narcotism. Charas and bhang are not known to produce tendency to insanity. Smoking of ganja is not an unfrequent cause of insanity. 40. Siddhi is used by kabirajes in native me- dical practice. It is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. Ganja is also said to be used for the latter purpose. 41. (a) Siddhi is used medicinally for digestive disorders. It notably increases the appetite. Ganja also does the same. (b) Like other narcotics, moderate use of ganja is said to give a staying-power under severe exer- tion and to alleviate fatigue. (c) Ganja is said to give immunity from attacks of miasmatic diseases. For medicinal purposes siddhi is used by both the rich and the poor; ganja and charas by labouring classes only. I refer to the moderate habitual use of the drug. 42. The moderate occasional use of the drugs is harmless. The moderate habitual use of the drugs is not known to produce evil effects. 43. The moderate consumers are inoffensive. 44. The effect of the moderate use of the drugs upon habitual consumers is refreshing. Ganja and charas in such cases may produce mild intoxi- cation attended with pleasurable sensation. Siddhi and ganja increase the appetite for food. The effect of the drugs may last for about an hour. Usually there are no after-effects. No longing or uneasiness is felt for want of subse- quent gratification, i.e., immediately after the effects of the drugs have passed off; but a habi- tual consumer feels happier and more at ease if he gets the drug at his accustomed hour. 45. (a) The habitual moderate use of any of the three drugs is not known to produce any physical, mental or moral evil effects. It may only make a man slightly irritable. (b) to (f) No. 46. The habitual excessive use may produce physical, mental and moral evil effects. Habitual excessive use of ganja is known sometimes to pro- duce dysentery and bronchitis. It may also weaken the intellect and produce insanity. The mental disorder is usually of a violent character, and may sometimes develop into confirmed (per- manent) mania. In cases of temporary insanity the symptoms may be reinduced by indulgence in the drug after liberation from restraint. 47 and 48. No. 49. The first effect of the drugs, like that of most other narcotics, is to produce general ex-
310 citement. They may, therefore, be sometimes employed to excite the passions. But habitual moderate ganja-smokers generally shun women. Prostitutes are not known to use the drugs as aphrodisiacs. The drug has no special power to produce impotence. When impotence follows the use of the drugs as aphrodisiacs, it would be difficult to determine how much of it is due to the influence of the drugs, and how much to ex- cessive indulgence of the appetite under artificialstimuli. 50. Excessive use of the drugs may produce similar effects in an exaggerated degree. 51. Habitual moderate consumers of the drugs are not known to be specially addicted to crime, but bad characters may use these drugs equally with other narcotics. 52. The excessive use of the drugs is common among badmashes. 53. People indulging in excessive use of ganja may become violent and commit crimes. They are sometimes affected with homicidal frenzy and run amuck. 54. Yes. They sometimes do it. 55. Ganja and charas cannot be easily admin- istered to others without their knowledge. Cri- minals sometimes induce their intended victims to take siddhi so as to make them insensible to facilitate commission of crime. In large doses siddhi alone may produce profound sleep. 56. Moderate consumers of the drugs usually take them in an unmixed state, or mixed with comparatively harmless substances only, such as tobacco with ganja and charas, and spices with siddhi. Veteran ganja-smokers are occasionally known to take dhatura seeds with ganja to heighten its effects; but more commonly dhatura seeds are mixed with ganja to be administered to others for criminal purposes. 57. I do not know that ganja or charas is ever eaten or drunk. 117. Evidence of RAI BAHADUR KANNY LOLL DEY, C.I.E., late Chemical Examiner to the Government of Bengal, Calcutta. 2. Dr. Prain's definition of the drugs may be taken as correct. The drugs are known in and about Calcutta as ganja, charas and siddhi or bhang. 16. Yes. Bhang is usually prepared by the people in their own houses. When the plant is unusually leafy, the leaves do not adhere to the flowers on the stems so as to become clotted, but remain detached. These leaves are gathered and dried and sold as siddhi, subji or bhang. 18. All these drugs do not keep well after six months, unless they are preserved in a stoppered bottle and exposed to the sun from time to time. 19. There is but one form in which ganja and charas can be used, which is by burning like to- bacco in a chillum and inhaling the smoke througha pipe. 20. Ganja is a favourite with the up-country people, quite as much as tobacco is with a Bengali. I do not intend to say that its use is confined to the higher provinces alone; it is also in demand in Lower Bengal, but here it is not so universally adopted as a stimulating drug. Labourers, night- watchmen, ascetics and other people following occupations involving hard manual labour or ex- posure to the influences of the weather are given to ganja-smoking because it enables its votaries to undergo exposure or great manual labour at a minimum cost of tissue. Charas is expensive, so it is seldom used by low class men. 22. The ordinary charas sold in the bazars is the charas of Kabul, as gathered in Central India. The most valuable drug is that grown in Nepal and sold at double the price of the ordinary charas. The charas of Herat is said to be the most power- ful variety of the drug, but it is scarcely known in this country. 23. I am not aware of bhang being used for smoking. 24. Bhang is a favourite with the up-country people. In Lower Bengal darwans, ascetics and up-country rich men use it. 25. The use of charas is diminishing. But it is very difficult to say whether the use of ganja and bhang is decreasing. Ganja and bhang are some- times used as substitutes for spirituous liquors as being cheap and less injurious. 30. It is a remarkable fact that in this country at least the votaries of ganja, as a rule, always smoke the drug in company and seldom singly. People sit in a ring and pass the huka round, nobody taking more than one or two long-sustained puffs. Women and children seldom smoke ganja and charas in Lower Bengal. Women suffering from bowel complaints have recourse to bhang, other remedies failing. 31. Ganja-smoking and charas-smoking are at first very repulsive; but when the habit is once formed, it is difficult to break it off; not so diffi- cult, however, as to break off the habit of drink- ing spirituous liquors or opium. The habit of drinking or eating bhang can be easily formed and given up. A moderate habit of smoking ganja or charas and drinking bhang seldom grows into excess. 32. Ganja votaries before beginning to smoke always take the name of Mahadev, with whom it is a favourite drug. The use of bhang affects our social custom on the Bijaya day after the goddess Durga has been thrown into the water. The custom is quite harmless and never leads to the formation of a habit. It is generally believed to be essential on that day. Siddhi forms an essen- tial element in all religious and social performances. 33. I believe the indulgence in charas seldom or never grows into a passion. 34. Daily labourers ascetics, persons who expose themselves to the inclemency of the weather, who keep up at night, who are suffering from bowel complaints or want of appetite, would be deprived of a necessity of life and valuable remedy if they are prevented from, ganja-smoking. 35. A compulsory prohibition of the use of these drugs would cause great misery and create discon- tent, as they are absolute necessity with the people who use them. Yes, if the consumers are deprived of the short spells of enjoyment amid the labour and cares of life. Prohibition may stimulate men to have recourse to alcohol and other drugs, who now shun them on religious and social grounds. 36. Hemp is generally substituted for alcohol as being cheaper and less disastrous to society. 37. A ganja-smoker may often be made out by his appearance, which is always dry and rick- etty, eyes sunken and cheeks flattened. Ganja fumes are believed to possess the property of dry- ing up the humours of the body and giving the persons who inhale them a faded look. A ganja- smoker can never be slim, and if the habit of excessive indulgence be long persevered in, it brings on dysentery and diarrh311 diet of milk and ghee, and confectionery having a large share of these oily ingredients. None of these effects are perceived in a charas-smoker. I do not know whether the resin (charas) has any property of mitigating the evils produced by ganja, but I believe the indulgence in this drug seldom or never grows into a passion. The intoxication produced by charas-smoking is much tamer than that of ganja. It scarcely brings on any hallucination such as is caused by intoxication generally. Persons under its influence scarcely betray any incoherence in manner or speech. Neither is the habit productive of any perceptible evil in the constitution. But ganja is more powerful in its effects, and it leaves a more lasting impression on the system. One peculiarity in ganja-smoking is that it makes the persons with whom the indulgence has become a habit choleric and irascible, rough in manner and rough in speech. 40. Bhang and ganja are prescribed by native doctors in bowel complaints and are recommended as appetisers. Bhang is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Bhang and ganja are nervous stimulants and give great staying-power under severe exertion, exposure and fatigue. They are great appetisers. Hemp is acknowledged in British Pharmacop312 Question 37.313 53. I do not know of any case in which exces- sive indulgence in any of these drugs has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Yes. 55. Yes; sometimes done. Invariably mixed with dhatura seeds for the purpose. 69. People are not consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. 119. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON BOSONTO KUMAR SEN, in Civil Medical Charge, Bogra. 1. As a medical man and service in ganja-pro- ducing districts. 2. Yes, these definitions can be accepted in this province. These products are locally known as (1) bhang or siddhi, (2) charas, (3) ganja. 3. I know hemp plant grows spontaneously in Rajshahi and Bogra Districts. 4. It is known by the name of bhang and siddhi plants. They refer to the same plant. 5. It grows in low land in winter. 6. Dense. 7. Hemp plant is cultivated extensively in the Rajshahi Division (a) for the production of ganja. 11. No. 12. No. 13. Cultivation of hemp plant for ganja is re- stricted to Rajshahi Division. Do not know the cause of such restriction. 14. (a) Ganja is prepared in the ganja-pro- ducing tracts in the Rajshahi Division to a large scale. 15. (a) Products of cultivated plants. Ganja.42. Moderate use of bhang and ganja do not seem to produce any serious organic mischief. 43. No, even moderate consumers are repulsive. 44. They (bhang and ganja), produce pleasant intoxication, talkativeness and merriment. They are refreshing. They produce varacious appetite not appeased by food. They do not allay hunger. Their effect lasts for four or five hours, sometimes longer. The after-effects are headache and giddi- ness. Yes, the want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 45. Yes, the use of ganja and bhang produces noxious effects. They weaken the constitution and produce loss of appetite. They generally produce dysentery, asthma, and bronchitis. They impair the moral sense, induce laziness or habits of immorality or debauchery. A ganja-smoker never talks on any important moral, social or religious subject, nor does he mix with good people. He has got a circle of his own where he indulges in loathsome conversation. Ganja produces insanity (mania) both temporary and permanent. In temporary variety the symp- toms were seen to recur on use of the drug after liberation from restraint. The typical symptoms of insanity are excessive talking, constant motion, insomnia, incoherent trembling and: violent screaming. The insanes generally confess to their taking the drug. 46. Ganja produces the symptoms mentioned under the heading habitual moderate use of the drug in a greater degree. 47. The use of ganja and bhang does not appear to be a hereditary habit, or to affect the children. 48. Answer to question 47 also applies here. 49. Yes, ganja and bhang are used as aphrodisiac. I cannot say if they are so used by prostitutes. Excessive indulgence of the sexual organs produces eventually impotency; but whether hemp has any direct connection with impotency I cannot say. I think ganja is more injurious when it is used as narcotic than as an aphrodisiac, because in the former case the people generally become insane. 50. Answer to question 49 also applies here. 51. Ganja-smokers generally commit petty thefts when they are in need of pice for the pur- chase of ganja. 52. The same. 55. Yes, stupefaction by ganja may be induced without admixture. 56. The admixture of dhatura seed with ganja and bhang increases the narcotic action of these drugs. Oral evidence. I am L. M. S. of Calcutta. I took my degree in 1877, and have been in Government employ since. I have served in several districts in Bengal and Assam. I have no special experience of in- sanity, except that I was employed for three months about a year ago in the Dullunda Asylum. Question 45.315 Superintendent of Vaccination, Eastern Bengal Circle; Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Western Bengal and Presidency and Eastern Bengal Circles; as officiating Civil Medical Officer, Pabna, and Assistant Surgeon in Civil Medical charges Rangpur, and also during my halts at head-quarters of districts. These products are known in Rangpur by the names of ganja, charas, bhang and siddhi. 3. Rajshahi, Bogra, Dinajpur, Rangpur, Pabna, Dacca and Mymensingh. It is abundant in Rangpur. 4. Ganja and bhang. Ganja and bhang are of different species. 6. Generally dense. 7. No cultivation for any purpose. 10. I have no knowledge. 11 and 12. Not known. 13. There is restriction for the cultivation of hemp plant for ganja in this district. The other parts of the question not answered. 14. (a), (b) and (c) No. 15. No knowledge. 16. People prepare bhang in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant grown anywhere. Ganja or charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant grown anywhere. 17. Not known. 18. Ganja, charas and bhang deteriorate by keeping. They perfectly lose their effects in time. They keep good for about two years. Rea- sons of deterioration being the destruction of resinous substances. The deterioration of the drugs can be prevented to a certain extent by keeping them hermetically sealed in tin-lined boxes. 19. Ganja is used for smoking in this district. Charas is not used here. 20. Generally low classes of people smoke ganja here, such as palki-bearers, coolies, dhobies, Bedias, fishermen, up country cooks and servants, etc. 21. Flat and chur ganja are used for smoking indiscriminately in this district. 22. Charas not used here and hence no import. 23. No. 24. Bhang is occasionally used as drink by the people here, specially by the up-country men, and it is rarely eaten by some prepared with luchis and kachuris. 25. The use of ganja is on the decrease owing to its increased price. 26. Most of the ganja-smokers fall under the head (a), i.e., habitual moderate consumers. A few fall under head (c), i.e., occasional moderate consumers. 27. Ganja is generally used by the low classes of people who are subject to excessive labour and exposure. 28. From 2 to 4 pice worth ganja being taken by each individual here among the habitual moderate consumers every day, morning and evening. 29. Dried tobacco leaves are mixed generally with ganja by the ganja-smokers here. Dhatura is not used. Tobacco leaves are mixed with ganja in order to remove its pungency. While bhang is drunk, it is generally mixed with milk and sugar. Dhatura seed is occasionally mixed with bhang for drink. 30. People generally consume ganja in solitude. Its use is chiefly confined to male sex and generally from adult age. It is not used by the children here. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is easily Formed. It is not difficult to break off the habit. The moderate ganja-consumers may turn to be excessive ones. 32. No custom either social or religious in regard to the consumption of any of the drugs in question here. 33. People generally regard the ganja-smokers with some degree of hatred. There is no concern with the religion here. The ganja-smokers are generally of peevish and hot temperament, so they are disliked by the people. No custom to worship hemp plant here. 34. It would certainly be a serious privation to habitual moderate ganja-consumers to forego the use of the drug. They lose their energy and appetite and get flatulence. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of the drug at once. If it be prohibited, then the ganja-smokers will resort to illicit dealings. Prohibition is therefore not desirable, as it will render serious discontent among the consumers. No political danger is apprehended if the use of the drug is discontinued. The prohibition of the ganja-smoking is very likely to be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other narcotic drugs. 36. I don't think. 37. I have no knowledge of charas-smoking. 38. No difference in effects. 39. Smoking of the preparation of the hemp plant is more injurious than drinking the same, because the smokers generally possess diseases of the lungs and air passages, such as bronchitis, h316 preparation, and according to the constitution of the persons using the drug; the after-effects of the drug being general depression. The above answers under 44 are applicable to the habitual moderate consumers of bhang. Yes; uneasiness or longing for the drugs, ganja and bhang, is felt if not subsequently used in time. 45. (a) The moderate use of ganja and bhang does not produce any noxious effects, physically, mentally or morally. (b) to (f) No. 46. All the faculties, physical, mental and moral, are impaired by the excessive use of the ganja-smoking. The excessive use of ganja pro- duces dysentery, asthma, bronchitis, chronic ca- tarrh and h317 28. Average allowance. Cost per diem. Ganja (a) Charas Bhang 71/2 to 15 grs. 5 5/8 to 111/4 " 6 annas weight 3 to 6 pies. 3 to 6 pies. 3 pies. Ganja (b) Charas Bhang 45 to 60 grs. 45 grs. 2 1/2 tolas. 1 anna and 6 pies to 2 annas. 2 annas. 1 anna 6 pies. 29. Ganja is ordinarily (a) mixed with tobacco and exceptionally (b) with charas. Charas is generally taken with tobacco. Bhang is ordinarily mixed either with salt and black pepper or with milk and sugar. The following are the ingredients of the bhang massala sold in the shop, viz., (1) dry rose leaves, (2) cucumber seeds, (3) kakur seeds, (4) kasni, (5) kahu or lettuce seeds, (6) poppy seeds, (7) gokuro kanta (seeds), and (8) aniseed. 30. The consumption of ganja and charas is generally practised in company and that of bhang in solitude. It is not particularly confined to any time of life. Excepting the prostitutes and Bairagis the consumption of charas, ganja and bhang is mainly confined to the male sex. Some women take bhang for chronic bowel complaints. It is unusual for children to consume any of thesedrugs. 31. The habit of consuming all these drugs is easily formed. It is difficult to break off the habit of smoking ganja and charas, but comparatively easy in the case of bhang. There is no tendency in the case of any of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. In the religious custom a little bhang is taken as a drink on certain festivals, such as Bijoya Dasami day, after the Durga Thakur has been thrown into a river, and bhang water is also thrown on the head of certain lingas. The devotees assert that they drink bhang to forget the miseries of the world, and there is a popular saying that bhang increases intelligence and ensures success, but ganja does the reverse. 33. The consumption of all these drugs, especi- ally ganja and charas is held in disrepute. 34. There would be a serious privation to the consumers of all these drugs to forego their use, because they will suffer for want of them, from pains in the abdomen, diarrh318 24. People from all classes drink bhang. 25. Decrease in the case of ganja on account of its enhanced price, and of the high price of food grains. No increase or decrease in the case of charas and bhang. 26. Ganja. Charas. Bhang. (a) about 75 per 90 per cent 90 per cent. cent. (b) " 15 " 10 " 5 " (c) " 5 " 2 " (d) " 5 " 3 " 27. From all classes. Association with con- sumers in the case of all the three drugs, and use as a remedy for disease in the case of ganja and bhang, mainly lead to the practice. 28. Allowance by weight. Cost. (a) Ganja 1/2 to 1 anna 21/4 to 41/2 pies. Charas 1/2 anna 3 pies Bhang 3 annas 11/2 pies (b) Ganja 2 2/3 to 51/2 annas 1 to 2 annas Charas Bhang 1/2 chittack 11/2 annas 29. Ganja is (a) ordinarily mixed with tobacco, to make it bulkier, and with tobacco leaves, to make it stronger. It is (b) exceptionally mixed with charas to make it stronger. Dhatura is not so used. Bhang massala is sold here for the purpose of being mixed with bhang. Its ingre- dients are dry rose petals, cucumber seeds, kakur seeds, kashni seeds, kahu (lettuce) seeds, poppy seeds, gokhura seeds, black pepper, aniseed. 30. Ganja and charas mostly in company. Bhang alone as well as in company. Mainly con- fined to the male sex to middle and old age. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed and is difficult to break off. No tendency for the moderate to develop into the excessive habit. The answers refer to every one of the three drugs. 32. Certain sects of people, such as sanyasis, yogis, and recluses, offer ganja to Mahadeo (the destroying member of the Hindu Trinity). In the mela of Tinnath or Trinath (Mahadeo) ganja is always consumed by the votaries assembled. On such occasions the use of ganja is essential It is both temperate and excessive. No habit can be formed unless such custom is frequently observed. It is essential to drink bhang on the day of the Navami Puja (the third day of the Durga Puja); and on the day of Saraswati Puja (goddess of learning). No habit can be formed from observing these customs. 33. Consumption of ganja and charas is not regarded with favour except in the cases of yogis, sanyasis, and fakirs. There is a public opinion in regard to the practice. It is disapproval. Theconsumers are believed to be of irritable temper. Consumption of bhang is not regarded with dis- favour. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. Yes. The want of the drug brings about lassitude, disinclination for work, loss of appetite, dyspepsia, rheumatic, and colic pains. 35. (d) No. (b) Yes. (c) By law and police vigilance. (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) (a) No. (b) Yes. 36. No. 37. Effects similar. Of ganja instantaneous; of charas not quite so rapid; of bhang slow, but lasting longer, and is in some cases characterised in the first stage of intoxication by a sense of irascibility, the bhang consumer bursting out every now and again into loud peals of immoderate laughter. 38. No. 40. Medicinally bhang is used internally; ganja, only in external applications. 41. (a) Yes, all three are so used by consumers from all classes. (b) Yes, all three so used by labourers and fishermen. (c) Yes, all three so used mostly by up-country- men who come for work here. It is the moderate habitual use which is referred to here. 43. Yes. 44. Yes, it is refreshing. Produces intoxica- tion. Allays hunger. Creates appetite. The above answers refer to every one of the three drugs. Effects of ganja last fifteen to thirty minutes, of charas, two to four hours; and of bhang twelve to eighteen hours. No after-effects in the case of any of the three drugs. Want of subsequent gratification produces longing after the drug and uneasiness, in the case of all the three drugs. 45. Evidence on these points is conflicting. Some of the consumers maintain, others deny, that evil effects are produced. 46. Habitual excessive use sometimes produces insanity, and causes most of the evil effects refer- red to in question 45. 47 and 48. No. 49. Yes, sometimes. It is not so used by pros- titutes. 50. Excessive use will produce impotence in some cases. 123. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON DEVENDRANATH ROY, Brahmin, Teacher of Medical Jurisprudence, Campbell Medical School, Calcutta. 1. Being in Government service for over twentyyears, I have been, among other places, in Raj- putana, the North-Western Provinces, Behar, and Bengal, where hemp drugs are used by a large portion of people. Latterly, since 1884, I have been in charge of a ward of the Campbell Hos- pital, where, among others, lunatics are treated, and many of them do usethose drugs. 2. In places where I have served Dr. Prain's nomenclature is known, and is used for the pre- parations of hemp. 19. Yes, only for smoking. 20. As far as my information goes, the lower classes of people of the North-Western Provinces, Behar, and the Eastern Districts of Bengal smoke
319 ganja in large number. In those places charas is not so much smoked. About 20 per cent. of the population use those drugs. The number of the "bhadralok" class of people in East Bengal using those drugs is greater than in any other place that I know of. 21. Chur is preferred. 22. I do not know of any besides the native. 23. Only as a substitute for ganja, when that is not available. 24. Those who are habitually accustomed to take bhang, always drink it. Only when they have no time or place to make it into a pulp, it is eaten, and not otherwise that I know of. 25. Probably the use of ganja is on the increase. For I have heard people who are classed as "bhadralok," and who have some education too, but being of straitened circumstances cannot afford to indulge in expensive intoxicating drugs, do smoke ganja. Formerly people of their rank and status would never have done so. There are a good number of people also in the eastern dis- tricts of Bengal who, after drinking spirits or wine, smoke ganja to make the intoxication more profound. This practice has sprung up within living memory. 26. Bhang and ganja320 ering the amount of good that will result from the prohibition. 35. I do not think it will be quite feasible to do so all on a sudden. Every attempt to consume it illicitly will be made. Prohibition will very likely lead to drinking, which will be more expensive, and the consumers will not be able to afford it; hence crime will increase. I do not think that it will lead to any political danger. 36. I do not think so. 37. Ganja intoxicates instantaneously and pro- foundly. Charas is less intoxicating: it makes one dull; whereas when not taken in excess, makes one lively. The effect of the former lasts longer than that of the latter. 38. Chur is more preferred for its greater intoxi- cating property. 39. Smoking any preparation of the hemp is more injurious than drinking or eating any portion of it; because in the gaseous form its active prin- ciple is directly absorbed in the blood through the lungs, and the effect is instantaneous, whereas when taken in solid or liquid form absorption through the stomach is slower; and by the time its full physiological effect is produced, at least some portion of it is eliminated through the ex- cretory organs. 40. In ancient Sanskrit books on medicine bhang is only mentioned. Its synonyms are siddhi, ganja, matulani, madini, bijaya, and jaya. It is used by kabirajes for its medical properties. Ganja is not mentioned in Charaka or Shusrata. In Tantrik books it is mentioned. There it is called ugra and not ganja. It is used by kabirajes as a medicine. Charas is not mentioned in any of these books. I do not know of any of these drugs used for cattle disease, but bhang mixed with turmeric and treacle is given to horses and bul- locks after fatiguing journeys. 41. Habitual moderate use. (a) Bhang is digestive, but not food accessory. (b) Ganja is considered to give more staying- power, and alleviates fatigue than bhang. Both have similar properties. (c) None of the hemp drugs is considered as such. (d) They are stimulants, hence used as such by people living in unhealthy places as well. All classes of people, rich and low, use bhang and ganja for purposes indicated under (a) and (d).Only the poor, who have to undergo severe bodily labour to earn their livelihood, use for purposes indicated under (b). 42. I do not consider it harmless because it affects the brain. Any agent which causes de- rangement of it by stupefying it cannot be harm- less when such condition is produced habitually. 43. Yes. 44. To habitual consumers they are intoxicating, hence refreshing. They do not allay hunger. Only bhang creates appetite. Three or four hours will be the longest time for their effect to last. The after-effects are not marked. There is always a longing for the drugs, but that is marked at the hour for their habitual use. 45. Those who smoke ganja not more than twice or thrice a day and can afford to get good food, do not suffer in general health; but the absence of good food will make the ganja-smoker deteriorate in health. Mentally and morally all smokers fare alike. They become short-tempered and careless. Bhang does not impair digestion, whereas ganja does. Those of my patients who ad- mitted of having been habitual ganja-smokers suf- fered from dysentery or diarrh321 my hospital records I find that out of 49 purely ganja cases 24 were violent, 7 boisterous, 6 talka- tive, 1 suicidal, 9 had large delusions, and 2 were religious maniacs. The practice in the Campbell Hospital is to send away lunatics to Dullunda, or to make them over to their relatives when they have lucid intervals, so re-admissions are not very frequent; but in my private practice I have found relapses always follow whenever the old habit of using hemp drugs is resumed. I know of people who when very young, about 17 or 18 years old, con- tracted the habit of smoking ganja, and within a short time they became inveterate ganja-smokers. After some four years or so they became insane temporarily. There was no family history of nervous disease of any sort. 47. No. I do not think that such children suffer from any nervous disease. 49. In small doses used as aphrodisiac. I do not know whether prostitutes use it for such pur- poses, and my information goes to show that it is not much used by them for such purposes. Not more injurious than other narcotics. I do not think it tends to produce impotency. 51. Not that I do know of. As far as my ex- perience goes, the moderate use of these drugs has little or no connection with crime. 52. I cannot remember of any definite case. 53. Excessive indulgence in ganja does incite to violent crime. I know of a certain individual who came from a good family, and who contracted the habit of smoking ganja very early. At last he became insane. One day, after he had taken ganja he attacked a female relation of his, and killed her. On judicial enquiry he was found to be insane, and thus escaped the extreme penalty of law. 54. I have heard so. 55. Not that I know of. Complete stupefaction cannot be produced by preparations of hemp un- less the quantity be very large, which itself will produce suspicion in the mind of the intended victim. In McLeod's book of Medico Legal Ex- perience, page 115, only one case of death from bhang poisoning is mentioned. It was reported from Benares, but the issue of this case was not stated in the original. Majum, a preparation of bhang by boiling it in milk, and sweetmeats pre- pared with that milk. Two cases of poisoning by it are reported from Hoshangabad by Dr. P.Cullen in the "Indian Medical Gazette" for June 1868. It was not administered with the intention of causing death, but to effect a criminal purpose. 56. The ingredients I have mentioned before, and which are mixed with bhang, are used to make the drink palatable. Dhatura is mixed with bhang for personal consumption. I do not know the mixture to have been used for criminal pur- poses; it is quite possible to be thus used though. 57. I do not know of such instances. Oral evidence. I entered Government service in May 1873. My medical degree is L. M. S. of Calcutta. Question 20.322 cases the patient had a fit in the ward. This tends to show that it is impossible for me to find out any cause that I do not see. That is the case. By enquiry I may ascertain the use of a drug; or by seeing a fit of epilepsy I may find out that cause; but, apart from that, it is almost impossible for me to ascertain a cause. I know of no literature dealing with hemp drug insanity. I am teacher of Medical Jurisprudence, Campbell Medical School. 124. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON AKBAR KHAN, Teacher, Temple Medical School, Patna. 1. I have had no other and better opportuni- ties of obtaining information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs in regard to which my answers are framed than that I have at times observed some accidental cases, and that I have referred to many persons using these drugs moderately and excessively, especially some jogis and habitual smokers of ganja. 2. The definitions given of siddhi or bhang, charas and ganja by Dr. Prain appear to be cor- rect, and may be accepted for this province. Baluchar ganja is sold here generally. Bhang is known here by the name of bhang or sabzi, charas by charas, and ganja by ganja. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. They are not put to any other use. 20. Jogis, sanyasis, fakirs and lower classes of people smoke ganja largely. 21. Flat ganja, which is called baluchar ganja in this place, is preferred for smoking. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used, and it is obtained from Nepal, Kashmir and other high lands. 23. Bhang is generally used for drinking and not for smoking. But when the habitual smoker of ganja and charas has got none in his possession, he then, with great reluctance, uses bhang for smoking only to satisfy his mind; but this does not satiate his craving so much as ganja or charas would do. 28. The average allowance and cost of each of these drugs is per diem to323 more or less excitement and congestion of eyes. It is refreshing. It produces a little intoxication. It does not allay hunger, but it creates more or less appetite. Its effect lasts for two or three hours. There are very little or no after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification produces some longing and uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not produce any physical, mental, or moral change. It does not impair the constitu- tion in any way. It rather increases the appe- tite and- keeps the digestion in order, Charas and ganja cause dysentery, bronchitis, and asthma if the consumers are not well fed. It does not impair the moral sense or induce laziness or habits of immorality; but new smokers feel inclined to debauchery to a more or less extent. It does not deaden the intellect or produce any real insanity. I know of some cases in which it produced some insanity which appeared to be merely an exciting cause and of a temporary nature. I had no opportunity of seeing the symptoms re-induced by the use of the drugs after liberation from restraint in the cases that I saw. The symptoms in such temporary insanity are not at all typical. They consist only of some excitement of the brain, with either loss or increase of appetite, from which he recovers shortly after. I have not seen or heard of any case in which there existed any connection between insanity and the use of hemp. What it produces is only some temporary disorder of mind and no insanity in its true sense or literal meaning. I wish to illustrate this fact by an example, which will throw some light upon the subject. A respectable friend of mine was once given some sherbet to drink in which a large quantity of bhang was mixed. A few minutes after be felt as if he were once lifted to heaven and thrown down again on the earth. His whole body, especially the head, became hot, and his eyes reddened and seemed as if they were shooting out. His senses became very acute. He laughed at one moment and cried at another, and passed a whole night and half of the next day in this condition. The symptoms then passed away and he came to himself again. His mind was all the while quite clear. One who had no knowledge of his previous history would not but call him insane if he saw him in the condition described above; but this was no insanity. It was only a temporary excitement of the brain, which passed off after some hours. Hence I am inclined to believe that there is no connection between permanent insanity and the use ofhemp. 46. The same as 45, with the difference that the excessive use of any of these drugs produces some physical change, such as emaciation and broken constitution. 47 and 48. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs is not hereditary. Nor does it affect in any way the children of the moderate consumer. 49. The moderate use of ganja is sometimes practised as an aphrodisiac. Prostitutes use it for the same purpose. The use of the drug for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic, because it forces only a temporary and slight excitement for the time, weakening the power of the nerves gradually if repeated. The use of hemp does not produce impotence. 50. The same as 49; the difference being that the excessive use of any of these drugs does not make any change in the sexual power. 51 and 52. Moderate consumption of any of these drugs is not confined to bad characters. The consumers are scarcely known to have com- mitted any crime in general or of any special character. 53. No. 55. The criminals, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of these drugs and so stupefy them; but complete stupe- faction cannot, perhaps, be induced by any of these drugs without admixture. 56. The admixture of other substances in mod- eration or excess makes the drugs more or less mild. Dry tobacco leaves and khamira (of tobacco) diminish the effect of ganja and charas respect- ively. Rose water, raisins, etc. (mentioned in 29) make the bhang milder and cooler. I do not possess any information regarding the ad- mixture of dhatura, nux vomica, cantharides, opium or betel-nut for personal consumption or for administration to others. 57. I do not know of any case in which ganja or charas is said to be eaten or drunk. I know of one preparation called majum which is made with bhang, and which produces only some pleasant effect upon the mind. The man under its influence goes on laughing and seems to be quite jolly. 125. Evidence of Assistant Surgeon SOORJEE NARAIN SINGH, Kayasth, Bankipur. I have been Assistant Surgeon for the last 28 years; was in charge of dispensaries in Darjeeling, Gaya, Behar (Sub-division), Civil Medical Officer of Deoghur, Teacher of Materia Medica and Thera- peutics and Medical Jurisprudence in Dacca Medi- cal School, and Medical Visitor of the Dacca Lunatic Asylum. I am now Teacher of Materia Medica and Therapeutics, Temple Medical School, Patna, and a Medical Visitor of the Patna LunaticAsylum. 2. Yes, the definitions correspond with the local acceptance of the terms. In Behar the terms siddhi, subji or patti are not popularly used; bhang is the popular term. 19. Ganja and charas are generally used by the people for smoking. Ganja is rarely eaten. Charas, however, is eaten or drunk in solution by a limited number of the dregs of the populace, especially of the Arab and Negro community. 20. Ganja is used by many of the well-to-do idle Hindus in Behar, sparingly so by that class of people in Bengal. It is used largely by the low castes of Bengal and Behar, especially of the latter place. The worshippers of Mahadeva, as a rule, and fakirs and sanyasis, more or less, of all denominations use it. But the Vaishnavas of Bengal, the Dandis, the Nirmalas, the Akalis and Udasis of the Nanak Shahi sect, and many others never use it. Many mendicants and most of the dissipated and depraved use it. Charas is less used, as the generality of people can ill afford to buy it. It is a favourite intoxicant with many of the well-to-do Muhammadans leading a dissipated life. Hindus do not use charas so much, probably because it is collected on leather. 21. Flat ganja is more largely consumed than the round or chur, which, however, are consider- ed to be of a superior quality and more expensive. 2 X 2
324 22. Mirzapur or Nepali charas is chiefly used in Behar, but Herat charas is considered the best. 23. Bhang is sometimes, though very rarely, used by the indigent in outlying places for smok- ing, when ganja is not available. 24. In Behar, the North-Western Provinces, the Punjab and Orissa bhang is a favourite drink of a certain class of Hindus, especially of the upper castes to whom spirituous liquor is prohi- bited. The Brijobasis of Mathura and the people of Rajputana are well-known bhang drinkers. In Bengal the use of bhang is very limited and is in- dulged in generally on particular ceremonial occasions; as for instance, on the Bijoya Dasami day of Durga Puja with the Bengalis. Many up-country men325 number of the consumers of hemp who are not orthodox in their faiths will have recourse to al- coholic stimulants or other drugs, such as opium, dhatura, etc. 36. In India bhang and ganja were the prin- cipal intoxicants from time immemorial. These have been, to a certain extent, replaced by wine owing to (1) high duty on hemp, (2) cheap outstill wine, (3) import of European wines. The import of European liquor has been the cause of dimi- nishing the use of hemp and of increasing the use of alcohol in Bengal and Behar. 37. Charas is considered to be more mildly intoxicating than ganja. But the intoxication lasts longer. It serves the smokers both for wine and opium. From bhang-drinking intoxication will ensue in half an hour, and last two or three hours, whereas in ganja or charas-smoking intoxi- cation ensues almost instantly, and lasts about an hour or so. Excessive drinking of bhang is more injurious than smoking ganja or charas. Exces- sive and continued use of bhang induces a state of frenzy and is more likely to bring on insanity than such use of ganja-smoking. The general constitution also suffers more from excessive use of bhang-drinking. 38. As the chur and round ganja contain more of the resinous matter, they are more intoxicating than flat ganja. 39. Smoking of ganja or charas is less injurious than eating or drinking the same, or excessive drinking of bhang or eating majum, because the effect of smoking is less intense and more evanes- cent in its character. Besides, when any of these preparations are drunk or eaten, the digestive system is more taxed, and disorders of digestion with its attendant consequences, dyspepsia and diarrh326 gait, a cunning look, constant giggling and rubbing of hands. The subject is at times violent, and exhibits signs of excessive hunger or sexual excitement. Insanity of this kind is generally of a temporary nature, readily cured under proper restraint and treatment, and said to be as readily re-induced by resuming the use of the drug. Most of these men confess to the use of the drug; some deny. I know of no case of brain disease or mental anxiety where persons took ganja for relief and became insane; nor do I know, on the contrary, of insanes taking to ganja, because of deficient self-control and weakened intellect. 47. Heredity is never noticed in the causation of hemp-consuming habit in the offspring, although they may acquire such habit by evil company at home and bad training. In some cases of habitual moderate ganja-smokers the children are seen to suffer in physique and mental and moral powers. 48. As above, with greater force. 49. These drugs are often used by the dissi- pated and low class prostitutes as an aphrodisiac. Persons using these drugs for this purpose are tempted to gradually go into excess. After each excitement there is a corresponding depression and a gradual decrease of mental and sexual powers, a general deterioration of health. To make good this depression and disability increased doses are taken recourse to which again only magnifies the evil consequences and eventually results in impotence. 50. Excessive use of these drugs as an aphro- disiac produces more injurious effects than its use as an ordinary narcotic327 are attributed to ganja, but I have no personal knowledge of this matter. There is a great deal of difference between alcoholic delirium tremens and the ganja temporary insanity I have been de- scribing and they are easily distinguished. In the case of alcohol the man speaks sense, but has occasional and particular delusions. He has clear mind otherwise. The ganja man has always hal- lucinations. The trembling of hand and tongue is not so much in the case of ganja as in alcoholic delirium tremens. Besides the giggling and other additional symptoms mentioned above are not found in alcoholic delirium tremens. The duration of the latter is also shorter than in the case of ganja. 126. Evidence of Assistant Surgeon NEMAI CHURN CHATTERJI, Brahmin, Bhagalpur. 1. I have had no special opportunities of study- ing the qualities and characteristic effects of hemp drugs; but living as I do at a place where cooks, menial servants, palki-bearers, and low class Hindus generally are addicted to ganja-smoking, and where bhang is freely drunk by darwans and even by men belonging to a better class, I have seen and known some of the effects produced by these drugs on their consumers. I have also known something of these drugs in my experience as a medical practitioner. 2. Bhang, charas and ganja. 19. So far as I know, they are used only for smoking. 23. I have never seen or known the smoking of bhang. 28. (a) Four and five chillums of ganja, cost 2 pice; and one pice worth of bhang. (b) Two bharis of ganja, cost 8 or 10 annas; and 2 annas worth of bhang. 29. I don't know of any admixtures. I don't know of any such preparation. But when bhang is drunk by well-to-do persons as a stomachic, they generally mix with the bhang aniseeds, cloves, cardamoms, dried rose buds, cucumber seeds, and such like things. 30. Bhang is generally drunk in solitude, and ganja smoked in company. Excepting female sanyasis (mendicants), I have not seen any female ganja-smoker or bhang-drinker. No; so far as I know I don't think it usual for children to con- sume any of these drugs, though a few low class boys, specially those whose fathers or guardians are addicted to the drugs, learn to use them while yet in their teens. 31. In my opinion the habit is, comparatively speaking, easily formed and easily broken off. A confirmed ganja-smoker or bhang-drinker does not feel the want of his favourite drug so keenly and has not the acute hankering after it which the confirmed opium-eater or alcohol-drinker has for his. I think there is a tendency in the case of these drugs, as in fact in the case of every intoxicant, for the moderate to develop into the excessive. But in this case the tendency is neither so rapid nor so marked as in the case of certain other intoxicants, and can be more easily checked. 35. The only custom that I am aware of is the drinking of siddhi (bhang) in the Lower Provinces of Bengal on the Bijaya Dasami day. It has now become a quasi-religious custom, and the use of the drug on that day is essential. On that day, after the immersion of the image of the Goddess Durga into water, friends and relatives visit one another's house and are offered siddhi (bhang) and sweets. I am inclined to think that the cus- tom was originally a social one, though promul- gated under the ægis of religion, as every Hindu custom is. On that day relatives, forgetting at least for the time their old quarrels and ancient differences, embrace one another and drink siddhi in one another's house. Even those who don't touch or taste anything that intoxicates, must take the prepared siddhi on that day with the tips of their fingers and taste it. Siddhi is regarded by the Hindus as an emblem of peace and pros- perity, hence it is offered for drink at that day along with sweetmeats. But apart from this emblematic use of the drug, I think there was originally another reason for its use. Bijaya Dasami is a day of hard work for the votaries of Durga, and some stimulant was found necessary to sustain their energies and also to alleviate their fatigue. Siddhi is mentioned in the Hindu medi- cal books as a stimulant. It is also cheap, and hence possibly its use was resorted to. One day's use does not produce any injurious effects or forma habit. 36. No. 37. I have no experience of charas smoking. 39. I have no experience. 40. Ganja and bhang in their naked form are very rarely prescribed by the kabirajes of Bengal, but are occasionally used by the Missers of these places in certain diseases. They are, however, largely used in the composition of several native medicines both in Bengal and in Behar. 41. Those who smoke ganja or drink bhang say that these drugs are digestive, and they alle- viate fatigue and give staying-power under exer- tion and exposure. Boatmen and people in East Bengal smoke ganja to prevent the consequences of damp and vicissitudes of climate. 42. I have not seen any bad effects produced by the moderate use of ganja or bhang, and hence I think that the moderate use of these drugs is harmless. 44. The immediate effect of ganja is said to be refreshing. I don't think it allays hunger for any length of time, but it is said to create appe- tite. Its want produces uneasiness and dulness. 45. I don't think that the habitual moderate use of ganja and bhang produces any noxious effects, physical, mental or moral. 46. The habitual excessive use of ganja impairs constitution, injures digestion, and may cause dysentery and produce insanity of delirious type and also roughens the temper and deadens intellect. 47.and 48. No. I don't think so. 49. I have reasons to believe that ganja and bhang are used as aphrodisiaes; but I have no further experience on the subject. 56 and 57. Have no experience.
328 127. Evidence of Assistant Surgeon BEHARI LAL PAL, Sadgop, Krishnagar, Nadia. 1. Personal experience. 2. Yes; siddhi, charas and ganja. 3 and 4. Not known. 5. I do not know. 6. I saw only few scattered hemp plants in Jessore district. 7. Not known to me. 10 to 12. Not known. 13. Is restricted in this district. 14. Not known. 15. I do not know. 16 and 17. Not known. 18. They quite lose their effects in time. But with ordinary care they may keep good for one year, I think. To prevent deterioration they must be kept in an air-tight case on an elevated place. 19. They are used in smoking in this district. 20. Sanyasis, boatmen, and fishermen. 21. I hear that chur is preferred. 22. Foreign, from Nepal. 23. Not known. 24. Up-country men generally drink bhang. 25 to 28. Not known. 29. Some spices and sugar are ordinarily mixed with bhang. I do not know of any preparation, such as "bhang massala". 30. In company to a greater extent. Children seldom consume these drugs. 31. Yes; I hear that it is difficult to break off.In some cases moderate habit develops into excess. 32. It is a religious custom among the Hindus to drink siddhi in a temperate form on the Bijaya Dasami day. It does not lead to the formation of habit. 33. Not known. 34. I think it would be a serious privation to the habitual consumers to forego the consump- tion of the drug they use. 35. I do not think it would be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. I believe that prohibition will occasion serious discontent among the consumers. Prohibition may be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. I do not think that alcohol is being substi- tuted at present for any of these drugs. 37 to 40. Not known. 41. (a) and (b) I believe so. (c) I have no personal knowledge. (d) Not known. Moderate habitual use is referred to. 43. Yes. 44. It is said to be refreshing, intoxicating, and it excites appetite. 45. (b) I believe so. (c) I do not think. (d) I heard several cases of dysentery occurred among ganja-smokers. (e) I do not think. (f) I think that ganja-smoking deadens the intellect and produces insanity329 carnal sensibilities, as hunger, thirst, etc. Siddhi is consumed by the well- to-do people to "cool the system when it is very hot," for certain ex- citement and as medicines when the bowels are out of order. Religious mendicants take it for the same pur- pose as that for which they consume ganja. 29. Ganja is smoked by itself and siddhi is taken as drink mixed with sweets and spices or eaten with bread (luchis). The object of the admixtures is to make it palatable and increase its strength. 30. The consumption of siddhi is practised in company on occasions; the habitual consumers take it by themselves but not for privacy. Ganja is smoked in solitude as a rule, or in select and private company. Adult males and prostitutes use ganja and siddhi. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is easily formed among the people of the low classes. It is difficult to break off. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. As regards siddhi, the habit is not so easily form- ed; it is easy to break off; and there is not much tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There is a custom among the people of West Bengal to drink siddhi on the last day of the puja during the Dassara festival. Even children are given to drink it. lt is not essen- tial. Only a little is used. The custom, however, has been almost done away with. I knew it as a boy. I do not see it now. In Eastern Bengal the custom is unknown. It is likely to lead to the formation of the habit and is otherwise injuri- ous. There is no custom, social or religious, of using ganja. 33. A ganja-smoker is regarded as an outcast of society. "Ganja-khor" and "ganjel" are terms of opprobrium. They have no position in so- ciety and are looked down upon. They are pests of society, shunned by all and never pitied by any. There is a strong public opinion in regard to the practice. A "ganja-khor" (smoker) is a ruined and a wrecked man; he is potent for mischief and may be up to anything. He may commit murder with an easy conscience. There is no act that he will not do. Hence is the strong sentiment against him. When strongly under the influence of siddhi a man may be as bad as a ganja-smoker, but the moderate drinkers are not generally so regarded. 34. It would not be a serious privation to any class of consumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use. 35. The use of all these drugs may be prohibit- ed. They would not be consumed illicitly to any appreciable extent. The prohibition can be en- forced by stopping the cultivation of the plant altogether and by making it penal for any private individual to do so as an article of trade. The prohibition would not cause serious discontent. It cannot create apolitical danger. It would not be followed by recourse to (a) alcoholic stimulants or (b) other drugs. 36. If the leisured classes get employments for their vacant hours (and the struggle for life is get- ting keener day by day to leave none an unoccu- pied hour now); if the poverty-stricken labouring people get enough to eat for strength to undergo the hard work without being under the necessity of using their reserved force brought forth by a stimulant; if the criminal classes are to be checked from their acts of violence and terror; the use of the drug (ganja) may be prohibited with- out risking anything whatever. The religious mendicants really do not need it, and many of the mendicants are but the deep-dyed criminals in disguise. If the whole class is suppressed, society would not be the worse for it. 37. The effects of charas-smoking differ in degree from those resulting from ganja-smoking. Charas-smoking is stronger than ganja-smoking. 38. I cannot say. 39. I have not had sufficient experience. 40. Ganja and siddhi are used by the kabirajes as medicines in bowel complaints. 41. (a) (b) (c) No. (d) Yes, medicinally otherwise than as a preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts, or a febrifuge. The fishermen, the boatmen, the dâk-runners, the palki-bearers and the sweepers consume ganja under the idea that it gives them staying-power under severe exertions or exposure, and alleviates fatigue. It is a mistaken idea. It simply deadens the feelings and sensibilities. While under its influence a man may bring into use all the strength in him without feeling bad till all his strength is drained away and lie is left a complete wreck; just as a man with a paralysed hand (the sensibility only being affected) would handle a piece of live charcoal till the hand is char- red and dead and useless, he never feeling at any moment what had been coming on. This is the case with the insufficiently fed poor hard-working men. Those who can afford to eat up to the stand- ard may keep off the injurious effects of the drug for a time, but ultimately they do succumb as well. I refer to the habitual use of the drug. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours; but all the same they are ever dreaded and never trusted, for they may break into vio- lence any moment by taking an extra dose. None are safe who have got a consumer in their midst. I say this of ganja and charas smoker especially. 44. As regards siddhi, a habitual consumer after a moderate dose feels refreshed and light; a slight intoxication may be produced. It allays hunger and fatigue; it creates appetite and cools the system. The effect lasts for about two hours. As regards ganja, in a habitual con- sumer it cheers up the system, creates appetite and removes fatigue. The effect lasts for an hour or two; the after-effects are very pronounced; the appetite is gone, insomnia is induced, the chest is affected, and the constitution breaks down com- pletely. A man cannot eat nor sleep, and be- comes a prey to all its concomitant evils. He is either a raving maniac or a religious idiot; the inmate of an asylum or a street beggar or the hermit of a cell. 45. (a) Yes; ganja and charas particularly. (b) Ganja impairs the constitution in more than one way. (c) Yes. (d) Yes. (e) Yes; a ganja- smoker is never a moral being. He or she is generally a debauchee. He is active as long as he lasts. (f) It does not deaden the intellect altogether. It produces insanity of a violent type, which generally has a religious element in it. It is often permanent. (g) A man takes to ganja- smoking not with a hope to obtain relief from mental anxieties, but for forgetting his physical wants when he is ill-fed and hard-worked, or for driving away the heaviness from an unoccupied 2 Y
330 mind, or for stimulating the carnal desires when he has got more than enough to enjoy. 46. Excessive ganja-smoking would occasionally cause temporary insanity, a mania of homicidal character. A man would commit murder under its influence. The habitual excessive use completely ruins a man: his intellect is gone, his moral faculties are dead, and his constitution is a wreck. The effects of bhang-drinking on a man, who never had it before, are horrid. He never forgets them after he had experienced them once. 47 and 84. I do not think so. 49. Yes. It is so used by the prostitutes. Its use for this purpose is more injurious, or it has to be taken in less increasing doses to keep up the exciting effect till the excessive excitement ends in impotence as its just reaction. 50. The strong excitement due to the excessive use brings on the reaction sooner. With this view religious mendicants take to the use of the drug. They must need suppress their carnal desires. 51. A large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of ganja and siddhi. Moderate use deadens the moral faculty. Exces- sive use excites the will-power to a high pitch, and a man may commit any act of daring while so excited. 54. Yes. These drugs have the peculiar pro- perty of helping abstraction and concentration of forces, both mental and physical. If a man wants to concentrate his mind to a special subject or wants to bring all his engergies to bear upon the performance of a certain act, he smokes ganja. While under its influence he forgets everything else; all responsibilities gone, his conscience and reasoning powers are laid at rest. He acts with vigour as if not his own, for there is no dissipation of energies. I have had no instances. A gang of dacoits would consume their ganja before they start on their business. A man is bent upon taking revenge on his adversary; he is weak and timid; he smokes his ganja and is in a moment turned to a ferocious being. 56. I cannot say. 57. I know of no such cases. 62. It should be stopped as far as the Govern- ment is concerned. The people may cultivate a little for their private use or for medicinal pur- poses. 63. The cultivation of the plant or the sale of the articles should not be in the hands of the Government. No countenance whatever should be given to the use of the drug. 64. I asked a ganja-smoker why he did take to the use of it. He said because it was brought to him, otherwise he would never have sought it out. 68. There are shops licensed for the sale of these drugs. These shops should be closed. 69. Local opinion ought to be taken before a shop is opened; and if it is taken, I think there would be no occasion to open one in any locality, for the ganja-smokers are cowards and the public have no sympathy for them whatever. Oral evidence. Question 1.331 to in the answer. I did not drink it on the latter occasion. It is not my recollection of the bad effects which has made me avoid the drug. I avoid everything that is unpleasant to me, and I have no attraction for bhang. Question 54.332 the ordinary way, but in company it generally comes to an excess to some extent. Bhang or ganja is generally confined to the male sex, but females sometimes use bhang and not ganja. Children are seldom found to use any of these two drugs except when it is given them in the shape of medi- cines by kabirajes. 31. The habit of consuming bhang or ganja is easily formed, but it is difficult on the part of the habitual excessive consumers to break off, though it is not the case with habitual moderate consumers. There is a tendency in the case of either of these two drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There is a religious custom amongst the Hindus, as far as my information goes, that offerings are made by them annually to certain gods of bhang prepared with the ingredients here- inbefore mentioned with the addition of ripe plantains, etc., of which they partake moderately, looking upon it as a holy thing; but it is not like- ly to lead to the formation of the habit. 36. There is no reason to think so. 37. The effects of ganja-smoking are stronger and more rapid in intoxication than those of bhang-drinking, which make a comparatively slow progress. 39. Ganja-smoking is injurious, but eating or drinking ganja is very rare as stated elsewhere. 40. Bhang and ganja are prescribed by kabi- rajes or baidyas on account of their medicinal properties. Bhang is, as far as I know, used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Moderate use of bhang or ganja may be beneficial in its effects333 patient, or as soon after as was convenient. Since 1880 the work has been regularly done by me. Then this same register contains below these entries the history of the patient in the asylum. This history is, as a rule, wholly written by the Superintendent. The cause is entered in the register from the descriptive roll. The cause was not shown sepa- rately in the details at the top of the page until 1890, when I inserted a heading for the sake of convenience. Before 1890 it was shown always clearly in the first entry, copied or abstracted from the descriptive roll. When the descriptive roll showed the cause as "not known," but stated under the heading about intoxicants that the patient used ganja, the insanity was always shown in the asylum books as due to ganja. Dr. French in 1880 gave me an order to do so, and this has been the procedure ever since. I have not referred the point to other Superintendents, but simply followed this procedure. The only other kind of difference from the de- scriptive roll that I can recall to mind is when an entry of cause, which really means nothing (such as derangement of brain), is put down in the de- scriptive roll, I refer to the Superintendent as to what I should enter. He would in almost all cases tell me to enter "Not known." These are the only cases in which the register differs from the descriptive roll as to cause, so far as I remember. Cause is never entered in the register from enquiry made after the patient's ad- mission. I know of no case of this being done. The entry made at the top of the page would never be altered. But if any enquiry which I might make showed cause not hitherto known, this fact would be entered in the history of the case. I remember such cases, and I might be able to point them out. But that entry in the history of the case would not alter the cause, as shown in Statement VII of the annual report. That statement is filled up only from the entries made in the descriptive roll as copied into our register. I would mention to the Superintendent that in conversation with the lunatic I had ascertained that he took ganja, or that he had asked me for ganja; and the Superin- tendent would enter that fact in the history of the case. Not even where the cause is left blank would any entry ever be made afterwards on that subject among the entries taken from the descrip- tive rolls. I know of no use to which the Superin- tendent would put the information I thus gave him,beyond the advantage of knowing more of the case. It would not be used in compiling State- ment VII. I compile that statement, and have done so for seventeen years. I have spoken to the friends of lunatics about the cause of insanity. But I do not think I have ever reported to the Superintendent anything told me by friends. I have never kept friends for the Superintendent to see. 132. Evidence of BABU DURGA DASS LAHIRI, Brahmin, Medical Practitioner, Rangpur. 1. From persons using hemp drugs. 2. Locally known by the name of ganja and charas as well as bhang and siddhi. 3. Rajshahi, Bogra, Rangpur and Pabna. It is abundant in Rangpur. 4. Ganja and bhang. Bhang and ganja are of different species. 5. Not known. 6. Generally dense. 7. No cultivation. 10 to 12. Not known. 13. There is restriction for cultivation of ganja in this district. The other points of the question not answered. 14. (a), (b) and (c) No. 15. Not known. 16. People prepare bhang in their houses. It can be prepared from hemp plant grown anywhere. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant grown anywhere. 17. Not known. 18. Ganja, charas, and bhang deteriorate by keeping. They perfectly lose their effects in time. Keep good about two years, cause of deterioration being the destruction of resinous substances. The deterioration of the drugs can be prevented to some extent by keeping them hermetically sealed in some tin-lined boxes. 19. In this district ganja is used for smoking. Charas is not used here. 20. Generally low classes of people smoke the ganja here, viz., palki-bearers, coolies, fishermen, etc. 21. Flat and chur ganja are used here indiscri- minately for smoking. 22. Charas not used, and hence there is no import here. 23. No. 24. Bhang is occasionally used as drink by the people here, especially by the up-country men. 25. The use of ganja is on the decrease owing to its increased prices. 26. Most of the ganja-smokers here fall under head (a), habitual moderate consumers. 27. Ganja is generally used by the low classes of people, who are subject to excessive toils and exposure. 28. From two to four pice worth ganja being taken by each individual here among the habitual moderate smokers. 29. Dried tobacco leaves are generally mixed with ganja by the ganja-smokers here. Dhatura is not used. Tobacco is mixed with ganja in order to remove its pungency, while bhang is drunk mixed with milk and sugar. Dhatura seed occasionally mixed with bhang drink. The preparation of bhang massala is not known here. 30. People generally smoke ganja in solitude. Its use is chiefly confined to the male sex. It is not used by the children here. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is easily formed. It is very difficult to break off the habit,
334 but not so difficult as opium with the opium-eaters. The moderate consumers may turn to excessive ones. 32. No custom, either social or religious, in regard to the consumption of the drugs in question here. 33. The people generally regard the ganja- smokers with some degree of hatred. There is no concern with the religion here. The ganja-smokers are generally of peevish and hot temperament, and so they are disliked by the people. No custom of worshipping hemp plant here. 34. It would certainly be a serious privation to habitual moderate or excessive ganja consumers to forego the use of the drug. They lose their energy and appetite. I have no idea of the probable numbers of each class. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit at once the use of the drug. If it is prohibited, then ganja-smokers will resort to illicit dealings. A prohibition is not therefore desirable, as it will render a serious discontent among the consumers. No political danger is apprehended in disconti- nuing its use. The prohibition of the ganja- smoking is very likely to be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other narcotic drugs. 36. I do not think. 37. I have no knowledge of the charas-smok-ing. 38. No difference. 39. Smoking of the preparation of the hemp plant is more injurious than drinking the same in any of its forms, because the smokers generally possess the diseases of the lungs, as chronic catarrh, bronchitis and asthma. 40. Yes; bhang and ganja frequently used by the kabiraj for medical purposes. Yes; bhang is used for the diseases of the cattle. 41. The moderate use of bhang and ganja is beneficial to a certain extent: (a) as a digestive, (b) to alleviate fatigue and exposure, (c) as a preventive of diseases in malarious and unhealthy districts. (d) It is a powerful aphrodisiac. The drug is generally used by the low classes of people, such as palki-bearers, Domes, Chamars, etc. I refer the above to habitual moderate consumers. Higher classes of people occasionally use the drug for its aphrodisiac effect. 42. The moderate use of the drug is beneficial to health to a certain extent. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect is to exhilarate the nervous system. It is refreshing to some extent. It produces intoxication. It does not allay hunger; on the contrary, it increases the appetite. The effect lasts from two to twelve hours accord- ing to the dose and the nature of its preparation, and according to constitution of the persons using the drugs, the after-effects of the drug being general depression. Yes; uneasiness and longing of the drug is felt if not subsequently used intime. 45. (a) to (e) No. I have not seen any evil result mentioned when taken moderately, but it is very difficult to keep the moderation. 46. All the faculties, mental, physical and moral, are impaired by the excessive use of the ganja-smoking. 47 and 48. No. 49. Ganja is used as an aphrodisiac occa- sionally in moderate doses. Not used by the pros- titutes as an aphrodisiac. Not injurious for this aphrodisiac purpose. 50. The excessive use of the drug produces im- potency and other injurious effects. 51. Habitual moderate ganja consumers are not bad characters. Moderate consumers do not gene- rally commit any crime while under its influence. 52. The excessive use of the drug generally leads to the commission of crime or any other social violence. 53. I have no experience of the occasion of any particular case. 54. No. 55. It may occur, but I have no personal know- ledge of any particular case. 56. The effects of hemp plants used in modera- tion or in excess are modified by the admixture of other substances. Dhatura is occasionally mix- ed to increase the narcotic effect of the drug bhang. 57. I have no knowledge of the use of the drugs in eating or drinking. 58. So far I am aware, the present system of excise administration is working well. 60. No cultivation here. 61. No production of charas here. 62. No cultivation of hemp plant for the 'pro- duction of bhang here. 65. Bhang and charas are not used, and hence not imported. The present taxation on the ganja seems to be excessive. 66. Yes. 67. Yes; the present system of taxation on ganja seems objectionable. 68. Yes; there are shops licensed for the sale here, and they should continue to exist for the convenience of the public. 69. Wishes of the people are consulted before any shop is opened in any particular locality. 70. I have no knowledge under this head. 133. Evidence of REV. D. MORISON, M.B., C.M., M.D., Medical Missionary, Rampur Boalia. 1. I have lived for about fifteen years in Rampur Boalia, and have had occasion to give the matter some attention medically, socially and morally. I am acquainted with the medicinal properties of the drug, and have observed its effects physically and morally on some natives in whom I am inter- ested as head of this mission. 2. The plant known to us in Rajshahi is the dried flowering tops, flattened, of the Cannabis sativa, and I am informed that no other kind of ganja is sold in the shops, nor are the people in the habit of using any other form of the drug, except in exceptional and extreme cases, when the leaves and stems of the wild plant are used as a substitute for the cultivated plant. The cultivated plant is so cheap, so conveniently obtained, and so much superior in its intoxicating qualities, that the wild plant, with risk of detection and heavy fine and its disagreeable after-effects, is almost never resorted to, except in desperate cases, when
335 it is impossible to get the other and more agree- able plant. The definitions of flat and round ganja are not known here; only the flat ganja is used. I am not quite certain as to broken ganja or chur. 3. In Rajshahi. It is abundant in Rajshahi if allowed to grow after being sown. 4. It is known as ganja, siddhi and bhang in this district. 5. The soil and climate of Rajshahi are pecu- liarly favourable for its growth from the fact that it grows every year in my compound, and has to be cut down as offensive jungle; but it was first sown there by my syce, who used the drugs. 6. It grows densely, and seems self-propagating and rapid in its growth. 7. Yes. (a) For ganja chiefly. I cannot answer for the others. In the extreme north-east of the district the cultivation is under the Government Excise Department. 8. I cannot say. 9. I know nothing practically of its cultiva- tion. 10. I have been informed that there is a special class of men with hereditary experience handed down from father to son. Personally I cannot say whether this is true or not. 11. I am not aware, but I should think in this climate and soil it would be possible to bring the wild plant into domestication. 12. I have no special knowledge of this. 13. It is. To a plot, as I said, in the north-east of the district. Cannot answer the others. 14. (a) Ganja. North-east of Rajshahi. 15. I have only noticed the flat licit ganja smoked here. 16. (a) Cannot say. (b) Certainly: it is a mere infusion with spices, milk, etc., added. (c) I should think so with care and cultivation. 17. Can't say; but Hindus use it chiefly. 18. Can't say definitely. The tinctures prepared in England seem to have lost some of the pro- perties of the freshly prepared ganja from the physiological effects being somewhat milder and less marked. I presume the cause of deterioration will be found in the effects of damp and air modify- ing its chemical constituents. 19. I only know of ganja as used here for smoking. I know of no other use. 20. The ganja-smokers are chiefly from the labouring classes, day-labourers, cartmen, brick- layers, carpenters, blacksmiths, fishermen, milkmen, raiyats, and devotees. I took a rough census of a neighbouring village within municipal bounds, and found 60 per cent. given to the smoking of ganja. They are mostly day-labourers, cartmen, and raiyats. This percentage is high, and would not be found so high in any village outside municipal bounds. 21. Flat, I am told. 22. Not used in this town, as far as I know. 23. It is, by those who cannot afford to get the ganja; but to a limited extent. 24. I am of opinion that it is not much used here, except for smoking purposes; but on certain occasions Hindus use it. 25. I believe the use of ganja for smoking is on the increase. The mode of smoking in companies attracts young lads to hear the stories, and they taste the pipe and easily form the habit. Liquor enhanced has led a few to seek stimulation by ganja as the cheaper form of intoxication. 26. For ganja I estimate that336 classes. Illicit cultivation can easily be kept down by a small reward, as it is a large bulky plant and not easily concealed. No discontent among consumers if it were done gradually and warning given beforehand. Yes; I believe there would be some who would take to liquor if it were cheap enough. First try the effect of enhancing the price; then, if necessary, let prohibition follow, except for medicinal purposes. In my opinion enhance- ment would put it beyond the reach of the class who consume most. 36. No; its price has rather induced some to try ganja as the cheaper form of intoxication. A man accustomed to intoxication will in despera- tion fly to any nervine stimulant that he can get, whether liquor, ganja or opium. It is the hunger of the nervous system for its accustomed stimula- tion. 37. I cannot say; it is not used here to any great extent. Indeed not at all, if I am correctly informed. 38. Only the flat kind is used here for smoking. 39. Smoking, I think, is the most injurious form of taking the drug, for the following reasons:337 to go to excess more speedily than the man with vigorous intellect and possessed of self-control. The weaker will yield first in all such cases, and is less liable to recover himself. I am convinced that ganja weakens the will-power, making the man liable to be influenced by others from with- out; and, if so, more liable to be influenced from within in moments of anger or under provocation or delusion. 47. No; not hereditary, nor does it affect off- spring to any appreciable degree. 48. I know it leads to neglect of the family claims, rendering a man callous to natural affec- tion; but this is owing to the commanding nature of the craving for the drug. 49. (a) It is by young men. (b) Yes; prostitutes take it, but drink or im- ported liquor is fast supplanting it in this respect. (c) It leads to over-stimulation of the sexual function. (d) It produces impotence in man as a natural result of over-stimulation. 50. In excess it ultimately obliterates the sexual desire, and makes the subject indifferent to every desire, mental or physical. To produce this condition is the object of the Hindu devotee when he indulges to excess. He becomes oblivi- ous of all desire, set free from all worldly or temporal attractions, and all mental desires. The mind, they say, is thus put into the divine atti- tude of neutrality or equilibrium, poised between desire and non-desire. 51. Ganja-smoking demoralises the smoker and slackens his moral fibre; but although they are untrustworthy, still I do not find them largely as a class given to crime. I would class them next to opium-smokers in this respect. The tendency is to make them reckless, and in times of great scarcity or under temptation the ganja-smoker would yield to temptation before the ordinary non- smoker. It does not incite to crime directly, but the ranks of crime would be more easily recruited from ganja-smokers than from those who are not demoralised by its use. 52. The smoker who uses the drug to excess will ruin his home by selling off his goats, cows, and effects rather than do without it. He thus becomes its slave, and may be induced by the craving to steal to supply his wants. 53. I have instanced under question 45 a case which occurred in this district. 54. I am told that that is the general impres- sion among the people. 55. I cannot say. Yes; deep coma follows a strong draught of an infusion of ganja, but I have never heard of it being used alone for criminal purposes. 56. Answered previously as to effects. I am not aware of dhatura being used with it. 57. No experience of this. 58. Not practically acquainted with this branch of Excise administration. Popularly the impres- sion is that there might be greater care exercised in preventing illicit ganja from being sold to the public secretly. 59. I cannot go into this question here. 60. I have no practical knowledge of this. 61. Not used in Rajshahi as far as I know. 62. Not much used in this district. The plant is easily controlled by offering a small reward for information of private cultivation. 63. Yes; to retail shops for ganja. (1) There are 405 shops in Rampur Boalia for the retail sale of ganja for a population of twenty thousand. Two shops would be ample. (2) The drug is too cheap; a lad may buy one pice worth, and get a taste of the drug sufficient to produce intoxication. (3) It should not be sold to lads under twenty years. I know boys of ten to fifteen who club together to buy ganja for smoking. It is a shame that they should have the tempta- tion thrust upon them by retail shop-keepers, who will gladly supply the drug to mere children. (4) Increase the price, say double what it is, and you will reduce the number of smokers by 90 per cent. This would put it beyond the reach of the labour- ing man, who is the largest consumer. 64. No experience of this. 65. Taxation of ganja is not sufficient when one remembers the minute quantity which produces intoxication. One pice worth to a beginner is suffi- cient to intoxicate. The same applies to alcoholic liquors; they are too cheap and thrust too much into the face of the public by the multiplicity of shops. 66. I only know the one kind of flat ganja. Its price certainly should be raised to save the morals of the rising generation. 67. It is too cheaply sold (ganja), and the tax should be doubled, as stated above. 68. Yes; four or five. Reduce them by half or one-third. Two shops would be ample. 69. Never. I cannot say. I suppose the ganja farmer chooses his ground and takes up the most promising site for his shop. Local public opinion would close every ganja, opium and liquor shop in Rajshahi. 70. Untaxed ganja is procurable in this dis- trict; from whom and to what extent I am unable to say. NOTE.338 134. Evidence of PYARI SANKAR DASS GUPTA, Baidya, Medical Practitioner, Secretary, Bogra Medical Society, Bogra. 1. I am a medical practitioner, and have per- sonally observed cases of ganja intoxication. 2. These varieties, as defined here, are accepted in this province also. (1) Bhang, (2) charas and (3) ganja are generally the names of the respect- ive articles in this province. 3. I have seen in Jessore and Bogra the plant growing spontaneously. It is abundant in the eastern part of Bogra. 4. Bhang, siddhi, bijaya, are the names applied to the same plant. 5. It grows in sandy alluvial soil in winter. 6. It grows densely. 7. It is cultivated in Rajshahi, Bogra and Dinajpur districts. (a) For ganja. (b) Charas comes out during the process of preparation; but it is not the object of the cultivation. (c) Bhang is not cultivated. (d) No. 8. The area has been increased for the increased demand, as I am told. 9. First a plot of land is made ready for sow- ing seeds, and when the plants grow one foot long, they are transplanted to another piece of land most carefully cultivated, free from weeds and manured with cow-dung and oil-cakes. They are planted about a yard's distance. 10. They are the ordinary cultivators and do not form any special caste. 11. No. 12. Not to my knowledge. 13. The following are the ganja-producing dis- tricts:339 28. (a) One pice to one anna. (b) I have known men, sanyasis, taking 20 tolas a day, spending R3 for it. The minimum is two annas a day. 29. Dhatura seeds are sometimes known as an adulterant of ganja, but used only on rare occa- sions. 30. These drugs are generally preferred to be taken in company. Sanyasis take them with Uttar Sadhaks, or disciples. Some smoke in soli- tude for devotion. Females of lowest classes, prostitutes and abandoned women, smoke it also. Children of ganja-smokers, of singing parties, those in bad company smoke ganja. Bhang is also taken by them with their elders. 31. The habit is contracted easily. Three days' smoking produces the habit. Once formed, it is difficult to break off the habit. Like other intoxicating drugs, taking a little leads to take more. 32. Bhang is used in Bijaya Dasami. The name Bijoya is suggestive. During Lakshmi Puja and Sivaratri fasting, etc. These are the drowning the images of Durga, worship of the goddess of fortune, and the fasting day said to be observed by the great Mahadeva. Ganga is used in excessive quantities during Charak Puja, taking place on the last day of the Bengali year. It is the worship of Siva joined by lower-class men, who generally form the prin- cipal factors of the puja. It is by no means essential, for we do not use them on any occa- sion. 33. Ganja-smokers and bhang-drinkers are generally looked upon with hatred. Educated public opinion hates them. There is no religious or social check. The ganja-khors are generally hated. It is for their bad character that they are so much hated. He is generally rude, violent in temperament, lacking in all his duties, a bad son, undutiful father, cruel husband, a troublesome neighbour, and a bad citizen. He is a liar. If any one speaks in a varnished language, it is said to be a "ganja-khori galpa." I do not know any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. The Mahanirban Tantra says, "Modyam mansam tatha matsyam mudra mai- thuna mabacha." Wine, flesh, fish, fried peas and women are mentioned as essentials of Sakti Puja, but nowhere the hemp drug is used as such. 34. It may be considered a little hard, but the difficulty is not insurmountable. There is no pro- bability of any disease. Of the class (a) and (b) 50 per cent. will be much inconvenienced. Of the (c)and (d) it will not be very hard. The sanyasis will take it much to heart, as they are, as a class, in- variably addicted to the vice. 35. It is perfectly feasible to prohibit these. There may be probability of the drug being illicit- ly consumed. To prevent consumption the tax may be increased and the methods suggested in the last chapter may be adopted. The prohibition will give rise to no political danger; for the ganja- smokers have very little influence over society. The Government has faced questions of a greater religious character, as the Sati or the Age of Consent Act, with boldness; this is comparatively a minor question, affecting only depraved men. Prohibition will not increase alcoholism, but it may give rise to bhang intoxication. 36. Rather alcohol is being substituted by these drugs owing to the greater price of the former. 37. The effects of charas are milder. 3.8. Flat ganja is preferred, being more effective. 39. Smoking bhang is less injurious than taking it internally, as the smoke, being more volatile, loses its effect soon; while the drug taken by the stomach has its influence in full over the constitu- tion. 40. Bhang is used by kabirajes as medicine. It is also used in hom340 food; and its long-continued use, loss of appetite. Ganja-smokers generally die of bloody dysentery, asthma and phthisis, and hæmoptysis, &c. Ringer says: "Indulged in for a long time, it produces loss of strength, trembling and much mental weakness." Of all the ganja-smokers that I have seen, I have not seen any moral or religious man taking intelligent interest in any good subject. It produces insanity, generally mania. Delusions of senses, a sort of dual consciousness, give succession to unsound mind. Healthy boys have been attack- ed after a debauch, and restored to health on dis- continuing it. I have also seen a menial spending his last pie in the ganja shop. 46. Excessive smokers generally ruin their health sooner, hastening their death or soon get- ting into a state of non compos mentis, and become inmates of lunatic asylums, whose statistics will amply show the truth of the assertion. 47 and 48. I think in that case association has more to do than heredity. But the fact is certain that sons of ganja-smokers become also smokers. The ganja-smoker often urges his son to bring fire for it or assist him in smoking, and the child is thus initiated in the vice. 49. Ganja is an aphrodisiac. It is also used by prostitutes and adulterers. It is more injurious when used in that capacity. It is generally seen that persons who use artificial aphrodisiacs are generally barren. It is generally the case with aphrodisiacs that they subsequently impair sexual power and produce impotence. The rule is not otherwise with ganja. 50. Persons using ganja as aphrodisiac subse- quently increase the dose, and excessive smoking, in addition to its ordinary effects, injures the sexual powers also sooner and more effectually. 51. Nearly all bad characters are ganja-smok- ers. To harden one's self to a career of vice, to deaden conscience, and to produce boldness in the face of danger, persons take to ganja-smoking. There is no crime which ganja cannot assist. Thieves, robbers and adulterers are nearly all ganja smokers. 52. Bad characters at first commence with moderate quantities. But as they grow in vice, they also become immoderate, as they require a greater quantity to drown their conscientious scru- ples. 53. I have recently read of a criminal alleging as his plea that he was under intoxication by ganja-smoking. Other cases of this kind have also been heard. 54. Most badmashes smoke ganja before per- forming their premeditated acts of crime. It sti- mulates their powers, gives them energy for ac- tion, deadens their conscience, and makes them reckless. Robbers, after committing their crimes, enjoy themselves in a party to forget the pangs of conscience. 55. Cases have been heard that bad characters in railways or inns form acquaintance with their victims and induce them to partake sweetmeats, and, when perfectly insensible, they rob them of all their properties. These drugs produce com- plete stupefaction and have been administered to produce sleep. 56. Dhatura seeds give greater power of intoxi- cation, and excessive adulteration of it has pro- duced temporary insanity. 57. Ganja is often drunk in connection with bhang. I have not known any such use of charas. When a person habitually takes bhang, his crav- ings are never satisfied by the drug alone, and he admixtures it with ganja. In that case the intoxi- cation is still more powerful. 58. It is capable of improvement. Greater barrier should be placed before people, so that it cannot be smuggled or easily secured and procura- ble by children and bad characters. 59. At present one man is allowed to buy twenty tolas, but it should be restricted to five tolas. There is no restriction about age. It should be a rule that no one below sixteen years or so should be allowed to buy ganja from the shop. Insanes and hardened criminals, who use ganja to assist them to commit crimes, should not be allowed to buy ganja from the shop. Opinion of the majority of the residents should be taken before establishing a ganja shop to any locality. If the authorities keep greater eye towards its prevention than the profit hereby obtained, I think the abuses may be successfully checked. The tax on ganja should be enhanced. 60. At present there is much possibility of smuggling. Cultivators of ganja may make illi- cit sale of it. There should be greater supervision to prevent such abuses. 61. Charas is not produced here. 62. There should be a restriction about the cul- tivation of bhang plants. If the Government orders special men to destroy all wild plants and keep the cultivation of them under its own men, as in the case of ganja, it may be prevented from abuse. It may cost some trouble, but it will amply repay. 63. As regards charas and bhang, I have no knowledge; but about ganja, the quantity should be restricted to five tolas a man, and the tax on it should be increased, so that it may not be avail- able to all classes owing to greater price. 65. The price of ganja is much less in propor- tion to alcohol and other intoxicants. But it should be raised, for nothing checks these habits so successfully as to place it beyond the reach of the people. 66. There are different rates for the different varieties, as I am told. The price should be pro- portionately raised. 67. No. 68. I am told there are houses appended to each ganja shop for smoking there. But such places, if they at all exist, for I am not exactly sure, are highly dangerous. They are potent for mis- chief, and the seat of all conspiracy for crime. It should be a law that no one should be allowed to keep such a place appended to his shop; no one should be allowed to smoke in the premises of the shop. 69. The wishes are not consulted, and no mea- sures taken, so far as I know. I think local opinion should be taken more fully than (if taken) at present, and that opinion should be from those who are the true representatives of the country. 70. There being no Native States, I am not able to answer this question. Oral evidence. Question 1.341 Question 28.342 ploughed. Ridges are now made over the land and the seed is sown in July and August; the seedlings are planted on the ridges. When the plants flower, experts go round the field and remove the staminate plants. Ganja will now form and will be ready in January and beginning of February. 10. No; they don't form a special class; they are of the same class as other agricultural culti- vators. 11 and 12. No. 13. (a) Yes, the cultivation is restricted to the districts of Rajshahi on account of their soil. (b) No. 14. (a) Yes, ganja grows extensively in Nao- gaon in the district of Rajshahi and in Sultanpur station, Northern Bengal Railway. Charas is never extracted in this province; it comes from Nepal. Bhang is cultivated to a large extent in Bhagal- pur, Patna, Monghyr, Sahibganj. Calcutta market is supplied from the products of these places. It also grows abundantly in the districts of Rajputana, where no duty is levied on the product. 16. It is not generally prepared by the people in their houses. Yes; bhang could be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. No; ganja and charas require some special process; besides, wild ganja is unfit for human consumption. 17. Ganja is prepared by the middle-class Bengalis who are agriculturists and who live in the Rajshahi district. Bhang is commonly pre- pared by the middle-class Hindustanis and the Chowbes of Muttra. It is sometimes, though very rarely, prepared by malis. Charas is made by the Nepalese and the people of Amritsar. 18. Yes, they do. Bhang and ganja keep well for twelve months only, after which they are sup- posed to lose their intoxicating virtues. Govern- ment never allows the shop-keepers to retain ganja for more than two years. Damp and moisture destroy the resinous matter. There is nothing to prevent deterioration. 19. Yes; ganja and charas are only used for smoking, but there is only a nominal percentage of men who chew ganja and swallow it with the help of water. Instances of this rare variety of ganja consumers can be seen amongst the inferior class of Marwaris living in Barabazar. 20. Ganja is smoked by the Hindus and Muhammadans. Moreover, Chowbes, Bengali Babus, sadhus and fakirs smoke it; women of disreputable character are also ganja-smokers. Charas is used in very small quantity and by a limited number of men. Out of 100, 95 would be ganja-smokers and 5 would be charas-smokers. 21. Round ganja is generally prepared by the people of this province. 22. Charas is only supplied from Nepal, and the people of this province prefer it. Amritsar charas is consumed by the people of Amritsar. 23. No. 24. Marwaris, Johuris or people who deal in precious stones, Chowbes, most of whom are em- ployed as jamadars in mercantile firms, Sikhs, Bikanir men, jogis, and sanyasis drink bhang to excess. Bengalis and Muhammadans do not indulge in it. Cent. per cent. of the Johuris and Chowbes take it, and 30 per cent. of the Marwaris are known to take it. In Barabazar. 25. They are decidedly on the increase. Cheapness is their best recommendation. 27. Apart from the poorer class of people who use ganja and bhang for their cheapness, there are thousands of respectable men who are addicted to these drugs only because they are not disallow- ed by the Shastras or religious scriptures. Johuris teach their children to practise bhang from their infancy. 28. (a) One pice to four annas. (b) Eight annas to two rupees. 29. All classes of ganja-smokers use the same ingredients, tobacco leaves and little water, whilst the charas-smokers use only prepared tobacco. Of those who indulge in bhang, the poorer class use a small quantity of black pepper only; whilst the well-to-do class of consumers use sugar, rose- leaves, aniseed, seeds of cucumber, black pepper, almonds, cloves, cardamom. Bhang massala343 of the drug depends on the quantity and quality of its resinous matter. 40. Bhang is often used by the kabirajes and hakims in the treatment of chronic diarrh344 respectable Marwari families, among whom I have a large practice. I am not sure of the fact; if the statistics do not support it, my impression is pro- bably mistaken. I have attended one hundred cases of the kind I have described. They are cases of poisoning by bhang and ganja, and are common only during the Holi festival. Of late a practice has grown up of taking a mixture of bhang and ganja and other drugs, of which I am pretty sure from certain symptoms that dhatura is one. One patient only has told me that he had used dhatura, but I have observed dhatura symp- toms in many of the cases. I cannot be positive that in any single one of the cases the symptoms were solely referable to the toxic effects of ganja or bhang. None of the cases formed the subject of any police enquiry. The drugs I understood to have been taken voluntarily for intoxication, and in no case were the effects fatal. None of these cases was a case of insanity. Some were cases of intoxication, and the longest dura- tion of any case of intoxication was thirty-six hours. Question 46.345 40. Bhang is used by the native physicians (kabirajes) in several of their medicines, but ganja and charas are never so used. Bhang also forms an ingredient in some of the medicines used in the treatment of cattle. 41. (a) The moderate use of one or other of these drugs may excite cravings for food, especially sweets, which, if satisfied unchecked, often bring on indigestion. (b) They give staying-power, etc., to those only who are habituated to their use. (c) I do not believe they act as febrifuge or preventive of disease in malarious or unhealthy tracts. 42. I consider moderate use of any of these drugs (excepting perhaps bhang) to be harmful, inasmuch as moderate use often ultimately cul- minates into excessive use. 44. The immediate effect of moderate use on habitual consumers is intoxication. It may be refreshing. It does not allay, but on the contrary creates, appetite, which, in my opinion, is spurious and unnatural. Effect usually lasts from three to four hours. The after-effect is more or less depression. I do not think want of subsequent gratification produces any longing or uneasiness in moderate consumers. 45. I do not think habitual moderate use of bhang produces any noxious effect, physical, men- tal or moral. But this cannot be said of either ganja or charas, the moderate use of either of which may often develop into the excessive. Unless so developed, the moderate use of ganja or charas does not appear to exert any material in- fluence on the constitution or injure digestion, etc. Insanity often results from excessive and not from moderate use, and where such is the case, hemp drugs appear to me to be the exciting and not the predisposing cause. The insanity is not always of the same type and is often temporary and may be re-induced by the use of the drug. 46. I have known of several cases where persons became insane through excessive use of ganja. In fact, excessive use of either ganja or charas may lead to all the evils enumerated in the previ- ous question. 47. The habit, in many cases, is certainly hereditary; and when children take to the habit, the effect undoubtedly is injurious. 48. The habit of excessive use is also some- times hereditary. There is tendency in a son to imitate his father in this as in other matters; and when this does occur, the effect is really dangerous. I have known cases where children have been so infected. 49. Not unfrequently hemp drugs are used by men as aphrodisiacs. Prostitutes use them with a view to deaden their conscience and forget the miserable state of their existence. I cannot say when its use is more injurious346 I know the preparation known as "bhang massala." Its ordinary ingredients are cucum- ber seeds, aniseed, poppy seeds, black pepper and rose petals. There is a richer variety which con- sists of, in addition to these, liquorice, sweet almonds, cardamom and saffron. 30. Ganja is generally smoked in solitude; ganja-smokers are looked down in society and hence the desire to smoke it privately. As a rule no invitation is made to join in smoking, but should one or more persons happen to come at the time, they sit together and smoke. Novices, who care more for privacy, select a solitary place where they meet at an appointed hour and smoke. Well-to-do ganja-smokers generally have some hangers-on who smoke with them. I have also known poor ganja-smokers doing sundry gratui- tous services to a rich consumer for being allowed to smoke with him. Sometimes bhang is drunk in company. Generally the habit is confined to the male sex, but very many women of ill-fame do smoke. Ganja-smoking is scarcely taken to before arriving at the age of 20 years or so. 31. The first experience of a ganja-smoker is not always pleasant; it excites a form of delirium and hallucinations, usually followed by deep sleep. But of course this varies with the constitution of the individual and the quantity of smoke drawn in. Very many opium-eaters prefer an excuse for contracting the habit, but ganja-smokers general- ly make none. Youngsters learn through the force of example of their seniors; and notwithstanding the first unpleasant experience, they repeat smok- ing, and, during the course of a month, become habitual smokers. The habit once formed is certainly difficult to break off; it requires mental fortitude and determination in a high degree to do so. Moderate consumers can break off the habit without much bodily discomfort. I have known moderate consumers of scanty means doing without it for days together. Of course they suffer some uneasiness, viz., disinclination to take any food, puffiness of the abdomen, chilliness, run- ning from the nose, aching of limbs, and a sense of general malaise. The case of excessive con- sumers is different. Every habitual consumer must go through a stage of bodily discomfort before being able to give up the habit. But I think habitually excessive inebriation generates a loss of mental strength with which the degree of determination necessary is incompatible. This is the source of weakness, and hence the difficulty. It appears to me, however, that it is not so difficult to break it off as that of opium. These remarks apply to ganja and charas. Bhang is not habit- ually drunk in this part of the country, and so I have little information to give about it. There is a decided tendency in the case of ganja for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. A habitual smoker cannot resist the temptation of a smoke when available. People with long purse almost always run to excess. But I have known poor men (a few of my palki-bearers of Bagdi caste) who have been smoking for a long time, but with whom the habit is generally a well-regulated one. 32. There is a semi-religious custom with re- gard to the use of bhang. It is drunk on Dasera and Lakshi-purnima days. Ganja is also offered to Mahadeva on the Sivaratri day. But the cus- tom is certainly not regarded as essential, and it is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit or prove injurious. 36. Amongst the low-caste people I do not know whether alcohol is supplanting ganja; but I know this, that many ganja-smokers drink country liquor as well. Amongst the Bhadralok class ganja always leads a small number of votaries; and that number, I think, has diminished still further; there are more persons addicted to drink- ing liquor than to smoking ganja. I think the reason is partly cheapness of liquor and partly because it is easily get-at-able. But the principal reason appears to me to be the fashion of theday. 37. The effect of ganja and charas smoking aro alike in kind, but they differ in degree. There is, however, another difference, and that is, that the intoxication of ganja is immediate, while that of charas takes time to develop; further, ganja in- toxication reaches its acme soon and then begins to decline, while that of charas gradually increases and lasts longer. Charas is stronger than ganja and produces all its effects, but in a higher degree. In bhang intoxication there is some sort of dry- ness of tongue and throat, redness of eyes, sudden startings, hallucinations, loss of sense of time and space and so forth, as that in ganja intoxication, but the effects last a very long time. Bhang is undoubtedly milder than ganja; all habitual ganja consumers, whom I have questioned, uniformly say that they derive no inebriation by smoking it. The difference in effect between the two appears to me to be partly due to the fact that while the one is smoked and consequently its action is rapid, and the other is drunk and consequently its action is slow. 40. Kavirajes prescribe old bhang fried in ghee and mixed generally with carminatives, in cases of chronic diarrh347 45 and 46. All persons are not similarly affected by ganja; hence even a moderate use produces different effects in different individuals, and, fur- ther, moderate use varies as to quantity according to the idiosyncracies of individuals. If indulged in for a long time, it more or less perverts the functions of the brain, upon which its effects are most marked. There is one characteristic with ganja-smokers very commonly observed, and that is their easily excitable temper. A ganzil (ganja- smoker) is almost synonymous with hot-headed- ness. I know many instances of improper acts done by persons under the influence of ganja; subsequently, when sober, they regret having done what they did. As to physical deterioration, while I have seen numbers of ganja-smokers who have grown thin and emaciated with a peculiar cachectic look about them, I have also seen many who have maintained plumpness of their body and limbs after years of habit. The latter class of cases are generally found among well-to-do classes. The difference appears to me to be due to abundant wholesome food and good living which tend to combat the evil effects of the drug. A ganja- smoker badly needs some fatty food, such as ghee, milk, etc. In the case of poor persons,348 head, and it would be wrong to enquire now to be enabled to answer this question. 29. I have been told that confirmed habitual smokers of ganja and charas sometimes mix other substances with them to enhance their effects, but what these adjuncts are I have never made it a point to enquire. I am not aware of any prepara- tion as bhang massala being sold in the bazaar. 30. As far as is known to me, the habitual smokers would like better if they get companions to join them in the smoke. The male sex from manhood upwards are generally addicted to the habit, but females are not exceptions. It is not usual for children to contract the habit. 31. The habit is easily contracted and difficult to break off. Moderation may and does often lead to excess. 32. There is a usual practice amongst Hindus of drinking a watery solution of smashed siddhi on the closing day of Durga Puja. The custom is more social than religious, and having been in vogue from time immemorial is regarded as essen- tial. The upper classes, especially those who have the puja in their house, make it a point to smash some siddhi, dissolve the smashed mass in water, sweeten it with sugar, and flavour it with cardamom or other carminatives, and a pot of the mixture is offered to all persons that come to their house after the evening of the closing day of the puja. As the practice of greet- ing each on this day and on this auspicious occa- sion is an established custom, all persons of what- ever ages, with the exception of little children, are made to partake of this harmless beverage. The use of sweets enhances the effect of the drug; but as it is taken in small quantity, it is per- fectly innocuous. It is only indulged in on this occasion, and never fosters a craving or habit for its use. 36. I am not aware of alcohol being used as a substitute for hemp; nor do I think it ever likely of its being so used. 37. The effects of charas-smoking are in my opinion pretty much the same as those resulting from ganja-smoking. If there be any difference, the difference is one of intensity, the latter being more telling on the constitution than the former. The effects of bhang are quite different from those of smoking ganja and charas. They are, if taken in small quantity, quite innocuous; and a novice may indulge in a slight potation without the least un- pleasant effects, while a few pulls of the other two preparations always entail unpleasant effects in the shape of headache, fits of coughing, and a derange- ment of the mind. 39. I am not aware of ganja and charas being taken in any other form than that of smoking, or of siddhi being used in any other way than that of a drink. 40. Bhang is much used among native doctors, especially housewives, as a corrective of dyspepsia and as a remedy to remove tendency to looseness of the bowels, and doctors of the western system of medicine do not discountenance its use on account of their observation of its good effects in some cases. Hemp is used in the treatment of gonorrh349 47. The habitual moderate use of hemp prepara- tions is not in my opinion a hereditary habit, nor does it in any way affect the children of the moderate consumers. 49. The preparations of hemp have some aphro- diasic properties, but I am not aware of their being so used either by males or depraved females. It is not, however, improbable that reprobate libertines and the lower class of unfortunates might resort to their use for their specific action on the sexual organs. 50. See answers to questions Nos. 45 and 46. 56. I am not aware of other substances being mixed with the preparations of hemp to enhance their effects. 57. I do not know of ganja and charas being eaten or drunk. In conclusion, the use of hemp preparations even in excess is not in my opinion so injurious to the system of the consumers, or baneful to the community at large, as the use of alcohol. If the cases of insanity, which can be traced to the abuse of this drug, were compared with the whole body of consumers and the total number of insanes, the ratio will, in my opinion, be found to be but a minute fraction, and would hardly justify the cost of labour and money that is being bestowed on the subject. But this is a matter foreign to the object of this query, and need not be discussed in any length. 139. Evidence of DR. MOHAMMAD SADRUL HAQ, Medical Practitioner, Patna City. 1. Medical experience. 19. They are used only for smoking purposes. Besides that, a kind of sweetmeat, called majun, is prepared of bhang. 23. Bhang is never smoked of. 28. I have no personal information thereof. A cooling beverage is prepared of bhang, and drunk by male Hindus. Females and boys are included. 29. I have no knowledge of such a massala. Dhatura and nux vomica are generally put in to increase the narcotic effect. 30. I have no knowledge of the extent of the consumption of such drugs; but they are largely used in company. They are confined to the male sex only. Now and then little grown-up boys are also allowed to drink bhang. 31. The habit of consuming bhang, etc., is easily formed. Bhang is a common draught for all male Hindus at sunset. Some educated persons form exceptions. When the habit of drinking bhang is once acquired, men of loose character are led to smoke charas and ganja, mixed with tobacco (dried leaf or guraku) in huka or chillum, to increase their sexual pleasure. It is difficult to lose the habit. In fact there is always a tendency towards its excess. 32. Hindus believe that the drinking of bhang is a religious custom, as their saint Sivji was always in the habit of using bhang, charas and other poisonous substances. Bhang is freely drunk by male Hindus on the occasion of all pujas. It is regarded by them as a religious custom. Hindu monks use in the highest degree. The effects of charas and ganja are more injurious than those of bhang. 36. I do not know if alcohol is ever used as substitute. 37. There is no difference of any particular type in their injurious effects; but the effects of charas are more powerful and lasting, and those of bhang are mild. Charas and ganja act on the brain and spinal cord, paralyzing more or less motor and sensory nerves; consequently the loss of energy, exertion, appetite and sexual power, and also timidity, laziness and emaciation are their ultimate results. 39. The drinking of bhang is less injurious. Bhang does not act on the brain, nor does it retard the process of digestion. 40. I do not know any trained medical man ever prescribed ganja or charas for smoking. Cattle are never treated by these drugs. 41. The use of any of these preparations has always been injurious. (a) None of these is ever used as an accessory or digestive food. (b) It does not produce staying-power, nor does it alleviate fatigue. (c) They are never used as febrifuge. 42. The use of these drugs is never without any harm. 44. The moderate use of these drugs acts, in the case of habitual consumers, as a little refresh- ing. It does not produce intoxication but it re- tards hunger. The effect lasts about an hour. Drowsiness is its after-effect. 45. Certainly they produce noxious effect on the moral and physical constitution. 140. Evidence of TRAILOKYA NATH MAJUMDAR,* Baidya, Medical Practitioner, Bankipur. 1. From cases that have come under my ob- servation in the capacity of a private citizen as well as a medical practitioner. 2. Yes. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. Siddhi is used both for smoking and drinking. 23. Yes. My observations in this respect are confined to Eastern Bengal and specially to the district of Jessore. There bhang or siddhi is used in smoking by those who are accustomed to ganja and charas generally, and sometimes by those who do not smoke these preparations; but to a very limited extent. 28. The words "moderate" and "excessive" are relative terms. The average allowance and cost * Was invited to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but failed to appear.
350 depend upon the quantity that one can consume and the cost of purchase. 29. With bhang, ordinarily, milk, sugar or molasses, aniseeds and pepper seeds are used; and exceptionally, both with bhang and ganja, dhatura seeds are used to make it stronger. I do not know of any preparation such as "bhang massala." 30. Ganja is generally used in company. Bhang is used sometimes in company. Ganja, so far as is known to me, is not wholly confined to males. Public women are known in many cases to smoke ganja. Exceptional cases are seen of boys using both ganja and bhang; although as a general rule men, when they are young, acquire it as a habit and continue it till late in their lives. 31. The habit of smoking ganja is very easily formed; and there is a marked tendency in the case of this drug for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. It is very difficult to break off the habit of ganja-smoking. Bhang is not taken to so readily. It is developed slowly and may as readily be given up. 32. There is a custom of using bhang on the Bijaya Dasami day,351 in Muzaffarpur and other places. The exact extent of such cultivation cannot be stated. In Dacca, Patna and Chota Nagpur, the plant is cul- tivated for use as bhang; in Orissa or Muzaffar- pur for production of ganja and charas. It is cultivated on the Himalayas for its fibre. 8. I cannot say whether there has been any considerable increase or decrease in the area under such cultivation. 9. The land is cleared of jungle; the seeds are put down about the end of May or beginning of June. As soon as the seedlings have fairly sprung up, the ground is carefully cleared of weeds and the plants thinned, so as to leave an open space of 3 or 4 inches between. The plants are not cut before October or November. 10. They are of the same classes as other agri- cultural cultivators. 11. Yes, sometimes. 13. No special conditions of climate, soil, rain- fall, elevation above sea-level, are necessary. There is none where its cultivation would be im- possible. 14. Yes, bhang is prepared in Dacca, Patna, Chota Nagpur. In Muzaffarpur and Orissa it is cultivated for ganja and charas. 16. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) No. 18. Yes, they deteriorate by keeping and quite lose their effect in time. They keep good a year or so. Exposure to air and damp causes deterioration. These drugs should be so kept that they may be protected from damp and the exter- nal atmosphere. 19. Yes. 20. The lower classes and a very small number of the middle class are addicted to the smoking of ganja and charas. Fishermen, boatmen, artizans, syces, bearers (not Urayas) and religious mendi- cants and sanyasis are the people who are found generally to smoke ganja. 21. Chur is usually preferred for smoking, being thought to be strongest in narcotic pro- perty. Next to it the round is liked, and flat liked last of all. 22. Both native and foreign charas is used. Foreign charas is imported from Afghanistan, Thibet, Bokhara and Herat. 23. Never, as far as I am aware of. 24. Bhang is drunk chiefly by up-country men, darwans, sepoys, constables, etc. 25. It is on the decrease. 26. (a) Next to (c) in point of number. (b) Smallest in number comparatively. (c) This class is the largest. (d) Third in point of numbers. 27. The habit is confined chiefly to the lower classes, who have to undergo hard work and toil and are exposed to all sorts of weather. 28. (a) 2 to 4 pice. (b) 4 to 12 pice. 29. Aniseed, black pepper, sugar, with or without milk, are usually mixed with prepared bhang. Dried rose leaves are also sometimes added. Dhatura is rarely added. The object of these ad- mixtures is to render bhang palatable or to enhance its intoxicating properties. 30. The consumption of ganja and charas is practised usually in company. Bhang is drunk both alone as well as in company. The consump- tion of these drugs is confined mainly to the male sex, to adolescence and old age. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. (a) No. (b) No. (c) As a rule, no. 32. Bhang is usually drunk on the last day of the Durga Puja. By the ignorant and un- enlightened classes the use of bhang is considered essential, not so by the educated and enlightened classes. It is generally temperate and not likely to lead to the formation of the habit or other- wise injurious. 33. It is generally regarded with disfavour. Social public opinion denounces the consumption of ganja and charas. The sentiment is to be attri- buted to the conviction in the minds of the people that the consumption of these drugs leads to laziness, immorality and crime. I am not aware of any such custom. 34. No. 35. (a) No. (b) Yes. (d) and (e) It would occasion serious discon- tent among habitual consumers, but such discon- tent would never amount to a political danger. (f) Yes; in some cases the prohibition would be followed by recourse to (a) alcoholic stimulants, (b) opium. 36. Yes; alcohol is to a certain extent substi- tuted for ganja and charas, and the change is to be attributed to fashion. 37. The effect of charas-smoking is more sudden and intense than that of ganja-smoking, and lasts only for one or two hours; whereas the effect of ganja-smoking lasts from four to six hours. 38. No difference in kind, but there is differ- ence in degree. Round is thought to be stronger than fiat, and chur stronger than both flat and round. My opinion on this point is based on the testimony of ganja-smokers. 39. No, because smoking produces more sudden and more intense effects than eating or drinking the same drugs, although the effect may not last so long. 40. Yes, ganja and bhang are used on account of their medicinal qualities. Bhang is used in cattle disease. 41. Yes. (a) The consumption of bhang sharpens the appetite and helps the process of diges- tion; hence is often prescribed in the form of tincture in dyspepsia. Ganja acts as a food accessory in religious mendicants and beggars who have their meals at irregular hours, and who, during their period of starvation, resort to ganja-smoking, which has the effect of preventing hunger. (b) Ganja-smoking gives staying-power under severe exertion to bearers and boat- men, fishermen, etc., prevents the evil effects of exposure, and alleviates fatigue. (c) Ganja-smoking may act as a febrifuge in malarious and unhealthy tracts. (d) In the form of tincture ganja is very often prescribed successfully in the
352 treatment of tetanus, delirium tremens, sleeplessness, dyspepsia, to relieve pain and spasm. I refer to the moderate occasional use of the drug. 42. The moderate occasional use is harmless, except to those who are predisposed to insanity. The moderate habitual use, as a rule, does not bring on insanity, except in those who are predis- posed to it. 43. Yes. 44. A pleasurable sensation and elevation of spirits. It is refreshing and produces slight in- toxication. Ganja allays hunger, and bhang creates appetite. The effect of charas lasts for one to two hours, of ganja four to six hours, and of bhang ten to twelve or even twenty-four hours. Yes; the want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness and longing. 45. (a) Yes. (b) and (c) It impairs the constitution after long use, causes loss of appetite and injures digestion. (d) May be an indirect cause of bronchitis, dysentery and asthma. (e) Impairs the moral sense, induces laziness, and leads to insanity and debauchery. (f) It deadens the intellect and produces in- sanity only in those who are predisposed to it, or whose nervous system is weak and excitable. The insanity is, as a rule, of the violent type, and is temporary. The symptoms may be reinduced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. A murderous propensity is a typical symptom of this form of insanity. Yes, insanes confess to the use of the drug, though they have no recorded ganja history. (g) Yes. No. 46. The bad effects are more marked. Most cases of insanity are to be attributed to the habitual excessive use of ganja. 47 and 48. The children are sometimes found to be affected, their intellect has in many instances been noticed to be weak, and their moral sense rather blunt. They are seen sometimes to imbibe the habit of ganja or charas smoking, but whether the habit is the result of hereditary influence trans- mitted to the children, is a question which I am. unable to answer satisfactorily. 49 (a) Yes. (b) Yes, by low-class prostitutes. (c) No. (d) Yes. 50. The excessive use of any of these drugs leads to impotence. 51 and 52. Yes; criminals who resort to these drugs have their moral sense blunted, and are very often led to commit crimes with a view to obtain the money requisite in satisfying their created wants and vicious desires and propensities. 53 and 54. Yes. 55. Yes; people are sometimes induced to smoke charas and are rendered insensible, and their things are thus robbed. Very often dhatura is mixed with it to induce complete stupefaction. Complete insensibility and stupefaction may be thus induced by ganja and charas without any admixture. 56. The intoxication caused by hemp is more intensified by admixture with other substances, whether used in moderation or excess. Dhatura is most commonly mixed with bhang to heighten its intoxicating effect for personal consumption or for administration to others. 57. In Orissa ganja is powdered and eaten bypeople. 58. It is working well. 60. The cultivation of hemp and its preparation are, in my opinion, sufficiently controlled. 61. Sufficiently controlled. 62, 63 and 64. No. 65. Yes, reasonable. 66 and 67. No. 68. Yes; such places should be selected, subject to local option. 69. No; the wishes of the people are not consult- ed, but they ought to be. 142. Evidence of NIMAI CHARAN DAS,* Vaidya, Medical Practitioner, Chittagong. 1. My occupation as medical practitioner. 2. Yes; may be accepted. Bhang, charas and ganja. 7. No; not cultivated in this district. 14. No; not prepared in this district. 20. The labouring classes, such as fishermen, shoemakers, up-country servants, and most of the prostitutes smoke ganja in this district. Charas is not used in this district. 21. Chur is generally preferred. 22. Not used in this district. 23. No; not used for smoking. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the in- crease. We can make out by the increase of sale. 26. (a) 50 per cent. (b) 12½ " (c) 12½ " (d) All. This is for ganja only. The number of bhang-drinkers is very limited. None smoke charas in this district. 27. Ganja is generally taken by the labouring classes to bear up fatigue. 28. For ganja only353 Generally excessive. As far as my experience goes, I have seen all habituated. Sanyasis are also habitual excessive smokers. 33. The consumption of ganja is regarded to be heinous. Charas is not consumed in this district. People do not regard bhang-drinking to be so heinous as the other two. The use of any form of the narcotic is in disrepute, simply because people have understood, by the light of education and experience, the evil effects they produce and bring on over the human frame. The custom of worshipping the hemp plant is not prevalent in this district. 34. Yes; it will be a serious privation to habitual excessive smokers to forego the con- sumption and little privation to habitual moderate smokers, and it will be no privation to the other two classes. 35. Yes; the prohibition of all these drugs is feasible, and that would be doing great benefit to the people of India. There cannot be any political danger, because the use of the narcotics is chiefly confined to the lower and the poorer classes of the land. The consumers are mostly illiterate and of unsound mind. To prohibit the use of the narcotics one easy plan would be if there be a notification to the effect that no vendor will be able to sell ganja, bhang and charas for any other purpose except medical. Of course there are consumers who will suffer much for the first few months. In that case they will procure a medical certificate to the effect that such a man requires such a quantity of ganja, etc., for such a length of time. Within a year at least most of the consumers will give up the practice for the difficulty of procuring medical certificates, and then all will be in peace. 36. Alcohol is not substituted for ganja, charas or bhang, because alcohol is dearer, and the smok- ers being the poorer classes of the land. 38. The difference is in degree and not in kind. 40. Ganja and bhang are used as medicine by kabirajes. I have seen ganja used in cattle disease. 41. (a) Bhang and ganja are digestive if taken internally in medicinal doses. (b) Yes; to some extent. (c) Yes; may be used in a very mild form. The labouring class mostly use for the purpose. (d) I refer to moderate occasional use. 42. I think moderate use is not injurious, if taken internally for medical purposes. 43. No; even they also sometimes prove offen- sive. 44. They feel a little enervated. Yes; it is a refreshment to them. I think it does not pro- duce intoxication; if so, very little is used. 45. (b) Yes; it impairs constitution. (c) Yes. (d) Yes. (e) Certainly it does. (f) Yes: they deaden the intellect and produce temporary insanity. 46. The children do not inherit, but they learn by example. The children become weak in in- tellect. 48. The majority of the children born become weak in intellect, and some insane. 49. Yes; they are used by the prostitutes as an aphrodisiac. Hemp, if taken for a long time, produces impotence. 51. Yes; most of the bad characters are con- sumers of hemp drugs. 53. I know there was a Muhammadan in this district some twenty years ago, who was an excessive habitual ganja-smoker. All the Muham- madans of the district would call him a fakir and had great respect for the man. They believed that the man had some superhuman powers. He had consequently lots of disciples, who would supply him with ganja and food. One day one of his disciples was late in bringing him his usual smoke. He got annoyed and in his frenzy gave one or two cuts with his dhaw (an instrument of cutting), of which he died instantly. 55. I don't think complete stupefaction can be induced without admixture. 56. I have heard of dhatura leaf mixed with ganja and seed mixed with bhang and given to smoke and drink to induce complete stupefaction. 63. With regard to the wholesale vend of ganja, I propose the improvement as follows:354 which grows wild in many parts of the district; somewhere it grows in abundance. 19. Charas is to my knowledge never used for any other purpose than smoking, but ganja (or what is better known pharmaceutically as Can- nabis indica or Indian hemp) is also used, besides for smoking, in many diseases. For example, in case of dismenorrh355 ticularly ganja, continuously may not utterly deaden the intellect, but certainly it is impaired consider- ably. It is an established fact, and supported by many an Indian authority on the subject, that ganja is one of the chief causes of insanity; in my opinion, it appears to be an exciting cause. Gen- erally it produces insanity of a violent type. Majority of habitual consumers become permanent- ly insane, never to be cured. Some become tem- porarily so, and become sane on breaking off the habit. In cases of temporary insanity symptoms are apt to be re-induced on resuming the habit. I am aware of one person, by name Bhakta Poddar, in this district, who was a confirmed ganja-smoker, to become insane under its continu- ous use, and he was not fit for any duty in life, but after some years I found him sane. On enquiry I learnt that he gave up the habit of smoking ganja. In his case, on enquiry, I came to learn that some mental anxiety about some family matters tended to give rise to indulgence in the use of ganja. I am not in a position to declare positively whether this question has been sufficiently considered in explaining the connection between insanity and the use of ganja. I cannot say whether insanes who have no recorded ganja history confess to the use of the drug. I think there is evidence to indicate that insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. 46. To this question I should reply that what has been said about the habitual moderate use of the drug (ganja) on the consumers, appears in the aggravated form in cases of habitual excessive use, and the effects are apt to be more rapid in these cases. 47. Not necessarily. Children of many a ganja- smoker or bhang drinker or eater are entirely free from the evil habit. In some cases habit may be inherited as other propensities and aptitude of a father are inherited by sons, such as propensity for the pursuit of literature on the part of the father is inherited by the son. As regards affect- ing in any way the children, I should say that deterioration of general health of the father, in- duced by the continuous use of the drug, may act as a cause for producing unhealthy children. 48. The same may be said of the habitual exces- sive use. 49. Moderate use of ganja or bhang is practised by many as an aphrodisiac. Yes, it is so used by low-class prostitutes. Hemp, when used habit- ually, is apt to produce impotence in the long run, as is the case with every other narcotic, such as alcohol, opium, etc., especially when used to excess. 50. What has been said under the head of con- tinuous moderate use only appears in the aggra- vated form, and more rapidly in cases of excessive use. 56. Answered under some other head. 57. I know of no person who eats or drinks ganja or charas. I have therefore no experience of the effects produced by using the drugs in that manner. In conclusion, as a nearly permanent resident of the district I am in a position to say, both from information obtained through reliable sources and from personal observation, that the use of ganja is very extensive in the district among low-class people. I am of opinion that bhang is less inju- rious than ganja, and it is rarely apt to be taken to excess. Under several heads I have expressed opinions regarding effects on human beings pro- duced by the moderate and excessive use of the drug habitually,356 36. Yes. Alcohol is substituted in some cases by ganja or bhang, alcohol being dearer than the other ingredient. The consumers of alcohol have recourse to the latter substances. 37. Effects are stronger in the case of charas than in the case of ganja. The effects in the case of bhang-drinking are slower in developing than in cases of ganja or charas. 39. Drinking of any preparation of the hemp plant is less injurious than in the cases of smok- ing or eating the same. In the case of eating, the intoxication is rather severe. In the case of smoking, the effect is immediate. The excessive drinking of bhang or smoking of ganja produces insanity. 40. Yes; native doctors or kabirajes use ganja or bhang in the several diseases of human beings, and also in several diseases of the cattle, such as loss of appetite and diarrh357 is prepared for the private consumers, i.e., for those who are unable to smoke ganja publicly, as it is hateful. 30. The average consumption of ganja in solitude is half a tola and in company is three or four tolas. It is chiefly used by the male sex, but occasionally used by women of lower castes and prostitutes. There is no necessity of smoking ganja at any time of life. Children are not accustomed to, nor feel necessity for it. 31. The habit can be easily formed, but cannot be broken off so easily, as the person in the habit of consuming a particular quantity of these drugs feels very little intoxicated; he is consequently obliged to increase the quantity. 32. There is a custom among the Hindus to smoke ganja and drink bhang in Pana-sankranti and Durga Puja Bijaya358 146. Evidence of BASSUNTO KUMAR ROY, Zamindar and Medical Practitioner, 24-Parganas. 1. (a) My professional knowledge as a medical practitioner. (b) Zamindar. 14. They are not prepared in this country. 19. Ganja is used for smoking and for the pre- paration of some quack nostrums. 20. The lowest classes generally and a small minority of higher class people use ganja. 24. People of all classes, majority of them being of the lowest class. 30. Ganja and charas are consumed in solitude. Males generally use them; children never take them. 31. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) That is the case with every intoxicating thing. 32. Devotees (mahants) as a class generally consume ganja and bhang. Devotees consider them essential for the preservation of their health. Their habits are temperate, and are not other- wise injurious to them. 35. The use of charas should be prohibited and that of ganja and bhang restricted by some legis- lative enactment. This procedure would neither produce any serious discontent nor cause any poli- tical danger. 40. Yes, bhang is used by kabirajes for their astringent pills for digestion. Tincture of Indian hemp is used for several diseases in the old school of medicines. 41. (a) Bhang is used as a digestive, and under certain circumstances of fatigue to overcome the exhaustion. (c) As a febrifuge and digestive bhang is used by kabirajes. Tincture of Indian hemp is also said to possess anti-periodic properties, but is less used than opium. 65. (a) Taxation upon charas should be greater than that of ganja and bhang. (b) Alcohol being more detrimental to the health of the public than bhang, the tax upon bhang should be lowest of all. 68. Yes, there are houses for this purpose. 147. Evidence of GURU CHARAN GHOSH, Medical Practitioner, Monghyr. 1. My twenty years' experience as a medical practitioner enables me to form an opinion regard- ing the matters connected with hemp drugs. 2. Yes. Charas, ganja, and bhang or siddhi. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smok- ing. 23. I have never witnessed bhang or siddhi used in smoking, but it is heard it is used in Bengal and Behar amongst the middle class of the people. 28. Not known to me. 29. Black pepper is ordinarily mixed with siddhi, and tobacco with ganja and charas. I have experienced dhatura mixed with bhang in strengthening intoxication. Yes; cucumber seed, rose leaf, black pepper, aniseed, cardamom, cinna- mon, are the ingredients known to me for the pre- paration of bhang. 30. The consumption of these drugs is prac- tised generally in company and seldom in solitude. It is mainly confined to the male sex and to all stages of life. Yes, children of bad character consume these drugs. 31. (a) Yes, it is easily formed. (b) No, it is not difficult to break off. (c) Yes. 32. The consumption of these drugs is not in fact essential to the observance of social or reli- gious customs, but the illiterate and ascetic class of men use them as an auxiliary to their religious contemplation. It is generally excessive. Yes, it leads to the formation of habit as well as proves injurious. 36. Yes; alcohol is to a certain extent substi- tuted for these drugs. The reason for this change is attributed to the fact that it is more fashionable. My own experience is the proof of this change. 37. The result of ganja-smoking differs from charas in this, that the former is more strong and active in its action than the latter, but both at the end bring on a disorder of the brain. On the other hand, bhang is a little mild in its effects and irritates the stomach. 39. Yes, the reason for this being that in eat- ing or drinking it comes in contact with blood and thus produces a baneful effect on the consti- tution. But smoking is rather supposed to do more mischief to the brain than eating or drink- ing, and is therefore more incentive towards pro- ducing insanity. 40. (a) Yes. (b) I have no experience in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Yes. (a) As a food accessory or digestive. (b) Yes. (c) Yes; as a febrifuge and preventive. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of any of these drugs on the habitual consumer is certainly refreshing. It produces a little intoxi- cation, creates appetite, and its effects last for a couple of hours or so. There are no after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification produces a little longing and uneasiness. 45. (a) to (e) No. (f) No. The moderate use of any of these drugs has not appeared to me to be the exciting cause of the insanity. 46. In many cases known to my experience it has appeared to me that the habitual excessive use of these drugs, especially ganja, has been the exciting cause of insanity and has also produced all the diseases mentioned in paragraph 45, such as dysentery, asthma, etc. 47. No, not at all.
359 48. I do not think so. 49. (a) Yes, to a certain extent. (b) I have no experience. (c) No, not more injurious. (d) Yes; excessive use of hemp tends to pro- duce impotence, and not the moderate use. 50. The excessive use of any of these drugs does not excite venereal desire. 56. In moderation and in excess the modifica- tion tends to increase the mischievous action. Not known to me. Oral evidence. Question 1.360 smoked, while bhang is taken in the shape of adrink. It is unnecessary to say how ganja and charas are smoked; suffice it to say that before smoking, ganja is pulverized, mixed with tobacco leaf, and made into a sort of pill mass by the manipulation of the operator's right thumb over the left palm, with the addition of a few drops of water; while charas is mixed with prepared tobacco after drying it over fire. The smoking is generally done by chillum or huka. Bhang or siddhi is taken as a drink, and is prepared by pounding it on a pestle and mortar with rose leaves, black pepper, cucum- ber, water-melon, cardamom seeds, and then either mixed with milk and sugar or plain water. Sometimes siddhi is chewed with pan. The effects of the three varieties are identical; except when smoked, the action is more rapid. Ganja-smoking is more or less prevalent amongst all classes of men, but it is more widely used by the lower classes of society than by the upper ones. Native musicians, as a class, smoke ganja with the object of improving their voice. The lower orders of East Indians and Portuguese also smoke ganja. I think it is on account of its cheapness that the ganja is largely consumed by the poor. There are some persons who must have some intoxicant, no matter what it is361 tion are mostly the persons who swell the list of the inmates of the asylums and are prone to commit mischief. I am not prepared to accept the opinion that ganja smoking or bhang drinking are doing great injury to the moral tone of our society. I believe that more misery, distress, poverty, and untimely deaths amongst the population of the country are produced by the wide-spread sale of spirits and liquors than by the consumption of ganja or opium, or by the both. Before any legislative measures are taken for stopping the sale of ganja or opium, or before any step is taken to increase its duty, it is imperative on Government to ap- point a Commission to enquire into the wide-spread belief that our country is suffering more from the evils of easily accessible Europe wine shops and country liquor stalls than those arising from the sale of ganja or opium. In well-informed circles, it is considered almost a truth, that the moral tone of our society has undergone a change for the worse since, owing to the increase in the number of shops, the public have improved facilities for obtaining liquor and spirits; and the people fear that if Government restricts the sale of ganja, opium or bhang, many of them are sure to con- tract the vice of drinking, which, in their estima- tion, is a worse evil than the existing ones. 150. Evidence of DURGA NATH CHAKRAVARTI, Brahmin, in charge of Tangail Dispensary, Mymensingh. 1. I am a resident of Tangail and practising here for these fifteen years. Ganja consumption is very great here. I have seen many ganja smokers myself. 2. Bhang plant is indigenous here. Ganja plant is a different species of the same plant, of which one or two I have seen here. The distinc- tion I could make is only in the vigorous growth of ganja plant and its containing more resinous matter. In all other points I accept the definition laid out here. 19. I have no experience about charas. My answers will deal about ganja and bhang only. Ganja is generally used for smoking, but ganja is also taken mixed up with sweetmeats known commonly as majum. 23. No. I have seen one man only who smoked bhang occasionally. 28. Bhang being indigenous here, it costs nothing to the people here. About ganja the cost will run thus:362 (f) Yes. It is only after a long use. I saw only one case. It is of a permanent type. Temporary type is not rare. A man often forgets of his action under ganja when in sane moments. 46. I have seen some 20 persons who became insane under excessive ganja smoking. Some of them are raving mad. The madness is permanent. They get temporary excitements. Somewhere these excitements were due to the temporary abstinence of the drug and somewhere to their excessive use. In the neighbourhood of my resi- dence a woman of middle class died from dysen- tery and was a hard ganja smoker. Her one son, a hard ganja smoker, became stark mad, and another son, a very good intelligent man, a few years since has become insane. They keep up intelligence and reasoning power except during excitement, but are incapable to conduct business and to manage their own affairs and cannot be in any way trusted. 47. No. 48. I do not know of any hereditary longing for the drug. In one case the parents were ganja smokers and the boys were also hard smokers and became mad, and I could find no proof that they were hereditary. 49. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) They suffer from the ill effects of indulg- ing to an excess. (d) I know none. 56. As to administration to others, dhatura is often given to produce sleep for the purpose of theft. Bhang and ganja mixed with dhatura is often administered in the country to produce mad- ness. Oral evidence. Question 1.363 151. Evidence of BIJOYA RATNA SEN*, Kaviranjan, Kabiraj, Calcutta. 1. Myself being a physician, practising under the system of Ayurvedic School, I am acquainted with the qualities of hemp plants as with the merits of innumerable other medicinal plants and ingredients. Besides that, being acquainted with the customs, manners, etc., of various classes of people and physicians of different schools, and having travelled in many districts in connection with my professional calls, I have also gained some experience in respect of the different kinds of hemp plants and drugs. So my replies are based to a considerable extent on my own experi- ence in connection with my professional attain- ments. 2. Yes. The definitions may be applied to Bengal. The products are locally known as fol- lows:364 of the habit or otherwise injurious by use on this occasion only. 33. The consumers of charas and ganja are socially regarded to be low, because these intoxica- ting drugs are generally looked upon as hated things, for men create a peevish temper by taking ganja and charas. 34. When a person creates a habit of taking these (bhang, ganja or charas) intoxicating drugs, they would certainly feel uneasiness for some time if required to give them up. The want of stimu- lating effect which acts on them by their use is the cause of this uneasiness. 35. Yes, it is feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs; for some time it may be illicitly used. The present excise laws are sufficient to enforce this. The prohibition will certainly create discontent to a certain extent, it will have no connection with politics. The prohibition may be followed by a recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. Very seldom. 37. Smoking of charas and ganja produces nearly the same effects, but charas is little stronger than ganja. 38. The chur is more acute than flat or roundganja. 39. Siddhi is taken by mixing with water. The eating of ganja and charas by mixing with water must be more injurious than smoking. Smoking acts less injuriously, as by this procedure its severity is lessened and thereby some intoxi- cating portion is burnt. But if taken by mixing with water, their entire severity acts on the whole system. 40. Only siddhi is used for medicinal purposes by kavirajes. 41. Bhang, if taken in small quantity, creates appetite and increases digestive power. All these (bhang, ganja and charas) give staying-power under severe exertion or exposure and alleviate fatigue. I believe siddhi is preventive of disease in malarious or unhealthy tracts. Monks, peasants, cultivators, and native sailors, etc., use ganja and charas to obtain staying-power under expo- sure and to alleviate fatigue. This remark is applicable to moderate con- sumers only. 42. The moderate use of siddhi is rather harmless. It increases the intellect of the man and does improve the health. 43. Yes. 44. The moderate use of ganja and charas is refreshing. They produce mild intoxication and create appetite. The intoxication of siddhi lasts some hours, but that of ganja or charas for an hour or two. The want of subsequent gratifica- tion produces longing and uneasiness, but in certain circumstances the use of ganja causes dysentery and interferes with the action of the lungs and brains. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja or charas, but not of siddhi, may in some cases produce noxious effects, physically, mentally and morally. It impairs the constitution. It injures the digestive power, and creates dysentery, bron- chitis, asthma, etc. It also impairs the moral sense and induces laziness, immorality and debau- chery. It may also produce insanity both tem- porarily and permanently, but such insanity in most cases may be cured by giving up their use and by proper medical treatment. The use of these drugs by persons suffering from mental anxiety does not produce good effect, and the use of these drugs by those suffering from brain disease is injurious. The persons deficient in self-control through weakened intellect should not use any intoxicant ingredients as these, as indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by such persons may create many diseases. 46. The habitual excessive use of ganja and charas is generally found to cause all the above diseases. 47. No. 49. They are scarcely used as aphrodisiac, though they may be resorted to as such by infa- mous characters of the vulgar class. Liquor is the intoxicant in use among a great majority of respectable prostitutes; charas and ganja are consumed by lower classes of prostitutes who can ill afford to pay for liquor. Their (siddhi, ganja and charas) use as aphrodisiac is more inju- rious than their more common use as intoxicants. For, in cases of fatigue due to severe exertion, their effect is beneficial owing to their stimulating properties, but in a sound state their effect is un- wholesome in consequence of the excitement of the entire system. 51. Of course a great majority of moderate habitual consumers of ganja are low and vulgar, though not bad characters. The moderate users of ganja are not generally injurious or criminals. 52. Large portion of bad characters are habitual excessive consumers of ganja. Its excessive use may make a man violent in temper and such a person may possibly be induced to commit crimes of dacoity, rioting or other offences of violence. 53. Sometimes the excessive consumption of ganja and charas may incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. No; I do not know of any case. 54. Such cases are very rare. 55. No; complete stupefaction cannot be effect- ed without admixture of other strong ingredients. 56. Ganja and siddhi, moderated by the admix- ture of other ingredients, remove the fatigue, increase the appetite and stimulate the system of labourers. But the effect is contrary to excessive consumers. 57. I am not acquainted with any process of eating or drinking of ganja and charas. 60. The cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant, and the process of its preparation are, I believe, sufficiently controlled by Government, and, I think, require no modification. 61. Charas is not produced in this province (Bengal). 62. I do not see any necessity for controlling the cultivation of the hemp plant for the pro- duction of bhang or siddhi. 68. I am not aware of the establishment of such houses in this province for the preparation and consumption of these drugs, but there are licensed shops for selling these drugs. Such houses, if any, must be for the use of low and vulgar persons of bad characters, who only can resort to them. They are considered by gentle class to be infernal or hellish places. 69. Yes; I think so. If not, it should be done.
365 I do not know what measures are required to be taken for this purpose. Yes; public opinion ought to be considered. In conclusion, siddhi or bhang is used generally by up-country or religious people, and its moderate use is beneficial in some respects. Ganja and charas are smoked generally by low class labourers for alleviating fatigue, and obtaining staying- power under severe exertion or exposure and for refreshing themselves. The excessive use of these drugs, as in the case of other intoxicating ingredients, is very injurious, and they create many wasting diseases, and produce immorality. All these are regarded as addiction to low vices, and those who indulge in ganja and charas are con- sidered to be hated beings, and such persons lose all their respectability in the eyes of sober and good people. 152. Evidence of GANGA PERSAD SEN, Kaviratna, Kaviraj, Calcutta. [ The evidence of this witness is exactly the same as that of Bijoya Ratna Sen (No. 151), and is not reprinted.] 153. Evidence of GOPEZE MOHUN ROY, Baidya, Kabiraj, Calcutta. 1. The opportunities presented before me in obtaining the informations in connection with hemp drugs are from the following sources, viz.:366 Ganja and charas, when moderately used, have not been found beneficial as digestive, but they have been found beneficial in respect to severe exertion, exposure or fatigue. 42. The moderate use of ganja and charas, even where not beneficial, does no particular harm, be- cause it does not create any organic disorder, mental derangement, or impair the nervous system and the vigour of the body. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja and bhang is a pleasant sensation of intoxi- cation accompanied with forgetfulness of worldly cares. It is also refreshing, and creates appetite. The effect of the moderate use of bhang, however, does not allay hunger as it does in the case of ganja. The effect of bhang moderately used lasts for some ten to twelve hours, whereas that of ganja lasts for about two or three hours. In both cases there are no after-effects. The want of sub- sequent gratification produces longing for it and uneasiness. The moderate use of charas:367 30. As a rule, each of these three drugs are generally taken in solitude, but they are some- times also taken in company. It is mostly con- fined to the male sex and after infancy in some cases, but it is generally taken by adults. Women of the better class never take to the use of these drugs. But I have heard that women of low class, and some low class prostitutes, are addicted to taking these drugs. Some children, say over 10 or 12 years of age, also do take these drugs, but their number is not large. 31. The use of consuming any of these drugs at first begins with bad company, which afterwards forms into a habit. However, it is not difficult to break it off, if the consumer so minds it. When once a habit is formed, there may be a tendency in the case of any of these three drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. It is a custom amongst the Hindus to drink siddhi on the night of the Bijaya day of the Durga Puja, as is enjoined by the Hindu Sastras. Most people drink it in moderate quantities on that day, and they do never take it afterwards. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit, or otherwise injurious. 36. Yes, as far as I have heard, I have reason to believe that alcohol is now being substituted to a certain extent for these drugs. But, as my information is hearsay, I cannot attribute any cause for this change; neither can I cite any proof. I merely state my information for what it isworth. 37. The effects of ganja-smoking and charas- smoking are nearly the same, both being very heating and producing costiveness. A habitual consumer is apt to get dysentery, brain disease; and it may finally bring insanity. They are not used in Aurvedic medicines. The effect of drink- ing siddhi is also the same, if taken in excessive quantities. But to drink it in mild doses removes looseness of the bowels, and it also serves as an aphrodisiac. The Aurvedic Sastras prescribe the use of it, and its seed in the preparation of the Aurvedic drugs. According to the Aurvedic Sastras, siddhi is heating, digestive, stringent and narcotic. I annex hereto extracts* from the late Dr. Uday Chand Datta's Hindu Materia Medica, in which he has described the various uses which are made of it in the Aurvedic medicines, as well as of the various uses of it and its kindred products, the ganja and the charas as intoxicating agents. Besides the uses mentioned in the said extracts, there are other uses, but these will, I think, suffice for establishing its medical properties. 39. As I have already stated, I have not much experience about the smoking of ganja and charas, but with reference to siddhi, this much I can say that drinking it in moderate doses is less injurious than the smoking of the former. 40. Yes, vide my answer to question 37. I do not know if any of them are used in the treat- ment of cattle diseases. 41. I have already stated that I have no parti- cular experience of ganja and charas, but I have heard that their smoking gives stimulus to work and alleviates fatigue. But I know that drinking bhang and the medicines prepared with it remove looseness of the bowels and impotency. I do not know whether they are febrifuge or preventive of diseases in malarious and unhealthy tracts. 42. I do not think the moderate use of ganja and charas to be harmless, because it causes costive- ness giddiness and affects the brain. But siddhi and its seed being admixed in an atomic quantity with other ingredients in the Aurvedic medicine, is beneficial. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of any of these drugs on the habitual consumer is constipation, astringency, intoxication, exciting appetite. It is refreshing till the intoxication lasts (which lasts for two or three hours), after which reaction sets in, and the result is giddiness, thirst and costiveness Yes, the want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness in the case of habitual consumers. 45. Yes; it causes constipation, affects the brain and consequently leads the consumer to commit acts of criminality. Yes; it impairs the consti- tution. Yes; it injures the digestion and finally causes loss of appetite. Yes; I know it causes dysentery, and I believe, owing to its heating power, it can cause bronchitis or asthma. Yes; it impairs the moral sense and induces laziness and habits of immorality, as it affects the brain. I have come across several cases in which the excessive use of ganja and siddhi has produced insanity. In those cases it has appeared to me to be both the exciting and the predisposing cause. Insanity produced by it is of the same type as ordinary insanity. In some cases it was tem- porary, and in others permanent. The symptoms may be re-induced by the use of the drug after liberation or restraint. Yes; persons deficient in self-control, through weak intellect, are most apt to get insanity by the use of hemp drugs. 46. This has been answered along with ques- tion 45, 47 and 48. Have no knowledge. 49. Yes; it is practised by some persons as an aphrodisiac. I am told some low class prostitutes use it as such. I do not think its use for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordi- nary narcotic. I do not think it tends to produce impotence. 50. The same answer as against question 49. 56. See my answers with regard to questions 29 and 37. 57. I do not know. 155.368 bhanga, patra, matulani, jaya, bijaya, and morasan. Sambidasar.369 156. Evidence* of RAM CHANDER GOOPTA, Kabiraj, Barisal, Backergunge District. 1. So far I know from experience and Ayurveda Sastra. 2. Round ganja is not used in our district; but in some places it is used. In our district we have the use of flat ganja. Ganja is the only name by which it is known here. 3. Hemp plant grows spontaneously in certain places of Dinajpur District and in the tract lying on the banks of the Bhoirab river in the district of Khulna. Ganja is a certain form of bhang, i.e., jata bhang (bhang flowers coated with resin) is called ganja. Charas is the resin which exudes from ganja. Also preparation of ganja mixed with certain scented substances for the purpose of smoking is termed charas. Charas is produced from ganja. Consequently the cultivation of both ganja and charas is the same. 4. The following are the different terms by which bhang is used in Sastra:370 In our common sense, we know nothing more than what is written in our Sastras. Mrita sanhitaspeaks of giving bhang as a sacrificial offer to Siva: Siva is propitiated by the offering of bijaya leaves; it matters little whether they be dry, broken or ground. More virtue can be earned by the offering of a dry leaf than by distributing hoards of jewels. In the Nigama Tatwa also, if any one offers flowers and leaves of bijaya to Siva, he enjoys happiness in this and acquires salvation for the next. 33. People in general speak ill of the use of any of these drugs, unless it be in keeping with the rules of Sastra. To use ganja, bhang, and charas is disreputable, as it alters the man's temper and tells upon his health. I know nothing about the worship of hemp plant, neither do I know of any rule prescribed in the Sastras for such worship. 34. In my opinion it would not be a serious privation for those who consume ganja for the sake of mere intoxication, to forego the use of it. Of course they may be uneasy for a period, but if the use of ganja be gradually given up, there is no fear of uneasiness. But it would be a se- rious privation on the part of those who use ganja and bhang moderately for devotional purposes. I cannot speak as to the probable number of them. 35. In my opinion it is feasible to prohibit the free use of these drugs, as they are not generally used according to the dictates of Sastras. Gov- ernment may prohibit the consumption in any way it likes. The prohibition may at first occasion discontent among consumers, but in the long run, when the habit of hankering after this drug is weakened, it will prove to be a source of good. Therefore this immediate discontent, when fol- lowed by future contentment, may not prove in- jurious to Government, and there is no fear of political danger from the class of consumers of these drugs against the rules of Sastra. This prohibition may cause a small number of exces- sive consumers of these drugs to have recourse to some other stimulants or drugs. But it may not be the case, as the intoxicating power of different drugs is different. 36. I have not seen whether alcohol is now to a certain extent being substituted for any of these drugs, nor do I find any special reason for think- ing this to be so. I have said above that unless the intoxicating power of different drugs be dif- ferent, why should a man be addicted to the use of all these drugs and alcohol as well. If the effect of any one of these drugs and alcohol had been the same, he might have been satisfied with the use of any one of them. Hence it is evident that these drugs and spirits have their separate effect each. So I cannot say whether the decrease of ganja consumption will occasion any increase in the con- sumption of spirit. But it is not impossible for a man of bad character to have recourse to any in- toxicant. 37. The effects of charas and ganja smoking are supposed to be different, because charas is stronger in its effect than ganja. But I cannot tell the exact difference between them. 38. What different effects these different drugs (viz., round and flat ganja and charas) have upon their consumers, I cannot say. 40. The drug designated as bhang is used by the native physicians in preparing their pills, modak pills (digestive pills) and oil, etc. I have never read any treatise on cattle disease, but have heard that bhang is sometimes used in treatment of cattle diseases. 41. I am not acquainted with the use of charas. The qualities of bhang as prescribed in the Ayur- veda-Sastra are given below:371 157. Evidence of BRAHAM DEO NARAIN MISRA, Vaid, Arrah. 1. I have had information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs from the following sources:372 becoming poor. Among lower classes there are persons who, previously though in the habit of using these drugs, have become addicted to alcohol on account of their sudden rise to afflu- ence in the scale of society. The use of wine is a better luxury, though medically never less injurious than any of these drugs, but people who are addicted to the use of these drugs never dream to use wine on account of their poverty. Most probably the habit of using these drugs spread among the people during the Muhammadam rule not on account of poverty of the people, but simply because the Muham- madan government, good or bad, prohibited the manufacture and use of it, except in very very exceptional and rare cases. Be it known that among the thirty-five crores of Hindu population, if there might be one crore people who are in the habit of using any of these drugs, there might be more than forty lakhs who cannot even touch alcohol on account of religious prohibition. 37. Charas is not so very injurious to the sys- tem as the ganja. Certainly it affects the brain like ganja. But in a different way. It produces a sort of dryness in the brain, but never produces dizziness in it. It heats the blood, but does not produce any drying effect; whereas the ganja affects the whole system, and specially the brain, in a very injurious way. It melts the brain matter and heats it to a degree which is a first step to insanity. It soaks the blood and makes it impure. It affects the liver, bowels, and the heart so much so that it opens an easy path to lots of diseases. The consumer becomes languid, peevish and destitute of any power of reason in case of excessive use. Insanity follows, and premature death is the ultimatum. Bhang is less injurious than ganja and charas. It affects the brain to some extent, but it produces constipation and a sort of heat where bhang massala is not mixed with it. Certainly it deranges the bowels. 38. The smoking of a preparation of the hemp plant, far from being less injurious than drinking or eating the same, is more injurious as is found by observation and close study of the consuming system, as is prevalent in this part of the country. The reasons are very clear. In smoking, the smoke ascends up to the brain and affects it, so that the smoker is always in danger; rather in ninety-five cases out of a hundred it proves to be the fact that he is attacked by any of the follow- ing diseases:373 the insanity produced by ganja are the follow- ing:374 seeds, poppy seeds, aniseed, and rose petals. To make it rich some use milk or curd, almond, rose water, and such other things. Soot makes the preparation strong to the extreme. 30. The consumption of these drugs rarely, if at all, is practised in solitude. Females also very freely take to these drugs. The use is not con- fined to any time of life, neither is it usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit is not easily formed; but when once formed cannot be easily broken off unless another intoxicating drug is had recourse to. No tendency for excess is observed in moderate con- sumers. 32. The custom of drinking bhang on the Dasa- hara day is observed as a religious rite Ravan, the demon god of Ceylon, was killed on that day, and Ram, the conqueror, with his monkey troops, celebrated the victory with this drink. Ganja and bhang are copiously used on the occasion of Sivratri and Charak and all other celebration of the god Siva. But the use of these drugs is not reckoned as essential to any form of religion, as an abstainer can equally join the worship. But such observances cannot possibly lead to the form- ation of the habit, though unaccustomed drink- ers or smokers may suffer for the time being. 36. I have no reason to think that alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for any of these drugs. On the contrary, alcohol drinkers are seen to advert to these drugs. 37. The effects of ganja can by no means be compared with those of charas. Charas is for beginners and ganja for adepts. The effects of bhang, though it takes time to take effect, are lasting; so much so, that sometimes it continues for two or more days. 39. Smoking any preparation of the hemp is obviously more injurious than eating or drinking the same. The reasons that can be assigned to this effect are (a) that the smoke is irritating, and consequently may bring on dysentery by its action on the mucous membrane of the alimentary canal; (b) that by irritating the mucous mem- brane of the respiratory passages it may cause bronchitis and asthma. The smoke that gets in- gress into the lungs enters the pulmonary blood, and thence it goes into the brain, irritates it, and hence causes a rush of blood into the same. The man suffers from the effects of congestion, such as delirium, etc., and thus there is a tendency to- wards insanity, the vessels of the brain remaining in a constant state of turgescence. 40. Siddhi and ganja are prescribed for their medicinal properties by native doctors. Siddhi in small doses is used for diarrh375 Question 45.376 20. Palki bearers, diggers of earth, night watchmen, fishermen, sanyasis, and other people following occupations involving hard manual labour or exposure to inclemencies of the weather, are more given to smoking ganja than people in other occupations of life. Better classes of people sometimes contract the habit of smoking ganja, but their number is less than one in a thousand of low class smokers. Among well-to-do men the habit is less prevalent in Lower Bengal than in Behar. Charas is rarely smoked by low class men. It is too expensive for them. Even among the better classes the use of charas is diminishing. 21. The round variety of ganja is the one usual- ly used. 23. I am not aware of bhang being ever used for smoking. 24. Bhang is mostly eaten and drunk by up- country people. In Lower Bengal the largest proportion of consumers consist of sanyasis, up- country traders, and darwans. Among the people themselves in Lower Bengal the proportion does not exceed one in five thousand. 25. The use of charas is certainly on the decrease. It is difficult to say whether the use of ganja and bhang is decreasing. Those who have suffered by the use of spirituous liquors, or are unable to pay for it, find in ganja and bhang a cheap and less harmful substitute. 28. The quantity of bhang used by moderate consumers does not exceed two tolas per day. On an average half a tola is the ordinary allow- ance. An excessive consumer would eat so much as four tolas a day. A moderate allowance of ganja is a quarter tola a day. The outside limit for hard smokers is one tola a day. 30. In Lower Bengal ganja and charas are rarely smoked by women or children. Women suffering from chronic bowel complaints have re- course to the use of bhang or opium when other remedies prove ineffectual. 31. The habit of consuming either ganja or charas is not easily formed. The use of either is always repulsive in the beginning, but after the habit has been formed it is difficult to break off; not, however, so much as to break off a habit of drink- ing liquors. The habit of eating bhang is com- paratively more easily formed, but it is one which can be given up much more easily than either ganja or charas. There is no tendency in the case of any of these drugs for a moderate habit running into excess. 32. The only custom which affects the use of these drugs is the one for the use of bhang on the Bejoya day after the Durga Thakur has been thrown down into the water. The custom is qutie harmless. It is generally believed to be essential, but bhang is never used in excess on the occasion, and it never leads to the formation of a habit. 33. The habitual use of any of the drugs has been always looked upon with disfavour. The con- sumers are generally regarded as men liable to be easily irritated, and therefore men to be cautious- ly dealt with and not to be lightly offended. 34. It would be a serious privation to several classes of consumers if they were forced to forego the use of the drugs. Persons suffering from chronic bowel complaints or want of appetite, for instance, would be deprived of a valuable remedy if they were prevented from taking their daily al- lowance of bhang; persons who have to work in the sun, keep up nights, or undergo hard manual labour would be deprived not only of a valuable refreshment, but what must be regarded a neces- sity of life to men of their occupation, if they were prevented from smoking their usual dose of ganja. 85. A compulsory prohibition of the use of the drugs would cause great misery to the consumers and make them seriously discontented. The number of consumers is not large enough to justify any apprehension of political danger; but it would be wrong to create such discontent and to deprive a large number of peaceful men and useful members of society of their short spells of enjoy- ment amid the labours, cares, and anxieties of life. It would be a tyranny of the majority over the minority. The use of the drugs is so great a necessity to them that it would be practically impossible to prohibit their use. There would be illicit consumption to a large extent, and the very prohibition would perhaps stimulate persons who would have otherwise kept aloof to take to the use of the drugs. Hemp is used by a large number of men who shun alcohol on religious and social grounds, and who would never use it as a substitute for hemp. 36. Far from alcohol being used as a substi- tute for hemp, people readily use hemp as a substitute for alcohol. It is cheaper, and is believed to be not so injurious to health and ruin- ous to the individuals. 89. Smoking ganja and charas is generally believed to be more injurious than eating and drinking bhang. Smoking has a stronger effect, and is more liable to lead to excess than eating bhang. 40. Both bhang and ganja are prescribed on account of their medicinal qualities. They form ingredients of several well-known and standard medicines in Hindu pharmacy. Bhang is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Both bhang and ganja possess valuable pro- perties. Both of them are appetisers; bhang is beneficial in cases of chronic diarrh377 49. Both bhang and, ganja are used as aphro- disiacs. It is so used by men only, although pros- titutes have been known to smoke ganja. The use of ganja and bhang as aphrodisiacs is not more injurious than their use as exhilarants. 51. It would be unjust to connect the use of these drugs with crime as cause and effect. It is, on the contrary, believed that those who smoke ganja or use bhang are open-hearted men, who enjoy the happiness of others and delight to see others happy. 56. The only substance which is usually mixed with ganja is tobacco, for the purpose of improv- ing the flavour. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant should not be controlled. It would hardly be feasible. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. But that is unnecessary. The licensee is the best man to judge whether there is a demand for a shop in a certain locality. 161. Evidence of MAHARAJA GIRIJANATH ROY BAHADUR, Kayasth, Zamindar, Dinajpur. 1. Informations received from people of various classes who use the drugs. 2. Dr. Prain's definitions are on the whole acceptable. But I doubt that the extirpation of the male plants in the laud (and not any other natural causes) is the sole cause of formation of a resinous coating which prevents seeds setting forth freely. I have seen flowers of wild hemp plant, the males and females of which, unlike the culti- vated ones, grew together, full of resin. Siddhi, bhang, and subji are the local names of dried leaves of both the male and female plants. The three different preparations of the drug are known as (a) siddhi, subji, or bhang, (b) charas, and (c) ganja, respectively. Of the three varieties of ganja, the round ones are not used in this district. 3. Bhang plants grow spontaneously in Raj- shahi, Bogra, Dinajpur, Rangpur, and Malda. They are more or less abundant there. 4. Bhang. Yes. 5. Temperate climate, damp and sandy soil. 6. Dense. 7. Yes. The cultivation of the plant is carried on in the south-eastern portion of Thana Mahadeb- pur under Government supervision. The plant is grown for ganja and charas, but not for fibre. Oil of the ganja seeds possesses some medicinal property, and is sometimes pressed out of the seeds. 10. No. They are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 11. Wild hemp can be raised from the seeds of cultivated hemp, but not vice versá. 13. Yes. Hemp plant is cultivated in a por- tion of land, about 400 square miles in area, lying at a point where Dinajpur, Bogra, and Rajshahi Districts meet. It cannot be grown on pure sand and land utterly devoid of sandy admixture. Please see my answer to question 5. 14. Yes. Ganja is cultivated in Rajshahi, Bogra, and Dinajpur. Charas is also produced in the same locality, but in very small quantity, and is not known to be exported or exposed for sale regularly. Bhang also is not known here to be prepared for sale. People, however, collect leaves in small quantities in March and April, and pre- serve them for medicinal as well as for narcotic purposes occasionally. This latter practice, how- ever, is few and far between. 16. People do not prepare bhang "generally"for fear of prosecution. Ganja and charas can be prepared anywhere from cultivated and uncul- tivated hemp plants; but as the outturn of the last preparation is very small and inferior by far, people do not exhaust their energy in such pre- paration. 17. Cultivating class, 18. Yes. They quite lose their narcotic effect after two and sometimes three years. They can be kept good for a year with ordinary care. Ganja in air-tight tin-lined boxes, bhang in well covered earthen or porcelain vessels, and charas in plantain leaves, would last without losing their efficacy longer than if preserved otherwise. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. (The former, however, is sometimes used in medi- cines.) 20. Ganja is generally used by the lower and labouring classes as well as the religious mendicants and jogis, but seldom by men of higher classes, except Brahmin confectioners and professional musicians. Females, except a few among the prostitutes, do not take anything intoxicating. Charas is used by a very small number of people in Bengal. Inveterate smokers of ganja will never prefer charas, as the intoxication produced by it is not so intense. Young men learning to take intoxicating drugs, or men of nervous tem- perament, are often found to indulge in charas on account of, perhaps, the mildness of its effect. About 5 per cent. of the male population smoke ganja and 25 per cent. charas. In the North- Western Provinces charas is generally taken with ganja, but not so in these provinces. 21. Round and chur ganjas are preferred. Round and chur ganjas are smoked largely in Southern, flat ganja in Northern and Eastern, and flat and round ganjas in Western Bengal. 22. Native. Foreign from Nepal. 23. People who are too poor to purchase ganja use the dried leaves of bhang sometimes. But such instances are very rare. 24. Taking regular and occasional consumers together, about 15 per cent. of the male popula- tion take bhang. Majum is prepared from bhang. It is a sort of intoxicating sweetmeat. The ingredients are bhang, clarified butter, sugar, and milk. 25. The use of ganja is rather on the increase; of siddhi and charas stationary. The reasons for increased consumption of ganja are:378 26. Ganja, 5 per cent. Bhang, 15 per cent. (a) 2.5 (a) 5 (b) 1.5 (b) 2 (c) .75 (c) 4 (d) .25 (d) 4 27. Ganja is consumed mainly by the labouring classes to ward off the effects of exposure in incle- ment weather and to endure the hardships of toil in the cultivating season, by the jogis and religi- ous mendicants for concentration of mind, and by the upper classes for the mere luxury of intoxica- tion. The same remarks apply to the consump- tion of other drugs. 28. Ganja (a) 3 to 6 pies. (b) 2 annas to 8 annas. Bhang (a) 3 pies to 6 pies. (b) 6 pies to 1 anna. Charas (a) 6 pies. (b) 1 anna. 29. Ganja (a) Tobacco leaves and water. (b) Rose-water, tobacco leaves, cardamom, saffron, and sometimes charas. Bhang (a) Aniseed and black pepper. (b) Black pepper, aniseed, and car- damom. Charas (a) Prepared tobacco or singly. (b) Prepared tobacco and juice of betel leaf. Cocoanut water, milk, and sugar are sometimes mixed in bhang to make it more intoxicating. Dhatura is very seldom or never mixed with ganja and bhang. Exceptionally inveterate ganja smokers and evil intentioned persons sometimes mix dhatura seeds in the ganja, and I have seen a few bhang drinkers who do not fear to mix arsenic in the drink. The bhang massala gener- ally consists of379 and dyspeptic people use it to facilitate digestion. I refer to moderate habitual and occasional use. The benefit derived from indulgence in such drugs counterbalances the harm caused by it. 42. The use of intoxicating drugs, whether moderate or excessive, like intoxicating liquors and other exciting causes, undermines the consti- tution by giving the system an artificial, and consequently unnatural stimulus. The effect, however, of moderate use is too slow and small to be easily perceivable to any appreciable extent. 43. Yes. 44. The effects of ganja and bhang are stimulat- ing and invigorating. They produce a little intoxi- cation and increase appetite. Although it increases the appetite, ganja gives the power of enduring the hunger. Bhang increases the appetite as well as longing for food. The effect of ganja lasts for one to two hours, and that of bhang not less than six hours. Want of gratification at the prescribed time produces some temporary un- easiness. 45. The moderate use of ganja and bhang does not impair the health appreciably, injure the digestive power, or cause loss of appetite. Ganja smoked for years together has in many instances been found to cause bronchitis and asthma. Bhang stops dysentery. Moderate use of the drugs does not produce insanity. It sharpens, then deadens, the intellect. 46. All the harmful effects may be produced by excessive use of these drugs. 49. Yes. Ganja is an antidote to impotency. 51 and 52. A large proportion of bad charac- ters is either moderate or excessive consumers of these drugs. The consumption of these narcotic drugs has no direct connection with crimes of any general or specific character. 53. Yes. I know of no case. 55. Yes, but complete stupefaction cannot be induced without admixture. 57. Ganja very scarcely eaten. I know of some Urdhabahu Jogis eating it. 162. Evidence of RAJA MAHIMA RANJAN ROY CHOWDHRY, Zamindar, Kakina, Rangpur. 1. Information obtained from medical men and from those men who use these drugs. 3. Hemp plants are cultivated in the districts of Rajshahi and Bogra. In Naogaon Sub-division it is abundant. 4. It is known by the names of ganja and bhang. 6, The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily dense. 7. There is no cultivation of hemp, but wild hemp (bhang) grows abundantly in the jungles. 15. Cultivated hemp is used in smoking; cha- ras (cannabis) is also used in smoking. Wild hemp is generally used in drinking (ghata) and smoking, and one of its preparations is made with milk and sugar called majum, and is used in eating. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the people in their home. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from wild plants. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Generally sanyasis and people belonging to the singing classes smoke ganja and charas. 23. Bhang is also used for smoking. Those people who cannot afford to purchase ganja, use bhang in smoking. 24. Up-country men are generally accustomed to drink bhang. 28. Habitual moderate consumer of ganja usually smokes one-fourth of a tola per diem, which costs him one anna, and habitual excessive consumer smokes one tola per diem, which costs him 4 annas. 29. Tobacco leaves are ordinarily mixed with ganja to make it mild and to prevent coughing; kneaded tobacco is mixed with charas. Black pepper, milk and sugar are mixed with bhang to make it tasteful and to improve its power of intoxi- cation. Dhatura is not used with any of them. 30. These three drugs are generally practised in company. Their use is mainly confined to male sex. It is not usual for the children to use any of these drugs; but many of the children of the sanyasis use ganja. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed. It is difficult to break off. There is the tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 33. Those who use these drugs are generally looked in bad lights by the public. There is no such custom to worship the hemp plant. 36. I do not think there is any reason to believe that alcohol is now substituted for any of these drugs. As these drugs are generally used by the poor people, the price of the alcohol being higher, they cannot afford to buy it. But these drugs are sometimes substituted for alcohol. 37. There is great difference between the effect of charas and ganja smoking. The ganja is more intoxicating than charas. 38. Flat ganja is very strong, chur is less strong than flat, but round is somewhat milder. 40. In some diseases bhang ganja is prescribed by the native physicians. This is also used for the treatment of cattle. 41. The moderate use of bhang (ghata) keeps up the digestive power. The moderate use of ganja gives temporary relief after hard bodily labour. Some of the labouring classes of people use ganja to get refreshed after hard labour. 42. To say the truth the use of these drugs is not beneficial to health. 43. The moderate consumers are not offensive to their neighbours. 44. It is temporarily refreshing. It produces intoxication. It does not allay hunger. It creates hunger. It soon drives a man out of temper. Its effect lasts from three to four hours. Its after- effect dullness. 45. It causes loss of appetite. It generally causes dysentery, bronchitis, asthma. To habitual smokers the use of medicine in dysentery produces little effect. The excess in practice of it produces insanity. 3 E 3
380 47. These drugs are used as an aphrodisiac. The use of the drug is prevalent among the pros- titutes. 54. Some of the criminals use these drugs to make themselves strong to commit act of violence or other vices. 55. Criminals in order to carry out their evil designs induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs and so stupefy themselves. Complete stupefaction can be made without admixture. 62. I do not think it necessary to control the cultivation of bhang as it is not injurious to the people. 68. There is only one license shop at Kakina. 163. Evidence of MAHARAJA BAHADOOR SIR JOTEENDRA MOHUN TAGORE, K.C.S.I., Calcutta. I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter No. 1581, dated 7th instant, and en- closures, and in reply to say that my knowledge and experience of the subject of the questions framed by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission are so limited that I regret I am unable to give any precise information thereon. The fact is the hemp plant is not cultivated in that part of the country in which I am a resident, and over which my personal knowledge extends, and that therefore all I can say about the use of the three drugs re- ferred to in the questions must necessarily be of a general character, and as such will, I fear, fail to enlighten the Commission in the way their elabo- rate and exhaustive enquiries demand. I can only say that ganja and bhang have been in use in this country from a very ancient time, and it appears that the latter especially has the sanction of religion for its use, so much so that on the last day of the great Durga Puja festival the use of Bijoya, another name of bhang, is enjoin- ed on every Hindu, and the custom of drinking a quantity of it, however small, prevails almost in every part of Lower Bengal, if not all over the country. Besides, the drug is considered to be of such an auspicious character that when pur- chases are made on any festive occasion, bhang or siddhi is the ingredient that occupies the first place among all articles bought. The use of ganja is, however, more confined to the lower and labour- ing classes of the people than to those who occupy higher positions in life, and are free from the ne- cessity of manual labour. It is generally smoked and seldom, if ever, eaten or drunk. The use, if carried to excess, prejudicially affects the brain, and proves deleterious in other ways; but moder- ate indulgence acts, it is believed, as a prophylac- tic against diseases incidental to the low lying parts of the country which are subject to damp and moisture. Its cheapness recommends it to the poor people who require a stimulant to sustain them in their physical labours, and in its effects is less injurious on the whole than alcoholic drinks. Bhang is a more innocent narcotic. It is general- ly drunk and is medicinal to some extent in helping digestion. It is largely used in the preparations of the medicines administered by the Kabirajes (native physicians) and is considered both as an appetiser and aphrodisiac. Its use is more exten- sive among the people of the North-West Pro- vinces, many of whom take it regularly as a stimulating and refreshing beverage every evening, and some even twice a day; nor is the drink, as far as I know, considered reprehensible from a social point of view, for almost every male mem- ber of a family uses it freely and openly, and does not look upon its use in the light of a moral delin- quency. When used in moderate and regulated doses, it has seldom been known to have any in- jurious effect. Charas is much milder in its effects than ganja, and used to be smoked by even the well-to-do portion of the community in former times much more than at present, the test of the people being in recent times diverted to imported wines in pre- ference, undoubtedly to the greater injury of theirhealth. On the whole, in an economic and perhaps sanitary point of view, the use of the aforesaid indigenous drugs appears to me to be preferable to the use of the ardent spirits and wines now rapid- ly replacing them, to the great injury of the moral and material well-being of our people. As regards the prohibition of the use of any or all of these drugs, I am inclined to think, having regard to the very extensive use of them all the country over, so as to make them identical almost with the ordinary necessaries of life, that the prohibition, if enforced, would cause serious and general discontent, and, I fear, would lead many to take to the use of ardent liquors; and this, in my humble opinion, would be replacing one evil by another of still greater magnitude. The above is an imperfect expression of my general views on the subject of the reference and is based on information and observation which I believe to be substantially correct. 164. Evidence of RAJA SURJYA KANTA ACHARJYA, BAHADUR, Zamindar, Mooktagacha, Mymensingh. I can speak from my experience as a native of the district and resident landed proprietor of 24 years' standing, having personally looked after and controlled the workings of my zamindari since 1869. I would beg to point out that my remarks, whatever they may be worth, must be taken as applying only to my own district (Mymensingh), outside of which my knowledge of the subject is not at all of a precise nature. In this particular district the extent of my property and the fact that I tour about a great deal and see things for myself have brought me into more or less intimate touch with all classes of society. Hemp or ganja does not, I believe, grow spon- taneously in any part of this district, and it is generally known only as ganja to the native population. It is a cold-weather crop, and is to the best of my knowledge only cultivated on that side of the district which abuts on the Jumna river. Though
381 as to the extent of the cultivation I cannot speak, having but little property in that direction, my impression is that the area under hemp drugs cultivation is exceedingly small; so much so, as to make it impossible for me to classify the loca- tion of the different varieties. It is certain that in all cases the cultivation of ganja is only a matter of agricultural expediency, and is confined to no particular class of the people. Ganja plants are raised from the seeds of flat ganja, which is the staple hemp drug in common and general use in the district. Charas is practically unknown in the district, and what bhang there is grows wild. The principal and almost the only form in which hemp drugs are consumed in this district is in the shape of flat ganja. The preparation of hemp drugs, like their culti- vation, is undertaken by any person, irrespective of caste or creed, either as a commercial specula- tion or for domestic consumption. Bhang and ganja, when old, lose their in- toxicating power and they become useless after a year or so. It is said that damp and exposure materially lessen the intoxicating effects of these drugs. Charas does not deteriorate so rapidly; it remains effective for years if not exposed to damp. It is also used medicinally. I do not know whether ganja or charas is used in other ways in general besides smoking, though sometimes majum and other intoxicating confec- tions are prepared with ganja, and it is said that dhatura is sometimes put in them, as well as bhang, to make them stronger narcotics. Ganja is almost invariably inhaled in the same manner as tobacco smoked, and it is generally believed that more than one-half of the labouring classes smoke it and do so as refreshment, either to stimulate them to the hard work they have to undergo in sun, rain, or cold, as the case may be, or else to assist their repose after the great fatigue of their day's work, and it may be said that ganja- smoking is almost general amongst these classes, without any distinction of locality. A labourer who can afford ganja, will, as a rule, indulge in it, and I would be sorry to see that class deprived of what is to them, in my opinion, an indispensable luxury and an inexpensive tonic. The consumption is yearly on the increase, as labour in the fields is gradually greater. Charas is little known and seldom used in this district, while bhang is never smoked and only used in form of sherbet and for medicinal purposes. Up-country people, who reside here or come down for work, are very partial to bhang; but the consumption is small, and cannot be accur- ately estimated or localised. I think it may be safely assumed that the great majority of ganja-smokers in this district are moderate in their use of the drug, although of course some go to excess, as is the case with the drinkers of spirituous liquor. The average consumption per diem of ganja for an adult may be taken at one-eight to one-fourth of a tola, up to 2 tolas for an excessive consumer, and aggravated cases have come to my knowledge in which individuals have got through as much as half a powah, i.e., ten tolas, in one day. The average cost is about 3 annas per tola. In rare instances I believe dhatura is mixed with ganja to increase its strength. Bhang and patti are also mixed together with other drugs and spices by those bent on complete intoxica- tion, but such cases are the exception. Hemp drugs are as a rule consumed in private, by which I mean on the smoker's own premises, especially by those with whom the practice is not a daily one; but habitual smokers often meet together at a given place and pass their leisure in conversation, refreshing and exhilarating them- selves with the fumes of ganja. I do not believe that any women, except those of loose character, use the drug, and even among that class the percentage of ganja-smokers is very small. Instances of ganja-smoking among children are almost entirely confined to those who are being trained up for immoral purposes, and are consequently more in the way of such tempta- tion. The habit af ganja-smoking, once contracted, is apt to become a permanent one, and is certainly very difficult to break off, and in many cases, especially if acquired very early in life, is apt to lead to its excessive abuse. Among Hindus, in certain forms of worship of their god Mahadeo, the use of ganja is prescribed; but the custom is observed only by the lower classes as a rule. Recently among the lower class of people a new ceremonial by the name of Tinlakpeer has come into practice, in which ganja is the chief ingredient, and in this ceremony habitual and occasional ganja-smokers, even non-smokers, join, and all indulge freely in ganja-smoking, and in these so-called religious meets people are given a taste for ganja. The use of ganja in connection with religious rites is now-a-days discouraged and in disrepute. Certain ascetics favour the use of ganja very strongly, but I have never heard in this dis- trict of such a thing as ganja plants being worshipped. With special reference to question 34, I think that any such course as the prohibition of the use of ganja would be too drastic a measure, and would entail a serious and perhaps a dan- gerous privation on the hardest worked section of our population, viz., the bona fide agriculturists and artisans. Moreover, it must be borne in mind that our raiyats can afford to pay for a stimu- lant if they wanted, and once deprived of their ganja, they might, and probably would, take to spirit-drinking, and worst state of affairs would possibly result. At present spirit-drinking among the classes I speak of is almost unknown. In the higher strata of native society the consump- tion of ganja is on the wane. But the con- sumption of European liquor by these classes is daily increasing and becoming more fashionable, and ganja-smoking and the drinking of country liquor are looked upon as most plebeian habits. I believe native kabirajes prescribe ganja as an ingredient in aphrodisiac medicines, and bhang is sometimes used as digestive. A moderate use of ganja is said to help the appetite, but of course I can speak only from hearsay. I certainly believe that it gives stay- ing-power and recuperates a tired man by assist- ing his repose as I have previously mentioned. I am not prepared to say of ganja that it is harmless even in moderation. But at the risk even of seeming inconsistent, I must say that I consider it a necessity to the people and a thing of which it would be undesirable to deprive them.
382 Doubtless ganja-smokers are of uncertain and irrit- able temper, but I do not think its effects in that way are worse or even as bad as those of alcohol, and I believe it to be a stimulant better adapted to the native constitutions. There is no doubt that a man can degrade himself mentally, morally, and physically by excess in the use of hemp drugs in the same way as an alcoholist can do; but I think the substitution of alcohol for hemp drugs (and alcohol is to my mind the inevitable substi- tute) would only magnify what evil at present exists. The practice of ganja-smoking is not, I think, hereditary, but in certain families it might be called traditional. It is of course true that most bad characters are ganja-smokers. But whether their vicious tendencies have induced them to take to ganja- smoking or the blame of their moral deterioration is to be attributed to the indulgence in this habit, I cannot say. However, I cannot fully believe that ganja is so much responsible for crime as that criminals make use of ganja as a necessary sedative after, or a stimulant before, the commis- sion of crime. With regard to the questions asked in chapter VII by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, I do not think that I can make suggestions of any value without going further into the matter. I have only to say that there are ganja shops in almost every town and village in the district, but I do not at present feel in a position to com- mit myself to any suggestion as to how the exist- ing state of things could be improved. It is certain that ganja shops do not spring up in defiance of public opinion, as the supply is very unlikely to go where there is no demand, and it is unlike a shop-keeper to take his wares to a bad market. The habit of ganja-smoking has the authority of long custom and tradition, and I think the chasas or agriculturists, who are the principal con- sumers, would consider themselves hardly treated were they deprived of such a necessary luxury. If any steps can be taken to check its abuse, I am heartily in favour of their adoption. But, as I have said before, I think that ganja has now become a positive necessity to the lower classes;and it must be remembered that it is no innova- tion of western civilization, but a habit dating back, I may say, from very ancient times, the sudden eradication of which would be difficult. In conclusion, I have only to say that I have refrained from touching any points which lie out- side the scope of my personal knowledge, but I believe that such information as I have given you will be found in the main correct and I hope use- ful. 165. Evidence of RAJA RANAJIT SINGH, Vaisya, Zamindar, Nashipur, District Murshidabad. 20. I know of no special classes which use ganja, charas, or bhang as a rule in excess. The drug is in moderate quantities used by sanyasis, up-coun- try people, and the labouring classes, especially in the agricultural and swampy districts of Bengal. 41. The drug is used in moderate quantities with the object of producing narcotic and exhilarating effects, as also relieving fatigue after labour. 28, About an anna worth of the drug is regard- ed as moderate consumption. 31. The moderate use of the drug, especially ganja, does not unfrequently tend to develop into the excessive use. 32. The drug, especially bhang, is ordinarily used on the occasion of the Holi festival by up- country people, and less so by some people in Ben- gal on the Dussara day. 46. The effects of the drug when used in (a)moderation are narcotic, and when used in (b)excess, general weakness and prostration, loss of appetite, and ultimate dysentery, especially when the frame is not supported by milk and other sub- stantial food. These effects in the case of charas are serious; so far as ganja is concerned mode- rately so, and in the case of bhang not consider- able. 29. Such admixtures as dhatura, soot, and the juice of pan leaves, are used with ganja with the object of making the drug strong, while in order to produce mild effects are mixed with the drug kahoo, kashni, koolfa, gokra kanta, rose petals, jastimodhu, cucumber (shasha) seeds, sounf, kharbooza seeds, Gujrati ilachi, and golmarich. Of these, the dha- tura and soot appear to be noxious, the former of which is more frequently and knowingly consumed with the drugs with the object of making it strong. 55. This question is answered in reply to ques- tion 29. 35. Except for financial considerations, the use of hemp drug, especially charas, should be prohi- bited. But for the protection of revenue, the use of ganja and bhang should be continued under restrictions. The question is not one without difficulty. The imposition of stricter terms should be gradual, so that the difficulty to those who are in the habit of regularly using the drugs should be slow in their appreciation. Bhang, pure and simple, is not so deleterious as the other two forms of hemp. Hence a free use of this drug will to some extent make up for the restricted use of ganja. The suppression of charas and the re- stricted use of ganja, will in some measure affect revenue. The rise of the price of ganja and bhang may to some extent compensate for the loss of revenue, but an unreasonable rise is fraught with the danger of adulteration of the drugs with deleterious matter such as dhatura, etc. If this latter can be guarded against, partial pro- hibition of the drugs as indicated above may be possible. 166. Evidence of RAI RADHA GOVINDA RAI, SAHIB BAHADUR, Kayasth, Zamindar, Dinajpur. 1. Contact with persons who use the drugs and from informations received from other sources. In a portion of my zamindari, within the districts of Bogra and Rajshahi ganja is grown, specially in the subdivision of Naogaon. 2. The three definitions given of the ganja may
383 be accepted for this province. But the flat and the charas are generally grown in Bogra and Rajshahi and not the round ganja. The flat is locally known as kali and the chur has no other name. The definitions of siddhi and charas, as quoted from Dr. Prain's report, are also accepted here. 3. Hemp plant grows spontaneously in Dinajpur, Rajshahi, and Bogra. It is abundant in Bogra and Rajshahi. 4. The different names are bhang tree, from which siddhi is prepared, and ganja tree from which ganja is prepared. The plants belong to the same species, but are somewhat different. 5. I have no knowledge of these facts. 6. The growth of wild hemp is ordinarily dense. 7. (a) and (b) Hemp plant is grown in Rajshahi and Bogra for production of ganja and charas. (c) Plants are not cultivated for production of bhang, and it is prepared from wild plants. (d) The plant is not grown for fibre and seeds. 8. Not aware of. 10. The persons who cultivate hemp do not form a special class, but are ordinary agricultural cultivators. 11. No. 12. I am not aware if wild hemp is cultivated for production of ganja. 14. Ganja, charas, and bhang are prepared in Rajshahi and Bogra, to what extent it is not known. 15. I have no knowledge of the methods of pre- paration. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by people in their houses. It can be prepared from hemp plants wherever grown. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 17. Not known. 18. Ganja, charas and bhang deteriorate by keeping. It loses its effect in time. Deteriora- tion can be prevented by keeping it wrapped in cloth or gunny. It deteriorates in damp. 19. As far as I know, ganja and charas are used only in smoking. 20. Poorer classes generally smoke ganja;charas is rarely used. Most of the sanyasis and mendicants and low-class people, such as day labourers, menials, and up-country palki-bearers, generally use it. The proportion of the ganja- smoking class is about 1/32 in this district. 21. Flat ganja is preferred. 22. I am not aware what charas, native or foreign, is used. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Both rich and poor use bhang. Proportion is not known. 25. Use of ganja is on the increase. The smokers believe that its use makes them hardwork- ing, and brings in concentration of mind. 27. Sanyasis are habitual excessive consumers. Mendicants and menials are habitual moderate consumers. The mendicants travel from place to place, and the reason of their using ganja is that they can endure different climates. The reason which leads the menials, day labourers, etc., to use it is that they can do hard work. 28. To habitual moderate consumers, from 1 pice to 2 pice. To habitual excessive consumers, from 1 anna to 2 annas. 29. The ordinary bhang massala is black pepper and aniseed. It is made rich by mixing milk, sugar, rose-water and cardamom, which is used by the higher classes. 30. The use of ganja and bhang is mainly con- fined to the male sex, and they are used by adults and old men. Children do not use the drugs. 31. Habit of consuming ganja is easily formed, and its moderate use develops into excessive. 32. On the last day of Durga Puja, that is on the Bijoya day, bhang is generally used by all classes, Its use on that day is regarded as essen- tial, but its use is moderate. Many take only a drop of it. It is not injurious, and does not lead to a habit. 33. Use of ganja is regarded as disreputable. The public opinion is against it. 34. It would be a serious privation to excessive consumers to forego the use of ganja and bhang. By the use the consumers feel a sort of pleasure which they cannot forego. 35. It is not feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. Its prohibition would occasion discontent among the consumers. But it would not amount to political danger. Its prohibition would be followed by the recourse to alcoholic drinks or other drugs. 36. I do not think alcohol is being substituted for any of these drugs. 37. Not known. 38. Not known. 39. Drinking bhang, it is said, is less injurious than smoking ganja. 40. Bhang is prescribed for its medicinal quali- ties by the native kabirajes It is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Moderate use of bhang is384 167. Evidence of RAI BAHADUR RADHA BALLAV CHOWDHURI, BAIDYA, Honorary Magistrate and Zamindar, Sherpur Town, Mymensingh District. 1. The answers are framed on the local experi- ence I have about the matter, and I have also con- sulted local men of experience and the medical practitioners (both doctors and kavirajes). 2. Yes, the hemp drugs are known in this quar- ter by the names given. 3. In this part of the country the growth of wild hemp and bhang is abundant. Ganja is very rare. 4. Ganja and bhang. These are different spe- cies of hemp plants. 6. Scattered. 7 to 9. None. 10. None. There is no cultivation of hemp plant in this part of the country. 14. Ganja and charas are not prepared here. Bhang is prepared here by people from wild hemp plants to a large extent. 15. Bhang is prepared for eating and drinking from the wild plants. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by people in their houses. It can be prepared from plants wherever grown. I cannot say whether ganja and charas can also be prepared from wild plants alike or not. 17. Generally, the people of all classes keep bhang (hemp plant leaves dried) prepared in their houses. Some people keep it as a household medicine and some as a pleasure drug. Bhang is generally kept by the up-country men settled here. 18. I cannot say about ganja and charas, but bhang does not deteriorate by keeping within a year; it loses its effects to some extent by keep- ing. If properly cared for it keeps good for a whole year. People generally use bhang, at least after some months it was first dried. Its stimu- lant nature gradually decreases by keeping. Damp is the cause of deterioration. Bhang does not generally deteriorate if it is kept in a dry place and sometimes be exposed to sun. Generally bhang is kept on a machan or hung in a pot in the kitchen, so as to keep it always free from being damped. 19. The use of charas is not prevalent here. I have no knowledge of it. Ganja is generally used for smoking, sometimes used also in another shape called majum. If ganja is fried in ghi a cer- tain kind of juice comes out of it and this juice is called the majum, which is used by people as a pleasant drug mixed with sweetmeat. 20. Generally the working and labouring classes of the community smoke ganja. Generally 10 annas of the population use it. I think it is equally used both in towns and in villages. 21. All kinds of ganja are generally used here, but the flat ganja has preference to others. 22. I have no knowledge of it. 23. Bhang is not used here for smoking. 24. The use of bhang is generally prevalent amongst all classes; the proportion is 4 annas to 16 annas. The use of bhang is much prevalent amongst the up-country men and Beharis settled here. 25. The use of ganja seems to be on the de- crease; the reason may be attributed to the use of country liquor, which is gradually increasing amongst the labouring class. I can say nothing about charas. The use of bhang is neither on the increase nor on the decrease. 26. Ganja and bhang385 once formed. It is generally seen that if a ganja- smoker cannot smoke ganja he gets dysentery. 35. It will be impossible to prohibit the use of ganja and bhang; I am afraid that if it is done so the drug would be consumed illicitly, and the prohibition would occasion much discontent, rather a panic among the consumers; but I do not think that such discontent would amount to any political danger. Yes, surely the prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants, which I think are in themselves much more injurious in every way than ganja, bhang, opium and all other drugs, if even taken together. 36. Yes, I think that alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for ganja and bhang. The cause may be attributed to the luxurious habit which the people are acquiring after the Western civilization, which I think they mistake to under- stand. 37. I do not know anything about charas. 38. I do not know. 39. I am given to understand that the smoking of ganja is more injurious than any other prepara- tion of it for consumption. Bhang is never used in smoking. 40. The bhang is used by kavirajes (Indian doctors) as medicine. I do not know about ganja. Neither ganja nor bhang is used in the treatment of cattle-diseases. 41. (a) The moderate use of bhang is beneficial in its effects as a full accessory to digestion. (b) Ganja is used by the lower classes of the people, which gives them a staying-power under severe exertion or exposure and to alleviate fatigue. I have dealt with the preparation of the consuming people in question No 26. I refer to moderate occasional use of the drug here. 42. Yes, I consider the moderate use of ganja and bhang to be harmless. I never heard of any such moderate consumers to have suffered from its effect. 43. Yes. Why moderate, even the excessive consumers also are inoffensive to their neighbours, while the man who would drink a glass of liquor goes out into the street to fight with the innocent people. 44. I cannot say anything about the immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja and bhang on the habitual consumers. I think it is refreshing and produces intoxication to some extent. The use of ganja and bhang does not allay hunger. The use of bhang creates appetite. It is seen that the want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja and bhang sometimes do mischief to the mental power. The habitual moderate use of ganja may impair the constitution to a little extent, but the bhang does not. Bhang and ganja do not injure the digestion or cause loss of appetite. Ganja causes dysentery and sometimes bron- chitis. Ganja sometimes impairs the moral sense and induces laziness. Sometimes ganja does deaden the intellect and produces insanity of milder type, and such insanity sometimes becomes temporary and sometimes per- manent. Such temporary insanity may be re- induced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. I do not know about any typical symptoms. Sometimes insanes confess that the use of the drugs has made them so. 46. The same answer I have made for question 45 will answer all parts of this question, but the results are more likely to occur from the exces- sive use. 47, 48 and 49. No. 50. The excessive use of ganja and bhang tends to produce impotency. I am unable to answer other queries of the question. 51. No. 52. Yes, a large proportion of bad characters are excessive consumers of ganja. The crime of theft generally is the special character of an excessive ganja smoker. 53 and 54. No. 55. No. The matter related in questions 53, 54 and 55 rather relates to the habit of drinking liquors. 56. The effect of hemp is not modified by the admixture of other substances. I have dealt with the subject in my answer to question 29. 57. I know nothing of charas; ganja is generally used in smoking There is also another mode of using ganja, which is known here as majum, and with which I have already dealt in my answer to the question 19. The use of majum is not at all injurious to health if used moderately. Oral evidence. Question 1.386 168. Evidence of RAI TARA PERSAD MUKERJEE BAHADUR, Brahman, Zamindar, Pleader, Saran Bar, Chairman of Municipal Board, Revelganj, and of Local Board, Chapra, President, Bench of Magistrates, Chapra and Revelganj. 20. Fakirs and palki-bearers generally take ganja, some with moderation and some in excess. Bhang is used by some of the higher and also by the lower classes, and mostly by the Mathura Chowbay Brahmins. I can't give any opinion or information about charas. 41. Fakirs smoke ganja for the purpose of preventing the accumulation of phlegm, since they have to travel on pilgrimages in different climates. Palki-bearers and coolies smoke ganja to find relief from fatigue. Bhang is used by many as medicine, and by some as an intoxicant. It is difficult to say how much pleasure is felt by those who use either ganja or bhang or both. 28. The consumption of each kind of these drugs depends on the constitution of each man. 31. It is probable that moderate use may deve- lop into excessive use. 32. None that I know. 45. When used in moderation, the use of these drugs is beneficial; and injurious when used in excess. 29. Dhatura is sometimes used to make the drugs stronger. 55. Can't give any opinion. 35. No; it should not be prohibited, and neither is it feasible to do so, as the drugs are used by particular classes of men for particular purposes. 59. Cultivators have now and then to give wild bhang to their cattle for medicinal pur- poses in cases of illness, over-work and general debility, etc. It is not proper to prosecute these cultivators if a small quantity of wild bhang, which each cultivator should keep for his cattle, be found with them. The agriculturists should be allowed to keep a certain quantity of bhang, as there has of late been much deterioration of cattle in consequence of the keeping of the wild bhang by husbandmen even in small quantities being a subject of criminal prosecution. 169. Evidence of BABU HARI KRISHNA MAZUMDAR, Baidya, Zamindar, Islampur, District Murshidabad. 1. As a zamindar my property lies in Nadia, Murshidabad, Rajshahi, and Birbhum. I have to go there on business, and I have therefore had opportunities of obtaining informations regarding some matters connected with the use of hemp drugs in those places. Moreover, I had occasion to mix with Beharis, Uriyas, and North-Western Provinces people freely. As a Chairman of the Berhampur Board, I have to travel in the interior of the district on my inspection tour. I am an Honorary Magistrate with first class powers, and have to try several police cases. 2. The definitions of charas, ganja, siddhi or bhang may be accepted for my province, and they are locally known by the names charas, ganja, andsiddhi. 6. The growth of the wild hemp in Murshid- abad is generally dense. 7. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of ganja and charas in Murshid- abad, Nadia, and Birbhum. 12. In this part of the country wild hemp is not cultivated. They grow on damp soft soil. They are generally seen in unused tanks. 16. In most cases people prepare bhang or siddhi in their houses from wild plants. They also prepare ganja, though not generally, from wild plants grown in jungles, but I have not heard of preparing charas. 19. No; generally ganja and charas are used for smoking purposes; but ganja is also used for medicinal purposes. I know of some men who chew ganja. 20. There are no special classes who smoke ganja and charas. But generally they are used by people of lower classes. The sanyasis in general use ganja. About 15 per cent. of lower class of people, 5 per cent. of gentlemen, and 99 per cent. of sanyasis smoke ganja. 21. Flat ganja is preferred for smoking. 22. Charas is generally imported from the North-Western Provinces, and it is chiefly used. 23. Bhang is scarcely used for smoking. 24. In Bengal very few people drink bhang regularly. During Durga Pujas some people drink bhang. In Bihar, Orissa, and the North- Western Provinces most people drink bhang regularly. 25. The use of ganja, charas, and bhang, or of any of these drugs, is not on the increase. Some twenty or twenty-five years before in mufassal towns and big villages there were regular addasfor ganja-smoking. Generally those addas are not now seen. Most people have substituted opium or liquor, or both, for ganja. In some cases it is also seen that people substitute ganja for liquor and break off the habit of drinking, and vice versà. I know of some four or five gentlemen who were excessive drinkers of alcohol, but they have now left drinking, but have taken to ganja-smoking regularly. In old days, when liquor was not so available as it is now, the number of people ad- dicted to drinking was small. People want some- thing for stimulation; consequently they will either use ganja, opium, or alcohol. 28. Four chillums of ganja per diem are regarded by the habitual moderate consumers as the moder- ate allowance, and they cost about half an anna. Charas is not generally used by a separate class of men for smoking purposes. Those who smoke ganja take charas generally. Bhang or siddhi is less costly, and for a habitual moderate consumer twice a day is sufficient. Habitual excessive con- sumer's average allowance of ganja per diem can-
387 notbe ascertained, but I think twenty-five chil- lums per diem can be taken. 29. Opium and dhatura are mixed with ganja to increase its intoxicating power. Dhatura is also sometimes mixed with siddhi or bhang, which makes the drug more intoxicant. Dry tobacco leaf is always mixed with ganja. No bhang massala is sold here for the purpose of being mixed with these drugs. People mix golmirich (pepper), dhania, and mahuri with siddhi or bhang, and sometimes milk and sugar. 30. In most cases the consumption of each of these three drugs is practised in company. Gene- rally some men assemble together in a place for the purpose of smoking ganja, which is called "ganjar adda". Here they talk on various sub- jects and concoct plans for the fulfilment of their evil intentions, Bad characters generally assemble in such an adda. It is confined to the male sex, though not mainly. Some women of low caste, such as bagdi and bania, and some women of ill fame use it. It is not confined to any time of life, but generally children do not consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is not formed easily. I do not think that it is not difficult to break off the habit easily, though I have seen several smokers of ganja who after using it for a long time have left it. The moderate use of the drug tends to develop itself into an excessive one, is the opinion of the veteran smokers. 32. In some places there is a social custom that the people there drink bhang or siddhi during the Durga Pujas, especially on the last day of the Puja on Dasami day, when the idol of goddess Durga is taken to the river, people generally drink bhang. The use of the drug in connection with such custom is not regarded as essential. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit or otherwise injurious, a day or two in a year cannot do any permanent harm or good. 33. Gentlemen class generally regards the con- sumption of these drugs as a vice, but the case is quite different with the lower class people. He who can smoke ganja in excess gets the title bhangi388 48. Habitual excessive consumption of the drug is not also a hereditary habit and it does not affect the children anyhow. I know two gentle- men whose fathers were not in the habit of taking any intoxicating drug. They (the sons) were ex- cessive consumers of ganja drugs, opium and liquor when available. They died early, but their (consumers') sons are strong and healthy and they do not use any intoxicating drug. 49. The moderate use of ganja and siddhi is practised, though not generally, as an aphro- disiac. I know of a good eminent kaviraj who ad- vised a gentleman to drink siddhi for this purpose. Some prostitutes use ganja for this purpose. Some time ago a prostitute told a gentleman to smoke ganja to increase his venereal appetite. I do not think it more injurious. No; the use of hemp does not tend to produce impotence. 50. The case is quite the contrary when it is used in excess. 51. In towns a large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of ganja. I do not think that there is any connection between the moderate use of ganja and crime in general, but the advantage of the use of the drug is that they can talk and consult matters in adda freely, and the use of the drug stimulates a little. The consumers of ganja generally commit petty thefts. 52. The excessive use of ganja has the tenden- cy to make the consumer lazy and inactive. 53. The excessive indulgence of any of these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. I do not know any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy 54. Yes. 55. I have no personal experience, but I have heard that criminals, in order to further their de- signs, induce their victims to partake of bhang or siddhi mixed with sherbet and so stupefy them- selves. Complete stupefaction cannot be thus in- duced by this drug without admixture. 170. Evidence of FAZL RUNBBEE, Dewan to His Highness the Nawab Bahadur of Murshidabad, Murshidabad. 20. There are no classes which specially use ganja, charas or bhang in moderation or in excess except sanyasis. Ganja is to some extent used by the labouring classes of the people, such as boat- men, fishermen, bearers, etc., in moderation. 24. The up-country men residing in Bengal take bhang, though not in large quantities. The number of people who take charas, however, is limited. 41. Ganja is smoked to counteract the evil in- fluences of the climate and also for purposes of intoxication. Bhang is used as a stimulant and also as a provocative of appetite. It keeps the system cool. The use of ganja enables one to concentrate his attention to any subject that one takes up. The pleasure consists in the narcotic effects produced by the consumption of the drugs. 28. One to four chillums of ganja and charas and from half to one tola of bhang a day is regarded as a moderate consumption. The cost of ganja would be about 4 pice, that of charas about 3 annas, and that of bhang about 2 pice. 31. Yes, generally. 32. There are no special occasions when ganja is socially or religiously used. Bhang is used on the Bijoya and Sivaratri days by a large number of all classes of the Hindu pepole. 44. Ganja in moderation protects one from the injurious effects of the climate. Bhang in modera- tion is attended with no evil effects. 46. The excessive use of bhang produces excessive intoxication. Ganja in excess breaks down one's health; charas does the same, but not bhang. Ganja and charas produce strong intoxication, even in small quantities, whereas bhang in moderation is very mild in its effects. 29. Tobacco is generally mixed with ganja to render the smoke more mild and agreeable. Dhatura and kuohla (nux vomica) are mixed with ganja to make the narcotic offects stronger and lasting. Such admixtures are made use of by the sanyasis, as ganja alone fails to produce the desired effect. 55. No, except those stated above. 35. No. Though, as already stated, the con- sumption of ganja is injurious to health, and its stimulating power is temporary and weakening, yet its entire prohibition would not only be not practicable, but would bring in other worse in- toxicants. 67. In the present excise system the high duties imposed and the increased license fees levied upon the drugs have raised their prices too high, and the consumers who cannot afford to pay for the quantity they require, buy a little and admixture other poisonous substances with it, as stated above, knowingly, for reasons already mentioned, and thereby totally ruin their health, and sometimes ultimately even meet with an untimely death. 35. I think the use of bhang and ganja should not be prohibited altogether. Their complete prohibition might bring in a more extended use of alcoholic liquors and other poisonous substances, which would be worse than ganja for the people. The use of bhang, as far as I know, is not so injurious. It does very little harm to the health of the consumer, except that it makes him very much intoxicated when he takes it in excess. 171. Evidence of BABU RAGHUNANDAN PRASAD SINHA, Brahman, Zamindar, Dis- trict Muzaffarpur. 1. I have personally seen many ganja and bhang consumers of various classes and degrees. Many of them are and have been my servants, and residents of the place I live in. Numerous instances of sadhus consuming and its effects upon them have come under my personal observa- tion. I have seen many consumers of the town and watched the effects of consumption upon them. 3. In the districts of Western Behar (i.e., the districts under the Commissioner of Patna Divi- sion) only the male hemp plant, which is simply
389 used as bhang, and can in no circumstance be used as ganja, grows spontaneously. 4. The male hemp plant is called bhang plant and the female hemp plant from which ganja is prepared is called ganja plant. They do not refer to exactly the same plant. 5. The male hemp plant grows wild generally in an uncultivated land, and does not require specially good soil. 6. Of the wild male hemp plant (used as bhang and not as ganja) dense. 7. No. The cultivation of the hemp plant in this province for production of either ganja or charas, or for its fibre or seeds, is never done, and is also a criminal offence. No cultivation of even male hemp plant is done, but it grows abundantly wild in an uncultivated place, which some people gather and use as bhang. 8. There has been total decrease in the area wherein male hemp plant used to grow wild, because the village police, under instruction from the superior Police officers, has this year uprooted the wild hemp plant grown anywhere. 11. No. 12. No; male plant is extirpated. 13. Yes; restricted to all the districts. In the Patna Division its cultivation on a large scalewould be impossible, hence restricted. 14. Ganja and charas are not prepared in this province. The male hemp plant grown wild is used as bhang everywhere, which requires no special preparation. 15. The male hemp plant grown wild is plucked and dried in the sun, and then its leaves washed in the water, and then used for eating and drink- ing after its being powdered with at least gol- mirich. It is seldom used for smoking. One rare preparation of bhang is called majum, which is prepared by boiling bhang together with misri, etc., etc., in ghee, which is used very rarely, only by the rich men of the town. 16. Yes. Perhaps bhang cannot be prepared from the female hemp plant from which ganja is prepared, and, if prepared, it would not be liked by people, as it would not come to the same standard of taste and other requirement found in bhang of male plant. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 19. Generally speaking, they are used only for smoking, but I have heard of ganja used even as medicine. Ganja is offered to certain elementals (lower Devas) in worship by certain class of persons. 20. In villages none smoke charas, which is smoked only in town by comparatively very few persons, specially old Muhammadans. Eighty per cent. of sadhus (ascetics) of all orders and places, smoke ganja, and also a little less than 5 per cent. of Hindu house-holders do smoke it, specially town people. Muhammadans do not smoke ganja on religious grounds. 21. Flat (patti) ganja is preferred for smoking. 23. Barely bhang is used for smoking by the ganja-smokers when unable to obtain ganja either for want of money to purchase it or any other cause. 24. Nearly 85 per cent. of sadhus (ascetics) of all orders and places eat or drink bhang, and also 20 per cent. of the Hindu house-holders; but many of them do not do it continually and regular- y, and specially not all the year round. Bhang- drinking is specially done in hot season, and eat- ing in rainy and winter seasons. The practice is universal and not confined to any locality. Sixty per cent. of the higher Hindu castes of the North- Western Provinces do drink or eat bhang, which is specially universal in its character in Muttra among Chaubays. Bhang eating is resorted to by comparatively few persons. 25. Ganja and charas smoking on the decrease, specially on account of high rate charged for ganja. The use of bhang is neither increasing nor decreas- ing, but stationary. 26. Among ganja-smokers390 (d) Prohibition will occasion serious discontent among the consumers. (e) Sadhus may create political danger, but house-holders will not. (f) Not to alcoholic stimulants, but to other drugs may. 36. No. But the fact is this that the greater number of the consumers of bhang and ganja are among those castes who do not have recourse to alcohol on account of prohibitive caste rules. 37. Yes; charas-smoking cannot be regarded as stimulant, but its contrary, whereas ganja- smoking sometimes serves as stimulant. 39. No; rather I would say, bhang drinking or eating not injurious at all, but generally bene- ficial to its consumers, as it cures many diseases, such as piles, etc., etc., which is not to be expect- ed from ganja and charas smoking. 40. All the schools of native doctors prescribe invariably bhang-taking on account of its medi- cinal properties, and bhang is widely used in the treatment of cattle disease. Bhang is a sovereign remedy for the poor in sit-jvara (periodical fever). 41. Ganja may in cases of (b) and (c), and bhang may in (a) and (b), but not charas. Sadhus (ascetics) generally use bhang for purposes mentioned in (a) and (b), and ganja for (b) and (c), and also for the purpose of averting the injurious effects of bad climate of several places when they go on pilgrimage. There is a certain classs of sadhus called "tapasvi" and "naga," large in number, who do not live in houses even in the winter season, but in open place, and more- over do not keep cloths upon their bodies, and to them ganja-smoking is a matter of necessity in order to warm them. I refer to the moderate habitual use of ganja, because moderate occasional use thereof generally ends in moderate habitual use. In case of bhang I refer to the moderate occasional use. 42. Yes, harmless. Moderate use of ganja acts as a stimulant and prevents the injurious effects of cold upon constitution, climatic or otherwise. The use of bhang prevents and cures many diseases, such as piles, indigestion, and fever, and also has refreshing effect. 43. Yes. 44. Yes; moderate use of bhang and ganja is refreshing. To habitual consumer, and even to moderate occasional consumer, the use of bhang and ganja does not produce intoxication; and if it ever produces intoxication at all, not of the kind produced by the use of alcohol, but quite inoffen- sive. Ganja use does not allay hunger, but bhang may. Bhang creates appetite, but not ganja. No after-effects in the use of bhang and ganja. In case of ganja want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 45. (a) Of bhang does not; of ganja does some- times, mental and rarely moral even. (b) Bhang does not; ganja occasionally may. (c) Bhang does not; ganja occasionally may. (d No. Answer refers only to bhang and ganja. (e) Bhang use does not; the use of ganja not unoften induces laziness and sometimes even habits of immorality only to the persons who are naturally immoral and not to others. (f) Bhang use does nothing of the kind, but ganja use may sometimes deaden the intellect, but cannot produce insanity. A chela (disciple) of Mahant Ganesh Dass, the Mahant of Maniari, District Muzaffarpur, grew insane, who was a habitual excessive con- sumer of ganja, which he even consumes while being insane, but there is no certainty of the fact that this insanity is due to the consumption. The other insane persons I have met were not ganja-smokers. 46. There are many eminent sadhus who are habitual excessive consumers of ganja, but no kind of injury has thereby been done to them. But others (besides great sadhus) who are exces- sive consumers of ganja are more or less injured, but excessive habitual consumers of ganja are mostly found among sadhus. 47. No. Answer refers only to bhang and ganja. 49. As regards bhang, no. 51. As regards bhang, no. As regards ganja, it is no doubt a fact that many bad characters are habitual moderate (rather excessive) consumers of ganja, but there is no connection with their crime and ganja consuming. It is the bad characters who have betaken themselves to ganja consuming, but not the ganja consuming which has made them bad characters. 53. As regards bhang, no. 54. No (refers to bhang and ganja); but they may use ganja as stimulant. 55. Complete stupefaction not possible from ganja or bhang without admixture of dhatura, etc. 57. Ganja is never eaten except as medicine. 62. No; controlling not required. 65. Taxation of bhang not reasonable. 67. Bhang must not be taxed. 68. I have seen ganja consumed in the shops where they are sold, which ought to be stopped. 69. Wishes of people are not consulted or considered. Yes; local public opinion ought to be considered. 70. No. No ganja is allowed to be brought from Nepal, and sufficient precautions are taken for this purpose by Nepalese police officers, who examine the luggage of men coming from Nepal. 172. Evidence of BABU SURENDRA NATH PAL CHOWDHURY, Zamindar, Ranaghat, District Nadia. 1. As a zamindar owning landed property in the districts of Nadia, Jessore, Khulna and the 24-Parganas, in all of which hemp drugs are more or less consumed, Jessore and Khulna claiming the foremost place. 2. Yes. They are known by the names men- tioned in Dr. Prain's report. 3. In almost all the districts I have mentioned, and have experience of, the hemp plants grow spontaneously, but no use is made of them.
391 4. It is known as bunna or jungli siddhi (wild hemp). This, I cannot say, refers exactly to the same plant cultivated in Naogaon and Patna. 6. Ordinarily dense. 7. (a) Yes. (c) Yes, in Behar. 10. No. They are of the same classes as the other cultivators. 11. Not that I know of. 12. Not in the places I know of. 13. Yes. Rajshahi in Bengal, and Patna in Behar. 14. (a) Yes. (c) Yes. 15. (A) Ganja, before being smoked, is gen- erally cut to pieces, sprinked with a little water, and mixed with a little quantity of prepared tobacco and sometimes with that of dried tobacco- leaf. By well-to-do smokers the drug is soaked in rosewater before being used. (B) The drug (bhang) is sometimes used with pan (betel) in the same way as spices. Some confections are made with the drug ground. (C) As a beverage, bhang is drunk mixed with rosewater, milk and sugar, black pepper, aniseed and some other seeds, and spices. The poorer classes generally seem to be content with only water, black pepper and aniseed. 16. (a) Yes. (b) an No. 19. Yes. 20. The industrial classes (mostly up-country men) smoke ganja with very few exceptions, while the consumers of charas are mostly Muhammadans in up-country, not without a sprinkling of Hindus. Charas is generally used as an aphrodisiac. 21. Round ganja is preferred for smoking, but the other kinds being cheaper are generally used. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used. 23. Yes, but rarely. Not in any particular locality or localities. 24. The up-country men generally drink bhang, though occasionally eat it. Perhaps it will be no exaggeration to say that almost all of them indulge in it. Bengalis also, to some extent, eat or drink it, either for medicinal purposes or as an intoxicating drug, instead of alcohol. 25. The use of these drugs, if anything, is perhaps on the increase. I would attribute it to the rise in the price of country liquor, consequent on the abolition of outstill system; secondly, there is a certain sect of Muhammadans (found among the lower classes) who though they used country liquor before, have now taken to these drugs, as alcohol is prohibited by their religion; thirdly, many well-to-do people have begun using them; and lastly, the Ayurvedic treatment in which bhang is used in many diseases, gaining popularity in these days, the kabirajes require the drug more largely than before. 26 and 27. (a) The number of "habitual moderate consumers" far exceeds that of "habitual excessive consumers." The labouring classes, such as boatmen, fishermen, coolies, etc., having to be exposed to the inclemencies of the weather, generally resort to the use of ganja, although moderately: up-country men with few exceptions habitually use bhang in moderate quantities. There are few men in this province who habitually consume any of these drugs, charas in special, and that too moderately. (b) I had no occasion to come across or hear of habitual excessive consumers of charas, though I cannot say that this class of consumers of ganja and bhang are not to be found. Certain religious sects, such as jogis, sanyasis and fakirs (both Hindus and Muhammadans) use these drugs (ganja and bhang) in excessive quantities to enable them to endure hardships, to deaden their passions, etc.; and their number is not small. (c) Amongst others, bhang is generally used for medicinal purposes, though occasionally drunk for the sake of pleasure by number of respectable Bengalis and up-country men. There is a very small number of occasional moderate consumers of ganja and charas, who use them for the sake of pleasure. They are generally found among the well-to-do class of men. On some religious occa- sions bhang is used by all Hindus in moderate quantities, and ganja by some, moderately too. (d) Bad characters take to excessive consump- tion occasionally when they have anything to do, as thereby their senses are stupefied. Licentious persons and profligates, though they also come under head (a), generally have recourse to excessive use of these drugs (charas in especial), the effect being sexual endurance. 28. (a) To a habitual moderate consumer of ganja, the average daily cost may be two pice; moderate consumer of siddhi has generally to spend one pice or less per diem. (b) About two annas is the approximate average cost of an excessive consumer of ganja, though there are cases where a smoker spends four to six annas per diem on the drug. As for siddhi or bhang, two pices (½ anna) might be said to be the average daily cost of an excessive con- sumer. 29. (a) Black pepper and aniseed with bhang, dry tobacco leaves with ganja and prepared tobacco with charas are ordinarily used. To assist diges- tion and to prevent cold the mixtures are used with bhang. To impart mildness in smoking is the object of admixtures with ganja and charas. (b) With bhang, spices are used for making it flavoury; milk and sugar, to sweeten it and make it stronger; as are also dhatura and soot with bhang, and dhatura with ganja, used with the object of increasing and retaining for some length of time the intoxication. There are a collection of seeds, called bhang massala, which are used with bhang to increase the flavour of the drink. 30. The consumption of these drugs is generally practised in company; only those who use any of these for medicinal purposes take it in solitude. The profligates also generally use it in solitude. I cannot say that these drugs are solely confined to the male sex, although the overwhelming majority of consumers come of this sex alone. None of these drugs is confined to any particular time of life, although the youths generally take to these things; but in the cases of excessive drunkards, they having given up the use of alcohol, use ganja or bhang excessively even at an advanced age. It is not usual in children to use any of thesedrugs.
392 31. I don't think the habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed, or it is very difficult to break off. The moderate habit in the use of these drugs does not tend to develop the excessive use of them. 32. Dussera or Bijoya Dashami and Siva Ratri are the religious festivals in which it is the custom to use bhang and ganja. Ganja is not required to be taken during the former festival, while bhang is freely used on both the occasions, The consumption on these occasions, though ge- nerally temperate, is not so necessarily. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit, or otherwise injurious. 33. The moderate consumption of bhang, speci- ally on religious occasions or for medicinal purposes, is not looked down upon, but those of others (ganja and charas) are. The use of any form of the narcotic is generally held in disrepute, as that destroys the sobriety, morality and the innate dignity of man. Those addicted to this habit are generally found to lose their steadiness of character. There is a sect of Puritans who, having no regard for these religious ceremonies, look down upon the use even of any of these narcotic drugs. I do not know of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. Yes, I think it would be a serious priva- tion at once to forego the consumption of the drugs, specially the siddhi, or bhang, and in some cases even ganja. Amongst others, the industrial classes shall perhaps suffer most if they be depri- ved of the use of what they consider to be a necessity (vide answer to question 26). 35. No, not siddhi in special. The result of such prohibition would be illicit consumption. Prohibition can by no means be strictly enforced, for, as experience shows, in spite of the excise laws, cases of illicit sale of exciseable articles are often heard of. Yes, I think it would occasion serious discontent among the consumers; but I would not fear so much as to cause political danger, certainly not in this province. Yes, the prohibition in the consumption of these drugs will, I am afraid, be followed by the use of the baneful and absolutely ruinous alcoholic stimulants. 36. These drugs are replacing alcohol to a certain extent. The rise in the price of distillery- liquors, in consequence of the abolition of the outstill system, is mainly the reason of the poorer classes resorting to some of these drugs more largely than before. Amongst the well-to-do classes, their sad experience of the baneful effects of alcohol in this country, is chiefly the cause of giving up liquor for bhang or ganja. As a proof of what I have stated, I might mention the increasing sale of these drugs. 37. The effects of charas smoking last longer than those of ganja. The former is generally used by pleasure-seekers, its effect being sexual endurance. 38. I don't know. 39. Certainly not, rather the more injurious. 40. Yes, only bhang is largely prescribed and used in some way or other for its medical qualities by the Hindu school of medical science or Ayurveda. Ganja is used by European doctors, of course mixed with some other ingredients. I am not aware of their use in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. (a) The moderate use of bhang is bene- ficial, as it tends to help digestion. The use is not confined to any special class. (b) Ganja gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, and tends to alleviate fati- gue. It is used by the industrial classes as such, and in moderate quantities. (c) It is said to be a preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. Moderately used by the industrial classes. (d) Bhang with sugar is sometimes consumed moderately by songsters to make their voice sweet. 42. Yes. 43. Yes. They are unlike the consumers of alcoholic stimulants. 44. To a habitual consumer, the effect is refresh- ing, inasmuch as the moderate use of any of these drugs alleviates fatigue. The effect on a habitual moderate consumer of any of these drugs ceases to be intoxicating after the habit is acquired. Rather than allaying hunger, it creates appetite. The effect of a chillum of ganja (which is perhaps the strongest of all the drugs) on a habitual consumer does not last more than an hour at most. 45. (b) Ganja and charas do injure the system. They injure the liver and spleen, and hence cause loss of appetite. (d), (e) and (f) Yes. 46. The excessive use of ganja and charas may bring on the bad effects I have stated above. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. Yes, in some instances. The mo- derate use produces no injurious effects, but the excessive use of hemp tends to produce loss of power. 51. A large proportion of bad characters are consumers of some of these drugs. A habitual moderate consumer, when unable to afford to pay for the drug he is used to take, often takes to petty thefts. I do not see any connection it has with crime in general. 52. Occasional excessive use seems to be in some way connected with violent crimes. The effect of excessive use is to stupefy the consumer for the time being, when he could not be held responsible for his actions. 53. Yes, the excessive use of ganja only. 54. Ganja may be used in this way. But I do not know of any such cases. 55. Yes, but complete stupefaction is impos- sible unless the drug is mixed with dhatura or any other ingredients. 56. (a) Bhang393 57. I have no experience of this. 58. I cannot say that the present system of ex- cise administration in Bengal is working well, though no better system could be thought of. 59. The system is all that could be desired in order to prevent illegal sale of exciseable articles, but owing to the inefficient working of the system, the effect produced is not wholesome. The head of excise administration has, if my information be correct, made it incumbent on his subordinates to detect one or two cases of illicit sale every month, and to secure a conviction of the offender, failing which the subordinates are either fined, suspended or dismissed. The excise law, moreover, allows a handsome reward to such men who detect any such cases. From what I have heard, this gives rise to many a false case got up by unscrupulous subordinate officers, either for the sake of reward or to please their superiors. Many an unhappy creature is even sent to jail I understand. No such reward should, in my opinion, be offered nor any pressure should be brought to bear upon the excise subordinates, save only that of thorough and frequent supervision. 63. No objection. 64. No. 65. Is quite reasonable. 67. No. 68. There are shops for the sale of these drugs where may be found many consuming them on the premises. I have objection to people smoking them on the premises of a shop. 69. Wishes of the people are not consulted be- fore a shop is opened. But local public opinion ought to be consulted. 173. Evidence of BABU GIRJAPAT SAHAI, Kayasth, Zamindar, Patna. 1. Brahmins and other caste people being asked informed me. 2. Dr.. Prain's remark appears to be correct, 3. In Tirhut bhang grows spontaneously. 4. I don't know. 5. Not known. 6. Dense. 7. No cultivation here. 8, 9, 10 and 11. Not known. 12. Wild hemp is not cultivat duction of ganja. 13. It is not restricted in this province. 14. Not known to me. 15. Method of preparation is not known to me. 16 and 17. Not known. 18. Quite ignorant of that. 19. Ganja is used for smoking. Bhang is used in drinking, eating, and worshipping Siva. No other use. 20. Fakirs and sadhus generally smoke ganja in all the localities. 21 and 22. Not known. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Almost all the Brahmins and other caste also, but rarely. In all districts in Behar. 25. To my understanding it is on the increase. 26. Unable to give any reply. 27. Brahmins generally take bhang, which they say helps in their devotions. 28. The average expenditure for each person of excessive consumer per day is two annas and that of moderate two pice. 29. Round pepper with bhang is generally used, Dhatura is never used with bhang. 30. Bhang is generally used in solitude. Male sex of mature age, not children. 31. Those who are habituated from a long time, it is very difficult for them to give it up at once. Men beginning with small quantity afterwards take large quantity. 32. In Siva Puja all Hindus are bound to offer bhang to the idol. It is also used in medicine. 33. Not known. 34. It would be a serious privation if the drug be prohibited regarding the priestly classes. 35. To prohibit the use of the drugs will produce great inconvenience to the people as well as discontent. The prohibition can be enforced by raising the price of these drugs, whereupon the consumers shall be obliged to diminish the quantity they take. This will tend to remove them from such habits. 36. Alcohol is never a substitute for it. 37, 38, 39 and 40. Not known. 41. (a) Bhang and ganja help digestion. (b) Bhang and ganja make men indefatigiable. (c) Not known. Labouring classes generally use them for those purposes, and we generally give bhang and gur to our horses when overworked. 42. Moderate use of bhang is harmless, since it gives necessary stimulation. 43. I have never seen any ganja and bhang smoker or drinker to be offensive to his neigh- bours. 44. It creates appetite, and the effect lasts for five or six hours. 45. (a) Ganja produces noxious effects physi- cally and mentally, but not morally. (b) It does impair. (c) No. (d), (e) and (f) Not known. 47. It is not a hereditary habit. It never affects children. 51. No. 53. It never incites unpremeditated crime. It never excites to homicidal crime. 54. No. 55. No stupefication is caused by these drugs. 57. Not known. 58. I am quite ignorant of the present system of excise administration, and therefore cannot give any opinion. 62. The cultivation should be controlled by levying exorbitant taxes on the cultivators. 3 G
394 63. The only improvement I suggest is to tax heavily. 65. Taxation on all the intoxicants should be trebled. 66. I do not know its kinds, so I cannot suggest any opinion. 68. In this province we have shops for sale of these drugs. No houses. In my opinion shops should be allowed on heavy taxes. 69. I have never been consulted. 174. Evidence of BABU RADHIKA CHURN SEN, Kayasth, Zamindar, Berhampur. 1. I have seen people of the upper grades of society, who have renounced social ties and have become ascetics, as well as other people, accus- tomed to hemp drugs. From accidental informa- tions received from them on the effects of its use, I am able to write so far as I now recollect. 3. Hemp plants (siddhi) grow self-sown in neglected parts of the garden, on the slopes of a tank, and on damp soils not much exposed to sun. My knowledge on the matter is confined within limited areas in our district. 6. Wild hemp grows dense. 11. I believe not. 14. Ganja is prepared in Balughara, which is, I believe, in the confines of Dinajpur, and in Naogaon in Rajsbahi. 16. Bhang may be prepared from wild plants, but not so with regard to ganja and charas. 18. Yes; they do. I think they keep good with ordinary care up to three or four years. Damp causes deterioration. Bhang may be preserved a longer period, and old bhang is preferred to raw or new bhang for medicinal purposes. 19. I believe ganja is sometimes used for medicinal purposes. Ganja is powdered and mixed in oil with other ingredients, which is boiled, and is then used as a cure for some skin eruptions. Cannabis indica is another medicine administered in cases of hæmorrhage. 20. Ganja was pretty extensively in use in our district in former times, but not so now. 21. Flat and round kinds are preferred. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. In Muttra, Brindaban, people in general drink bhang. Some thrice, some twice, and others once a day. It is more prevalent in up- country than in Bengal or Southern India, where people of all classes more or less drink it. It is said to keep the body cool in hot weather and a proof against exhaustion from too much perspira- tion. 27. Generally low classes of people smoke ganja. It is supposed to have the power to sustain labour. Sanyasis, with few exceptions, are addicted to this habit. To guard against the influence of climate as well as to enable them to concentrate their thoughts in the contemplation of the divi- nity, which is a condition dependent upon the suspension of mental activities, they take to ganja smoking. 28. (a) From two to three pice a day. (b) From six to eight pice a day or more, say, three to four annas. 29. Tobacco is mixed with charas and ganja for smoking. Black pepper and aniseed are ordinarily used as bhang massala, and in hot weather well-to-do people put (khira) dwarf cucumber seeds, khur- booza seeds, cardamom, and cloves; also sugar and other palatable things, such as milk, with saffron, in the beverage. 30. Children do not use these drugs. Yes; it is confined to the male sex chiefly. 31. I think the habit is easily formed. It is not so difficult to break off the habit as in the case of the opium. I think the tendency towards the habit becoming excessive is common in all inebriat- ing drugs and drinks. 32. There are no social or religious customs that I know of in which ganja or charas is in essential use. Bhang is drunk on the fourth duy of the Durga Puja in moderate doses. But is not essential. It is optional. 33. The consumption of these drugs is certainly held in disrepute. People addicted to the use of these drugs are regarded as idle and worthless. Sanyasis (ascetics), who smoke ganja, are not looked upon in the same bad light. They belong- ing to a privileged class, the odium does not approach them. There is no custom that I know of, at least in Bengal, where hemp plants are worshipped. 34. In the case of boatmen and Muhammadan labourers, who on Ramzan days are wont to fast, they are accustomed to smoke ganja in order to sustain their powers as a labouring class. I think it would be a serious privation to interfere with their habits. The same will be the case with the ascetic class. 35. Charas, I think, is not of so extensive an use as the other two, and it can be easily checked. Bhang is used by persons subject to chronic dys- pepsia and looseness of the bowels. But they are exceptionable cases. In Muttra, Brindaban, and in other parts of the North-West it is in extensive use, where a prohibition would occasion serious discontent. A sentiment of high respect is enter- tained for sanyasis by all classes of people, and a discontent reaching them by such an interdiction is, in my opinion, likely to extend to other classes, which might in time amount to a political danger. In the Punjab I think ganja is more extensively consumed than in other parts of the Continent, and there are many Punjabi ascetics whose in- fluence upon the people of their presidency is per- haps greater than those in others, and an inter- ference in their habits might result in a serious danger. The prohibition might lead to alcoholic drinks. 36. Lower class people now-a-days indulge in drinking country wine to a greater extent than formerly. I think the increase of wages is one of the causes. 38. Chur ganja is less strong than the other two, and the effect of the former is proportionally less. 39. Bhang drinking is much less injurious than smoking charas or ganja. 40. I have stated about the medicinal properties of bhang and ganja that I know of in my answers to some of the foregoing questions. 41. (a) Bhang is used by some as a food ac- cessory.
395 (b) Ganja is smoked to give staying power, etc., etc., etc. (c) Supposed to safeguard against the influence of climate. Moderate habitual use is supposed to attain these objects. 43. They are so. 45. Ganja and charas impair the constitution ultimately. In the cases of excessive consumers ganja causes sometimes dysentery. It does seldom impair the moral sense, and is not calculated to create immorality or debauchery, but to some extent it induces laziness. Ganja in some cases produces insanity, and the symptoms are likely to be reinduced by the use of the drug after abstinence. The consumers perhaps do not admit it. This is a difficult question to answer, for I have known persons who are excessive consumers of ganja to be of jovial temper. I have knowledge of a Sub-Judge, who had a good reputation of his judicial capacities, a more than a moderate con- sumer of ganja, and who retired from service on full pension, and lived to a good old age. I have also known persons who have turned insane by ganja smoking, and it is quite possible that persons predisposed to insanity on account of weak intellect and weak health, incapable of keep- ing the use of the drug within moderate bounds, have developed into insanity. 47. My answer is in the negative. 49. I have no knowledge of the drug being used as an aphrodisiac. I think it has a tendency to produce impotency in some cases. 51. I think not. So far as my experience goes, I don't think the use of this drug tends to pro- duce a passion for crimes in general or special. 52. Excessive use of ganja has the effect of fortifying one in the commission of bold and rash premeditated acts of crime. The same might be said with regard to alcoholic drinks. 53. My answer is in the negative. I do not know of any case in which it has led to such a frenzy. 54. Criminals who are accustomed to the use of ganja do use it for such a purpose. 55. Complete stupefaction does not result in ganja without admixture of dhatura, etc. 57. I know of no case wherein ganja or charas is eaten or drunk pure or simple. But small pastry cakes are made of siddhi and small square bits prepared of the same drug mixed with sugar and other spices, which are eaten, and which produce a more severe effect upon the consumer than when used in a liquid form. In some in- stances ganja in small does is mixed with bhang and drunk. But such instances are rare. It may be found amongst veteran bhang consumers in the North-West, and Marwaris upon whom bhang fails to produce the desired effect. 65. In my opinion alcoholic drinks are more injurious in their effects than the use of these drugs, and the former ought to be more heavily taxed. 68. There are no such places that I know of. 175. Evidence of BABU RUGHU NANDAN PRASADHA, Zamindar, Patna. 1. So much of my information as is not per- sonal has been derived from consultation with the consumers as well as my zamindari thikadars, shop-keepers, and other members of the middle classes. 2. The definitions as given by Dr. Prain may be accepted for the province of Behar as correct. Besides those mentioned, another name for bhang, not mentioned by Dr. Prain is "boonti," and is current in this Province. Ganja and charas are known only as ganja and charas. The varieties of ganja are three, as mentioned by Dr. Prain: flat ganja is known in this Province as "pamure," round ganja as "gol" or "chur," and broken ganja as "rorha" or "chur." 3. The hemp plant grows wild in the districts of Shahabad and Champaran and also Monghyr and Bhagalpur, and rather abundantly in Malda. 6. The plant in its wild state generally grows in dense patches. 8. The plant is cultivated to some extent in the districts of Patna and Muzaffarpur, and to the best of my information there has been no marked increase or decrease in the area under cultivation. 9. Sometimes in March, April, and occasionally even earlier, the land is ploughed from four to ten times for the purpose of freeing it from all weeds, it being a belief that land for hemp cannot too often undergo the process. In May, after the first shower of rain, a nursery for the rearing of seedlings is formed on high land of a light sandy loam. The plot is repeatedly ploughed, and, if need be, harrowed, until by August the soil has been completely pulverised. On a sunny day the seed, some four or five seers to the bigha, is sown broadcast; and by the latter end of September the seedlings are from 6 to 12 inches high, when they are simply pulled up by the roots, and put down 6 to 8 inches apart on the ridges the same day. Towards the end of October the ridges are opened out, manured with oil-cake and cow-dung, and then reformed, freshly manured soil being thrown up round the roots of the plants. In November the lower branches of the plants are lopped off to promote the upward growth of the shoot; the ridges are redressed and manured, the furrows ploughed, and weeds removed. The crop of the hemp plant is harvested in February and March. 19. Charas is never used for any other purpose, but smoking ganja is sometimes used by Ayurve- dic physicians in the preparation of medicated oils for various diseases. 20. The use of charas in this province may be perhaps found to be more prevalent among low classes, especially in the larger towns, than among any other section of the population. The use of ganja is not confined to any particular class or to any particular locality, but there are sects of religious mendicants who are habitual and even excessive smokers. Among other classes which use ganja may be mentioned agricultural and day- labourers, palki-bearers, fishermen, boatmen, and dhobies; but votaries of the drug may also be found even among the respectable middle classes. 21. Chur ganja is preferred as having the strongest intoxicating properties over the other two varieties396 22. Charas imported from Dacca and the Punjab is used in this province. Herat charas is, how- ever, considered the best, and is also imported to some extent. 23. I have never known bhang being used for smoking. Probably it is never so used. 24. Bhang is generally used by the classes to whom the use of spirituous liquors is prohibited on religious grounds, such as Brahmins, Kshet- riyas, and other higher castes. Ninety per cent. of the pandas or spiritual guides attached to the temples of Baidyanath, Deogurh, and Gaya in Behar are as a class addicted to the use of bhang. Bhang is also largely used by native Hindu sepoys. 25. My observations lead me to believe that there has been latterly a decrease in the consump- tion of hemp drugs, especially bhang, of which the use among the intelligent middle classes is being supplanted by the illicit use of alcohol. In the case of ganja and charas, increased duty as well as facilities for obtaining cheap liquor, may account for diminished consumption. 26 and 27. Generally speaking, I may state that in this province the habitual excessive con- sumers of ganja are the sadhus or peripatetic reli- gious mendicants; the habitual excessive consumers of bhang are the pandas or spiritual guides attached to the temples at Baidyanath and Gaya and other similar temples. It is impossible for me to as- certain their proportion to the total body of the consumers of these two drugs; but I believe upon enquiry it would be found that the proportion of all habitual excessive consumers to the total of consumers is not a very high one. As a rule all those who use these two drugs to overcome fatigue, to avoid the evil effects of exposure, and as a stimulant after a hard day's work are habitual moderate consumers. From the fact that sadhus and pandas, as above mentioned, are habitual ex- cessive consumers, it may be inferred that idleness and immunity from worldly cares as to the pro- vision of the necessaries of life, combined with the notion that the two drugs are helpful to the concentration of mind for religious purposes, are important factors which lead to habitual excessive use. Another factor in the cases of others, though not a numerous class, may be found in the desires for a stimulant for their purposes of sexual pleasure. 28. NAMES Average allowance Class of consumers. Costs. OF per diem. DRUGS. Bhang Half a tola to five tolas Habitual moderate Half anna to two " One chittak to two annas. chittacks Habitual excessive Two annas to four annas. Ganja 75 grains Habitual moderate One anna and a half " 600 grains Habitual excessive About 12 annas. 29. The ingredients ordinarily mixed with bhang are dried rose leaves, black pepper, rose water, keora, aniseed, almond, cardamon, sugar, and other spices to improve the taste. Dhatura is sometimes mixed with it by those whom bhang by itself fails to intoxicate. A small quantity of dried tobacco leaves is probably the only ingre- dient which is ordinarily mixed with ganja. A preparation called bhang massala is sold in the bazar. 30. The consumption of hemp drugs is practised both in solitude and in company. Those who are habitual moderate consumers would generally prefer solitude. Occasional excessive consumers almost generally indulge in company. There is no particular time of life to which the use of the drugs is confined; they are used from adoles- cence to extreme old age. Women and children generally and as a rule do not indulge in hemp drugs. A few women of the town may be found to indulge in bhang, but probably none in ganja or charas. 31. Habit is not easily formed, but when formed it is difficult to break off, and then depri- vation of the drugs produces physical prostration. The moderate habit does not necessarily develop into the excessive. 32. The use of intoxicants, spirituous liquors, and bhang particularly among hemp drugs is an old institution during the Holi or the carnival of the Hindus. Classes which do not use, or are pro- hibited from using, spirituous liquors indulge freely in bhang and sweet cakes made with bhang, technically called majum. The custom is to offer something intoxicating to every visitor to your house on that day, and an important part of the functions of the festival is to receive visits from friends and to visit them in turn, so that by the time night comes, a vast deal of intoxicants is consumed by the revellers. Bhang or ganja or charas, of course, is not essential to the Holi from a religious point of view, but what is of more importance it is custom- ary, and custom has in this country all the force of religion. The use of these drugs on this occasion is of course excessive; it is injurious as all such excesses are injurious on account of the temporary physical prostration it brings about as a reaction- ary effect, but it does not commonly lead to the formation of habits. 33. There is a public opinion with regard to the use of these drugs. For instance, the use of bhang is not regarded as a social sin, while the use of ganja and charas among the higher classes is considered disreputable, although their votaries are not punished by ostracism or in any other way. Among the lower classes their use is not in any way considered reprehensible. I am not aware of the existence of any custom of worshipping the hemp plants, but bhang and ganja are sometimes placed as a native offering at the shrine of Siva. 34. It would be a privation to the habitual consumers to forego the use of the drugs. To the sadhus it would be a serious privation, for the drugs are said to exert a helpful action in the practice of what is called "hatha yogya," or the regulation of breath by systematic postures for the purposes of the concentration of mind. But in all cases there would be privation more or less after the habit is formed; for I consider that the habit of indulgence in intoxicants, whether hemp drugs or spirituous liquors, after it has been deci- dedly formed, produces a peculiar state of the nervous system, which becomes then almost natu- ral to the man, and when the influence of the in- toxicants is all at once withdrawn that system collapses. 35. I think it is possible to prohibit the use of charas, at least in this province. Charas is used by comparatively speaking a very small number of men; it is but rarely, if ever, imported into villages, and those who do indulge in it are not a very respectable class, or one from whose dis- content any political danger can possibly arise.
397 There is no likelihood in the case of charas of its being illicitly used. Charas is not made in this province; it is imported in small quantities from distant places; the price is higher than that of the other hemp drugs; and after its use is prohi- bited, it is likely that the demand would cease, or would be so small as not to make it any body's worth while to risk the dangers of smuggling. The case is different with bhang and ganja. In the first place, the consumers are a much more numerous class, including the sadhus who are notoriously held in reverence by the masses; and as the prohibition would soon come to be regarded as an interference with the liberties of those sadhus who are also religious teachers, a colorable interpretation might be put upon the prohibition as being interference with religion itself. This would be a political danger undoubtedly. In the second place, I do not think it would be practicable to prevent the illicit use of bhang at any rate, as it grows wild in the province; and nothing short of an army of excise men would be able to enforce the prohibition; while, on the other hand, the enforcement of such prohibition by the medium of under-paid men would naturally become in- quisitorial in its character. It is more than possible that the prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants and in a smaller number of instances other drugs like nux-vomica and dhatura. 36. I believe so, and I attribute the fact to the growing fashion among the English educated classes of indulgence in alcoholic stimulants. Alcohol is now much more consumed in an illicit manner by members of classes to whom its use is socially or religiously prohibited than was the case fifteen years ago. Numerically such consumers may be very small, but the fact is there all the same, and indicates that while Western education has the tendency to obliterate ancient customs and many social restraints as superstitious, it does not always provide healthy substitutes for them. 39. Rather the contrary. The general belief is that the smoking of the hemp plant is more in- jurious than the eating or drinking of the same. Excessive ganja smokers are greater sufferers in health than excessive bhang drinkers. In the case of the former the evil effects appear sooner than in the case of the latter. Cases of excessive bhang drinkers are known who have lived up to old age as not suffering materially in health owing to their habit, while excessive ganja smokers sooner or later contract diseases of the chest or the brain. It is, however, unsafe to generalise from a limit- ed number of instances, but the popular belief is that eating or drinking is the better form of using hemp drugs than smoking them. 40. Bhang is used in the preparation of several Ayurvedic medicines; it is also frequently drunk alone or in combination with suitable drugs for the removal of hæmorrhoids and constipation. In the treatment of cattle diseases it is also used largely. Ganja is used by Ayurvedic physicians in the preparation of several kinds of oils for ex- ternal application. 41. The moderate use of bhang may be bene- ficial in its effects398 Ganja is physically harmful even in moderate quantities if taken habitually. Sooner or later it produces chest or brain complaints. If used in excessive quantities, these complaints are produced more rapidly. But cases may be found of moderate consumers who escape any harmful physical consequences with impunity. These consequences are undoubtedly hastened and aggravated by want of rich farinaceous and oily foods, and, on the other hand, if not wholly prevented, considerably delayed by the use of such foods. On the mental faculties the effects of ganja, unlike those of bhang, are rather exciting than soporific. Cases of insanity are known to have arisen from even the moderate use of the drug. I am not aware of any case of the perversion of the moral faculties from the habitual moderate or excessive use of the drug. 47 and 48. In my opinion the habitual moderate or excessive use of hemp drugs does not lead to children being born with potential germs of the habit in them unlike the children of dipsomaniacs. As to any other effects of the parental habit, if the parental constitution is impaired by it, then child- ren are naturally weak and unhealthy, but similar children are born of parents whose constitutions are impaired from any other cause. 49 and 50. Bhang in moderate quantities, and often mixed with other drugs, is used as an aphro- disiac, also by prostitutes; but to my knowledge it is not more injurious when used for this purpose than when used for its narcotic properties. Cases of loss of virile power, partial or temporary, fol- lowing the excessive use of the drug as an aphro- disiac may be found. 51 and 52. So far as my observations go, I do not believe that any large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate or excessive consumers of hemp drugs, nor does there appear to be any special connection between crime and these drugs. 53. Excessive indulgence in these drugs may lead to the committal of unpremeditated crime, but then it would be properly due to temporary insanity caused by such indulgence. I am not, however, aware of any instance of it or of the use of homicidal mania following the excessive indul- gence of hemp drugs. 54. I am not aware of any of these drugs being used by criminals for the purpose mentioned in this question. 55. I believe some instances may be found in the records of our police courts of the use of these drugs by criminals for the purpose mentioned in this question. Complete stupefaction may be produced by excessive doses of the drugs in per- sons not habituated to them, but various degrees of helplessness, short of complete stupefaction, may be enough for the purposes of the criminals. I do not, however, believe that such cases are very common. 56. In moderation, the effects of bhang are modified for the better by the admixture of cooling stuff like rose leaves, rose water, keora, aniseed, almond, the seeds of different kinds of melon and cucumber, etc., etc., etc. These substances have the tendency to counteract the excess of laryngeal dryness and constriction which bhang alone would produce. As a rule, no such substances are mixed with ganja; only a little dry tobacco leaves is all that is mixed with it. Excessive consumers of bhang do sometimes mix dhatura seeds with their draught, because bhang alone after a time fails to intoxicate them sufficiently. 57. I am not aware that ganja or charas is ever eaten or drunk. NOTE.399 10. The persons who cultivate hemp for its narcotic properties do not form a special class. The cultivators of Rajshahi and Jessore are mostly Muhammadans. 13. Hemp plant is grown in the districts of Rajshahi and Jessore. Damp soil favours the growth of hemp from which ganja is produced. 16. Bhang is not generally prepared by the people in their houses. Leaves of wild male hemp do not make good bhang, and are seldom used. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 18. All the three drugs (ganja, charas and bhang) deteriorate by keeping for more than about six months. They lose their effect in time. If kept in well covered receptacles, and exposed to the sun from time to time, deterioration could be prevented. In fact, it is so done at present by the licensed vendors. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Cultivators, fishermen, night watchmen, ascetics, musicians, and other people whose occu- pations involve hard bodily labour or exposure to inclemencies of the weather are generally addict- ed to smoking ganja, and in a very small per- centage of cases charas. Some even of the better class of people smoke ganja and charas. Amongst the better class of people the habit is more preva- lent in Behar than in Lower Bengal. The use of charas is declining amongst all classes of the people given to smoking hemp. 21. The round species of ganja are preferred for smoking. 22. The charas of Nepal and Gorakhpur is chiefly used. 23. Bhang is very seldom used by more than a very small number for smoking. 24. Bhang is eaten and drunk mostly by the up-country people. In Lower Bengal it is used by a very small percentage of the people of all classes. 25. The use of charas has very much decreased, but the use of ganja and bhang is on the increase. The reasons of the former, so far as I have been able to ascertain, are (1) the higher price of charas as compared to that of ganja; and (2) ganja is considered a more lively intoxicating agent than charas. The reason of the latter is that both ganja and siddhi are used as a cheaper and less harmful substitute than spirituous liquors. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers require quarter to half anna worth each. (b) Habitual excessive consumers one anna to two annas worth each. 29. Ganja is usually mixed with tobacco leaves. Bhang massala consists of poppy seeds, petals of roses, seeds of cucumber, aniseed, and pepper. 30. In Lower Bengal ganja and charas are rarely smoked by women or children. The use of all the three drugs is mainly confined to the male sex. 31. The habit of smoking ganja and charas is not easily formed. The habit of eating or drink- ing bhang is easily formed. When the habit is contracted it is difficult to break off. There is not very great tendency in the case of any of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive,400 177. Evidence of GOSSAIN MOHENDRA GIR, Sanyasi, Zamindar, English Bazar, Malda. 1. These answers have been framed upon in- formation obtained from smokers, consumers, and dealers of hemp drugs, 2. These definitions may be accepted for this district, except that round ganja is not prepared by rolling under foot, but it is rolled by hand, and that the dry leaves of the hemp plant is also called "bijoya." These products are locally known by the names given in paragraph 2. 3. In this district, the hemp plant grows spon- taneously. It grows also in hilly districts. 4. The hemp plant is known by the names of ganja and bhang. The plants which do not flower are known as bhang. 5. Not known. 6. The growth is ordinarily dense. 7. Not in this district. 10. No, they do not form a special class. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is not restricted in this province. 14. So far as it is known, ganja is only pre- pared in this province, and in Rajshahi District. The extent to which it is prepared is not known. 15. Some drink bhang by grinding it with pepper, sugar, milk and water, and some swallow it with water. Ganja is generally smoked by mixing with tobacco leaves. 18. Ganja and bhang do deteriorate by keeping. They lose their effect in time. They keep good for about a year. The causes of deterioration and the measures to prevent it are not known. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. Mostly the lower classes of people smoke ganja. Members of the upper classes smoke it but rarely; sanyasis smoke it as a rule. Charas is not used in this district. 21. The flat ganja is preferred for smoking. The people inhabiting the Eastern portion of the province prefer round ganja, and those that live in the West prefer flat ganja. 22. Not known. 23. No. 24. All classes of people drink bhang in cases where opportunity is not got for drinking. Re- course is had to eating also. The people inhabit- ing the Eastern portion of these provinces are less addicted to it than those who live in the West. 25. The use of ganja is on the decrease. The reason is, therefore, attributable to the high price. Nothing is known as to the use of charas and bhang. 29. Tobacco leaves are ordinarily, and powders of sandal wood are occasionally, mixed with ganja. Sugar, rose, seeds of cucumber, pepper, mohuri, ice, elaichi, milk, badam, posto-dana are occa- sionally, and mohuri and pepper are ordinarily, mixed with bhang. Dhatura is seldom used. Tobacco leaves are mixed with ganja for preventing cough, and powders of sandal wood are mixed for perfuming the ganja. The ingredients that are occasionally mixed with ganja are for the purposes of luxury, and the ingredients that are ordinarily mixed with bhang are for cooling purposes. The answer of the second paragraph of this question is not known. 30. These drugs are consumed both in solitude and in company, but their extent is not known. Yes, it is mainly confined to the male sex. The practice is not limited to any time of life. It is not usual for children. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is easily for- med but it is not the case with bhang. As regards charas, nothing is known. Yes, the habit of smoking ganja is difficult to break off. There is a tendency in case of all the drugs for the moderate habit to develop to the excessive. 32. There is no custom, either social or religious, in regard to the consumption of any of the drugs. The answer of the remaining portion is not there- fore necessary. 33. The consumption of these drugs is generally regarded as degradation. In public opinion, the practice is condemned. As they are intoxicating drugs, their use is considered disreputable. There is no such custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. It would be a serious privation to the con- sumers of these drugs to forego their consumption. It would affect the health of the consumers. The answer of the last portion is not known. 35. It is not feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs. The drug would be con- sumed illicitly. If the price of the drugs be con- siderably raised, the prohibition may be enforced. The prohibition would occasion discontent among the consumers. The discontent would not amount to political danger. The prohibition may be fol- lowed by recourse to other drugs. 36, 37, 38 and 39. Not known. 40. Not known. The bhang is used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) The moderate use of ganja, bhang and charas is beneficial in effects as digestive and as a remedy against cold. (b) To give a staying power under severe exer- tion and exposure, and alleviate fatigue. Lower order of people generally use these drugs for the above purposes, but their proportion is not known. The moderate habitual use of these drugs is referred to here. 42. Not necessary. 43. Yes. 62. There is no necessity of putting any control over the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted before a shop is opened in a locality. The local public opinion ought to be consulted. 178. Evidence of BABU KALIKISTO SARKAR, Kayasth, Talukdar, Kasundi, Jessore. 1. By enquiries. 2. Yes, the definitions given by Dr. Prain may be accepted. It is known by the name as given by Dr. Prain.
401 3. Jessore. I am not aware of the particular locality where it is abundant. 4. It is known only as wild bhang. 5. As far as I know, wild hemp generally grows in a little dry and high land. 6. The growth of the wild hemp in this district is not ordinarily dense, but scattered. 7. There is no cultivation of hemp plant in this district now, but I am informed that formerly in Kotchandpur in the sudder sub-division of Jes- sore there was cultivation of hemp plant. 8. Nil. 9. I have no experience of the method of hemp plant cultivation. 10. I am informed that people who cultivate hemp plant are of the same class as the other agricultural cultivators. 11. As far as I know, plants cultivated for the production of ganja are never raised from the seeds of the wild hemp. 12. No. 13. As far as I know, in the lower province of Bengal hemp plant for ganja is only cultivated in the Naogaon sub-division of the Rajshahi Dis- trict and in some parts of the Bogra District. I am not aware why these two districts are selected. No, the cultivation is not common to all districts. I am not aware if there are any special conditions of climate and soil, etc., necessary for the cultiva- tion of hemp. I am not also aware if there is any part in this province where its cultivation would be impossible. 14. In the Jessore District neither ganja nor charas nor bhang is prepared. 15. I am not aware. 16. In the Jessore District bhang is not prepared by the people in their houses. Yes, as far as I am aware, bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. No, neither ganja nor charas can be prepared from the wild plant wher- ever grown. 17. By people of the cultivating class. 18. I am not aware. 19. Ganja and charas are generally used for smoking, but sometimes ganja is used for medici- nal purposes. 20. In the district of Jessore generally, people of the lower class, such as palki-bearers, domes, bagdis and buna-coolies smoke ganja, and their number is small. Sanyasis, baisnabs and fakirs also smoke ganja, but charas is not generally used in this district. 21. In the Jessore District, as far as I am aware, flat and chur are preferred for smoking. 22. I am not aware. 23. I am not aware that bhang is ever used for smoking. 24. Up-country people generally drink bhang. 25. The use of ganja, charas and bhang, as far as I am aware, is not on the increase. 26. In my estimation402 (d) I do not know in any other way. I am informed that 20 per cent. higher class of people use bhang for the above purposes and 90 per cent. of lower class of people smoke ganja in unhealthy places. I refer to moderate occasional use in regard to bhang and to moderate habitual use in regard to ganja. 42. Nil. 43. As far as I am aware, moderate consumers of ganja, bhang and charas are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The effect of the moderate use of bhang, charas and ganja, I am told, is refreshing. It produces a little intoxication. Smoking of ganja allays hunger. Drinking of bhang moderately creates hunger. The effects of ganja last for about three or four hours, and that of bhang about 12 hours. I am not aware if the want of subsequent gratification produces any longing or uneasiness. 45. In my humble opinion habitual moderate use of these drugs does not produce any noxious effects, physical, mental, or moral. But when it goes to excess, the effect is quite the reverse. This answer refers to question 46 also. 179. Evidence of BABU JAGAT KISHOR ACHARJEA CHAUDHURI, Brahmin, Zamindar, Muktagacha, District Mymensingh. 1. Being a zamindar in Mymensingh District and having occasion of touring almost all over it, I had direct intercourse with every class of people and had opportunity of acquiring person- al experience about their habit of life and matters connected with the hemp drugs, in regard to which my answers are framed. 2. These definitions may be accepted for the district. Except flat ganja no other sort is known here. By the term bhang it is understood by this district people to be the dried leaves of a different kind of plant called bhang that grows up spontaneously all over the district, specially in hill quarters. It is not clear, as defined, whether these bhang plants are same as male ganja plants. Charas is only known here by name, but seldom used. 3. I do not know of any district where hemp (ganja) grows spontaneously. 4. I do not know of any other name by which ganja is called by the district people, though it has so many names in Sanskrit Lexicon. 5. I have no knowledge of what sort of climate, soil, rainfall, elevation that favour the growth of wild hemp. 6. I have no information about the matter. 7. Hemp (ganja) is said to be cultivated in certain parts of the Mymensingh District border- ing the river Jamuna. 8. I have not much information about the matters in question. 9. I do not know much of the matters as asked in this question. 10. I have, not much knowledge about the mat- ters in question. 11. Ganja plants can be propagated from the seeds that are found in flat ganja. 12. I have no knowledge about the matters, as referred in this question. 13. I have no information about ganja be- yond the district I live in. 14. (a) Ganja is not prepared in this district in a big scale. (b) Chara is not at all prepared in Mymen- singh. (c) Bhang, as stated in my answer No. 2, is used by a very small majority, but it is not prepared as understood by the term. Some use the broken fragments of ganja which are sold by licensed ganja vendors. It is called patti or chur. 15. Ganja is generally smoked. Majum and other confectionery preparations of it are eaten, Both bhang and patti are drunk in shape of sherbet. 16. People generally prepare bhang in their own houses. It can also be prepared from leaves of ganja plants. I don't know any other plant from which ganja or charas can be prepared. 17. There are no particular classes that make preparations of hemp drugs. 18. Bhang and ganja, when grown old, lose their intoxicating power, and they grow useless after a year or so. It is said that damp and exposure deteriorate the intoxicating essence of bhang and ganja. Charas does not deteriorate so rapidly. It remains effective for years if not exposed to damp. Charas is also medicinally used. 19. I do not know whether ganja and charas are used other ways in general, besides smoking, though sometimes majum and other intoxicating confections are prepared by ganja. It is said that dhatura is sometimes mixed with ganja and put into it to make it more strongly intoxicating. 20. It is generally believed that more than half of the labouring section of the community and artizans mostly smoke ganja as a refreshment, either to stimulate them to the hard work they undergo in sun and rain or to drown their wearied limbs to repose. And now-a-days ganja-smoking has become almost general among those classes of people without any distinction of locality. 21. Flat ganja is sold in this district, and the people have no idea of other kinds besides it. 22. Charas is not much known in this district, and it is seldom used by this district people. 23. Bhang, as understood by this district people, is never smoked, but only used by a few in form of sherbet. 24. Especially the up-country people that reside in this district are addicted to the use of bhang as a drink, and there is no particular locality where bhang is drunk. 25. The use of ganja is, I believe, on the in- crease among the labouring classes, who find it a cheap refreshment or luxury to indulge upon. 26. (a) It is difficult to state exactly the pro- portion, but I believe that almost seven-sixteenths of the labouring population are habitual moderate consumers of ganja, and among other classes the proportion of ganja consumers will not exceed three-thirty-second part of those classes of people.
403 (b) The number of habitual excessive con- sumers are only few, and would not go beyond one-sixteenth of the population. (c) and (d). It is believed that occasional moderate consumers and occasional excessive con- sumers number themselves very few and do not come under any proportion. 27. From the proportion stated above, it will be seen that the labouring classes and artizans mostly take up to consume ganja. 28. The average allowance per diem ranges generally from one-eighth of a tola to a quarter tola to a moderate consumer, and from half a tola to two tolas for a habitual excessive consumer. I have seen two or three men that smoke half a powa of ganja per diem. The average cost ranges according to the quantity of ganja they daily consume, though it is said that a moderate consu- mer can manage with half an anna a day, while an excessive consumer requires four annas perdiem. 29. I have heard that some exceptional ganja- smokers mix dhatura with ganja to make it more strong, but the number of such men is very limited. I don't know whether any other massala is mixed with bhang except some spices to make it fragrant. Sometimes patti, as stated in paragraph 14, is used by certain bhang drinkers who find bhang not strong enough to afford them that height of intoxi- cation to which they like to indulge. Some use bhang and patti mixed together. 30. The consumption of each of these drugs is mostly practised in solitude, though often habitual ganja-smokers who are neighbours, come to meet in certain parts of the day to pass their lazy hours in pleasant talks, refreshing and exhilarating them- selves on the fumes of ganja. It is the male sex that usually consume it, and except some public women of the bazar no one of the other sex indulges in ganja. The few children that addict to ganja- smoking are considered lost children. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is early form- ed especially in bad companies, and if once formed it is difficult to break off. And it is often found that habitual consumers turn up excessive consu- mers. 32. Among Hindus in certain form of worships of their god Mahadeva ganja is used, but it is not much observed now by the gentry. Recently among the low class people, a new ceremonial by the name of Tinlakpeer has come into custom, in which ganja is the chief ingredient. In observing the ceremony, habitual and occasional ganja-smokers, even non-smokers, freely mix, and all indulge in ganja-smoking, and in these so-called religious meets people are taught to taste ganja which is really injurious. 33. The consumption of any of these drugs is considered prejudicial. The religious idea of using them is now-a-days discouraged and disreputed; though certain religious sects, mostly ascetics, re- gard ganja-smoking as a necessity to lead their religious life and achieve the object of their religion. Among people in this district ganja plants are not worshipped, and I have not even heard of any such custom. 34. Though ganja-smoking is thought to be injurious, still it will be a privation, specially to the labouring class of the population, to forego it altogether. And if ganja is no more allowed to them, they will mostly addict to spirit drinking which will be practically more prejudicial to their health as well as to their income. Ganja is used in this country from very traditionary times, and it is no introduction of Western civilization. To meet their cravings for intoxication it suits more the constitution of the people than any other in- toxicating ingredient. 35. The prohibition of ganja in particular might occasion some discontent among certain classes that cannot do without it. But I think cer- tain restriction is more advisable than prohibition.In my opinion no political danger except clamour is probable by such a discontent. The total pro- hibition of ganja will force the people to addict to alcoholic stimulants or dhatura which are regarded more injurious than ganja. 36. To a certain extent alcoholic stimulants have been substituted for these drugs, as ganja- smoking is considered as an ignoble habit of the low people. People are also prone to the fashion of the time. Among alcoholic drinkers, those that drink European liquors are regarded more dignified than country wine consumers. 37. It is said that charas-smoking in moderate shape is milder than ganja-smoking. 38. I have no experience about the matter entered in this question. 39. I have not experience enough to pass any opinion on the matter in this question. 40. I know that native kabirajes make some sort of aphrodisiac medicine, rather confections, in which ganja is one of the ingredients. Bhang is used sometimes as a digestive medicine. I have never seen ganja to be used for cattle diseases. 41. Moderate use of ganja, as I said before, gives staying power under severe exertion or exposure, or to alleviate fatigue. As for other matters referred in this question, I have no better knowledge. 42. I cannot say that use of ganja in any shape and form is harmless in the long run. 43. Ganja-smokers are invariably considered men of rash and impetuous character. 44. I can only say that moderate use of ganja is refreshing, and produces intoxication and pro- motes appetite to a certain extent. 45. The matters referred in this question are more in the sphere of medical men than that of mine to answer. 46. I have nothing more to answer than what I have done in paragraph 45. But I can so far say that habitual excessive consumers generally degrade themselves mentally and morally, as well as physically. 47. Though the habit of ganja-smoking is not exactly hereditary, but it gives license to the posterity to addict into the pernicious habit of smoking ganja. 48. I have nothing more to state than what Ihave said in paragraph 47. The question partly needs medical knowledge to be answered. 49. It is said that ganja, but not bhang, has aphrodisiac properties. 50. It is rather powerfully poisonous when used in excessive quantities. 51. I can say that most of the bad characters are ganja-smokers; and it is ganja that makesthem impetuous and bold to perpetrate the foul actions they commit. 52. I believe they grow up more fierce and turbulent by the excessive use of ganja. 3 H 2
404 53. I believe on the affirmative. 54. I think they do. 55. I have experience of such cases. 56. I have not much knowledge on these mat- ters, as referred in this question. 57. I know that ganja is smoked, and nothing more. 58. I have not much knowledge about the system of present excise administration, and conse- quently unable to answer this question. 59. I have no answer to make. 60. Ganja is very little produced in our district, so I have nothing to say as asked in this ques- tion. 61. Charas is neither produced nor much known in this district. 62. Bhang, as understood by this district people, grows spontaneously in abundance, and I think no method can be adopted that will come to practical effect in the way of control. 63. I am not in a position to answer the ques- tion which requires medical knowledge to be properly answered. 64. I like that Government should adopt strict- er regulations for the import and export of these drugs than the present existing ones. 65. It is difficult for me to answer a questionlike this. 66. I have no knowledge of the thing and can- not pass any opinion. 67. I have no answer to make. 68. In our district there are ganja shops almost in every town and mufassal market, where generally ganja-smokers resort and smoke ganja; and sometimes innocent people are tempted to use ganja in these shops. 69. The wishes of the people are never consult- ed or considered in opening a ganja shop in any locality. The excise authorities give license to the applicants to open these shops. The public opinion must necessarily be considered and con- sulted. 70. I have no knowledge about the matters entered in this question, and no answer to make. Appendix to the evidence of BABU JAGAT KISHOR ACHARJEA CHAUDHURI. Letter No. 460-A., dated Calcutta, the 6th March 1894, from T. INGLIS, Esq., Secretary to the Board of Revenue, Lower Provinces, to the Secretary to the Indian Hemp Drugs Com- mission. In continuation of the Board's endorsement No. 2274-B., dated the 28th December 1893, I am directed to state, for the information of the Commission, that on receipt of the replies of Babu Jagat Kishor Acharjea Chaudhuri to the questions framed by the Indian Hemp Drugs Com- mission, an enquiry was ordered regarding the alleged cultivation of ganja in certain villages in Mymensingh near the river Jamuna. The Collector of Mymensingh reports that the Babu cannot speci- fy the villages in question where ganja is said to be cultivated, and that he is clearly laboring under some misapprehension. A local Sub-Inspector of Excise was deputed to interview the Babu with a view to make the necessary enquiries on the subject, and it appears from the report he has submitted that Babu Jagat Kishor Acharjea Chaudhuri was laboring under a delusion when he sent in his answers to the Commission's questions. 180. Evidence of BABU KAMALESWARI PERSAD, Zamindar, Monghyr. 1. I owe my information to hearsay. I have also heard about these drugs from the persons who consume them. 4. It has no different names as far as I know. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by people in their houses. 17. By cultivator class. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. I do not know if they are put to any other uses. 20. Ganja is smoked by religious mendicants and low class people, and charas mostly by Muhammadans in almost every locality. 21. Flat ganja is preferred for smoking. All these three kinds are used according to the means of the consumers. 23. No. 24. All classes of people and in almost every locality, but specially in North-Western Provinces, where one-half of the population eat or drink bhang, and a few people only in Bengal. 25. The use of these drugs is on the decrease on account of their being expensive. 29. Dhatura is not used. Bhang massala is mixed with bhang. Its ingredients are black pepper, aniseed, endive (kasni), seeds of cucumber, and sugar. 30. These drugs are generally consumed in company. The consumption is mainly confined to the male sex, and is practised in young age. Children do not consume them. 31. Yes; it is not difficult to break off if it is not habitual. Yes; there is such tendency. 32. There is no social custom, except religious custom, which is prevalent only among religious mendicants in regard to the consumption of bhang and ganja. 33. There seems to be a public opinion in regard to the practice of bhang. The use of charas and bhang produces bad effects. It is therefore that these are held in disrepute. There is no custom of worshipping hemp plant, but sometimes in performing religious works, certain people make offerings of ganja and bhang. 34. That class of consumers who have been using the drugs from a long time, and who have therefore formed a habit, will suffer a serious priva- tion if they forege them. 35. No; if prohibition be enforced, the drugs will be used illicitly. Prohibition will occasion serious discontent among the consumers. 37 and 38. No. 40. Only bhang is used medicinal purposes.
405 Ganja and bhang are used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of bhang may be bene- ficial in its effects. 42. The moderate use of charas and ganja will not do much harm. 43. Yes. 45. No; moderate use will not produce bad effects. 47. No. 49. It is not used by prostitutes. If moderate- ly used, it does not produce impotence. If taken excessively, very injurious results will follow, and may produce noxious effects, physical, mental, and moral. 51. Yes; they use ganja. Its moderate use has no connection with any crime. 53. Yes, I know of no such case. 55. Seldom. Complete stupefaction can only be induced when the drug is mixed with some other thing. 181. Evidence of BABU KRISHNA CHANDRA RAI, Baidya, Government Pensioner and Zamindar, District Dacca. 1. I was in the Sub-Executive Service for about 27 years and was in charge of the Abkari Depart- ment of Pirojpur Sub-division for about 2 years, of the Mymensingh District for more than a year, and of the Dacca District for about 5 years. Pirojpur is in Backergunge District. I had, when in charge of the Abkari Department, oppor- tunity of obtaining information regarding hemp drugs. 2. The definitions given by Dr. Prain are cor- rect and may be accepted in the districts named by me, viz., Dacca,Mymensingh, and Backergunge, and in others where I have been in the course of my service; the names locally known are also the same, viz., flat, round, and chur ganja. 3. Hemp plant (wild) male generally and mostly, and female in extremely rare cases grow spontaneously in Dacca and Mymensingh Districts. I do not recollect seeing the plant in Backergunge. In the Dacca District it is abundant specially in the sub-division of Manikgunge where my home is. I can reasonably venture to say that it is also abundant in other parts of Dacca and in some parts of Mymensingh, where the land is not very low. 4. It is called bhang or siddhi and it refers exactly to the same plant. 5. I have invariably seen wild hemp grows on lands which are used as homestead land. No special conditions of climate, soil, or rainfall are necessary. 6. Its growth is dense ordinarily. 7. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant in the districts of which I have experience, viz.,Dacca, Mymensingh, and Backergunge. I know also that there is no such cultivation in Tippera, Noakhali, and Faridpur. In rare cases one or two female plants spontaneously grow in the premises of the ganja-smokers, but the smokers take care to conceal the fact from the authorities for fear of punishment. 8. No answer necessary. 9. I can give no information on this point. 10. Regular cultivators of hemp plant are only to be found in Rajshahi, of which district I have no experience and can give no information. 11. I have not seen cultivation. I said I have never been in Rajshahi. My evidence will be hearsay. I am told that seeds are raised some- times from the female wild hemp plant. 12. I have no reason to suppose that the wild hemp is anywhere specially cultivated for producing ganja. 13. The cultivation is restricted to only Raj- shahi District in Lower Bengal. Can give no information required by this question, as to why it is restricted to only one district and not com- mon to all the districts. I think the cultivation is not impossible, but never tried in any other districts. 14. My answer refers to the districts of Dacca, Mymensingh, and Backergunge. In none of these any preparation is made of the hemp plant for ganja, charas, and bhang, but leaves of the wild hemp are dried and preserved in small quantity by some persons for using medicinally. 15. There is no preparation of any kind in the districts mentioned above. Those who take wild bhang daily are mostly up-country men, who come to East Bengal for service. Hindus of this part of the country who are addicted to bhang drinking pound the dried leaves, mix sometimes with milk and sugar, but often with water, black pepper and dhoma (a sort of spice) powder and then drink. This preparation is made imme- diately before drinking. 16. I have said above what I know of the wild hemp plant from which ganja is in rare cases pre- pared by the smokers on whose premises one or two female plants grow spontaneously. The pre- paration is made secretly and by concealing the fact from the authorities. Charas is never pre- pared in the districts I named. 18. All three drugs become deteriorated and lose effect when kept for a long time, hence the surplus ganja of the Government store (gola) is destroyed annually. They never or seldom re- main useful after two years, and after a year, I am told, the effect or intoxicating power becomes much less and therefore consumers do not use them. I am not aware of any special measures which can be taken to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. I am aware of no other purpose for which they are used. 20. Ganja-smokers are to be found amongst all classes of the people in these districts; the pro- portion, I suppose, may not exceed on an average 7 per cent. or even less than that; comparatively a very small number of men can only be traced amongst the urban population who are addicted to the use of charas. Ganja smokers are to be found both in towns as well as in villages. Men who use charas can hardly be found in villages. 21. I am of opinion that people seldom look to the difference in kinds or effect; they look chiefly to the cheapness of the price, and hence flat ganja
406 is more in use in all parts of the districts I men- tioned. 22. I can give no correct answer to this. When at Dacca I had only one or two shops under me. I think charas used to be brought from Calcutta. 23. I have not seen nor heard that bhang is ever used in smoking. 24. Bhang consumers generally belong to the middle class of the population. Low people do not use it as narcotic or for intoxication. It is difficult to give population, which, by guess, I would assume to be not more than 2 per cent. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the de- crease. Domestic expenses increased to a very great extent, and the people can hardly afford to spend money in luxury and debauchery; besides, education is now more spread and its effect is gradual reformation of society. 26 and 27. I cannot give any correct, or that may be approximately correct, proportion of the different heads. 28. Average daily allowance by guess may be assumed as follows:407 There is no special class of people to whom the above remarks apply, except those who are known amongst the Hindus as "religious mendicants";they use exclusively bhang. My remarks apply to both moderate habitual use as well as to moderate occasional use of the drug. 42. I have mentioned above that moderate use of bhang is beneficial. Moderate use of ganja may not be beneficial, but it is harmless, because it is not very expensive, nor the smokers are in any way troublesome to the neighbours. 43. Yes, they are inoffensive. 44. Immediate effect is refreshing; the consum- ers also feel little intoxication. They say that it does not allay hunger, but it creates appetite. The effect lasts only a short time. No after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification produces no uneasiness. 45. I think this is intended for medical men. 46. The general opinion amongst the sober and educated men is that excessive smoking of ganja has a tendency to insanity. It is productive of dysentery. It impairs the moral sense and leads to laziness and to debauchery. 47. and 48. I am not of opinion that the habi- tual moderate or excessive use of these drugs, viz., bhang and ganja, would appear to be a hereditary habit, or to affect in any way the children of the moderate consumer. 49. The moderate use of both ganja and bhang is practised as an aphrodisiac. It is so used by prostitutes. The use is said to be less injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. No one whom I asked says that the use of hemp produces impotence, but they are not medical men. 50. The same remarks apply to excessive use. After such use for some years the ganja con- sumer naturally becomes weak, peevish, and is apt to get dysentery. 51. It is supposed by many that bad charac- ters are generally consumers of ganja, and in few cases they are addicted to other narcotic. They use ganja to refresh themselves before they attempt to commit any crime. This opinion is general or common amongst the natives. 52. The same as above. 53. I found no case to suppose that excessive indulgence in using ganja or bhang incites to any unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise, I know no case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. They do so, but not in all cases. 55. I am aware that criminals do sometimes try to stupefy their victims, but I cannot say whether they do this by means of these drugs. The im- pression prevails that they use dhatura for this purpose. Latter part I cannot answer. 56. I have no information to answer this ques- tion. I can only say that dhatura is seldom or never used in this country (East Bengal) as an admixture. 57. No reply can be given, 58. Excise administration in respect to hemp drugs, as far as I can judge, is working well, though it is capable of improvement. 59. I would suggest a reduction in the number of shops for selling the drugs and increase of duty. This will, I am of opinion, reduce consumption without causing loss of Government revenue. 60. Dacca, Mymensingh, and Backergunge are not ganja-producing districts. I can give no in- formation. 61. No reply can be given. 62. Wild bhang grows spontaneously in abun- dance in the district of Dacca, and partly in Mymensingh, but not in Backergunge, where the growth is scarce. The consumers of bhang in these districts are few, and they use it to some extent medicinally. There is no cultivation, and any control on the part of the authorities quite unnecessary. Orders for destruction of the wild plants may continue as at present. 63. I left service for about ten years, and during this period took no notice of the present system; but generally I have no objection to the whole- sale and retail vend of ganja and bhang or their preparation. I can say nothing of charas. 64. There is, in my opinion, no objection to the existing regulations. 65. In my opinion the taxation is reasonable. I would suggest a still heavier tax for the drugs, as well as for alcoholic intoxicants, with a view to reduce consumption. 66. There is some slight difference in the quali- ties of the three different sorts of ganja. The tax for flat ought to be very slightly less than for round and chur ganja, but the effect or intoxicat- ing power of all three kinds is comparatively very little, at least such is expressed by the ordinary consumers. 67. I do not consider that there is any objection to the present method. The administration is going on smoothly for some time past. 68. I am aware of no houses or shops in the three districts I named, licensed for the sale of the drugs or their preparations, where, at the same time, they may be consumed on the premises. Had the case been such, it would have been ob- jectionable. It would be giving undue advan- tages to the vendors. 69. When I was in the service, it was usual to consult and take the opinion of the neighbour- ing people before a site for a shop was settled, but no opinion was ever asked before a shop was to be opened. I think local public opinion ought to be asked or consulted. 70. I have no information to answer this ques- tion. 182. Evidence of BABU BEPIN BEHARI BOSE, Kayasth, Zamindar, Sridhanpur in Jessore. 1. I have the opportunity of seeing only bhang plants spontaneously growing in many parts of Jessore. 2. As regards the same Dr. Prain's report is correct. Ganja and charas are not grown any- where in the district. Bhang, charas and ganja. 3. Jessore and Backergunge are the places in which bhang grows in abundance spontaneously. Ganja grows in Rajshahi I have heard, but not spontaneously; they are cultivated. 4. Bhang and ganja. They are different plants.
408 5. They grow in abundance in low lands, just after the rains set in. 6. Very dense. 7. No cultivation in Jessore, but there are, so I have heard, in Rajshahi. 8. There being no cultivation in Jessore, I am unable to reply to this question. 14. Bhang leaves are dried and kept by some people for use, but not for sale. 15. Dried bhang leaves are dried and ground with water and then drunk by some people; these leaves are taken from wild plant. 16. Bhang is prepared by the people in their houses. I have no experience of the same as re- gards ganja and charas. 17. In Jessore and Backergunge bhang leaves are prepared by people of all classes who use them. 18. They deteriorate if kept on earth without covering them tightly. 19. As far as I know, they are used only for smoking. 20. The former is much used in smoking by the lower class of people and the latter by the middle class. I don't know the proportion of the people who use them. In towns more people use them than mufassal. 21. I do not know. 22. Charas is not native of Jessore; it is im- ported from Behar and perhaps Rajshahi in Bengal. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is used in drinking by middle classes in North-Western Provinces, Behar, and Bengal. About two-thirds of the people in the two former and about one-eighth of the people in Bengal. 25. Except in towns I don't think the use of the drugs is on the increase, at least in Bengal. 26. (a) About one-eighth of the people in Bengal are habitual consumers of bhang; save this I do not know. (b), (c) and (d) I do not know. 27. Bhang is first used for medicinal purposes and then it is habituated. I have no experience as regards ganja and charas; so far I know that many people have ruined their health by the use of ganja and many contract dysentery and con- sumption and succumb to them. 31. The habit is formed easily. It is not at all difficult to break off the habit. Yes, the habit generally grows excessive. 32. It is the custom amongst sanyasis and mendicants to use ganja; and the bhang leaves are required to offer to Siva to make offering to the deity, but not essential. It is generally excessive, and the habit proves injurious. 33. The use of these drugs is now generally re- garded with hatred; the public opinion, with few exceptions, is quite against it. Of these drugs ganja is generally in disrepute. I do not know anywhere hemp plants are worshipped. 34. There may be some uneasiness at the time people forego the consumption, but after some time no such uneasiness will be felt. As is evident with the convicts in the jails, they are not allowed to continue the habit and they enjoy better health. I have no idea of the numbers of each class. 35. Yes, it will be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and charas, but not bhang, as it is less injurious, and religion of the Hindus in a certain measure enjoins the use of it. If the use of the former two drugs be prohibited by law, I dare say no one will illicitly use them. No serious discon- tent will be occasioned by the prohibition, and no political danger will ensue. The prohibition will not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulation or other drugs. 36. No. The people will easily forego the use of drugs if prohibited by law. 37. So far I know that the effect of charas smoking is not so serious as that of ganja. 38. I do not know. 39. As regards bhang only, my experience is that it is less injurious in drinking than smoking. I have no knowledge of the other two drugs, ganja and charas. 40. No drug is ever prescribed by the native doctors for medicinal purposes, except in rare instances the kabirajes do so in diarrh409 57. I have no experience in the matter. 58. I am not acquainted well with the present system. 59, 60 and 61. I am not in a position to do so. 62. It should be controlled by the imposition of a heavy duty; it is by all means feasible. 63 and 64. I am not in a position to answer. 65. Bhang and alcohol should be more heavily taxed, and ganja and charas should be stictly pro- hibited by law. 66. I am not in a position to reply. 67. I have not the least objection to increase taxation on these drugs, rather I hope Govern- ment should not shrink from its duty to check and heavily tax them. 68. There are many shops and houses in the province; they should be stopped and controlled. They are creating the greatest injury to the coun- try, specially in a tropical one in which we inhabit. 69. Local opinion should invariably be taken. I do not think it is done so in all cases. 70. I do not know. 183. Evidence of M. KAZI RAYAZ-UD-DIN MAHAMED, Zamindar, Commilla, Tippera. 1. I was a Sub-Registrar at Moradnagar for a period of about 20 years. Lately I have inherited the zamindari of my father. I had very little opportunity of studying hemp drugs. 2. I can't say whether the definitions are appro- priate, as I have no idea. They are locally known as charas, chepta ganja, and gol ganja. 3. In the Tippera district bhang grows sponta- neously. It grows everywhere on moist land; but I do not know whether ganja grows in the district. 4. They are known as bhang or siddhi plants and ganja plants. They are separate plants. 5. It grows in a moist climate. A soft soil, but not under water. The rainfall should not be excessive, and no water should accumulate at the root of the plant. Elevation has no effect on the growth of the plant, for it grows on low as well as high lands. I have collected this much from the public. 6. I can't say whether the growth is scattered or dense; as far as I learn from people one or two growing somewhere. 7. (a) None in Tippera District. (c) No; it grows wild. The bhang plants grow wild everywhere scatter- ed. 8. No cultivation. 9. None. 10. No; none. 11. No. 12. None cultivated here. The practice is very limited. I do not know whether the male plant is extirpated. 14. None here. Bhang is produced, but just sufficient for the consumption of the people for medicinal purposes. It is produced everywhere. 15. No ganja and no charas is prepared here. Bhang is prepared from the wild hemp. The leaves are simply plucked and dried in the sun. These are stored up and used for smoking, eating and drinking with sugar, gur, and milk; also used for medicinal purposes. 16. Prepared by the people in their own houses. No 17. By everywhere using hemp. 18. Bhang deteriorates by long keeping. It may keep good for six months. Ganja deterio- rates by long keeping, say, for a year. Bhang and ganja quite lose their effects in time; but ganja will take a much longer time. Exposure to damp and air is the cause of deterioration. Deterioration may be prevented by keeping these in air-tight boxes as I come to know. 19. Ganja is for smoking, as well as it is used for medicinal purposes, in curing para- lytic and rheumatic pains, as I have experienced personally. It is also pounded and used in mixing with sweetmeats. This is so used in Dacca and Tippera districts. 20. The lower classes of Hindus and Moslems who undergo hard labour with a view to take rest are smoking ganja, and very little by the middle classes and trading classes. I think the ganja-smokers may be 3 or 4 per cent. in all localities. 21. Flat ganja is preferred as well as round ganja Flat, round, and chur ganja are used, but chur ganja in very small quantities. 22. I do not know. 23. Bhang is sometimes used for smoking when ganja cannot be obtained by the con- sumers. In all localities. By all habitual smokers To a very small extent. 24. The up-country men are generally in the habit of eating or drinking bhang. About 20 per cent. so use it. This is to be found in all places. Natives drink bhang. About 5 per cent. so use it. All classes of the people use bhang for medicinal purpose. In all localities. 25. The up-country men coming to our country have extended the use of ganja as well as bhang to a greater extent than before. 26. Ganja consumers are410 Bhang is ordinarily taken with cardamom, black pepper, sugar, and milk, kakri and khira and pumpkin seeds. 29. Dhatura leaves are mixed with ganja to increase the narcotic effects. Ganja is ordinarily mixed with tobacco. Dhatura seed is exceptionally mixed with ganja by habitual excessive con- sumers to increase the narcotic effects. 30. Ganja is consumed 25 per cent. in solitude and 75 per cent. in company of at least of two persons. Bhang is consumed in solitude. It is mostly confined to the male sex. People of middle age consume ganja. Habitual consumers also smoke ganja when old. Low class women, bairagi among Hindus, also consume ganja. Bhang is also taken by old women of Hindu sect, bairagi. Children never use any of these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed. It is diffi- cult to break off the habit. The moderate habit of using the ganja develops into the excessive. The habit of consuming bhang is not easily formed. It is easy to break off the habit. Its moderate use does not develop into the excessive. 32. Ganja is consumed in Trinath mêla. Number of people of Hindu sect meet and sing religious songs. Ganja is then offered to the god Trinath, and everyone present is bound to smoke ganja on pain of the god's displeasure. Ganja is consumed by sanyasis and fakirs to aid the concentration of their minds. The use is generally excessive, and the use of bhang is temperate. 33. Ganja-smokers are generally regarded with disrepute. The public opinion as regards ganja smokers is that they associate with low people, and have no control over their passions and are excitable. Bengalis generally do not approve the use of any form of narcotic. The character of the people is mild, and the climate does not require stimulants. Bhang consumers are not regarded with disrepute. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant; but ganja is often given as offering to Mahadeo by the habitual execessive consumers of the Hindu sects, such as sanyasis. 34. Yes; it would be a serious privation to forego the use of ganja. People can forego their food rather than the use of these drugs. Three per cent. of the people are ganja smokers; but it would not be serious thing to forego the use of bhang. Two per cent. use bhang here. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja or bhang. They would be con- sumed illicitly. It will be difficult to enforce the prohibition. The prohibition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers; but it would not amount to a political danger. The prohibition will be followed by recourse to alco- holic stimulants by ganja smokers. 36. No; it is quite contrary. 37. I do not know. 38. I have no knowledge of it. 39. No; all alike injurious. I can't say whe- ther drinking or eating ganja is more injurious. Bhang is seldom smoked. 40. Bhang is used for medicinal purposes by kabiraj. It is also used in the treatment of cat- tle disease. Ganja is also used for medicinal pur- poses, to cure rheumatic and paralytic pains, which I have personally experienced. 41. (a) Bhang is used as a digestive. (b) Ganja is used under severe exertion and to alleviate fatigue, and as a staying power under severe exertion. (c) Ganja is used as a preventive of disease in malarious tracts. Low class people use ganja. Middle and high classes, especially up-country men, use bhang. The moderate habitual use is referred to. 42. The moderate use of bhang is harmless, because it fattens the body and increases the strength, whereas this is not the case with ganja rather it spoils blood and reduces men to skele- tons. 43. Yes; they are. 44. The moderate use of bhang is refreshing in its effects. That of ganja produces intoxi- cation, but not for habitual consumers. Bhang creates appetite, and the effect lasts for an hour or so. 45. It does not impair the constitution, unless milk is taken afterwards. It does injure the di- gestion, but bhang does not. The use of ganja or bhang does not impair the moral sense or induce habits of immorality or debauchery. The use of ganja causes bronchitis and asthma. The excessive use of ganja induces laziness; it deadens the intellect and makes men excitable, and sometimes produces insanity, temporary and permanent. The patients are easily irritable and the insane confesses the use of ganja. 46. Ditto. 47 and 48. No; it is not hereditary. It does not affect children. 49. Ganja is not used as an aphrodisiac. The moderate use of ganja or siddhi does not produce impotence. 50. Ditto. The use of excessive ganja produces impotence. 51. About 50 per cent. of the bad characters are habitual consumers of ganja. No connection with crime. 52. The excessive use makes men irritable, and induces them to commit offences against persons. 53. Excessive use of ganja makes men irritable, and may lead to violent crime. No case has come to my notice. 54. No, not here; but it is used in big towns, where there are hardened criminals. 55. Not here. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced without admixture with dhatura. 56. No admixtures are made here. Ganja is prepared with rose water to make it mild. No dhatura is used here. 57. It is sometimes eaten with bhang and sometimes with sweetmeats. Its effects are very intoxicating. These are used by habitual exces- sive consumers. 58. It is capable of improving the excise administration. 59. The consumption may be decreased if the duty on ganja is raised and the license fee lowered. This will increase the finance. No duty is levied on bhang. Some sort of duty ought to be levied on bhang. 60 and 61. None produced here. 62. I think the cultivation of the hemp plant for bhang ought to be controlled.
411 It will be feasible, though not all at once. Licenses on payment of fees may be granted for the cultivation of bhang plant within certain areas. Persons on whose lands bhang plants yielding four chittacks of bhang will be found may be prosecuted. This will bring the system gradually within the scope of the detective sub-inspectors of excise. Bhang plants will then have to be destroyed by excise officers. To levy duty on bhang will be the next step. The goladars of ganja receive a good profit. Twenty-five per cent. of the same ought to be paid as license fee. 63. For bhang, see Question 62. For retail vend of ganja, see Question 59. For retail sale of bhang, see Question 62. 64. None. 65. Taxation of ganja is reasonable; but no duty on bhang is levied412 any of these drugs is unanimously considered as immoral. Even those who are habitually addict- ed to the use of these drugs regard it to be ill, and will never allow their children to get into these habits. The public opinion is strongly against the use of these drugs. Musalmans are strictly prohibited from using these drugs by religion. It is con- demned also in society of the Musalmans. There is a Bengali proverb against the use of ganja current in Bengal. "Whoever uses ganja, his fingers grow, his shoulder gets round, he loses the name and prestige of his forefathers, and himself becomes a thief." The use of all these narcotics is generally in disrepute amongst people, and specially amongst people who are educated and enlightened. This sentiment greatly owes its origin to the spread of education and the advancement of civilisation. 34. No, the privation in foregoing the use of these drugs is only fanciful and temporary. If any one really tries to abandon this habit, he can easily do it, with a little firmness and strength of mind. Though at first it may appear to be difficult to give up the habit, but if once given up and continued for a few days with strictness, this new habit will gradually be practised and formed by course of nature. 35. It is quite practicable to prohibit the use of these drugs. If prohibited at once, they may be used illicitly; but this illicit use may be lawfully abolished. If the Government decreases year by year the amount of these drugs permitted to be sold, then in a few years the whole country may be free from these poisonous drugs, which injure people physi- cally, morally, and in respect of money. If at once the use of these drugs is prohibited, then the consumers may be discontented, but the discontent cannot amount to any political danger, because the consumers are mostly poor, mean, and paltry fellows. If the prohibition is done slowly, as already mentioned, then most of them will not even be able to perceive the abolition. 36. Yes, now-a-days alcohol is substituted to a great extent by low class labourers instead of ganja. The cause I attribute to the open trade of alcohol and its stimulant power when drunk. Labourers feel refreshed after hard toil, when drunk a little. The rich also mostly use alcohol instead of ganja. The reason is as above. The free trade of alcohol and its being had everywhere is the cause of substitution. 41. (a), (b), (c), (d) No. The ordinary labourers, such as coolies, use the drugs for giving staying-power in severe toil or to alleviate fatigue. The moderate habitual use is what is referred to here. 42. No, I do not think them to be harmless. For the use of the drugs demoralizes the character of people. The more injurious I consider these drugs to use, as people cannot be moderate in it. Though few people may be moderate for a short time, their moderation by and bye reaches excess. A man, who by using the drugs, loses his self- independence and self-control, cannot stick to moderation. 44. The habitual moderate consumers consider it refreshing when they consume their habitually consumed drugs. Yes, it has an intoxicating effect upon even the moderate habitual consumers. It diminishes hunger. It does not create appetite. The effect does not last for a long time. 45. (a) The habitual moderate use of these drugs increases lust. Physically it stimulates the nerves for a short time. It produces a bad mental and moral effect upon the consumers. (c) It helps digestion of the habitual moderate consumers. (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes, it deadens the intellect. 46. The habitual excessive consumers of these drugs, especially of ganja, lose all heart, morality and intellect. There is nothing bad in this world which such a man can't venture to do. 47. No, there are children of the moderate consumers of ganja known to me who have not inherited that habit. But the children of these people generally become of immoral charac- ter and of weak health. 48. The children of such people become general- ly immoral and of delicate health. 49. Yes, the prostitutes use the drugs, especial- ly ganja, as an aphrodisiac. The use of the drug for that purpose is more injurious than the ordi- nary use as an ordinary narcotic: for when the drugs are consumed as stimulants of lust, people indulge in lust more by its assistance, and hence the injury is more. 50. There are examples of people becoming im- potent by the use, especially the excessive use of these drugs. 51. Yes, a large proportion of the licentious people of the lower class use ganja and bhang. The moderate habitual use has no connection with crime in general, but it is nearly connected with lust. 52. The excessive use of these drugs makes men immoral. It leads413 185. Evidence of BABU JOGENDRA KISHORE RAI CHAUDHURI, Zamindar, Ramgopal- pur, District Mymensingh. 3. In certain quarters of Mymensingh bhang plant grows spontaneously. I cannot call this abundant. 7. No. 14 and 16. From what I know and understand, hemp plant is different from bhang plant. The latter grows, as already said, spontaneously, and native physicians and those who consume bhang gather the leaves and dry and preserve them for use. 20 and 24. The lower class of people smoke ganja. I have no idea of the proportion. Charas is of rare use in this district. Many up-country men habitually use bhang. Respectable Bengalis used to take bhang almost invariably in the Das- sara and Sripanchami days, but the practice is fast dying out. Sadhus and sanyasis, i.e., religious mendicants of the lower order, are often seen to smoke ganja with the object of effective meditation and concen- tration of the mind. 25. The use of these drugs, I shall say, is on the decrease. This may be owing to the influence of Western civilisation, which has a tendency to popularise wine. 26. I cannot say anything as to proportion. The up-country men that are to be found in this district are moderate consumers of bhang. There are occasional moderate consumers, too, among them, and, as already told, among the Bengali respectable class. Excessive consumption of any of these drugs is exceptional. 27. Bhang taken on the puja days (Dassara, etc.,) is for pleasure; all besides for medicinal purposes as a tonic. This drug helps digestion and increases appetite. As for ganja, I think it may be safely asserted that it is mainly used for the purpose of under- going hard labour, toil, and fatigue. 28. Habitual moderate consumption of bhang costs nothing; but such consumption of ganja may cost half an anna per diem or thereabout. 29. To increase intoxicating power sweets, in- cluding milk, are mixed with bhang; ganja is mixed with tobacco leaves. 30. To smoke ganja is degrading to a respect- able man, and hence to him solitude is convenient. Ganja, as a rule, is not known to be used in company, except in low brothels. Children, as a rule, do not use any intoxicating drug. Those of the low class people, however, are often seen to smoke tobacco. 31. I know of no such habit being easily formed. Of course, when one has got into the habit, it is difficult to break it off, as is the case with every habit. In ganja smoking there is a tendency, I think, to develop, but not to the ex- tent there is in wine drinking. 32. I know of no custom except what has already been said with reference to Sripanchami and Dassara. 33. Except tobacco, smoking all other intoxi- cating things is disreputable amongst all classes of natives. 34. I think it will be a serious privation to the cultivators and labourers, because, I under- stand ganja smoking stimulates to work and makes one impervious to heat and cold, and it is beyond their means to have a substitute. 35. I do not think it would be feasible to pro- hibit the use of any. Probably the prohibited drug would be consumed illicitly. It will be difficult to enforce prohibition, and any attempt to do so is almost sure to occasion discontent not only among the consumers, but probably among others also. Such discontent may or may not amount to a political danger; but it cannot be denied that every such discontent has a tendency to develop and amount to a danger. The pro- hibition is likely to be followed by illicit consump- tion. In some cases it might be followed by alcoholic stimulants. 36. Yes; the cause is apparently Western civi- lisation. Large numbers of grog shops is the proof. 40. Bhang is used in several medicines of the Hindu Pharmacop414 or any other such drug may cause serious injuries of different types, according to constitution and predisposing causes. It is not possible for medi- cal men even to say with what effect a particular drug will act upon a particular constitution. I cannot believe that permanent insanity can result, as a rule, from the use of hemp, however, exces- sive it may be. So far as I understand, its habi- tual excessive use leads to dysentery, bronchitis, asthma, or consumption even, rather than to insanity. 47. I don't think. 48. When one has already been attacked with any of the above-named maladies, his children may be affected by it. I don't think the habit in any case proves to be hereditary. 49 and 50. Yes; prostitutes in their earlier life may be supposed to have recourse to intoxication more for pleasure and jest than as an aphrodi- siac, in the sense in which I understand its meaning. My idea is generally males are ini- tiated in intoxication, at least in this country, for aphrodisiac purposes. This may not be the case with the low class people, in whom necessity may be supposed often to preponderate. I think these drugs, when used excessively for aphrodisiac purposes, do more harm by their ten- dency to produce impotence. I may add a class of religious mendicants, in Bengal at least. I mean the bairagis and baishnavas, the bouls and the kartabhajas, and such other sects are known to be habitually addicted to ganja smoking, pro- bably for aphrodisiac purpose only. Love-making and sexual enterprise seem to me to be a part of the religious faith of these people. The tantriks and bhairabs and bhairabis belong to a different order, I think, and these are more addicted to wine than ganja or other drugs. There are some mysteries in all these religious sects and in their habit and mode of life, and ganja or wine, as the case may be, and their use, I think, is looked upon with some religious veneration. Any pro- hibition, therefore, may be construed to mean the violation of the principle of religious neutral- ity. And, as already said, the common order of sadhus and sanyasis being mostly addicted to ganja, who smoke it for purposes of spiritual advancement, may also resent any prohibition. 51 and 52. Very likely. Moderate use of any of these drugs has no connection, I think, with any crime. Nor, I think, excessive use even has any necessary connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. I cannot induce myself to believe that ganja or any other drug is more connected with any crime than alco- holic stimulant. All intoxicating things have their excesses leading to fits of temporary insanity. It cannot be denied that, under such states, crimes are committed; but these are, I should say, rather exceptional cases. In many cases of heinous crimes, such as murder, rape, etc., fits of insanity are often seen to be raised as a plea in defence, and in cases of such plea the aid of ganja smoking is almost invariably invoked in, and medical evi- dence also is often found to have a leaning towards it. But I have grave doubts as to the truth of these as one of general exception. It is, however, an admitted fact that ganja smoking is becoming associated with insanity and murder and such other crimes and there seems to be a growing tendency in some circles to give undue weight to this association, which is perhaps more ima- ginary than real. It is in the nature of men always to find fault with others, specially when they are weak, and ascribe every occurrence to some known or unknown cause. From this natural weakness they become prejudiced against the latter as a class on the basis of something, perhaps real, originally which might have occurred as mere accident, but which subsequently, forming a ground of belief, serves to strengthen their predi- lection and fanciful bias. Ganja smoking is admit- tedly confined to the lower class of people. One of a higher class on every occasion and on every trifle showers upon them all bad names and abusive languages, such as "sala," "badzat," "paji," and so forth, and this is done with impunity and with- out a retort even. These epithets and invectives do not seem to have any origin, except the fact of these people being lower and weaker. If, under such circumstances, one of these happen to be guilty of any crime through stupidity, i.e., say, being under the influence of ganja, the stronger or one in power cannot remain satisfied by calling him a "gadha" only, but calls him a "ganjokhor" at the same time, ascribing his crime to ganja smoking; and thus every similar occurrence, that is to say, every occurrence denoting stupidity or want of sense, naturally calls forth this epithet in addition to what more such epithets one may like to use. Hence ganja, possessing the stupefy- ing property, all stupid actions, in course of time have come to be associated with its influence, and hence the prejudice and predilection; and this is also the reason, I think, why professional experts are found to have a leaning towards a version which accords well with this popular idea and popular notions and prejudice. I know of no in- stance in which any person of the higher class, being charged with any offence or being subject- ed to a fit of insanity, has raised any ganja plea or any plea giving occasion to discussions on the properties of ganja or any such drug. There are yet many respectable persons415 I am far from thinking that the growth of bhang plant should be in any way controlled, nor I think it would be feasible. 68. Intoxication can be controlled, and ought to be controlled, but it cannot be checked or prohi- bited. It is desirable, therefore, that licensed vendors of such drugs should be as limited as possible. To my knowledge there are no licensed shops or houses in this district which afford shelter to men addicted to the habit of smoking ganja, charas, etc., or drinking, or which allow persons of such habits to gather and enjoy. In Bengal, at least, licensed abkari shops are hardly seen to be con- verted into brothels, where all sorts of gatherings and amusements are allowed. 186. Evidence of BABU KALI PRASAD SINGH, Rajput, Zamindar, District Bhagalpur. 1. No other opportunities than coming in social contact with the persons of our neighbourhood who smoke the hemp drug. 2. These definitions may be accepted for our province. These names are given to the articles here. 3. Our knowledge is mostly confined to this district only. Ganja is not grown here, but we hear it is largely cultivated in Rajshahi District. We further know that bhang is spontaneously and abundantly grown in the North Gangetic part of the district. 4. Bhang is produced here and is known as bhang only. The names ganja, siddhi, and charas are also known to the public. 5. We cannot fully answer. Bhang needs damp climate and sandy soil. 6. Bhang is densely grown in the North Gange- tic part of this district. 7. In the North Gangetic part of this district. Bhang only grows spontaneously and is not cul- tivated for any purpose. 12. Ganja is not produced here. 14. Ganja and charas are not prepared here. Bhang leaves are plucked from the plants, ground in water and drunk. No other preparation is in use here. Bhang-drinkers are limited in numbers in this part of the district. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the people in their houses. Cannot answer the rest of the questions. 19. Ganja and charas are only smoked as far as we know. 20. All classes in the proportion of 15 per cent. smoke ganja. Charas is not smoked here as it is not procurable. 21. All kinds of ganja416 55. No, unless any other stupefying drug be mixed with it. 58. We have nothing to say against the present system of excise administration in respect of ganja, except that the dearer the drug is made the less will be the consumption. 60. Ganja is not produced here. 61. Charas is not produced here. 62. Ganja is not produced here; bhang is indigenous and cannot be controlled. 63. None. 64. None. 65. We say again the dearer the drug is, the lower its consumption will fall. 66 and 67. We have no opinion. 68. There are ganja warehouses and ganja and bhang shops and we have no opinion. 69. Wishes of the people are not consulted. 70. Ganja or bhang is not imported or smuggled from Native State into this sub-division. Gangetic Pandas, who come from places near the source of the Ganges, generally bring small quantity of charas to be given as presents to their jajmans in this part of the country. 187. Evidence of BABU GOPAL SINGH, Zamindar, Kumarsar, Bhagalpur. 1. I have seen people using bhang and ganja, and also seen bhang plants. 2. Bhang and ganja are used here and are known by these names. 3. Hemp plant grows wild in all districts. 4. Bhang known here as bhang or sabzi, and ganja is known as ganja. 5. Ganja is not grown here, but bhang grows in bhit lands. 7. No. 12. No. 13. Ganja is not cultivated here. 14. Bhang is cut and gathered and kept for use. 15. Ganja is smoked. There is no cultivation of bhang. 16. Bhang is prepared by the people in their own houses. 17. Bhang is prepared generally by all the castes. 18. Bhang loses its effects when it becomes old. 20. Ganja is used by the lower class of people. 23. Bhang is sometimes used for smoking by the lower classes. 25. The use of bhang is decreasing daily owing to the fear. 27. Bhang is taken by all the classes of people. 28. Mathura Chaubes spend more in taking bhang. 29. Black pepper and rose are ordinarily mixed with bhang. 30. Bhang is only used by the male. 33. The consumption of these drugs is blame- able. There is no custom of worshipping the bhang and ganja plants. 34. Mathura Chaubes and bairagis would suffer by giving up bhang. 39. I have not seen any people suffering from the injurious effects of bhang-drinking. 41. The bhang consists of digestive power. 42. The use of bhang is not beneficial. 50. Excessive use of bhang produces impotency. 51. Ganja is used by the people of bad charac- ters. 60 and 61. Ganja is not produced here. 62. Bhang is always grown here wild and not to be controlled. 68. There are many shops for selling ganja here. 69. No. 188. Evidence of BABU AMAR PRASAD SINGHA, Rajput, Zamindar, District Bhagalpur. The replies given by this witness are exactly the same as those given by Babu Kali Prasad Singh (No. 186) and are not reprinted. 189. Evidence of MR. L. H. MYLNE, Zamindar and Indigo-planter, Justice of the Peace, President of Independent Bench of Honorary Magistrates, Chair- man of Jugdispur Municipality, District Shahabad. 1. I have no special knowledge of the subject, nor special facilities for securing it, except such as my position as a landholder affords. 2. Bhang is applied to the dry leaves of the male hemp plant whether cultivated or not. Charas is applied to the resinous essence of ganja tips mixed with jaggery and other ingre- dients. Ganja is the dried flowering tips and adjacent leaves of cultivated female hemp plants. Flat ganja is prepared by stacking these tips or tops in a stack 10 or 12 feet high. As each layer is laid it is pressed under foot. Chur or broken ganja is made from flowers, leaves, etc., which have become detached in the process of stacking and unstacking. Round ganja is rolled by hand, not trodden under foot. Yes; flat ganja is known as "chapta ganja" and round as "gol ganja;" the third as "chur." 7, Not in this district of Shahabad.
417 18. These drugs keep very well for eight months in the year, but deteriorate and lose their strength during the rainy season. They won't keep for an indefinite length of time. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Charas is not used in localities near us. Ganja is used more or less by all castes and classes. Sadhus and fakirs (religious mendicants) smoke most heavily. It is said these use it chiefly to deaden sexual appetite. 21. The flat kind, as it is the most potent. 22. No charas is sold or used in this neighbour- hood. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is not usually eaten. Mixed with pepper and sugar in water it is used as a sherbet or drink. 25. The use of these drugs is on the increase. About 10 years ago there were three licensed shops in this Municipality which paid excise tax of Rs. 25 monthly each; now there is one paying Rs. 135 a month. The licensed sellers know that young boys of 10 or 12 are taking to it more than formerly. 26. Most of the adults in this town, or at least one-half, are moderate habitual consumers. Half a dozen men in the country round about are known to be habitual excessive consumers. There are hardly any occasional consumers, for once the habit is formed it must be daily gratified. 27. All castes and classes are addicted, from the poor or rich Brahmin and Rajput to the poor or rich Chamar and Dosadh. There are no particular habits of life or circumstances which lead to the habit or practice. Indulgence on a few occasions leads insidiously to the settled habit, which must be satisfied. 28. (a) Two katcha pice worth (2/7th of an anna) will purchase five rattis weight = 5 X 1 7/8 = about 9½ grs. troy. (b) Will consume four times as much as (a),and sometimes on special occasions a good deal more. 29. (a) With ganja, ordinarily "khaini" or tobacco for chewing. Dhatura is never used. With bhang are mixed sounf (aniseed), ground peppercorns, the seeds of cucumbers, rose leaves, and sugar. These admixtures are said to prevent the heating properties of the bhang and to reduce the intoxicating effects. This mixture is taken with water as a sherbet or as a "quid" for the mouth. 30. Chiefly in company, and is confined to the male sex of all ages above 10 or 12 years. 31. The habit is very easily formed after in- dulgence twice or thrice. The habit is difficult to break off, and there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. It is quite the custom, if not actually in- cumbent on every male person, to take some one of these intoxicating drugs on the day of the Holi festival. Bhang is chiefly used. There is a shrine or grave in the neighbourhood called the "Doodnath," where a sadhu addicted to the use of these drugs died generations ago. Many people take vows at this grave or shrine on the Holi day, and offer up ganja and bhang to the spirit of the sadhu. Such offerings may be and are made on other occasions also. 33. There is no religious or social feeling against the consumption of these drugs, nor does any disrepute attach to the practice. The hemp plant is not worshipped on certain occasions more than other crops are. 34. The privation would not be serious. Those addicted to the consumption of these drugs would feel the want of them for a few weeks, and would be disinclined for exertion of any kind till the craving wore off. No serious harm would result. 35. Prohibition could be easily enforced as in the case of opium, and illicit consumption would not be general. There would be no serious dis- content, and certainly no political danger, at any rate in rural tracts. The prohibition could not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants in the case of the higher castes, who must not touch alcoholic liquor of any kind. Such castes might take to opium, but this is doubtful; the lower castes would generally take to alcoholic stimulants. 36. I don't think this is the case. For intoxi- cating purposes these drugs are cheaper than al- coholic stimulants, even though their effect is not probably so lasting. 37. Charas-smoking induces severe headaches and affections of the air passages, causing cough and phlegm. Not so ganja. 38. Except that flat ganja is the strongest and chur the weakest, the three kinds produce the same effects in different degrees. 39. In smoking ganja there is more harm done than by eating or drinking bhang. The latter in- creases the appetite for food; the former tends to destroy it. Bhang has a beneficial effect on the physical frame; ganja reduces the physique, bodily and muscular. One reason given is that ganja is smoked unmixed with softening ingredi- ents; another is that the act of smoking is a tax on the heart and lungs, whereas mere eating or drinking bhang involves much less exertion. 40. Very seldom bhang is prescribed as a febri- fuge. Bhang mixed with "sattu" (ground gram) is sometimes given to fatigued cattle after extraordinary exertions with very good effect. 41. (a) Bhang acts as a fillip to the appetite, not so the others. (b) Bhang is taken more to comfort the system as it were than to give staying-power or alleviate fatigue. (c) Occasionally used as a febrifuge. The moderate habitual use of the drug is referred to above. 42. The consensus of opinion available near me is that the moderate use of these drugs, especially bhang, is not harmful. 43. Yes. 44. Very slight intoxication. The effect is more soothing than refreshing. Ganja spoils or weakens the appetite. Bhang increases it. The effects last about two or three hours. The after- effects are disinclination for physical exertion. 45. No noxious effects are produced from the habitual moderate use of these drugs. 46. Habitual excessive use induces affections of the lungs, throat, and air passages generally., The constitution is impaired and the body be- 3 K
418 comes emaciated. Laziness is induced, but not immorality or debauchery. The intellect is not deadened, nor insanity produced. 47 and 48. The habit moderately or excessively indulged in is not hereditary, nor does it apparent- ly affect the children of either class. 49 and 50. No; they are not used for this pur- pose by men nor by prostitutes. 51 and 52. No. 53. No; it has the opposite effect. Excessive indulgers become quiet and helpless. 55. Yes, but after dhatura is mixed with the hemp drugs. 56. See answer to question No. 29. 57 Ganja and charas are not eaten or drunk in this neighbourhood. 65. The tax might reasonably be increased for these drugs, because intoxication by using them can be produced at much less cost than by using the country alcoholic liquors, even though the effects of the latter are more durable. 66. No; one rate of taxation is the most suitable, though chur ganja, being less potent, might be more lightly taxed than the others. 68. Not in this municipality 69. No, but they should be. 190. Evidence of MR. F. G. GIBSON, Indigo Planter, Jessore. 1. From local information. 3. It is not grown here. 4. Siddhi, bhang, charas, ganja. 5. It grows in moist and shady places. 6. More or less scattered. 7. No; there is no cultivation of the hemp plant in this district. 8. No. 11. Not cultivated. 14. None prepared here, so far as I can ascertain. 16. It is drunk, or eaten in pellets, and occa- sionally it is smoked. 18. I have been told it deteriorates by keeping. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking only. 20. Coolies and syces are the class who use ganja mostly. Charas is used very little here. 21. Flat ganja is prepared for smoking. 22. It is imported. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 29. Ganja is mixed with tobacco for smoking. 30. It is consumed in company, and is mainly confined to the male sex. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. It is easily formed, and the habit once formed is not easily broken. 32. It is taken by most classes during the Pujas. 39. There are no other preparations of this drug, except for smoking and drinking. From enquiries made in the distict. 41. I believe it helps a man to sustain greater fatigue, especially during wet or cold weather. 191. Evidence of MR. JOHN D. GWILT, Tea Planter, Longview Company, Limited, Darjeeling. 1. My answers are based on facts collected from the people living in my vicinity and from the work people of this company. The workmen here are for the most part Nepalese, a few being Be- haris, and possessing, it seems, a better knowledge with reference to this drug than the former. 2. The three names, viz., ganja, charas and bhang, are, it appears, pretty generally understood by almost all classes of people here, and the defi- nitions given in question No. 2 can be accepted for this part of the district. 3. I have no special knowledge about this, but I understand that the soil of the Rajshahi District in Bengal is specially favourable for the growth of this drug. A plant belonging to the species of Cannabis sativa grows wild in this part of Darjeeling, and is known by the name of wild chang. 4. It is known by the names of wild chang. It is believed that this name refers to the same plant, possessing, as it does, more or less all the properties of the bhang of Bengal. 5. Any elevation below 3,000 feet and a soil having a little vegetable mould in it may, in my opinion, help the growth of this plant, the rainfall and climate, as a rule, not being of very special importance. 6. The growth is rather dense than otherwise where it occurs. 7. There is no cultivation of ganja in this part of the district, and the people here do not know what use to make of the hemp. 8. There is no cultivation of it. 11. I have not heard of the wild hemp plant being specially cultivated for the production of ganja. 12. The ganja is not cultivated in this part of the Terai, and this being the case, I am unable to offer any information with reference to this ques- tion. 14. None to my knowledge. 15. I can offer no particulars on this subject. 16. To the best of my belief, no one cares to try and prepare bhang in their own houses. It is believed that bhang can be prepared from the wild hemp plants, but people here do not know how to do it. It is doubtful whether ganja and charas can be prepared from these plants. 17. I have never known Nepalese to prepare the hemp drug; it is brought prepared by the plains men. 18. The drugs deteriorate by keeping, but do not altogether lose their effect. 19. I have not known them used for other pur- poses than smoking. 20. Mendicants use these drugs mostly. The proportion of the people who smoke ganja here is exceedingly small.
419 21. The more resinous matter there is in each kind, the better it is liked. 22. Cannot say. 23. I have not seen it used for smoking. 24. The Marwari class use bhang. I cannot state any proportions. 25. I should not say their use is increasing. 26. People who use the drugs in this district are decidedly moderate consumers. 27. Not known. 28 Cannot say. 29. Bhang, I know, is mixed with sugar and con- sumed like tea. 30. Men mostly use these drugs. I never heard of children taking them. 31. I should say the use of these drugs is here- ditary to a great extent, and the moderate habit seldom develops into the excessive. 32. Do not know. 33. The moderate use of these drugs is, in no way, in disrepute. 34. Yes; I think it would be a serious priva- tion, as those accustomed to the drug take it regularly, and state they cannot do without it. 35. It would be, I think, feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. Of course, it would create a little discontent amongst those who habitually use the drugs, but their numbers are so few that such discontent could not amount to a political danger. The prohibition would most likely lead to recourse to some other drug or to alcohol. 36. I do not think alcohol is being substituted for these drugs. The use of alcohol amongst the Nepalese is a curse. This cannot be said of the use of the hemp drug. 37. I do not know. 38. The effects seem all the same. 39. I cannot say. 40. The native doctors of the old school are in the habit of prescribing this drug on account of its medicinal effects. It is used in the treatment of cattle-diseases. 41. The moderate use of these drugs seems to do no harm. The people who consume them state they act as a food accessory; that they do give staying-powers and alleviate fatigue; that they are also of use in unhealthy tracts of country, and there is decidedly a certain amount of truth in these statements. 42. The moderate use of these drugs seems to be beneficial to some people, and they state the drug acts as a stimulant. 43. Consumers are stated to be inclined to be irritable, but not offensive. 44 The immediate effect is to refresh the habi- tual consumer, but the effect is not lasting; it acts as a stop-gap when food cannot be procured by retarding waste of tissue. 45. The habitual moderate use does not seem to impair the constitution. I never met any one insane from the use of these drugs. 46. In the habitual excessive use of these drugs, the patient gets into a comatose state, complains of burning pains, and says he must have milk, which alleviates him; the body has a dried up appearance. 47. The use seems to be hereditary, and does not appear to affect the children. 49. Cannabis indica is a powerful aphrodisiac, and is given by native doctors. The excessive use of hemp is stated to produce impotence. 51. This is not known to me. 53. I have not heard of it doing so. No; I do not know of any case. 54. I have not heard of it being thus used. 55. Cannot say. 58. The present system of excise administration in this district in respect of hemp drugs is, as far as I understand, working satisfactorily, and does not in my opinion call for any change. 60 and 61. I do not consider any modification necessary. 62 and 63. I suggest no change. 64. I have no objection. 65. Much more harm is done by alcoholic in- toxicants than by the hemp drug. I hear of more harm in a week by the use of the former than I do in a year from the use of the latter. If anything was taxed more, it ought to be alcohol. 66. I should not say it would be necessary. 67. No objection. 68. As far as I understand, there are regular shops in this district for the sale of these drugs. 69. The wishes of the people, I consider, ought to be decidedly consulted before liquor shops are open- ed. But the use of the hemp does not amount to an evil in this district. 70. None that I know of. 192. Evidence, of MR. JNO. RUDD RAINEY, Proprietor of "Khulna Estate," Khulna. 1. No special opportunities or knowledge of the subject. I merely answer such questions as I am able to do, as I have been asked by the District Officer to do so. 3. In Khulna and the adjoining district of Jessore, to my knowledge. 4. As far as I am aware, it is only known as bhang. 5. In low-lying lands and moist climate. 6. In dense patches here and there. 7. I believe so, but I do not know to what extent. 9. I do not know anything about it. 13. I believe so, but I have no certain know- ledge of it. 14. I believe they are, but I have no certain knowledge of it. 15. I am unable to do so. 18. I believe they do deteriorate by keeping, owing to atmospheric moisture, but do not know of any special measure that might be adopted to prevent such deterioration. 23. I do not know if it is used at all for smoking. 25. I believe they are on the increase, but I have no certain knowledge. 3 K 2
420 30. Mainly, I believe, to the male sex. 31. I believe it is easily formed and difficult to break off. 32. I believe some sect of Hindus take it on religious grounds. 33. I believe it is generally regarded as baneful. 34. To habitual consumers of the drug its prohibition would be a privation for a time at least, but would be beneficial to them eventually, I think. 35. It would, I think, be feasible to prohibit to a certain extent. 36. I do not think so. 38. I believe they have different effects, but have no precise knowledge on the subject. 41. I do not think so. 42. Certainly not harmless. 43. I think they are offensive to their neigh- bours who do not indulge in the drug, though probably not to any appreciable extent. 44. 1 believe it does intoxicate. 45. I believe it injures the constitution generally, but I do not know in what way, or to what extent. 47. I do not think it to be a hereditary habit. 49. I believe it is, but I do not know to what extent. Prostitutes are said to use it freely. 51. Bad characters generally have the reputa- tion of being habitual consumers of these drugs. 53. I believe it does to a very great extent. 54. They are said to use them for such purposes. 55. I believe so to some extent. 56. Bad in moderation, and excessively so when in excess. 57. I have no experience about it. 58. I am not well acquainted with the present system of excise administration. 62. It should, and I think could, be controlled. 69. I doubt if the people are consulted, but have no certain knowledge of the subject. 193. Evidence of Mr. A. G. M. WODSCHOW, Assistant Manager, Indigo and Zamindari, Dumur Factory, Purnea. 1. Having occupation for over 23 years in the Purnea and Bhagalpur districts in zamindari and indigo, and always dealing with the natives. 2. Ganja flat, and ganja broken, and bhang that grows wild all over near villages and rich soil. 3. The wild hemp bhang in Purnea and por- tions of Bhagalpur. 4. Bhang, not ganja. 6. Generally dense, and in places grows to over six feet high. 7. None. 11 and 12. No. 14. Bhang, wild hemp. (a) No. (b) No. 15. Bhang (wild hemp) leaves are sometimes dried and kept, but by very few, and a drink is made by pounding the leaves, mixing the same in water, and adding sugar. This is very intoxicat- ing. The pounded leaves are also mixed with water, adding some pounded round pepper. Not very intoxicating. The juice extracted from the green leaves is also used in making the same drinks as above. This is intoxicating. 16. Bhang is always prepared by those who want the drink in their houses or anywhere. Do not know and have never seen ganja or charas prepared from the wild hemp. 17. By Hindus and Muhammadans, mostly men from the west and north-west (called up- country men in these parts). 18. It does not deteriorate. I hear bhang is dried and tied in a bundle and kept in a dry place. 19. Ganja is only used for smoking. 20. All men, mostly Hindus, and of the poorer class, and over 40 per cent. It is less used to the east and north-east of this district. 21. Whatever is to be had. 23. Not known to me. 24. By all castes, and mostly by the higher class all over the Purnea and Bhagalpur Districts. By few under two per cent. of men. 25. None on the increase, and a wonder bhang is so little used, though not taxed. 26. Ganja421 40. Ganja.422 to alleviate the pains of piles. It is used in many other cases of other ailments. (b) Used as a drug in a moderate measure to give pleasure, it is considered to be less injurious to health than the country grog. The pleasure derived from its use is different from that enjoyed by taking spirituous liquors. It is difficult to propound the difference. Mainly, however, while the former enlivens, the latter stupefies. While the former brightens up memory and aids the con- versational powers of the user for the time being, the latter invariably dulls them. Ganja.423 Thus, after manuring and by repeated ploughing, when the land is sufficiently pulverised and be- comes fit for receiving the seedlings, ridges are made all over the field at equal distances of one cubit each. The seeds are first sown in the month of Bhadra in a separate field, which I think may be called the nursery. When the seedlings grow to the height of about a foot, transplantation begins. They are planted upon the ridges described above at a distance of about six inches. Transplantation is never delayed beyond the month of September. Here it would be worthy of note that the ridge-making and the transplant- ation of the seedlings should be completed in the course of one and the same day, otherwise the soil so well pulverised would scarcely retain any moisture to receive the young plants. The seed beds or nurseries mentioned above are never manured and the ground is never covered, as is generally done with the plantation of cab- bages, nor is the field irrigated. Rains are very injurious for both the seeds in the nursery and the seedlings shortly after transplantation into the field. The seeds take about a week's time to sprout forth. If heavy downpours set in after sowing the seeds in the nursery, or the transplanta- tion of seedlings into the field, a second sowing or plantation, as the case may be, becomes necessary. When the roots of the seedlings have taken hold on the soil a second manuring is done. But this time the cultivators generally use cow- dung and oil-cake who can afford it. When the young plants grow to the height of about two feet they are trimmed. The attention is directed only to the removal of the lowest branches, with per- haps the intention of ensuring the upward growth of the plants. In the first week of Agrahyan or earlier, accord- ing to the growth of the crop, the cultivators em- ploy ganja doctors, who are locally known as poddars or parakdars to inspect the ganja field, and this they continue to do till the middle of Pous, in order to destroy the male plants before in- florescence, because they make the female plants, which yield ganja, run into seed. The operation of trimming is renewed in the middle of December. When the fields wear a dry look, cultivators begin to water them. The culti- vators evince great care to keep the soil moist, which is generally sandy loam. In January, when the plants attain sufficient maturity, the cultiva- tors cut and remove the crop from the field to the place of manufacture. It is done generally in the morning. The stalks are then spread out in the sun and suffered to lie there till it is quite midday, when they are properly covered. When the even- ing comes on, the coverings are removed and they are left exposed to the dew. So the stalks remain till the noon of the following day. Now comes the threshing of the flowering tops. A mat is spread on a very plain ground, on which the stalks are all marshalled in a circular form called chakal, the tops all pointing to the centre. A mat is then spread over the file, and four or five persons ascend and begin to trample upon them. Pressing in this way goes on for about five minutes, when the men get down and, holding in each hand a stalk, begin to beat them against each other. It is done to remove the seeds from the tops. This process of marshalling and trampling is repeated twice more; but on the second occa- sion each twig is taken and pressed under foot separately. The cultivators then dry the stalks after covering the top for a short while, when the ganja becomes ready for market. This is the process of making flat ganja. The process of making the round ganja is near- ly the same in the main. The difference, how- ever, lies in this, that, instead of trampling with foot, the twigs are rolled. I must here note that for the first and second time the twigs are rolled with foot, and when they take a roundish shape they are for the third time rolled with hands to make them perfectly round. In the case of both round and flat ganja the process of trampling or rolling is repeated thrice. But in the interval of each of these the twigs are alternately dried in the sun and exposed to the dew. The flower tops of ganja detached from the twigs, whether of flat or of round, and whether the detachment is accidental or deliberate, are called chur. 10. The persons who cultivate hemp in the dis- trict of Rajshahi belong to the ordinary agri- cultural class. 11. Never. 12. I am aware of no place where wild hemp or bhang is cultivated for the production of ganja. 13. Yes. The cultivation is restricted to the districts of Rajshahi, Bogra and Dinajpur in the province of Bengal. In my opinion there is no special reason for this selection. But the culti- vators of their own accord commenced the cultiva- tion in the way of experiment, and afterwards, finding its return remunerative and the soil con- genial to the growth of the drug, extended their operation. I cannot answer this part of the question, as I have not got sufficient scientific knowledge of the matter. Its cultivation would be impossible in those parts which remain submerged under water throughout the greater portion of the year. 14. In the district of Rajsbahi, and perhaps in other ganja districts of Bengal, the cultivation of hemp is carried on only for the purpose of pro- ducing ganja. So far as I am aware, there is nowhere either in the Eastern or Northern Bengal a regular cultivation of bhang. It is only a wild indigenous plant which grows without any care as all other weeds do. The answer to the last part of this question will be found in my answer to question 7. 15. The method of preparation of ganja, for smoking from cultivated hemp plants, will be found in the last part of my answer to question 9. The leaves of wild hemp plant are dried by expo- sure to the rays of sun for preparing bhang used for drinking. I am not aware of any other me- thods of preparation of these drugs. 16. (a) Yes. (b) Bhang cannot be prepared from the cultivat- ed hemp plant, as I learn from the cultivators. (c)Whether hemp can be produced from wild hemp or bhang, as it is called, and vice versá, has, I apprehend, never been experimented upon. But I think such an experiment will not be wholly un- profitable. Hemp and bhang or siddhi belong to the natural order called Urticace424 hemp and bhang belong to the same natural order, and when both the species grow to the same height, and in all external appearance they present the most striking resemblance, and both the species un- deniably possess the narcotic principle, and speci- ally because the growth of wild hemp is never ad- vanced by the destruction of male plants, wild hemp may, under proper care, become ganja. It may also be supposed that hemp, in its degenerated and wild condition, becomes what we call bhang or siddhi. I have myself seen that such bhang plants as have a luxuriant growth bring forth leaves, which sometimes get matted together, and, if collected before inflorescence, might, to some extent, serve the purpose of ganja. 17. The answer to question ten (10) applies to this question also. 18. The narcotic power of ganja deteriorates by keeping. It loses its active principle totally in the course of time, retaining its effects for about two years with ordinary care. I believe that this gradual destruction of its effects is simply due to the atmospheric influence; consequently if this drug be preserved in cases hermetically closed, the effect will keep intact for a comparatively longer period. 19. So far as my experience goes, I think ganja is generally used for smoking purposes. I must here note that I use the word smoking in a quali- fied sense for narcosis only. There are, however, occasions when people of small means use it as medicine in such skin diseases as scabies, etc. They boil ganja with a little of raw sulphur and camphor in mustard oil and apply this medicated oil over the parts affected. I must here note that medical science has still now very considerable doubt as to the effect of this drug when administered externally. Dr. Bruce, in his well-known Materia Medica and Therapeutics (page 375), says425 28. The cost of a habitual moderate ganja smok- er for the drug would vary from half to one anna, and that of a habitual excessive smoker from two to four annas a day. 29. The smokers of ganja invariably mix tobacco leaves with ganja. I should here specially note that I have gathered information about this fact from a lot of confirmed ganja smokers. The ma- jority of them are unintelligent beings and do not know the how and why of such admixture. How- ever, the conclusion I have come to, is that tobacco leaf does neither increase nor decrease the narcotic principle of the drug. I believe tobacco is smoked by about ninety per cent. of the natives of Bengal. It is a peculiarity of tobacco smoking that it al- ways causes a temporary irritation of the air pas- sage. But the smoking of pure ganja does not produce any such, and its narcotic effect is almost instantaneous; consequently there is every likeli- hood of there being very long and bold whiffs, thus making the indulgence a fatal one. That is why ganja is mixed with tobacco. This mixture makes the bold whiffs to some extent very difficult. I believe originally this admixture of tobacco leaf was introduced as a safeguard against any such accident. To explain the admixture briefly, it may be said that it serves the purpose of a safety-valve with the hemp smokers. I am not aware of dha- tura being used as an admixture with ganja for ordinary smoking purposes. Those who drink bhang for pleasure's sake use the following ingredients with it:426 39. I think that smoking of these drugs is less injurious than either eating or drinking them. The eating or drinking of ganja is so very rare a phenomenon that I have never come across a single case in my life. In smoking the active principle does not wholly act upon the system, a part of it being burnt; but in drinking and eating, it wholly assimilates with the blood. 40. The native school of medicine makes very extensive use of bhang or siddhi for internal use in such diseases as indigestion, diarrh427 when nature does not require it, brings on a sort of sexual debility which ultimately may end in complete impotency. 50. When the use is excessive, the consequences, as shown above, are more sure, rapid and vehe- ment. 51. Habitual moderate consumers of ganja and bhang do not always turn out bad characters, so their proportion is not large. I do not think that moderate use of these drugs tends to make the consumers inclined to criminal acts. 52. The case of excessive use of these drugs is, however, very different. A man under the in- fluence of these drugs, when taken very excessively, as is the case with all other intoxicauts, may per- petrate any crime, however horrible. 53. Yes. I am not aware of any such instance. 54. Yes; hardened and professional criminals use these drugs in excess to make themselves proof against all humane qualities. 55. Yes; criminals sometimes, in order to carry out their evil designs, induce their victims to smoke ganja to make them lose their consciousness. I do not think that any of these drugs in an unadulterated state can bring on complete stupefac- tion. Dhatura and other narcotics are generally used for such purposes. 56. My answer to question 29 will explain the cause of admixture of tobacco leaf with ganja. I do not possess any such information. 57. I have no knowledge as to the eating or drinking of ganja and charas. 58. On the whole the present system of excise administration is working well; but for all that I believe it may admit of a few improvements. 59. I beg to suggest the following as improv- ments upon the present system of excise adminis- tration:428 60. The cultivation, in my opinion, is suffi- ciently controlled. 61. Charas is not produced in the province I belong to. 62. I don't see any necessity for such con- trolment. Yes, such check is feasible; but it is, as far as I understand, not necessary. 63. No. 64. The only suggestion which occurs to me regarding this question is that it would be more safe and convenient to export ganja to distant places by packing it in small boxes instead of sending it in bundles wrapped up with gunny cloth as it is done at present. The suggested change would save the drug from deterioration by atmospheric influence and waste caused in transporting the drug in the way now followed. 65. I am not acquainted with minute parti- culars regarding taxation, such as to enable me to answer this question. 66. Yes, there should be different rates of taxation. It should be regulated according to the quantity of the essential part which each kind of ganja possesses. The large, small, and absence of twigs in each kind flat429 tutes also indulge in it. I have not seen children consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit is easily acquired, difficult to break off, and has a tendency to excess. 32. "Three Nath Mela," where one pice pan and supari, one pice ganja, and one pice mustard oil are offered as a religious ceremony; and on every festival when Siva is worshipped where the banian and peepul trees are growing together (Ficus indica, Ficus religiosa) this custom is essential, but temperate. Their occasional smoking must lead to the formation of the habit. 33. Yes, there is a strong public opinion, both social and religious, in favour of the practice. The hemp plant is not worshipped in any ceremony, but it is held in great veneration by jogis, baira- gis, and other religious mendicants. 34. It would certainly be serious to a very large class of consumers. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit, but difficult to enforce. An army of excise men could not prevent the illicit growth and consumption. The prohibition would not drive Hindu devotees to alcoholic stimulant; to others it would. 36. No. 37. There is no difference between charas and ganja smoking, except that the latter is milder. 38 and 39. I am unable to answer these ques- tions; only those, who have tried it, can. 40. Yes, bhang is often prescribed by kabirajes, but I do not think ganja or charas is. I have heard that ganja is applied to extract worms in foot-sore disease of cattle. 41. The moderate use of ganja, charas and bhang is not harmful. People say that it is digestive, gives staying-power, and keeps off fever. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is harm- less, but it is very difficult to draw the line where the harm begins. It is said that one chillum of ganja is happiness, two heavenly, three intoxi- cating, and the fourth madness. Another saying is one chillum is so-and-so, two is refreshing, three is prime minister, and the fourth is kingly. 43. Yes. 44. I am unable to answer these questions. 45. I have already answered some of these questions. 46. I have already answered some of these questions. 47 and 48. No. 49. Yes, but it does not tend to produce im- potence. 50. Excessive use must eventually ruin the constitution. 51. Speaking as an old police officer, I have invariably found thieves and bad characters ad- dicted to smoking ganja; it is said to give them courage to undertake a job and cunning to escape capture. 52. Excessive use acts just the reverse of the last answer430 viduals (if any) in any of these classes who do not take the drug. Their use of it is rarely excessive. It is moderate. They generally take hemp as a beverage. They do not smoke. They say that the drink cools the belly, opens the bowels and assists in digesting food. This is true. A man who takes bhang can digest sweetmeats worth two rupees, while we could not digest four annas' worth. These men are also robust and able-bodied. Unless they were so, they could not do the hard work that falls to them. These temple servants are very numerous. There are about seven hundred houses of suars or cooks. That would give, say, fifteen hundred men. They have to cook both for those who are employed in the temple and also for bairagis, widows, etc., who are living in Puri, dependent on the temple and either paying for their food or receiving it as charity. Of the poshupalaks there will be about one hundred houses, and about one hundred of pandas. Of the pariharis or watch- men there are a thousand houses at least. All the servants or sewaks probably amount to three thousand. Then these people have gomastas, who go all over the country to bring in pilgrims. There are about three thousand such gomastas. I know one man, Harihar Guru, chief of the pariharis,who has five hundred gomastas of his own. Two- thirds of these gomastas are generally absent from Puri on duty. The rest are present. They all take bhang. Only pandas, who are very poor and cannot afford a gomasta, go out as pilgrim recruiters themselves. All these temple servants get part of the bhoj from the temple, and also receive presents from the pilgrims. These men rarely smoke; only the spoiled men among them smoke. They, for the most part, drink hemp. They use Gurjat ganja. This ganja is the flower mixed with the leaves or patti or bhang. These men often use Bengal siddhi when it is available. But they do not like it so well as Gurjat ganja, because they say it is not so effective. The Gurjat ganja is stronger, more agreeable to these people from their habits, and said to be more cooling than Bengal siddhi. These men do not take the Rajshahi ganja to drink at all unless they are obliged to do so. If they can get nothing else they take it. They took it when Gurjat ganja was prohibited. But they said it was too strong. They say it heats the body too much and causes dysentery and the pass- ing of blood. So far as I remember, there was no Bengal siddhi available then. Sometimes the leaf of the Gurjat ganja, which falls or is broken off from the plant, is used alone as bhang by those who only take a little bhang for pleasure. But those who have labour to do, mix the ganja flowers up in their bhang with the leaves. The Gurjat siddhi or leaves without the flowers is very weak. The population of the town of Puri is by the census 25,000. Among this population there is a large proportion of males. About one-half or seven-sixteenths may be deducted for women and children. The men are about twelve thousand five hundred. Of these, perhaps five thousand take no intoxicant regularly; but the remainder take opium, ganja or siddhi. I think that the majority take siddhi. There is almost no ganja-smoking among the temple servants; but bairagis and common people do smoke. For smoking, Rajshahi ganja is preferred. It is only, I believe, where it cannot be obtained that Gurjat ganja is smoked. The Raj- shahi ganja is far stronger. It is said that to drink it is very injurious, because it is so strong. I do not know that this is true if it is smoked. I have heard that the people who are accustomed to smoke Gurjat ganja say it is better; but I know that the smoker of the Rajshahi stuff prefers that, and any man who has smoked the Rajshahi ganja prefers it. That is because it is stronger, I suppose. Gurjat siddhi and Gurjat ganja are not imported separately. They are brought in, as a rule, on the one plant in bundles. If the leaves break off they are brought in separately, but under the same license as the ganja. I understand that the pro- hibition against Gurjat ganja has been withdrawn and that it can be imported by license. When the ganja flowers break off from the leaves, the latter are brought in also. They are very rarely drunk apart from the flowers. Certainly none of the temple servants would use the leaves without theflowers, because they want their bhang to be strong and intoxicating. What is known as Gurjat ganja is used in the town simply as siddhi or bhang. It is stronger than the Rajshahi siddhi, which is only leaves; but it is weaker than the Rajshahiganja. I do not think that Gurjat ganja is much used in the interior of the district for smoking, not so much as is the case with Rajshahi ganja. The latter is preferred where it can be got. The lower orders drink toddy when they drink, and the higher classes siddhi. I have myself seen siddhi or Gurjat ganja drunk by baniyas, Brahmans, Telis,cultivators, etc. This was at a festival. It is not, however, the custom for cultivators to drink siddhi or ganja. If they take hemp, they usually smoke it. Brahmans, on the other hand, drink it as a rule. Similarly bairagis smoke, but pandas,etc., usually drink hemp. The people not only use hemp for stimulant, but also because they generally believe that it is good for elephantiasis, which is common here, and for other diseases brought on by this climate. There is a great deal of smuggling of Gurjat ganja. That is, I believe, the principal source of supply. The smugglers are servants and con- sumers principally. The servants bring it for their masters to use or sell. There are about fifty thousand pilgrims at the Car festival in an ordi- nary year, and not less than fifty thousand more throughout the year. I know nothing of their habits while here. I cannot say how many use hemp. They may give ganja to the temple serv- ants. But no ganja is presented to the temple. Ganja is only given in Siva temples. If the Gurjat ganja were stopped, there would be discontent. There were complaints when it was formerly stopped. I heard that some six people died from not getting Gurjat ganja and having to drink Rajshahi ganja. They died within a year or two. They had dysentery and such diseases. They were shopkeepers and people of that class, not temple servants. I do not think that Bengal siddhi would satisfy people accustomed to drink Gurjat ganja. But if it were available, there would be less discontent. I am doubtful, how- ever, if it would be so beneficial to health as Gurjat ganja. I think that Gurjat ganja is good for the health. I have taken it myself on the doctor's recommendation and also in social feasts, and have found it beneficial. I should be against stopping Gurjat ganja too suddenly. We cannot stop smuggling without harsh measures. Harsh measures should be avoided.
431 199. Evidence of BABU SASHI BHUSHAN ROY, Chairman, Satkhira Municipality, District Khulna. 20. Coolies and palki-bearers use ganja, some in moderation, and some in excess. Saivas also use ganja. Charas is not in use here. Bhang is used in moderation by some in higher classes. 28. Six pies worth ganja per diem may be regarded as moderate consumption. 29. Tobacco is used as admixture with the hemp drug, the object being to soften the narcotic effect of it. No other noxious drugs (such as dhatura, etc.) are consumed knowingly with hemp drugs. 31. Moderate use generally tends to develop into the excessive use. 32. Lower class people generally use ganja in the time of marriage ceremonies. Higher class people use bhaug in the night of the Bijaya Dasami, i.e., the day following the Durga Puja. 35. The use of hemp drugs should not be pro- hibited. Labouring classes and lower classes in damp districts use it more for health than for pleasure. If its use be prevented, it would be injurious to their health. In my humble opinion the ganja trade should not be prevented, as many lower class people use it. If the use be prevented, these will resort to drinking, which will bring ruin to themselves and their family. 41. Coolies and palki-bearers use ganja only to enable them to labour hard. Bhang is used more for medicinal purposes. Ganja and bhang make men jolly. In damp climates ganja in moderate use may protect from malarious fever; coolies and palki- bearers can labour hard if they use in moderation. But use in excess, instead of doing any good, injures health. Bhang in moderate use improves digestion, and in damp climate prevents malaria. 55. No such other drugs are administered with any preparation of hemp. 59. Duty on ganja is very heavy. The shop- keepers who purchase and pay duty for the whole year suffer loss for the unconsumed amount of ganja in the end of each year, which is burnt by Government. 200. Evidence of BABU AGHORE NATH BANERJI,* Vice-Chairman, Serampore Municipality, District Hughli. 1. Eyesight of ganja and charas smoking and bhang drinking. Informations from ganja and charas smokers and bhang drinkers. Personal experience. 2. May be accepted. Ganja is locally known by the name of Bara Tamak and Ceyeeah. Charas is locally known as charas. Bhang is locally known as siddhi or bhang. 14. Not manufactured in the Hughli district. 16. Never seen any one preparing bhang in his house. 18. Ganja, charas and bhang stand good for a year. They lose their qualities and become useless after one year. These informations I have derived from the ganja and charas smokers and bhang drinkers. The resinous matter in each of the three drugs gets dried up after a year, and con- sequently they lose their narcotic power owing to the loss of the resinous matter which is the active principle. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking purposes only. The former sometimes, when boiled with cocoanut oil, is used domestically in Bengal to cure itches and other allied skin affec- tions. Extracts and tinctures of Cannabis indicaare made pharmaceutically and imported from Europe for the cure of certain diseases. 20. Lower class people above 30 years of age smoke ganja generally. Among females some prostitutes smoke ganja, and few middle class men and a very few rich men smoke ganja. Charas is smoked by very few young men of the middle class within teens. Proportion of ganja smokers among lower and middle class men, 1 per cent.; of charas very much less; localities cannot be particularized. 21. Round ganja is preferred in our district, but I have heard that flat ganja is preferred by up-country people. 22. I have heard that Nepalee charas is chiefly used here, and that it is imported from up- countries. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking in thedistrict. 24. Up-country people of all classes, not except- ing those even of Mewar, Marwar, etc., generally, with few exceptions, drink bhang. Sanyasis, i.e.,ascetics, or in other words, religious mendicants generally use bhang; people of Bengal proper use it either in its liquid or powdered form as a cure against indigestion and bowel complaints. 25. On the decrease; reasons432 Ganja Charas Bhang 26. (a) 80 per cent 90 per cent 97 per cent (b) 16 per cent 7 per cent 1 per cent (c) 3 per cent 2 per cent 1 per cent (d) 1 per cent 1 per cent 1 per cent 27. Habits of life or circumstances which mainly lead to the practice of ganja, charas and bhang. Ganja.433 irritable. Moderate use brings on in many cases excessive use, and thus it makes the fruitful cause of insanity so notoriously known to every medical man. It is the cause of almost all cases of insanity. I have seen many people have become mad by the ex- cessive smoking of ganja, but as charas-smokers are only few, so in- sanity from charas-smoking I have never seen. I admit that moderate use of ganja and charas gives staying power under severe exertion and exposure, and to alleviate fatigue; but these effects last for some time after the smoking. After smoking ganja or charas the smoker feels little easiness of mind and body from his fatigue, ex- posure or exertions, but that lasts not long, stays a few hours and goes off leaving a reaction which is very sedative to the system. So taking the good and bad qualities of ganja and charas smok- ing into consideration, I am of opinion that the people of our country will be highly benefited if Government be graciously inclined to stop alto- gether the sale of ganja and charas, for our people can well comfortably live without them. As for the moderate use of siddhi, I am of opinion that this substance, so largely used by our people, is very useful and beneficial to the health either as a food or medicine, so largely prescribed by the native kabirajes. There shall, I think, be a gene- ral murmur and dissatisfaction of the people who use it if the sale of this drug is stopped alto- gether. The above answer includes my answer to ques- tions 48 and 50. I have treated many cases of ganja-smokers attacked with fever. I met with considerable difficulty in curing them with medi- cines. Whenever I have administered medicines to check their fevers, they make no action, but rather aggravate the sufferings of the patient; conse- quently I was obliged to stop all medicines, and cured their fevers only with the application of ice to their heads and cooling drinks. 42. Not altogether harmless. It has some in- jurious qualities which I have explained in my other answers. 43. Yes. 44. Drowsiness (i.e., sedative action). Tempo- rarily refreshing. Yes; it increases hunger. Yes; lasts for a few hours. Little depression of spirits, Longing and uneasiness for a few hours. 45. (a) Slight. (b) No. (c) No. (d), (e), (f) Yes. Yes, may be temporary if taken care of and treated properly, and the use stopped as soon as signs of insanity are manifested; if continued still insanity becomes permanent. Insanes do not confess. 46. See answer to 41. 47. Not hereditary, but incurred; does not affect the children. 49. I have heard that sanyasis practise ganja- smoking not only to curb their sexual appetite but for other purposes. It is not used by prostitutes. The excessive use of ganja has produced many cases of impotence. 50. See answers to 41 and 49. 53. No (very rare in case of ganja-smokers only). I do not know of any case. 56. I have heard some excessive ganja-smokers finding no intoxication with ganja were observed to mix dhatura leaves with ganja and smokedthem. 68. In our town (Serampore) some shops are licensed to sell ganja and siddhi, but not charas. In Calcutta there are shops licensed for the sale both of ganja and charas. 201. Evidence of BABU KHETTRA MOHAN BASU, Municipal Vice-Chairman, Puri. Oral evidence. I am a pensioned Government servant. I am Vice-Chairman of the Puri Municipality, and also Honorary Magistrate and member of the Local and District Boards. I have been fifty years in this district. I have great knowledge of the habits of the people of this district. In the town of Puri, the Pandas and Sewaks, as a rule, take bhang. They rarely smoke. They take bhang for appetite and on account of the labour they have in connection with the temple. They have very heavy labour in cooking for all the people who live on the temple cooking: the bairagis, widows of Bengal, and others who live on the cooking and pay for their food. They have also very hard work in conducting pushing crowds from idol to idol. For bhang they use the siddhi that comes from Bengal, but they also use Gurjat ganja. They use that more than siddhi. When they could not get it they sometimes use the Raj- shahi ganja, but they prefer the Gurjat ganja. They think it more healthy; but the real reason why they use it more is that they get it more easily. They get it from the pilgrims from Gur- jat States and also from the shops here. They consume it twice a day434 I remember a great deal of ganja being brought in by night and buried in the sand for the Pandas,who went to take it when they required. Infor- mation was laid, and seizures were made. It is Gurjat ganja that is smuggled. The Gurjat pil- grims bring it to the Pandas. I base this on cases I have seen of pilgrims being convicted. They give it to the Pandas and temple servants and also sell it to them. There is also much smuggling by local people for their own consump- tion. I know this from my old experience when I was a Saristadar, and also from my experience as Honorary Magistrate. I cannot tell how much of the smuggling comes from Madras side and how much from our States. The ganja is the same in both cases. 202. Evidence of the REV. PREM CHAND, Missionary, B. M. S., Gaya. 1. My work lies amongst the masses in the town as well as in the district, and I have had many opportunities of observing the baneful effects of the hemp poison on those who take to them. 2. I think these definitions will do for this province. Bhang, charas, and ganja are terms commonly known in these parts. I should, how- ever, suggest that majun, vulgarly called majum, should be added to this list. It is made of bhang or charas, with sugar, flour and milk in small cakes of a light yellow colour and largely sold. 3. Muzaffarpur, Bhagalpur, Purneah, and Raj- shahi districts. I have seen it grow in the northern part of the Bhagalpur district in abundance. 4. Bhang, bhung, thundhai, sabzi, patti, siddhi, etc. The term "gorak ganja" is made use of by the sadhus for the wild hemp. They all refer to the same plant435 31. I think so. It is not only difficult, but, as far as I have seen, next to impossible to give up the evil habit, when the consumers meet with shops at almost every turn of the road where these poisonous arti- cles are exposed for sale. I have observed a very strong tendency in many to go to excess in the consumption of these drugs. 32. At the time of the Sivratri and Holi fes- tivals, 90 per cent. of the Hindus in many parts of India take bhang for several days. This undoubtedly in some instances leads to its use afterwards. The use of bhang is not in any way essential for the observance of these festivals. 33. The general public opinion is against the use of these drugs. Many educated people con- sider it a great evil, which ought to be classed with infanticide, human sacrifices, Sati, and the atroci- ties committed at the Charak festival which Hin- duism had the honour to permit, inculcate and practise, but for the intervention of the strong hand of the British Government. Some Hindus who are slaves to the use of these drugs might defend it on religious grounds, but Hinduism based on bhang and ganja is a social evil which should not be tolerated by any right-thinking person as well as the Government. I have not seen or heard of the worship of the hemp plant. 34. It would be a privation to the consumers if the drugs are prohibited; but it is not likely to be a serious one When some of the habitual consumers are put in jail for the commission of some crime, they do not get these intoxicants there, and they generally do well and gain flesh and health. 35. It would be quite feasible, and is most desirable to prohibit the use of these drugs, except when required medicinally on the prescription of a duly qualified medical practitioner. There will be some discontent amongst the consumers, but no political danger whatever is apprehended, as the Muhammadans, as a rule, are against these intoxicants, and several sects amongst the Hindus and many educated people look down upon it with horror. In some instances people may take to other intoxicants, but not as a rule. 36. I do not think so. 37. I have not observed any great difference between the effects of ganja and charas on the consumer. It much depends on the quantity consumed. 38. No; they are one and the same thing, and are not sold separately by the vendors of these drugs. 39. They are all most pernicious in their effect on the consumers. Bhang is little milder in its effects than ganja and charas. 40. Bhang is used by some native doctors as a medicine, and is also used in some cattle diseases. 41. (a) No; it is not a digestive. (b) No; on the contrary, it weakens and unfits those who take any of these drugs to do much physical or mental labour. Little exertion exhausts them. (c) Sometimes it is used in ague. (d) No. I refer to both. 42. The use of none of these drugs is harmless, but decidedly injurious to health. I have seen several moderate consumers and they lose flesh. 43. Yes; but on the slightest provocation they become reckless and furious. 44. Even the moderate use of the hemp drugs produces instantaneous intoxication, great excite- ment, and a degree of stupidity. The pupils are gradually contracted. It is not refreshing, and does not allay hunger or create an appetite for food. A false appetite is, however, sometimes caused by bhang. The effect lasts about eight or ten hours, according to the quantity taken. The after-effect is great exhaustion and lassitude, with a craving for another dose of the drug. 45. (b) They make one lose flesh and look dull. (c) Yes; they cause indigestion and create a false or short-lived appetite and general debility. (d) They cause bronchitis and asthma. In regard to it there is a well-known saying which has been thus translated into English by Dr. Fallon- "Who ganja smoke do knowledge lack; the heart burns constantly. The breath with coughing goes, the face as monkey's pale you see." Many ganja smokers die of dysentery. (e) Yes. (f) If taken for a sufficiently long time in excess, it is sure to produce insanity with ordinary diet; but if large quantities of sugar and milk are taken by the smoker, he may hold out little longer. The insanity at first temporary soon fixes itself permanently. The person runs about shouting, grins, laughs and cries in a most unnatural and diabolical way. I do not think the hemp drugs have any medi- cinal properties to relieve mental anxiety or cure brain disease. I do not think that an insane person who is not in his senses and not master of his own deeds would often take to ganja-smoking. It might be accidental in some extremely rare cases. 46. All habitual consumers, as a rule, take to the excessive use of these drugs, and are reduced to mere skeletons, and show a most pitiful figure of physical decay and moral degradation. They are helpless to support themselves, and with their intellect deadened, bordering on insanity, lungs contracted, bowels diseased, life is a burden to them, and death a release. Many excessive ganja- smokers meet with instantaneous death at the time of smoking it. 47. It may be so; but I am not certain aboutit. 49. Yes, bhang is used as an aphrodisiac; but I have a serious doubt as to its possessing aphro- disiac powers. I have heard of its being used by mahants and sadhus to bring on a state of stupor on the intended victims of their lust to effect their purpose. It is also used by the prostitutes. It does cause impotence and imbecility in the long run. 58. The hemp poison is used by bad characters. It is used for purposes of rape and robbery. 53. Yes. I do not know any case. 55. Yes. Without any admixture, any of the preparations of hemp is sufficient to completely stupefy the victim for hours. 58. It is working well in regard to revenue; but is sadly ruining the consumers of the hemp drugs physically and morally. 59. I do not think any attempt, without total prohibition or local option, is likely to remove the evil. 3 M 2
436 60. Ganja is not produced in Gaya. 61. Charas is not produced in Gaya. 62. Yes, by total prohibition. 63. The only improvement I can suggest is total prohibition. 64. It should be totally prohibited. 65 to 67. In my opinion total prohibition is the only means to repress and remove the evil. No amount of taxation is likely to ensure this end. 68. They should be closed. 69. The wishes of the people, as far as I know, are not considered before a shop is opened in any locality, although a rule exists to that effect. Not only local opinion be taken, but local option allowed. Oral evidence. Question 1.437 fixed stare, and an incapacity to wink. This is what I mean by pupils contracting. Question 45.438 Some women smoke ganja, but not nearly so many as take opium. Many boys begin the habit. 31. Habit easily formed. The one difficulty is a fear of the bad effects (after the first trial); but this is usually overmastered by a craving for the pleasing effects. Very difficult to break off. Great danger of the moderate use developing into the excessive. 32. (1) On the last day of Durga Puja, when the image is drowned, it is customary for every Hindu to drink a little bhang. A mere sip will satisfy custom, and many go no further; but some drink to intoxication. (2) In some parts of Bengal bhang is also drunk at Sib Puja, about the month of March. 33. By people generally the use of these drugs is accounted harmful. They consider that it leads to serious complaints, turns the blood black, grave- ly affects the chest, and brings on early death. Some people think that bhang and ganja aid digestion or keep off malaria; but the general sentiment is against these drugs. It is very com- monly known that they are largely taken for their aphrodisiacal properties. 34. It certainly would be felt as a very great privation; but in reality health would improve by that privation. At the usual time for smoking if the drug cannot be got, there is much uneasiness. Some say that the eyes begin to water. Then, of course, there is the craving. But these things are not "serious." It is the results of use that are serious, and not the results of leaving off. 35. (a) Yes. (b) Probably for a time at least. (c) Cultivation could be checked largely. (d), (e), and (f) Discontent, but not "serious." Not the slightest political danger. Probably to alcoholic stimulants. Let us hope that other dangerous drugs, such as opium, will be treated in the same way, and so be largely out of reach. 36. Mostly a question of price. If consumers can get intoxicated more cheaply on liquor, they will probably drift to that. Intoxication is the goal aimed at, and money is scarce. 38. Chur is the mildest, flat ganja is next in strength, round ganja is the strongest, and is also the pleasantest to use. Chur ganja irritates the throat very much;* flat, less; round, least. 39. Siddhi is the only preparation drunk. This is less injurious than ganja smoking. 42. No. The moderate use has an aphrodisiacal effect, which must be very harmful. And it is next to impossible for men to keep on moderately always with substances of this kind. Usually lack of means is the main argument for moderation. Consumers wish to enjoy the intoxicating effects. 44. Ganja produces thirst and immediate hunger. Water is used for the thirst and sweetmeat for the hunger. This sweetmeat increases the intoxi- cating effect. If smoked on an empty stomach the effect lasts from 3 to 4 hours; if on a full stomach from 11/2 to 2 hours. Intoxication comes on almost immediately, before half the pipe is smoked. The after-effects are nausea, langour, restless- ness, dullness of brain. The want of gratification leaves the smoker in a very restless, irritable, unhappy mood, with very little appetite for food. 45. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Ganja creates artificial appetite for a time, but tends to ultimate injury of appetite. (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes. The insanity in some cases is not permanent; but I believe the system suffers a permanent injury. One young man I knew was twice insane and twice recovered. But he will never be the bright fellow he was before. More- over, a serious uncertainty is introduced into his whole life. The suggestion quoted by the Lieute- nant-Governor of Bengal (Excise Report, 1891-92) "that it is as reasonable to suppose that excessive ganja smoking may be due to insanity, as that insanity may be due to excessive ganja smoking," strikes me as very unworthy of the gravity of the subject. In my own intercourse with superinten- dents of asylums they seemed very confident as to the cause of insanity. A fanciful witticism is scarcely the kind of thing to use at this crisis for minimising the evils done by a dangerous drug. The question suggested is about as difficult as could be proposed; meanwhile the possible wel- fare of thousands is jeopardized by the suggestion. Even granting any soundness to it, why should the predisposed to insanity be helped to it by Government cultivation and sale of ganja? I believe that this question of insanity from the use of ganja is a very serious one. The effect of the drug is so powerful that in some cases just once using it has produced insanity. Judging from the ordinary effects of this drug, as des- cribed by one long its victim, insanity would appear as the natural and almost inevitable result of excessive indulgence. It creates such horrible visions, intensifies so unnaturally all the powers of mind and body, exhausts physical and mental energy, and places its victim in the direct line for the mad house. In the special case of in- sanity that came under my own notice, the youth was formerly very bright, and seemed among the last about whom such a future could be expected. 49. Yes, largely. More Hindus than Muham- madans take ganja as an aphrodisiac. In this use it is most injurious to the community. I believe it tends to produce impotence. On the use of ganja as an aphrodisiac I have very strong testimony. By one who was its victim for seven years and mixed largely with smokers very great stress is laid upon this as one of the chief causes of its use. It seems evident that many youths and young men and even boys are tempted into this evil habit of ganja smoking just to encourage themselves in the excessive indulgence of sexual vices, and no doubt a very large amount of impotence is the result. * This degree of irritation or biting is, however, liked.
439 51. It is the current belief that the criminal classes take these drugs to get temporary artificial energy, and relief from thought and fear. 53. It makes men exceedingly irritable, and thus liable to commit hasty and serious crime. 54. Yes. 55. Yes, in many cases. Usually dhatura would be mixed with siddhi or ganja; but these drugs by themselves are sufficient and speedy in action upon those not accustomed to them. 56. Made very terrible by admixture with dhatura. Not usually mixed with other drugs. Not used for personal consumption; a fear lest it should kill. But used by criminals to stupefy others. 57. Never heard of these being eaten or drunk. It is siddhi that is drunk. 58. I should like to see the cultivation and sale stopped entirely. I believe that these drugs are simply demoralizing. If Government stopped its own cultivation, it would not be very difficult to control illicit cultivation. The wild plant is not much to be dreaded in comparison with the properly cultivated ganja. 69. I never heard of such consultation. Certainly. Written Statement put in by the REVD. Mr. PHILLIPS. 1. Opportunities of getting information.440 this habit to beggary and early death. (5) A Christian convert from Muham- madanism. This man has been three years a Christian. Previous to that he was the victim for over a year of this habit of ganja smoking, and has described to me from his own painful experience some of the mischievous effects of the habit. Rising some- times at midnight with horrible feel- ings, he would wander out into the darkness. At length he got so alarmed that he broke away from the habit. (6) A short time ago a man was found taking his day's supply of rice to sell in exchange for ganja. My informant asked him why he was doing such a foolish thing. He said, "I can better endure the cravings of hunger than the gnawing appetite for ganja." (f) Extent of consumption.441 become insane, and is now a Christian, and has given up the use of the drug. He told me that the aphrodisiac effects were those for which the drug was principally taken. He also described other effects, which I have mentioned in the last paragraph of answer 45, and his statement appears to me to be corroborated by the experiments of Dr. Wood, which are described in the pamphlet I present to the Commission. Dr. Wood's state- ments at the close of the paper is opposed to the aphrodisiac effects. Question 55.442 I would look at my watch, and then after an hour or two, as I thought, would look again and find that scarcely five minutes had elapsed. I would gaze at its face in deep disgust, the minute hand seemingly motionless, as though graven in the face itself; the laggard second-hand moving slowly443 30. Only a few take ganja in solitude, many in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex. Generally taken at youth. Children seldom take ganja. Bhang is taken both in solitude and in com- pany by men, and at all ages. 31. The habit of smoking ganja is easily form- ed by mixing in the company of persons addicted to its use. The habit, once formed, is difficult to break off. In the case of ganja, moderate habit develops into excessive. 32. The followers of Trinath observe a custom by which every member has to subscribe something for smoking ganja. Whenever fakirs and Kartabhajas assemble to- gether for religious purposes, they, as a rule, take ganja. The taking of ganja is considered by them essential, and it generally becomes excessive and consequently injurious to health. 33. The educated and higher classes of the people have a deep abhorrence for ganja. It is regarded as injurious both to body and mind. Public opinion is always against the practice. 34. It would be a serious privation, at least for some time, for the excessive consumer of ganja to forego it altogether. But such is not the case with the consumers of the other two drugs. 35. (a) Yes. (b) Not possible. (c) Gradually and by substituting coffee or tea instead. (d) The prohibition may cause discontent among the excessive consumers of ganja only, but for a short time. No apprehension of political danger therefrom. (f) The prohibition would not necessarily be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other dugs, for such are costly, and in most cases against the religious teaching of the consumers. 36. No. I do not think so. 37. The effects of charas smoking are different from those resulting from ganja smoking. The latter is much stronger than the former. 39. Smoking is more injurious than drinking or eating. Smoking ganja affects the brain and nervous system instantaneously, whereas the drinking or eating siddhi acts on the alimentary canal and helps digestion. 40. The native doctors mix ganja and other drugs with oil, and this preparation is prescribed for skin diseases. Siddhi is generally prescribed in chronic dysen- tery and diarrh444 If, however, it produces insanity, the children may also be affected by it. 49 and 50. I have no personal knowledge in the matter. But I am told that ganja and charas are sometimes used as an aphrodisiac. 51 and 52. Ruffians and dacoits generally use ganja to perpetrate their wicked actions. 53. A man loses his power of self-control by the excessive use of ganja, which sometimes leads to the commission of unpremeditated crime. I do not know any particular case about it. 54. Yes; ganja is so used. 55. Criminals sometimes induce their victims to partake of ganja in order to stupefy them and further their object. A sort of extract of ganja is also sometimes mixed with other eatable things in order to make the victims senseless. 68. There are shops in this district licensed for the sale of ganja. The number of these shops should be decreased for the good of the people. 69. Never. . No measures are taken certainly. Local public opinion should always be considered before a shop is opened in any locality. Oral evidence. Question 1.445 205. Evidence of the REVD. JOHN G. KERRY, Missionary, Dacca. Oral evidence. I am a missionary connected with the English Baptist Mission. I have been in India twelve years 446 With reference to crime, ganja is largely con- sumed by the turbulent inhabitants of Eastern Bengal. It is consumed in Behar, which fur- nished in former times the class of professional lathials, and, speaking from a wide experience, I should say decidedly that its use, or abuse if you like, had a marked tendency to lead to crime of violence. It was used by the old professional dacoits who have now been pretty well stamped out, and by rioters generally; not, I think, by thieves or burglars. I have known several cases in which lathials had primed themselves with ganja before committing crime, and I remember a case of an attempt to murder the Judge of Patna, in which the offender had similarly given himself such 'Dutch courage.' So far as my experience goes, ganja-eating is considered decidedly disreputable; and as for it being considered consistent with holiness, only last year a sanyasi was laughed out of the town where I was working when I convicted him of habitually consuming ganja. As to what restrictive policy should be adopted, I should feel inclined to try the experiment of increasing the duty up to a prohibitive point. I dare say that this might lead to some illicit cultiva- tion or preparation of the cultivated plant, to smuggling, and to indulgence in other stimulants. This probably would be the case to a certain extent; but if the consumption of a distinctly noxious stimulant could be restricted, even under such condition, I think that it would be an advantage. People will have stimulants, and it is folly to think otherwise or to devise means for the introduction of a reign of universal abstension from stimulants. The very recent disclosures as to ether drinking in Ireland in the district of "Temperance" apostles, may serve as an instance of what the result of such folly would be. But my opinion based on my experience, and what I have seen of the people of Lower Bengal, is that of the stimulants to which resort is had, none is so pernicious as ganja. Therefore I advocate its restriction, and that restriction is possible I be- lieve. 207. Evidence of BABU PURNENDU NARAYAN SINHA, Kayasth, Pleader and Zamin- dar, Bankipur, District Patna. 1. Personal observations and informations col- lected from the consumers of the drugs. 2. Yes; they are locally known as pamri, dali, and chur respectively. 19. Yes; they are used only for smoking. But ganja is used sometimes, though rarely, for medicinal purposes as an anodyne. Chur is some- times used in towns for the preparation of majums (sweet cakes). It is also used for the adulteration of bhang. 20. Vaishnava Sadhus, Nanaksahi Sadhus, Udasi Sadhus447 either ganja or charas. But they sometimes con- sume bhang. 32. In Holi and Dasahara bhang is consumed. The use of the drug is not essential, but has been sanctioned by custom, and, by association, is looked upon as essential. Generally the use is temperate, and is not likely to lead to the formation of habit. 33. Public opinion sanctions the moderate use of bhang. The use of ganja is always in disrepute, except in the case of ascetics. This sentiment is is due to the bad effects produced by ganja, espe- cially the irritable temper and impulsive violence generally noticed in the consumer. Ganja- consumer is a word of reproach, meaning one who acts as if he has lost all sense. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. It will be a serious privation to ganja- smokers to forego the consumption of the drug, only when the practice is old and becomes a habit. Charas is not habitually used in smoking. The foregoing of the drug will not be a serious privation. The consumption of bhang is an inve- terate habit with many, and the foregoing of the drug will be a serious privation to many. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and bhang, but it would be feasible to prohibit the use of charas. Certainly there will be illicit consumption of ganja and bhang. The prohibition of these drugs would occasion serious discontent among the consumers. As the prohibi- tion will affect Naga Sadhus, who are very assertive of their rights and fearlessly bold, and a large number of people of the illiterate classes, it may lead to some sort of political danger. 36. The prohibition cannot be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants in the case of Vaisbnavas and Nanaksahis, who may, as a last resort, take to opium, though it is hated at present by many. 40. Bhang is prescribed for diarrh448 produce no ganja nor the resinous substance known as charas. The plants are male. 12. No, not in the Lower Provinces of Bengal. 13. I am informed the female plant is exten- sively cultivated in Nepal, Terai, Gorakhpur, and many other districts of the North-Western Pro- vinces for ganja and charas. The best charas comes from Kasghar in the north-eastern border of China. It is highly priced, and is a luxury to rich people. 14. (a) No. (b) No. (c) No. See answer to question No. 7. 15. As far as I am aware, green leaves are plucked from the plants and dried and kept for drinking purposes. 16. Male plants produce the best bhang, and it is prepared in the houses of the people. The leaves of the female plants may be used as bhang, but as a rule they are discarded, being very strong if used as a drink. 18. If kept with ordinary care, ganja and bhang do not deteriorate for two years, but charas can be preserved in good condition for a much longer time. The former lose much of their strength after two years. 19. Used only for smoking. 20. These people who are exposed to inclemen- cies of weather, such as boatmen, carriers of loads, palki-bearers, fishermen, night-watchmen, men who spend their lives in manual work, and sanyasis. Charas is not used by low class people. The men of the higher class rarely use it too. Hindu and Muhammadan mendicants, vil- lage cultivators, day-labourers in the fields, boat- men, up-country Hindus, and Muhammadans of the lower classes, cartmen and the women of the town are chiefly the classes which supply customers to the vendors of ganja, charas or bhang. It is difficult to determine what particular class is addicted to what particular form of the drug, or if all the classes are equally fond of all the forms of the drugs together. But from a careful observation of all the facts falling within my own experience, I venture to think that ganja claims greater number of votaries, drawn almost equally from all the sources enumerated above, than charas or bhang, which should take a second place in this connection. Charas is the favourite form of the drug indulged in chiefly by the women of the town and the men who resort to their places, par- ticularly the younger men. Charas is also favoured by a class of young men of a higher status in life apart from the classes described above. Bhang is used almost exclusively by Hindus with- out distinction of classes. It is taken by them in the form of a drink, generally with the object of stimulating appetite which was weakened by in- digestion or other causes. 21. The flat kind is commonly used in these parts. Smokers would prefer the round kind, but it is dearer. 22. Native charas is chiefly used. 23. Not aware that bhang is used for smoking. 24. Bhang is used by sanyasis (ascetics), both eaten and drunk. The up-country durwans and up-country traders are the largest consumers. In Bengal, I may guess, the proportion is one to four thousand. By far the greater number of the drinkers of bhang consists of the Hindu sanyasis, who make it a point to drink it in pursuance of the dictates of a religious sentiment. It serves the purpose of casting away the sad thoughts of a sanyasi's life who, while he is conscious of his being a unit of the busy world around him, yet feels himself abandoned and neutral and an intruder in society according to the practical experience of life. The drink enables the sanyasi to pass the time in pleasant and pleasurable mood, and he who is sincerely a seeker of truth is enabled to fix his attention to religious contemplation unmoved from the object to which he had directed histhoughts. The Commission wants to be informed if any special class uses the drug in moderation or in excess. The mendicants excepted, all other classes use it in moderation. Excess, in the sense the term is used in the question, signifies, I opine, a quantity used which brings on intoxication of a degree which would render the user incapacitated for a time. Among habitual users, there does not appear any visible symptom of physical failings under the influence of the drug taken in excess. Exces- sive indulgence is very frequently noticed among the lower order of people of all the classes. 25. On information I may say the use of charasis decreasing daily. I can't say the use of ganja is decreasing at all. 28. The quantity consumed daily by a moderate smoker of ganja or charas is about 1/8 of a tola, A moderate drinker of bhang consumes about 1/4 of a seer in a month. N.B.449 together in an assembly. The priest throws the water over their heads. The bhang is then circu- lated. It is a harmless one. I think it is essen- tial. It is generally temperate, and by no means excessive. The drug is often used on such occa- sions as a sleeping draught to give tone to the system after the wear and tear of a toilsome day. 33. It is an opprobrium to the gentleman or Bhadralok classes to make a public display of their habit of smoking ganja or charas. The plant is never known to be an object of religious wor- ship or veneration. 34. It would be a serious thing to several class- es of consumers if they are required to forego the use of the drugs. Bhang is a remedy to those who are suffering from chronic bowel complaints or want of appetite. Ganja is not only a solace, but a necessity of life to persons who work in the sun and keep up nights, or who undergo hard manual work. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of this drug by compulsory legislation. The use of the drugs (ganja and bhang) may be viewed as a necessity considering the climate of the country and the condition of its people. The use of the drug is so bound up with the habits of the people that its prohibition will be considered a hardship. The use of the drugs is so great a necessity to them that it would be practically impossible to prohibit the use. The result of the prohibition is appre- hended to bring illicit consumption to a large extent. Certainly the prohibition will occasion serious discontent. Of course there is no political danger because the discontented people are not many in number in comparison of the population of the country. The prohibition will be followed by recourse (a) to alcoholic stimulants. Another grave issue hangs upon the question. There can be no doubt that the drug in one form or other is in extensive use at the present time; and that from ages it has been so used is evi- denced in the ancient works of Hindu sages and philosophers. Their Great God450 wakes up after a few hours' sound sleep with a giant's appetite for food. 45. Confining to the moderate use of ganja and bhang451 55. No knowledge or information about this. 35. The use of hemp drugs should be prohi- bited. This can be done by Government orders declaring the use to be an offence punishable by the Indian Penal Code. Exception may be made for the use on a very small scale for religious and medical purposes. 59. In my opinion the present excise system is defective in that it does not sufficiently provide for the illicit consumption and use of the drugs in question; also it does not contain any provision for the prevention of its use. 35. It is desirable to lay before the Commission that the opinion prevails among the educated classes that the use of these drugs being injurious from moral, social and medical points of view, steps should be taken to minimize the evils by passing stringent enactments against its use. 210. Evidence of BABU MADHAVA CHANDRA CHATTERJEE, Brahmin, Pleader, District Court, Dinajpur. 1. I am the born resident of a village in the district of Dinajpur, from which village the ganja cultivations I have spoken of in my answers are only six to ten miles distant. I have seen the cultivation of ganja. In my early years I had very frequent opportunities of seeing many ganja smokers, and I am acquainted with several persons who drink bhang. I know very little of charas or of the method of preparation of this drug and of ganja. Wild hemp plants I have seen in abundance in various places in the districts of Bogra and Dinajpur. 2. Yes; the definitions seem to me to be correct The first variety obtainable from the hemp plant is locally known by the name of siddhi and occa- sionally called also bhang. The second variety is called charas. The first variety of ganja is called chebti or chepti (flat). The second variety is, I think, called Jassura, but I am not sure of this (round). The third variety is called chur or bhangri (broken). 3. In the districts of Bogra and Dinajpur. I consider the spontaneous growth of the hemp plant in the district of Dinajpur to be abundant, but I cannot say if it grows more abundantly in any other district. 4. As far as my knowledge extends, it is known by only one name, at least in the two districts I have mentioned above. This name is bhang, though I must own that educated people some- times call it bijaya and sometimes siddhi. 5. As far as I know, the hemp plant does not spontaneously grow in low lands, or in very dry and hard soil; its growth does not seem to me to depend very much upon rainfall, as I have seen wild hemp plants to grow usually in what were known as seasons and years of general drought. Lands fit for cultivation of paddy are not conge- nial to the growth of the plant. 6. If not obstructed, the wild plant generally grows very densely. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated within my knowledge in a part of the district of Rajshahi and in some villages, which, I believe, belong to the district of Bogra, the extent of the cultivation being greater in the former than in the latter place. I do not know if the hemp plants culti- vated in these places are utilized for the produc- tion of charas, but, as far as I know, they are not utilized for fibre or seeds. The principal use to which the cultivated plants are turned in these places is the production of ganja, though I have reason to believe that some use is made of the leaves unfit for this purpose for the production of what is used as siddhi or bhang. 8. I do not know. 9. I am not very familiar with these. 10. As far as I know, they are of the same class as other agricultural cultivators, at least in the places I have mentioned in my answer to question No. 3. 11. As far as I know, no. 12. No. 13. No; as far as I know, the cultivation is not restricted to any particular district or dis- tricts, yet it is a fact that the cultivation is not common to all districts. I think there are some special conditions under which alone the cultivation is possible. As far as my know- ledge goes, lands somewhat moist, though suffi- ciently raised above ordinary level to prevent accumulation of rain water, are specially suited for the cultivation. Another condition seems to me to be that the soil be not very hard like the rar lands in the districts of Burdwan and Bir- bhum, or hilly and dry like those of some parts of the Sonthal Parganas. Lands of a soft and alluvial character are, I think, specially fitted for the cultivation; better still if silted up river- beds of sufficiently long standing are available. I think further that the plant requires for its growth lands over which the average rainfall is from 30 to 50 inches in a year; but of this I am not very sure. As to what special conditions of climate and elevation above sea-level are necessary for the cultivation of the hemp plant for produc- ing ganja, I have no knowledge. I think the cultivation of the plant will be impossible generally in districts like Burdwan, Birbhum, and Sonthal Parganas. 14. Yes, in places round about Naogaon in the Rajshahi District. The places belong mostly to the district of Rajshahi, and, if I have been correctly informed, also to Bogra. I do not know the extent of the preparations. As far as I know, all these three varieties are produced. 15. I know only the method of preparation of bhang from the wild plant. The plant that is used for this purpose is generally the female plant, though the male-plant is also occasionally made use of. The method of the preparation is to take some leaves from the plant, and, after leaving out the dry and withered or half withered leaves, to expose them to the sun for some time. After the leaves are dried for some time, they are boiled in a mixture of from 10 to 25 per cent. of milk and 90 to 95 per cent. of water. After drying the leaves once again, they are fit for use as siddhi or bhang. 16. Yes; bhang is generally prepared by the people in their own houses, and it can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. It has never occurred within my experience that ganja or charas is prepared from the wild plant, far less from the wild plant wherever grown. 17. Ganja and charas are prepared, as far as 3 o 2
452 I know, exclusively by the people who cultivate the plant, while siddhi is prepared by all classes of people indiscriminately. 18. Bhang prepared from the wild plant does deteriorate by keeping. I do not know if the others deteriorate also. I think bhang loses its effects altogether by lapse of time. By ordinary care bhang may be kept good for one to three years, but from the second year it begins to lose its intoxicating and narcotic properties little by little. I do not know if the other two varieties deteriorate. I do not know the causes of deterioration, or how deterioration could be prevented. 19. As far as I know, ganja and charas are almost exclusively used for smoking, though occa- sionally, but very rarely, the former is used for drinking by people who have been thoroughly habi- tuated to the drink. This latter use of the ganja is almost always conditional upon the want of the siddhi proper, or prompted by a desire to get stronger drinks than what is obtainable from bhang. 20. A very small proportion of the people smoke ganja and charas. These people are generally of the lower order of society. Ganja-smoking obtains more or less in almost all districts of Bengal pro- per, while the people of Behar and Sonthal Par- ganas residing in Bengal are, comparatively speak- ing, greater smokers. Excepting Bengal proper, I have no knowledge of the extent to which, and the class of people among whom, ganja smoking prevails in other parts of the country. 21. The round variety of ganja is preferred. 22. I do not know of any foreign charas. 23. Bhang is very rarely used for smoking. It is never smoked except when confirmed and habi- tual smokers cannot get ganja to smoke or cannot procure it for want of means. Its use for smoking even among the poor ganja smokers is only tem- porary, for they have an inveterate tendency to procure ganja with the first penny that they can turn. 24. I have never seen any people eat bhang, except with some other thing or a substitute for bhang; but, unlike gang-smoking, the drinking of bhang is not restricted to any particular class of people. Many respectable people drink bhang occasionally, and some respectable persons are even habitual drinkers of the drug. The wor- shipppers of Jagannath in Orissa and the Dobeys, Chowbeys, &c., of the North-Western Provinces who make tours in different parts of Bengal are, almost without exception, habitual drinkersof bhang. 25. I have no accurate information, but I think the use of all the three drugs, and more especially of the first two, is on the decrease. My reason for thinking so is that in the same localities I now see a smaller number of people to use them than I saw in my early age. 27. Habitual excessive consumers of ganja belong to the lower classes of society, while occa- sional moderate consumers and occasional excessive consumers are to be met with (though the instan- ces are rare) in the higher classes of society as well. This also applies to the consumption of charas. As regards bhang, my answer to question No. 24 states all that I know about it. I do not know the habits of life or circumstances which mainly lead to the practice. 28. I cannot say what the cost is for consumers of bhang and charas. For ganja smokers453 ganja454 advance money and profit by it do not belong to that class. 11 and 12. No. 13. The cultivation of ganja is restricted in the districts of Bogra, Dinajpur and Rajshahi. The cultivation is impossible in khiar (as opposed to alluvial) land. 14. The ganja and charas are prepared in the ganja tracts. I know not to what extent. 15. The cultivated ganja is prepared in this province in the method described by Dr. Prain, and is used for smoking only. The wild plant bhang is used to a small extent for eating and drinking purposes. The lower order of people use the seeds of cultivated ganja for eating pur- poses. 16. The bhang is occasionally prepared by the people in their houses. Not that I know of. 19. Yes. 20. In the ganja tracts 75 per cent. of the people are more or less addicted to ganja-smoking. The lower and poorer classes of people, the sanyasis and the bairagis, use the drug more fre- quently. 21. In this part of the country the chipti (flat ganja) is generally used for smoking, but the round one is preferred. 23. No. 24. Not more than 5 per cent. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase. 28. The habitual moderate consumer's average allowance per diem does notexceed half a tola, and does not cost more than two annas, but the excessive consumer can smoke one tola or even more. 29. Yes, occasionally; the object of mixing dhatura is to make it stronger and more effective where the consumer cannot afford to pay for the price of the larger quantity of ganja he would have otherwise required. 30. No. 31. Yes. It is not very easy to break off the habit. Yes, there is such tendency. 32. There is no social or religious custom pre- valent in the district which make the consump- tion of these drugs necessary. The moderate use of ganja and bhang is said to be enjoined in the Hindu Tantras, but it is observed more in the breach. 33. The hemp-smokers are often hated. The public opinion (both social and religious) is against the practice. The use of the narcotics in excess, except for medicinal purposes, is held in disrepute, as the people addicted to these vices, render them- selves useless to the society, become prey to the innumerable ailments, lose their mental activity, cultivate all the beastly propensities which the human mind may be subject to, and impoverish the family. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant prevalent in this part. It is not even heard of. 34. No, no serious privation. 35. Yes, it is feasible gradually. It cannot be done by one stroke. The only way to make it practicable is to gradually diminish the area under cultivation. If half of the area at present culti- vated is only allowed to cultivate in the next year, and if there be an annual decrease of 10 per cent. in the succeeding years, it may be fairly hoped that it would be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja to a great extent for intoxicating purposes. Care should also be taken to raise the market price by doubling the rate of the standard duty now in vogue. The drug does not grow in any other tract than those defined in my answer to question No. 7. And if strict vigilance is enforced in that tract, the illicit consumption will be rendered almost impossible. Of course, it would occasion a sort of discontent among the excessive consumers for some time, and will not last long. There are evidences in the jail records that the ganja- smokers, who are imprisoned for a considerable time, are not allowed to smoke ganja in the jail, and they do not feel much distress by it, and they actually give up the habit when they are released. The political danger is out of question. In some cases the prohibition may be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulant known as toddy, but the proportion will not be significant. 36. Not that I know of. 40. Bhang is used by the kabirajes for medicinal purposes. The hemp is indigenously used for external application in itches, humours, etc. 41. The moderate use of bhang for a limited time is known to be digestive, but it is injurious, if continued for a length of time. The moderate occasional use of ganja (but not bhang) is said to have alleviated fatigue and given staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, but there is always a re-action and depression afterwards. As to (c), there is no medical opinion in its favour, but the ganja-smokers are heard to extol the drug in such a manner, which, I think, they are, as a rule, bound to do. The drug is never used for sale purposes mentioned in (a), (b), and (c), for we have never seen any one, who is not a ganja- smoker, to smoke ganja for those purposes, but the ganja-smokers are reported to have said that. 42. The occasional moderate use of the drug may be harmless, but to be temperate in these intoxicating drugs is next to impossible. 43. Yes. 44. Yes; according to the habitual ganja- smokers it is refreshing. The moderate use (by which I mean a chillum at a time) of ganja is not known to have produced any sort of visible in- toxication in habitual consumers. It does not allay hunger, except when the man is insensible. It creates appetite for the time being, but it has bad after-effects, as dyspepsia, want of appetite, dysentery and other ailments akin to indiges- tion. The want of subsequent gratification certain- ly produces longing and uneasiness. 45 and 46. Yes; but, as I am not a medical man, I am not in a position to discuss the question in detail. 47 and 48. Yes, to a certain extent. 49. I know not whether it is used as aphro- disiac. It is said to be used by the prostitutes during their menses to prevent conception, and so it may produce impotence. 51, 52, and 53. The smoking of ganja excites anger, and, as such, does probably tempt the con- sumers to crime. 54. I know not whether criminals do actually stupefy their victims by the use of the drugs, but they may easily do if they like. Yes, complete stupefaction is possible by this drug even without admixture in a person not used to it, but serves the purpose better when mixed with dhatura.
455 62. Not necessarily, as there are no habitual consumers of this drug. The people use it occa- sionally for intoxicating and medicinal purposes. 69. Never. The local public opinion ought to be consulted, and due weight given to it. 212. Evidence of BABU PARAMESHWAR DAN, Kshetrya, Pleader, Judge's Court, Vice- Chairman, District Board, Dinajpur. 1. Informations received from persons who deal with hemp drugs and use them. 2. These definitions may be accepted for the province, but round ganja, otherwise called gol ganja, is not produced in the Rajshahi Division. It was previously imported from Jessore, but it is not now in use in Dinajpur. The other two classes known as flat or chipti ganja and chur ganja are in use in this district, and they are imported principally from Baubhora, a place in Naogaon sub-division of Boalia. 3. Hemp plants grow spontaneously in Boalia, Bogra and Dinajpur. They are abundant in all these three districts. 4. The ordinary hemp plants are known by the name of "Bhanger gachh," while the plants from which ganja is produced are called "Ganjar gachh." These plants are not the same, although they belong to the same species. 5. The wild hemp grows abundantly on river sides and in damp and moist soil. 6. The growth is ordinarily dense. 7. Hemp plants are grown for production of ganja and charas in Boalia, Bogra and Dinajpur. They are not grown for production of bhang only, or for fibres or seeds. They are grown in Bogra, Boalia, and in a small tract of Dinajpur in Thana Mahadebpur. 8. Not known. 10. They do not form a special class, but are ordinary agricultural cultivators. 11. Plants are cultivated for the production of ganja, but they are not raised from the seed of the wild plant. 13. It is not restricted to this province alone; it is grown in other provinces. But its cultiva- tion is not common to all districts, as these plants do not grow in hard soil. 14. Ganja, charas and bhang are prepared in Boalia, Bogra, and in a small part of Dinajpur. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the people in their houses. Can be prepared from hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas are not pre- pared from wild plants. 17. By ordinary cultivators these drugs are prepared. 18. Yes; they do. They lose their narcotic power in time. 19. So far as my knowledge goes, I know ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. Low class people smoke ganja and charas. Few people in the mufassal smoke, but the number is large in towns. In the town of Dinajpur there are many ganja-smokers. 21. Chur ganja is not a special preparation, but these consist of small bits obtained from round and flat ganja. In the district of Dinajpur flat and chur are used. 22 and 23. Not known. 24. All classes of people from the highest to the lowest drink bhang, and everywhere in the district. 28. (a) One pice worth of ganja is sufficient. (b) For habitual excessive consumers one anna worth. 29. Ordinary dry tobacco leaves are mixed with ganja by the labouring classes. I am not aware if dhatura is used. Dry tobacco is mixed to soften it, but dhatura is sometimes used with bhang to make it stronger. Bhang massala consists of black pepper and aniseed generally, but sometimes rose water, milk and sugar are used to make it palatable. 30. (a) Not known. (b) It is confined to the male sex and adults mainly. It is not usual with children. 31. Habit of consuming ganja is easily formed. Moderate use of ganja develops into excessive. 32. On the last day of the Durga Puja, bhang is used by almost all who worship the image of Durga. This custom is regarded as religious. Siddhi, as its name implies, is considered auspi- cious when one goes to a distant place. Its use on such occasion is temperate. It is neither in- jurious nor bad to the formation of a habit. 33. (a) and (b) Consumption of ganja is ge- nerally considered as hateful and disreputable. The smokers generally go by the name of ganja- khor, a term used in contempt. This sentiment is attributable to its non-use by the higher classes. (c) Not known. 34. Ganja-smokers would feel it a serious pri- vation if they are to forego the consumption, because they contract a habit and feel refreshed by smoking. 35. It is not feasible to prohibit the use of ganja. Its prohibition would occasion discontent, but would not amount to a political danger. Its prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic and other drugs. 36. To a limited extent alcohol is substituted for ganja. 37 to 39. Not known. 40. Kabirajes prescribe bhang for acidity and indigestion. Bhang is also used in treatment of cattle disease. 41. Their moderate use is not beneficial. By this I mean that their use by a man of healthy constitution is not beneficial. But the use of bhang by a dyspeptic is digestive. Use of ganja alleviates fatigue. It is also used as a preventive in malarious and unhealthy tracts. Labouring classes, more specially palki-bearers, use ganja for the purposes described in (b) and (c). 42. I don't consider moderate use ever to be harmless. It makes the consumer peevish.
456 43. Moderate consumers are no doubt inoffen- sive. 44. It is refreshing. Ganja and charas produce intoxication. Bhang also produces intoxication, if taken in large doses. 45. (a) and (b) Use of ganja and charas pro- duces noxious effect, physical and mental, and impairs the constitution. (d) and (e) Use of ganja causes dysentery if the consumers do not get proper diet. It induces laziness. (f) It deadens the intellect and produces in- sanity. I do not know what type of insanity is produced, and whether it is temporary or perma- nent. (g) Not known. 47. It is not a hereditary habit. 48. I am unable to answer the remaining ques- tions. 213. Evidence* of BABU UMA KANTA GHATAK, Brahmin, Government Pleader, Bogra. 12. I have heard that ganja is cultivated in the Bogra, Rajshahi and Dinajpur districts. 14. Ganja is produced in the jurisdiction of Thana Adamdighi. Bhang is produced in the eastern part of Bogra. Charas is not prepared. 19. As far as I know, ganja is smoked. I do not know how charas is used. Ganja is said to be used for medicinal purposes. 20. Sanyasis, baishnavas and low-caste people smoke ganja. 24. I have seen some Uriyas eating bhang. 30. I have seen five or seven persons smoke ganja in company. 33. Sanyasis are respected by people. Low- caste people are not respected.* Translation. 35. The prohibition of the use of ganja is likely to create discontent among the smokers. 58. It is not working well. 62. The plant grows wild. 65. Taxation would not be unreasonable. 66. It should be according to price. 67. The producers of ganja, charas and bhang should be taxed. 68. There are separate houses. 69. People are not known to be consulted by Government. It is absolutely necessary that they should be consulted. 214. Evidence of PUNDIT RAKHAL CHUNDER TEWARY, Brahmin, Pleader and Honorary Magistrate, Diamond Harbour, 24-Parganas. 1. From personal experience and enquiries. 2. Yes, by the above names. 3. In the districts of Nadia, Jessore, 24-Parga- nas and Rajshahi. 4. It is known by the names of ganja, bhang or siddhi, and charas. Ganja is of three different kinds, round, chur and flat. 5. In ordinary fertile sandy countries or lands. It is generally reared in winter season. 6. The growth of siddhi is dense where it grows, and that of ganja scattered. 7. No. 8. No reason can be assigned for it, inasmuch as no regular cultivation of it is in existence in this district. 9. Not known. 10. No, they are of the same classes as of the other agricultural cultivators. 11. Not known. 12. No. 13. Yes, in almost all the districts, except Raj- shahi. 14. No. 15. Not known in this district. 16. (a) No. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. 17. Lower classes of people. 18. Yes, these drugs deteriorate by keeping and quite lose their effect in time. They keep good not more than two years. They lose their intoxi- cating power when they become old. As far as I know, there are no such preventive measures. 19. Yes. 20. Low, agricultural, labouring classes, boat- men, palankeen-bearers, jogis, fakirs, small num- bers among gentries, and women among pros- titutes and lower class. One-fifth of the total male population among low, agricultural, etc., classes; fifteen in one thousand among gentry; and ten in one thousand prostitutes and low classes of people. In almost all districts. 21. Round is preferred by the ganja-smokers. 22. In Gorakhpur. The use of charas is not so much prevalent in this district. 23. No. 24. Siddhi or bhang is used by almost all classes of people, specially in Orissa and up-country. 25. Rather decreasing. 26. Vide No. 20. One-fourteenth of the whole of the ganja-smokers are moderate, and the rest ex- cessive. 27. Mainly from lower agricultural, etc., people and religious mendicants. 28. On an average sixteen persons may consume one seer of ganja per month. With regard to religious mendicants it is quite different. They may in a day consume eight annas worth ganja, that is, two kachas in weight. 29. Nothing is mixed with ganja and charas. Dhatura is sometimes mixed with bhang or
457 siddhi to make it more strong. I do not know of any preparation such as bhang massala. 30. They are almost always practised in com- pany, and, when among rishis and fakirs, two to four kachas of ganja are consumed, and otherwise one or half anna weight. Bhang, four chatacks, when in company, and, in solitude, one pice worth, in weight one tola. The use of charas is not so prevalent here. The children amongst low classes scarcely use ganja or charas; but sometimes bhang is used for medicinal purposes among all classes. 31. Yes, among low, labouring, etc., classes, it is difficult to break off altogether. No, it is al- ways the same, except in a few rare cases. 32. Many people use ganja and bhang to concentrate their minds to devotion, and that is generally among rishis and fakirs. On the Hindu festival day of Sivaratri almost all the people who are followers of Siva, specially up- country men, use ganja and bhang, as it is regarded essential. Temperate, and in rare cases excessive. Not injurious. 33. When among rishis and fakirs, it is regarded as religious, and in other cases otherwise. Yes, disrepute. The people who use it generally become headstrong. The worshipping of ganja and bhang is prevalent, but nothing is known about hemp plant. 34. Yes, especially to those who use it habitual- ly, as it may bring diseases; and also the low and labouring classes will not be able to labour as hard as they do, the drug being stimulant to them. 35. The use of charas may be restricted, but not ganja and bhang. Yes, very difficult to enforce prohibition. Yes, there would be serious dis- content, though no political danger. No other alcoholic stimulants would do. 36. Yes, liquor is being used among well-to-do classes. Yes, because it is not considered dis- reputable. 37. Yes, charas has not the same powers of stimulation as the ganja and bhang have. 38. No. 39. The drinking or eating of any preparation of hemp plant is not known, but only bhang is drunk. 40. (a) Yes, bhang only. (b) Yes. 41. Yes, it is generally known as "turitananda." (a) Yes, digestive. (b) and (c) Yes. (d) Not known. Respectable class of people use bhang as a preventive for looseness of stomach, and in small quantity in the last day of Durga Puja. Amongst low and other classes the use of both ganja and bhang is almost always habitual and in most cases in moderate quantity. 42. Yes; it is harmless. It is used to prevent exposure by the religious mendicants who resort to it for concentrating their mind to God. The lower class of people are known also to use it for the bad purpose, as well as to enable them to work hard. 43. Yes. 44. Yes, it is refreshing. Yes, it produces in- toxication but not so much as in the use of liquor. Yes, it allays hunger. Its after-effect is said to be uneasiness and indolence. The effect of ganja continues for two or three hours; bhang, seven or eight hours. 45. (a) The habitual moderate use of these drugs, except charas, is known to produce physi- cal, mental or moral effect, whenever the persons using them are in need of any of the effects (b) to (e) No. (f) No. when used in moderate quantity. I have not come across with such an instance, but some insane persons are found to have recourse to ganja-smoking, but no cause is traceable of their being attacked with the disease. 46. No answer necessary. 47. No. 48. Not necessary. 49. Yes, it is used by prostitutes. It does not tend to produce impotency, rather excites the passion. 50. Vide answer in question No. 45. 51. No. No connection with crime. 52. No answer is necessary. 53. No. The use of these drugs are known to be not so intoxicating as to lead people to a pre- meditated crime as in the use of liquor. 54 and 55. No. 56. When used in moderate quantity it gives additional strength to labour hard; it increases appetite, etc.; and when in excess, makes a man idle and makes him head-strong. With ganja no admixture is made. Dhatura is sometimes used with bhang to make it more stimulant. 57. I have not ever heard that ganja and charas are eaten or drunk. 58. Working well, but some changes with regard to price as well as its penalties must be considered to meet the requirements of the people. 59. The use of liquor should be prohibited, as its use is against the principles of Hindu and Muhammadan Laws. Ganja and siddhi and charas are not restricted by the Shastras. The price of it, if lowered by decreasing its duty, will be beneficial to the lower classes of men, as well as some mem- bers of the respectable men who are accustomed to it. The use of liquor by respectable rich old families has brought ruin on themselves, and also brought on untimely death. The above statement is given from my long personal experience. 60. Yes, sufficiently controlled. 61. No modification necessary. It is sufficient- ly controlled. 62. No further control is necessary. 63 and 64. No. 65. No. Some decrease in duty as well as price of these drugs is very desirable. 66. There may be no objection if uniform rates of duty be imposed on the three different kinds of ganja, but decrease of price and its penalties are indispensably necessary. 67. Yes. I have already recorded my sugges- tions. 68. There are shops, but no houses or premises for their consumption. The present system is working well. 69. Yes, when necessary. 70. There are no facts regarding the importa- tion or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States. Yes, duty is paid. There is no general use of untaxed drugs. 3 F
458 215. Evidence of BABU SASADHAR ROY, Brahmin, Pleader and Honorary Magistrate, Rajshahi, I. I have been asked by the Rajshahi Associa- tion to answer these questions, and I proceed to do so below. I am not myself a ganja-consumer of any kind, so I have no personal experience of the drug. But I have come in contact with many ganja and bhang-consumers, and so possess some infor- mation regarding these drugs. As regards charas I have no experience. 10. They are of the same classes as the other agricultural cultivators. 11. Not so far as I know in the districts of Rajshahi and Pabna. 13. There would be no part of the country, I believe, except any marshy lands, where its culti- vation would be impossible. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared, but not charas, so far as I know. 16. Yes; bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses to be drunk as an infusion, or swallowed as a bolus, or eaten as cake. The leaves from which it is prepared are gathered from wild bhang plants, and used, both dried and green. 18. Yes; it does deteriorate by keeping, and lose its effects, so far as intoxication is concerned. But its medicinal use improves by keeping. 19. In this part of the country they are used only for smoking. I speak of Rajshahi and Pabna, so far as I know. 20. I omit charas from consideration. As regards "classes," I think ganja is smoked, more or less, by all classes of people. I should note that palki- bearers, cooks, (up-country) and Uriya domestic servants, some low class prostitutes who cannot pay for wine, and sanyasis or religious mendicants, many bhadralok of limited income, and very rarely bhadralok also of wealth (these last as a substitute for wine), artisans or handicraftsmen are consumers, more or less, of ganja and bhang. As regards proportion, I believe, about 5 per cent. smoke ganja. The proportion for charas I cannot say, but believe to be exceedingly small. The smoking is principally done in residence houses, not in any public shops, where only a very small number of purchasers smoke. 21. I have heard that "flat" is preferred. 23. Bhang is not so used. 24. As regards classes, I refer to my answer 20. As to proportion, bhang is not habitually eaten or drunk in Rajshahi or Pabna, and, I believe, in the other districts of Lower Bengal. So the proportion cannot be given for such. But I can only say that I believe occasional eaters or drink- ers of bhang will be about 25 per cent. here. This includes in many cases the ganja-smokers as well. Bhang is also used in residence houses, for it is seldom purchased for luxury. 25. I believe the use of ganja and bhang to be stationary. It is, I should say, not on the increase. But as to charas, I believe its use is decreasing. The reason appears to me to be that they are not considered to be fashionable intoxicants. A certain amount of disrepute also attaches to ganja and charas, in regard to which public opinion is grow- ing stronger now than before. 26. As to ganja, of the 5 per cent. I have stated in answer 20, the major portions are habitual moderate consumers. As to bhang, I believe the 25 per cent. I have given in answer 24 are all occasional moderate consumers. I cannot give the proportion asked. 27. The principal circumstance is association with consumers. Hard workers of the classes mentioned in answer 20 take to ganja to relieve fatigue; bhadralok for pleasure, including sexual indulgence. Bhang is taken mostly on ceremonial occasions, sometimes for pleasure and in some cases for medicinal purposes. 28. I speak of ganja here. So far as I know, half an anna to one anna per diem for class (a). 29. With bhang the ordinary "massala" is mixed, also milk, curdled milk, etc. With ganja tobacco is sometimes mixed. Dhatura is given to add to its intoxicating power. I should say, in this part of the country, no special preparation is sold by the shop-keepers. It is the ordinary garam massala of the country. 30. To a large extent, the practice begins in company, but is afterwards indulged in solitude. Ganja is mainly confined to the male sex. Bhang is sometimes taken also by public women. I certainly think that the practice is very rare in women in this part of the country. Children sometimes take bhang. In this answer I have excluded charas from consideration; for it is not practised to any appreciable extent. 31. Yes; the habit is easily formed, so far as ganja and bhang are concerned. But as I have already said habitual bhang-taking is unknown here. Ganja habit, if once formed, is, I should say, difficult to break off. There is not much tendency (so far as ganja and bhang are concerned) towards excessive use. 32. I must very strongly assure the Commis- sion that in this part of the country there is no custom, social or religious, regarding the consump- tion of these drugs. The fact (for it is a fact) that they are sometimes consumed at ceremonials or Puja occasions, such as Bijaya Dashami, Kali- puja, Siva Chaturdashi, or the fact that sanyasis and the religious mendicants consume them, are no grounds for saying that there is any custom such as here suggested. Such use at ceremonials or Puja occasions is decreasing beyond doubt. Consumption on such occasions is never regarded as essential, or even necessary. It is very gene- rally temperate. It does not at all lead to the formation of any habit, though it is certainly theoretically "likely" to do so. It is not at all injurious. Except the first sentence the rest relates to ganja and bhang only. 33. It is regarded unfavourably. Yes, there is public opinion, but entirely social, not at all religious. The public opinion in regard to ganja is that smokers of it are considered low and irritable or inconsiderate. This disrepute is due among other reasons to: (1) it is no longer a fashionable intoxicant; (2) consumers mostly being not middle or higher class people; (3) consumers generally being very irritable. The word "ganja- smoker" (ganja-khor) has come to mean inconsi- derate and rough. There is no custom here of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. It surely will be a serious privation to con- sumers to forego ganja-smoking, if the habit has
459 been formed. Taking the adult male population to be two crores in Bengal, I should say the num- ber of consumers will be somewhere about ten lakhs. 35. In case of prohibition it will be very difficult, I believe, to prevent illicit consumption, which will in all likelihood follow in not a few instances. Prohibition will produce great dis- satisfaction among the consumers, but it will not be "serious." Such dissatisfaction or discontent will certainly not amount to a political danger. I believe the prohibition in many cases will be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 36. There is reason to think so. Alcohol is being substituted more or less for other drugs. The cause for this change is principally imitation of European habits. Alcohol is fashionable and is considered a civilized intoxicant. 39. I say of ganja: smoking certainly is less injurious, especially huka smoking. The reason obviously is that some injurious principles are burnt away and eliminated. In eating, the whole drug is swallowed. 40. Yes, bhang is given by the kabiraj in diar- rh460 growing spontaneously in several places of Bengal. Hemp abundantly grows in Kashmir. 4. I know of five names usually applied to hemp plants, namely:461 intoxicating effect which is believed to give pleasure. Therefore the largest number in my opinion are (b) habitual excessive consumers. The next are (a) habitual moderate consumers, whofor want of money are unable to indulge in excess. Then come those who may be called (d)occasional excessive consumers. Lastly may be mentioned those who are called (c) occasional moderate consumers. In the case of bhang, the order is otherwise, being (c) first, and then (a), (d)and (b), respectively. 27. (a) Are generally boatmen, fishermen, and other low classes following particular calling. (b) Are generally fakirs, sanyasis, and other reli- gious mendicants, as also those who incur the habit for the sake of intoxication. Also singers and musicians. 28. (a) From two pice to four pice. (b) From four pice to ten pice. 29. (a) Milk, sugar, mouri, golmarich are mixed with bhang or siddhi. (b) Ganja and charas are sometimes dipped in spirit and then made dry again. Dhatura is also used by veteran smokers. 30. Ganja and charas are consumed in smoking usually in company. Not so is the case with bhang. Habitual consumers generally smoke in company. The consumption is mainly confined to male adults. Women known as Bhairabis generally smoke ganja or charas. It is not usual for children to consume any of the three drugs. The boys of boatmen, fishermen and the young mendicants are often seen smoking ganja. 31. No, the habit is not easily formed; but once formed, it is difficult to give it up. Those who once form the habit are seldom seen to give it up. The reason is not that it is impossible to be given up, but because those form the habit do not seriously think to be got rid of it. No healthy influence is brought to bear on them. My belief is that even habitual consumers may give up the habit, if they choose to do so. Prisoners in jail get on well without the drugs, showing thereby that the use may be dispensed with without affect- ing the health and without any difficulty. The last question is answered in the affirmative. 32. The only custom I am aware of, in which bhang or siddhi is used, is on the occasion of the Bijaya, when it is considered essential for every Hindu to drink or touch the drug. It is not so considered by the enlightened class. The custom probably arose from the meaning of the word siddhi (success). The use on the occasion is temperate. Yes, it is likely in some cases to lead to the formation of the habit. The use is injuri- ous. 33. The consumers of any of these drugs (with the exception of persons occasionally taking siddhi or bhang) are generally treated with contempt in society. They are generally considered as untrust- worthy, incompetent to manage any business through lazy habits which the practice is believed to engender. Those who use the drugs are found to be worthless, hence the consumers are treated with contempt. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. The discontinuance of the use of the ganja may be regarded as a privation to the houseless religious mendicants, who believe that they over- come hunger and bad weather, as well as all melancholy thoughts, by the use of the ganja. They are lost to the society, and anything which makes them the more so is welcome by them. The discontinuance would not be a privation to any others, but would be a blessing, as it would make them more economic, active and careful about their family. 35. Yes, it is desirable that the use of the drugs be put a stop to. This can be done by prohi- biting the cultivation of hemp and destroying it wherever it grows spontaneously, as also prohibiting foreign imports. All illicit consumptions may be prevented by a strict vigilance and enforcement of the Excise Law, prohibiting the use of any of the drugs except for medicinal purposes. . The prohibition can be enforced in the same way as the law as to the offering to sale or having in posses- sion any unwholesome food or drink is enforced. There would be no doubt discontent in the minds of the consumers, but that would not be serious, nor would there be any political danger. The consumers have very little position in society, and are conscious of their guilt. They would not fail to perceive the noble intention of the Government. Yes, the prohibition would be followed by recourse to (a) alcoholic stimulants or (b) to the use of tobacco or opium. In the majority of cases, the use of tobacco smoking to excess would be re- sorted to. 36. No; alcohol would not be substituted for the drugs, unless the price would be cheaper. At present the drugs can be had at a cheaper price than alcohol. 37. Yes, ganja smoking produces a deeper and longer intoxication than charas smoking. The former lasts for hours and hours together, the latter for an hour or two. Sometimes charas smoking is resorted to to do away with the effect of the ganja smoking. The effect of the former is more sudden than that of the latter. In the case of charas, the consumer gets sometimes in- sensible while smoking, but he recovers earlier than the ganja smokers. 38. Yes, the effects are different in degree. The chur is the most intoxicating of the three, and the round or rolled ganja is more intoxicating than the flat ganja. The flat ganja is not much valued by habitual consumers. 39. Ganja or charas smoking is more injurious than siddhi drinking. But the latter becomes equally injurious if indulged in excess. The in- toxicating effect of bhang lasts from twelve to fourteen hours and sometimes for no less than twenty-four hours. In my opinion smoking is more injurious than either eating or drinking, as in the former case the head is affected more sud- denly than in the latter. 40. I am not in a position to answer this ques- tion. I have heard, however, that the drugs are used for medicinal purposes. I do not know whe- ther they are used in the treatment of cattle dis- ease. 41. (a) It is believed by some that siddhi sharp- ens appetite and also digests food. Some men drink siddhi in a moderate quantity, so as to be able to eat much in a feast. I do not believe that siddhi or the other drugs have any such effect. (b) The drugs do not give staying-power under severe exertion. Ganja smoking appears to pro- duce beneficial effect in the case of those who are constantly exposed to the weather, such as fisher- men and religious mendicants. Moderate occa- sional use may do good to the former and moder- ate habitual use to the latter. The use of the
462 drugs in a moderate degree may alleviate fatigue by bringing on sleep and insensibility but with bad after-effect. (c) I believe not. There are different opinions on the point. Ganja smokers are generally of weak constitution. 42. I do not consider the moderate use of any of the three drugs harmless, specially in the case of those who are engaged in the intellectual pur- suit of life. Those who wish to have their head cool and hands steady should not use any of the drugs. The use may he harmless, nay necessary in the case of those who would otherwise catch cold by exposure. In such cases the use may be regarded in the same light as the use of any medi- cine. 43. No; such consumers are generally found to be angry-tempered men. They are suddenly pro- voked. They annoy their neighbours by their misconduct. They have generally thievish habits. 44. The habitual consumer feels refreshed by the use of the drugs. Slight intoxication takes place, which does not deprive him of his senses. The use of ganja seems to allay hunger. The use of bhang in a moderate quantity is said to create appetite. In the case of charas, the effect lasts from one to two hours. In the case of ganja, the effect lasts a longer time. In the case of siddhi, the effect lasts usually for twelve or fourteen hours, sometimes for twenty- four hours. I know the instance of a moderate habitual consumer of ganja who could work with- out taking any food in the day time, but he would talk much and would seem to be of an irritating disposition. He is no better than a mad man and is very whimsical. 45. Yes, it produces bad effects. Yes, it does impair the constitution. It impairs the nervous system. It causes loss of appetite. So far as I know, it causes asthma. It impairs the moral sense materially and induces laziness and habits of immorality and debauchery. It deadens the intellect and produces insanity. The insanity so produced is generally of a temporary char- acter, curable by abstinence, and is likely to be re-induced by the use of the drugs. It is only ha- bitual excessive consumers and sometimes also habitual moderate consumers who are attacked with insanity. All bad results overtake them. Unless thoroughly reformed, the ganja smoker seldom finds fault with his habit and does not make any sort of confession. It is doubtful whe- ther moderate use of the drugs in the case of per- sons not suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease can bring on insanity. Such a constitution may stand the effects of the habit. But in a per- son who is suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease the habit is highly injurious and ends in bringing on insanity. Such men are usually prone to indulge in excess. There are instances of men deficient in intellect, who are induced by some- body else to the habit. In course of time the habit is formed. It is no longer kept in due bounds, and the ultimate result is insanity or half-insanity. Precisely is the case with those suffering from any mental anxiety. 46. Habitual excessive use of any of the three drugs is certainly injurious to health. It tells heavily on the intellect and the moral power. The nervous system is deranged. Laziness and drowsiness are the result. Insanity is oftentimes the fatal result. 47. It is not necessarily a hereditary habit. But the children of those who use those drugs are often- times corrupted by their examples. The sons of boatmen, fishermen, and the disciples of religious mendicants and singers often imbibe the habit. 48. See answer to question No. 47. 49 and 50. I know not whether it is so prac- tised. Prostitutes who are ill-conditioned and who are visited by the low and vulgar class do some of them use the drugs for the purpose of intoxication, and not so much for any other. They cannot please their companions, unless they themselves practise the same habit as that of those who visit them. I do not think that the use of hemp pro- duces impotence. 51. It is generally known that those who are habitual moderate consumers commit petty thefts. Those who are poor cannot afford to buy the drugs, ganja and charas. They are pick-pockets, and petty thieves. They lead such a life mostly for the sake of purchasing the drugs. 52. Those who indulge in excess commit thefts, robberies and dacoity. They cannot earn their bread or the drugs by the sweat of their brow, and consequently have generally recourse to those easier methods. 53. It is very likely that it does. I have not come across any such case. 54. Yes, most of them do so. Dacoits often do so. Murderers also do the same. 55. Such cases are very rare, so far as I know. I believe that complete stupefaction cannot be induced by the drugs without some admixture. 56. The effects caused by the admixture are well perceptible. Milk and sugar are sometimes mixed with siddhi to increase the intoxicating effect. Majum is prepared for the same purpose. Dhatura is seldom used as an admixture. Only veteran smokers do the same for personal consump- tion. It is used by designing men for administer- ing to others, either for satisfying a grudge or to rob the helpless man of his property. 57. Ganja and charas are seldom eaten or drunk. 58. No; I am not acquainted with the present system of Excise Administration, nor am I in a position to say how the system is working. 59. No; I am not acquainted with the present system of Excise Administration, nor am I in a position to say how the system is working. 60 to 67. Unable to answer. 68. Yes. Exception is only taken when any of those houses or shops are in the vicinity of any school, or respectable neighbourhood. The shops or houses should be at a respectable distance from the houses of the residents of the locality as well as from all public institutions and bathing ghats, etc. 69. The wishes of the people are seldom consi- dered. Most of the people do not know at all that they have any right to make any objection. They passively submit to what is done by the authorities, but they invariably regard such shops and houses as a nuisance. Yes, local public opinion ought to be considered. 70. None that I am aware of.
463 217. Evidence of BABU BEPRODAS BANERJEE,* Brahman, Pleader, Newspaper Editor, and Chairman, Baraset Municipality. 1. I have known lots of hemp and charas smokers; have seen Hindu and Musalman men- dicants, religious ascetics, use ganja and siddhi; and have also seen ganja and siddhi used in temples. 2. Yes. 3. Ganja chiefly grows in Rajshahi. But since the duty has been enormously raised, ganja is clandestinely cultivated. Large jars (jalas)are filled with earth and planted. Ordinarily one plant is in one jar. One plant generally produces about three seers of ganja. The jars are kept on roofs, or on places where they cannot ordinarily be seen. These plants seldom give out charas or first class siddhi. Gorakhpur produces the best charas. But the use of charas has very much diminished in Bengal during the last thirty years. 4. Ganja is the generic name throughout India. Charas ditto. Siddhi called subji, patti, pata or bhang. 5. I cannot speak with any authority. 6. Scattered, so far as I am aware. 7. I know Rajshahi charas is not produced in Bengal proper. 8. Ganja cultivation is decreasing. As an industry it is not so profitable now. The cause is the enormous increase in the duty. Another cause is the dislike of the higher classes to use ganja. Fifty years ago they used to smoke it in large numbers. Now " ganja smoker" is a term of abuse. The same is the case with charas and siddhi. Majum is a preparation of bhang. It is an oblong-shaped sweetmeat. At present its use is confined solely to up-country men. 10. Ordinary cultivators. 11. Not ordinarily. All plants do not produce seeds which germinate. They reserve some plants for seeds. The flowers are not broken for use as ganja. 13. The Government have better information than I can give. The Collector of Rajshahi must be an authority in this matter. I have seen ganja plants in Jonoargunge in the district of Chittagong. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. Largely in Rajshahi. 16. Ganja and bhang can be prepared every- where, but not charas. This comes from Gorakhpur and Nepal. It seems to me that a rocky soil and cold climate are necessary to enable the plant to exude charas. 17. By cultivators. Majum is prepared by a class of confectioners who reside in large cities. Bara Bazar is the only place in this part of the country where majum is made. 18. I have asked pacca ganja smokers. They say that, if kept out of damp, these do not lose their properties at least for five years. Siddhi, they say, won't last for more than two years. The older the charas the greater is its flavor and strength. This is what the topers say. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. A sort of majum is prepared from ganja. Some opium (guli) smokers use ganja with semi- liquid opium. This they call "grape shot" on account of its intoxicating power. Its specific name is then "jashu." 20. As a rule the educated classes abstain from ganja and charas. The latter was formerly the intoxicant of the bhadrolok. At present few high class men use them; it is the lower classes who use them everywhere. Sadhus, both Hindus and Muhammadans, almost invariably use ganja and charas when they can afford to buy it (charas). Mehters, carriage drivers, khansamas, tailors, itinerant musicians, men con- nected with mosques and temples are ganja smokers. They are used in every part of India. 21. Round ganja is preferred in the North- West and flat in Bengal. But to smokers both kinds are welcome. 22. Gorakhpur and Nepal. 23. Very seldom. But, as a variety, it is smoked everywhere in India. 24. Bhang is seldom eaten. Punjab people eat it when they cannot powder it. It is drunk in every part of India. Sepoys are specially fond of it and daily use it. In all temples dedicated to Siva bhang must be used in drinking and pour- ing on the head of the idol. The Maharaja of Benares gives bhang for use in the temple of Bisheshwar. 25. Ganja and charas are certainly not now used as before, though this decrease has taken place amongst the higher classes. As regards the others, they are in as much demand as before. The only restriction is the high price. Formerly one pice worth of ganja was sufficient for twelve smokes. At present it is barely sufficient for one full smoke. 26. (a) Most men who use it. (b) Spendthrifts and Musalman fakirs and Hin- du sanyasis. (c) Seldom any, as far as I am aware. A ganja smoker is a regular smoker. (d) Spendthrifts and religious mendicants, etc. 27. Generally poor people undergoing hard labour. This is their only stimulant. Religious mendicants, who have often to live under trees, in jungles, on mountains, etc., exposed to all weathers, are of necessity ganja smokers. They say that a man can better contemplate God after a hearty smoke of ganja. Ganja smokers come from all classes of the people. 28. (a) Four smokes (chillums) a day. (b) Twelve to twenty. This I gather from pacca smokers. 29. Tobacco leaf with ganja. Prepared to- bacco with charas. Very seldom dhatura is mixed by religious mendicants, and that when it is too rainy or too cold. Bhang massala is not used in this part of the country. A preparation so called is given to horses when they do not drink water. 30. Children do not smoke ganja. The greatest smoker won't allow it. Very few women smoke * Was invited to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but failed to appear.
464 ganja; those that do are invariably prostitutes. Ganja smokers always prefer to smoke in company. Bhang is not much used by females, though some respectable women, specially Muhammadan, do take it; children seldom. The same is the case with charas. Charas and bhangare ordinarily used in company, though bhang is not unoften taken in solitude. 31. The habit is formed like drinking habit. Generally bad company is at the bottom. The habit can be easily given up and causes no illness or inconvenience, as in the case of those using opium. Bhang and ganja are associated with the religi- ous rites of the Hindus, as a visit to the temple of Tarkeshwar would satisfy any one. On the day the idol Durga is immersed, bhang is con- sumed, though many people merely dip their fingers in the bowl and put it on their tongues. The god Siva must be bathed with milk mixed with bhang or siddhi. Musalman fakirs consider it absolutely necessary to use ganja and bhang. As a matter of fact, most people use these in moderation. Their use does not injure health, nor lead to the commission of crimes as dreadful alcohol does. A ganja smoker and bhang drinker can more easily give up these than one accustomed to drink spirits. 33. Charas smoking is called " bhadraloker nesha" (luxury of the gentleman class). Ganja- khor is a term of reproach or ridicule. Yet these people are not socially degraded; on the contrary, ganja smokers are regarded as simple men who hate to speak falsehood, and are generally fair in their dealings with the world. Great songsters generally have a smoke before music. They con- sider it necessary to concentrate their energy. Society in one respect loves ganja and opium smokers for their drollery. Like Irish bulls, there are numberless stories regarding these men. The father of Sir Raja Radhakant Deb and Babu Durga Charan Mukerji of Bagh Bazar, Calcutta, used frequently to entertain these people. Durga Charan is reputed to have spent three lakhs upon them. The great Hindu god Siva, our first surgeon and physician, who was the first to introduce inductive philosophy in the world, was a ganja smoker; hence ganja is considered a thing necessary for ascetics. The hemp plant is not considered sacred. 34. Yes, it will be a serious privation to all religions men to cultivators, small traders465 41. Yes. Before a feast, you will see all ganja smokers having a pull. It gives appetite and is digestive too. Bhang is well-known for this effect. Many hawkers sell hajmi guli (digestive pills). It contains a little bhang, and is most extensively used. Mr. Forbes Mitchell in his Reminiscences of the Mutiny, speaks in raptures of a pill of opium after a terrible march in summer. The effect of opium is slow. But ganja or a cup of bhang works wonders on the sons of toil. A man works the more if he can have a smoke whilst working. The staying-power is great. Alcohol makes man lose control over his muscles; but opium, ganja, and bhang have a contrary effect. As a preventive of diseases one has only to look at the sadhus, who have to remain on mountains, travel through jungles and marshes. Bhairavis ( female ascetics ) use ganja and bhang. People have a notion that these people possess wonderful medicines. Most medicines they give contain opium and bhang, though mercury is used too. In malarious places opium is extensively consumed. It is a remarkable fact that ganja smokers were free from attacks of fever when malaria appeared in Baraset, etc. In cases of diarrh466 48. Excessive use of ganja destroys both body and mind. Excessive use of opium impairs the digestive organs, and finally the man dies of dysentery. The immoderate use of the best medicine yet discovered by man467 68. Lots. The regulations regarding them are as perfect as human ingenuity and experience can make them. 69. People are seldom consulted, though Gov- ernment pay every attention to any objection raised by the people. The closing of the katcha distilleries proves how anxious Government are to consult the wishes of their people in this matter. I am strongly for local option. The time has come for it. 70. I have already said much on this head. I do not know if contraband articles come from any Native State; but this I know, that almost every train that comes from the North-West to Calcutta contains some men who have contraband opium with them. Some years ago, while at Arrah, a servant of the house where I was a guest blandly offered to sell me two seers of raw opium for four rupees only. These men certainly know how to dispose of these things. Here I again repeat, adjust the duty so as to sell opium at a uniform rate every- where. Of course, some distinction must be made in places which produce it. 218. Evidence of BABU NOBO GOPAL BOSE RAI CHOWDHOORY, Kayasth, Talukdar and Judge's Court Pleader (late Munsiff of Nator), Memari, Burdwan District. 1. I was Abkari Sheristadar for four years, and also Collectorate Sheristadar for five years. Besides this, when I was a Munsiff at Nator in the Rajshahi District for two years, I had the opportunity of seeing the cultivation of ganja in the Pargana of Dubalhati, within the jurisdic- tion of the chowki there, and had the opportunity of having conversation with several jogis, sanyasis, and rich rajas and zamindars. My age is now 60. On receipt of these questions, I had to consult with kabirajes, hakims and doctors, i.e., professors of medical science in different countries. At the age of 19, I entered into the Excise service. 2. Yes, these definitions may be accepted in our province with some additions. According to Sanskritists, the following names are known:468 is a fact. Constant use of ganja without good food leads to fatal consequences. It has been seen with men who indulge in ganja to render themselves subject to the fatal diseases of con- sumption, dysentery and insanity as an essential consequence. Rogi, jogi, bhogi and dagi use ganja. The rogis use ganja to get rid of certain diseases, the jogi for devotion purposes, the bhogi for digesting purposes, and the dagi for encour- agement in desperate acts Those persons who are in the habit of visiting prostitutes use charas. Those who act as actors in opera, etc., use charas. Those, that intend to prevent malarious fever, and try to keep health in bad climates and who are diseased, use ganja. The former is 10 per cent., and latter 50 per cent. Educated bhadralok hardly use it. A song is often spoken of by the smokers of ganja. It is translated thus:469 36. Any of these drugs is not substituted for alcohol. I don't think there has been any change. I think the latter dearer than former. 37. The effects are different; and effects of charas-smoking only give pleasure in the mind, but serve no medicinal purposes. But ganja cures many diseases, such as, rheumatic pain, leprosy; it increases male strength. According to native kabirajes, hakims and doctors, medicines can be prepared from ganja. 38. The people here use round ganja. The round ganja is superior in class, the next in kind is flat ganja, and chur is the worst of the kind. 39. Majority of people prefer smoking. Very few occasionally drink and eat. The former sys- tem is less injurious. 40. These drugs are used by native doctors for medicinal purposes. I have never heard of its ever being beneficial to cattle disease. 41. (a) Yes, I have already stated before. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. I know nothing about ganja. The coolies come from Hazaribag, Purulia, Ban- kura, Birbhum, to Burdwan and Hughli, for me- nial service or cultivation purposes. Up-country men such as panka-puller, palki-bearer, water- carrier, darwan, constable come to Burdwan, Hughli, after those districts turned to be mala- rious; also low classes, Bagdi, Hari, and Chandáls, use ganja as preventive of fever. The number of up-country men, who consume ganja is greater than that of the natives. 42. Yes, if not beneficial, moderate use of this drug is harmless. Moderate use is refreshing, and does create appetite, and bad climate can't injure health; the exposure would not make ill such, as constables in winter season are required to patrol in the night. They, I hear from several persons, keep health for the moderate use of ganja. They don't use excessively for the fear of being detected; so it is harmless. 43. Yes, inoffensive. 44. They would get ill and lose digestive power. Yes, refreshing. Yes, it creates appetite. According to some, its effects last for twenty-four hours, and others for more than that. The after- effects are desire for smoking ganja again. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not produce any noxious effects, phy- sical, mental or moral. It does not impair the constitution, nor does it injure the digestion, or cause loss of appetite; nor does it cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. Moderate use of ganja with good food does not produce any bad effects above mentioned. In my entire experience I have seen many rich men live a long life and die a good death after a habitual moderate use of ganja. 46. Excessive use of any of these drugs, and not accompanied with good food, leads to fatal consequences. That the abuse of ganja produces insanity in special cases is a fact; constant use of ganja without good food leads to fatal consequences. It has been seen with men who indulge in ganja to render themselves subject to the fatal diseases of consumption, dysentery and insanity, etc., as an eventual consequence. As to charas, I have no experience. As to ganja, I have learned by enquiry, and once I heard that the consumers have the ganja mixed in water, and drink the same; and when con- sumers of ganja don't get ganja, they smoke subji. The people who are consumers, use and drink ganja as above for medicinal purposes. I quote Sanskrit Madanpur. A sanyasi told me that if some of other drugs be powdered with ganja and used with water, leprosy may be cured. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. I can't answer this question. 51. I have never heard of any such ganja- smokers ever committing any crime being intoxi- cated. 52. The same answer as the preceding one. 53. A criminal case was committed to the Ses- sions Court of Burdwan in which a Brahmachari sacrificed a human being. The Brahmachari con- fessed having sacrificed a human body; he said to me that when he killed the body, he was not in his proper senses, on account of intoxication of ganja; he used to smoke ganja excessively. 54. The criminals of this country addict to the vice of taking liquor, but whether the criminals of the North-West use ganja or not, I can't say. 55. I have never come across such an accident. 56. Moderate use of ganja with good food im- proves health. The moderate habitual consumers never mix any other ingredients with ganja Ex- cessive smokers use dhatura seed and snake-kholos along with ganja to make it more powerful and strong. 57. It is already answered. 58 and 59. This system is good. I have no- thing to say and suggest about its improvements. 60. In this District of Burdwan, cultivation of ganja can be made. This I say from experience. I don't find any reason of modifying the system. The ganja is produced in force for controlling the process of its preparation. 61. I don't know anything of it. I have as- certained from many consumers that charas cannot be prepared here. 62. I can't say anything. I have no experience. Having consulted many a person on the subject, I come to the opinion that use of bhang is alto- gether harmless and beneficial to the health of the consumers; so I suggest that cultivation of bhang by the public may be permitted, and bhang should be exempted from the operation of excise law, and at the same time a heavy punishment should be prescribed for making ganja clandestinely on pretence of making bhang. 63. I have no objections. 64. I have no objections. The existing regu- lations are good. In my opinion there is nothing to suggest any alteration. 65. In my opinion the taxation is not unreason- able. 66. When there are different qualities of different kinds of ganjas, in my opinion, different rates of taxation ought to be introduced according to the quality of each kind, on this principle that taxation would naturally make the price of this kind of ganja high; that would deter the con- sumers to use excessively, but moderately. 67. I have no objections. 68. I don't know. 69. No. The public ought to be consulted in my opinion. At present only neighbouring licensed vendor is consulted; if he would say that there is no objection, the new license may be granted. 70. I don't know.
470 219. Evidence of BABU ABINAS CHANDRA DASS, M. A., B. L., Pleader, Judge's Court, Bankura. 1. Personal observation and enquiry. 2. The hemp plant is not cultivated in our dis- trict; neither are ganja, siddhi and charas manu- factured here. Dr. Prain's definitions may be accepted for our province, though there is a popu- lar belief in our district that siddhi is not manu- factured from the leaves of the hemp plant, i.e.,the plant from the flowers of which ganja is pre- pared. Siddhi, they say, is manufactured from the leaves of a distinct species of plant. The three narcotic articles are known in our district by the names of siddhi, ganja and charas. Ganja has three names according to its variety, viz., gol (round ganja), chipta (flat ganja), and chur (or broken ganja). Siddhi is also known by the nameof bhang. 3. I have no knowledge of any district in which the hemp plant grows spontaneously; but I am told that it is both spontaneous and abundant in the districts of Jessore and Rajshahi. I am also told that hemp grows wild in parts of the district of Singhbhum. 4. The wild hemp of the district of Singhbhum is said to be a distinct plant. The ganja, that is manufactured from it, is stronger and more narco- tic in its effect. 5 and 6. Do not know. 7. Yes. There is cultivation of the hemp plant in Jessore and Rajshahi. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant is not common to all districts. It is not cultivated in ours; and if people addicted to hemp secretly cul- tivate this plant, it does not flower at all, so ganja cannot be manufatured in our district. I am told that the leaves only are used as siddhi. I think there are special conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, etc., which are necessary for the cultivation of hemp for producing ganja. 16. In our district bhang used to be prepared by the people addicted to it in their houses. But this practice has been put down by the local authorities. I think bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. The hemp plant does not flower in our district; hence I think is the popular belief that the plant from the leaves of which siddhi is prepared is quite distinct from the plant from which ganja is produced. 18. All the three drugs deteriorate by keeping; and I am told they quite lose their effects in time. They keep good with ordinary care for two years at most. 19. Charas is used for smoking only. Ganja is generally used for smoking, but sometimes for medicinal purposes also. People prepare an oil with ganja and other things for the cure of itches. I have found this ointment to be very effective. Lepers use ganja under the notion that it helps the cure of their disease. People suffering from chro- nic diarrh471 restrain their passions and commune with God. But this is injurious to their system and often turns them into inveterate smokers. The use of ganja by young men on religious festivities often leads them to the formation of a habit. 33. The consumption of ganja, charas and siddhi is always looked with disfavour by the people. Excepting the sanyasis, nobody ever supports the custom of using these drugs. These narcotics are ever in disrepute. Ganja and charas undermine the intellect and make a man devoid of common sense and totally unfit for the world. People never trust a ganja or charas smoker. As soon as a man is known to have con- tracted a habit of smoking, he is put down for lost. His Lakshmi (or goddess of Fortune) is said to desert him, and people believe that he will be a ruined man before long. In a word, the con- sumption of these drugs by a man is always looked with horror. I know of no custom of worshipping the hempplant. 34. If sanyasis have to forego the consumption of ganja, they would regard it as a serious priva- tion; and so would inveterate smokers among householders. To others, it won't be any priva- tion at all. These remarks hold good in the cases of siddhi and charas also. Barring the sanyasis, the number of those who would suffer any serious privation to forego the consumption of these drugs is, I think, only 5 per cent. of the consumers. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and charas. Siddhi may be allowed to be used. In that case, ganja and charas won't be illicitly consumed. The prohibition of ganja and charas may be enforced by levying a heavy tax upon them. The prohibition won't occasion any serious discontent among the consumers; and the discontent would never amount to a political danger. Ganja and charas should not be prohibit- ed altogether by legislation. They should be heavily taxed; so that consumers would get only a very small quantity for what they can afford to expend on them. Necessity would compel them to use small quantities; and from small quanti- ties, they may give up the habit altogether. The prohibition in certain cases may be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 36. I am of opinion that certain people are born with a propensity for stimulants. Bad company only serves to give it an impetus. Those who would drink wine would not care for ganja, charas or siddhi. But those who have religious prejudices or fear the social ban, take to ganja, etc. These people would never drink wine, even though ganja be prohibited. Religious scepticism or unbelief has caused to a certain extent the sub- stitution of alcohol for these drugs. The lower classes of the people who are not Hindus take to wine, because a few pice spent on wine would cause them more intoxication and hilarity than ganja, charas, etc., and wine is not prohibited to them. These lower people are neither Hindus, Muhammadans nor Christians. They are the abo- rigines and often nondescripts. 37. The effects of charas-smoking are not different in any particular from those resulting from ganja-smoking. 38. Flat ganja is very strong and exciting. It makes its consumer very irascible and some- times violent. Round ganja is milder in its effects and soothing to smokers. This is generally preferred. Chur ganja is mild, dull and vapid, and does not command many votaries. 40. Ganja is used in a preparation of oil for the cure of itches. No school of native doctors prescribe its use to lepers; it is only the quacks who advise its use to them. Siddhi is used by kabirajes in a preparation of medicine for the cure of "ambalshul". Charas is never prescribed by anybody for any disease. 41. The moderate use of ganja is sometimes thought to be beneficial in its effects, (a) as a food digestive, (b) to give staying power under severe exposure, and (c) as a preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. But whether this is actually beneficial in its effects or not, I cannot say. 42. If the moderate use of ganja is not benefi- cial in its effects, I cannot say that it is harmless. A moderate use will lead to immoderate use; and it will serve to gradually sap the intellect of the consumers and make a wreck of it. Besides, it is not economical. Ganja-smokers want a little milk and ghi which entail on them an additional ex- pense, which is often too much for poor people. 43. Moderate consumers of ganja, siddhi and charas are generally inoffensive to their neighbours. But as long as the effect lasts, they are very ex- citable. Hot words, incoherent talk, and abuse would often result where one would think there was no sufficient provocation for them. Bed rol- ling eyes would often show that the owner of them is under the influence of any of these drugs; and so people would take care how to talk withhim. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of any of these drugs on the habitual consumer is stimulating. I can't say whether it is refreshing. Perhaps it is so. It does not produce intoxication, but a little excitement. As long as the effect lasts, the man does not feel hungry; but after that, he does. One of its after-effects is a little prostration. Want of subsequent gratification does produce a longing and uneasiness. The effect lasts for nearly an hour. 45. The habitual moderate use of all these drugs produces noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. It impairs the constitution of the con- sumer and makes him look haggard and lank. It injures the digestion and causes dysentery, bron- chitis and asthma. It impairs the moral sense and induces habits of immorality and debauchery. It also deadens the intellect and makes the man devoid of common sense and reason, if not insane. I am not aware of any instance in which the habitual moderate use of ganja, charas or siddhi has made the man insane. If want of common sense and sometimes of reason is insani- ty, then certainly does the habitual moderate use of ganja produce insanity. But this is an insani- ty of a very mild type which can be cured by giv- ing up the habit and again induced by taking to it. Habitual moderate consumers have lucid intervals, that is to say, when they are not under the influence of ganja, then they behave like ordinary men. 46. The habitual excessive use of all of these drugs ruins the man for ever. Physically, ment- ally and morally, he is lost for good. I have seen insane persons who are habitual excessive smokers of ganja, but had no means to judge whether keen mental anxiety or brain disease had anything to do with it. These men are always violent and do not know or cannot comprehend what they do. Hence, they behave like mad men. I should like to do away with both habitual moderate and habi-
472 tual excessive use of these drugs. I have no objec- tion to people's occasional moderate use of them. 47. I cannot say whether the habitual moder- ate use of any of these drugs is a hereditary habit or not. But this I can say for certain that it affects the children of the moderate consumer used in this way. It sets a bad example to child- ren who gradually learn to think that even a moderate use of these drugs is not so bad a thing after all. They are thus in danger of contracting a habit which may either be moderate or excessive. In this sense the habit may be called hereditary. 48. After what I have said about the habitual moderate use of these drugs, I think I need not discuss the question in regard to their habitual excessive use. 49. The moderate use of ganja is practised as an aphrodisiac. I am not aware of any instance in which the moderate use of hemp has produced impotency. 50. Excessive use of hemp produces impotency. 53. The excessive indulgence in ganja and sid- dhi incites to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. On the slightest provocation, an ex- cessive ganja-smoker becomes infuriated and does all sorts of mischief. Violence is used to members of the family for little or no fault. I know of no case in which excessive indulgence has led to tem- porary homicidal frenzy. 54. When wine is not available, these drugs are resorted to by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55. Yes. Complete stupefaction can be induced by ganja and siddhi without admixture, when the victim is not in the habit of using them. 56. When people want to be well intoxicated, they mix dhatura with siddhi. Oral evidence. I have been pleader for two years. I am 27 years of age. My experience is confined to the district of Bankura, and indeed really to the town of Bankura. The Indian Association sent me the questions to answer. The Indian Association is a political association in Bow Bazar, of which Babu Surendranath Banerji is Secretary. Several other pleaders in Bankura and I were selected, and the questions sent to us individually "with the com- pliments of the Indian Association." Question 20.473 220. Evidence of BABU ANANGO MOHAN NAHA, Kayasth, Judge's Court Pleader, Comilla, Tippera District. 19. I have known ganja only used for smoking. 20. In my district ganja is generally used by the lower classes of people, and that in places where there are bazars with a neighbourhood of low class men. Occasionally I have seen big zamindars addicted to ganja-smoking, but the middle class people are free from this habit. 24. In Comilla the up-contry Deswallis eat a small quantity of bhang. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase. For- merly in any place where there was no ganja- smoker we have now more than twenty or many more. 27. Not the cultivators, but the low labouring classes of the people. 30. Ganja is used or smoked in company and not in solitude. Ganja is used by male persons after they become majors. 31. The habit of ganja-smoking is easily formed. It is difficult to break off the habit when once formed. The ganja-smokers generally get into excessive habit of ganja-smoking. 32. In our district there is a quasi-social or religious ceremony called Trinath mela held by low class people, who smoke ganja very much on the occasion and sing all sorts of songs. The use of ganja is essential on this occasion, and this has led to the spread of the bad habit of ganja-smoking in this district. 33. Ganja or bhang consumers are generally hated by the respectable people, because their use is connected with something low or detestable. 34. It would be serious privation, no doubt, to many smokers. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. The prohibition may lead to the habit of drinking alcoholic stimulants. 40. Native physicians prescribe bhang or some preparation of it in acute disorders of the stomach of men. I have known of cases of this nature where bhang did excellent work in curing loose- ness of stomach. 41. Yes, the moderate use of these two drugs gives staying-power under severe exertion or expo- sure and also alleviates fatigue. In cholera epi- demics I have seen lower classes of people use bhang as a preventive and also as medicine with success. Small number of low class people use bhang in epidemic cholera. I mean the occasional use of the bhang drug. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is harmless. I have given my reasons in answer 41. 43. Yes, they are inoffensive. 44. Keeps him in the normal state of body and mind. The use is refreshing to the habitual con- sumers. It creates appetite. Its effects last nearly 21/2 hours. The want of the use of these drugs by the habitual consumers puts them to great uneasiness. 45. I have known of very strong men as well as men of weak intellect getting insane on account of the excessive use of ganja. Sometimes temporary insanity is produced. In East Bengal many of the insane persons become so on account of the use of too much ganja, which affects the brain injuriously. 47. In most cases I have seen the sons of the fathers addicted to ganja-smoking also smokeganja. 51. Yes; almost all the bad characters in any locality are habitual consumers of these drugs. Ganja-smokers are generally thieves. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should be, in no way, con- trolled. 68. There are shops or houses in the district where these drugs or their preparations may be consumed on the premises. This is objectionable for this reason that it tends to make the consu- mers more depraved than ever and that the shop- keepers make best of their position at the expense of these consumers. 69. No, never. Only the report of an excise officer is required to put up a shop in any new place. Sometimes these shops are very objection- able in some places. Public opinion or gentle- men of position and respectability should be asked before opening a new shop. 221. Evidence of BABU KAILAS CHANDRA DUTTA, Baidya, Vakil, Judge's Court, Comilla, Tippera District. 1. As a resident of Tippera District, I had occa- sion to see people smoke ganja, and hear from others. My knowledge of this subject is very limited. 2. In Tippera it is ordinarily known as ganja. To my knowledge, charas is not used here. 3. Rajshahi. 4. Here it is known only as ganja. 5. Don't know. 6. Don't know. 7 To my knowledge, there is no cultivation of ganja in this district. Bhang plants are here and there to be found. But as a rule they are not cultivated here. 14. No,474 21. Flat and round ganja is ordinarily used. 23. To my knowledge, bhang is not used for smoking. 24. A very small proportion use bhang; may be one in a thousand. 25. Yes, the use of ganja is on the increase. There is a greater quantity consumed every year now than it was five or ten years back. 26. About475 is known in this part of the province, and is generally used. 19. These are used only for smoking at least. I do not know of any other use. 20. Generally the lower classes of people take to the habit of smoking ganja. Charas is very rarely used in these districts. It will not, in my opinion, be very wide of the truth to say that almost the major portion of the rural population of this district, forming especially the lower strata of society, is addicted more or less to the habit of smoking ganja. 21. Vide answer No. 2. 23. Bhang is generally used for drinking pur- poses by people, and largely used by kabirajes (native physicians) for medicinal purposes. It is sometimes, but on very rare occasions, used for smoking also by confirmed ganja smokers, only when, on account of poverty or some other causes, they are unable to obtain the necessary supply of the stronger narcotic, viz., the ganja. 24. The use of bhang is not restricted to any particular section of the community, but the practice of taking it in the shape of confections or sweetmeats prepared with a little admixture of sugar, milk, and other edibles as well as in the form of liquid sherbets, obtains even among the higher orders of society. During the national festivals of Sarasvati Puja, which takes place some time in the month of January, the people consider it to be their religious duty to take bhang in some shape or other. 25. I think the use of these articles is gra- dually on the decrease. The reason, as I suppose, being that along with the spread of English edu- cation the better or more enlightened classes of people are beginning to realize their pernicious effects. Hence their consumption is rarely, if ever, encouraged by the polite society, although the tendency has been to introduce spirituous liquors in their stead to a large extent. The spread of mass education has also had its desired effect inasmuch as it has created a strong antipathy among the lower classes against the use of thesedrugs. 26. It is impossible to give anything like an accurate information on the subject without the aid of statistics. But roundly speaking, it may be safely asserted that among the classes of people who are in the habit of smoking ganja, those who habitually take it excessively form but a small minority. This, of course, has reference to the ordinary state of things in the society. But it is not unusual to see the peaceful villagers, old and young, including even those who have not as yet been initiated in the habit of smoking, gathered together on special occasions in a common centre with the avowed object of worshipping the Tri- nath, another name of Mahadeb (the presiding deity of all sorts of narcotics), but with the clear intention of indulging themselves in a sort of nocturnal revelry to give sauce as it were to their dull and monotonous life. It is on such occasions that there is generally a tendency to excess on the part of those who are already habitual smokers, as well as to a gradual and moderate use by those who have not as yet imbibedthe habit. The excessive use of both ganja and siddhi is to be found among certain religious sects and men- dicants popularly known as sanyasis. But they are so many itinerant vagabonds not coming with- in the pale of any society. 27. As already adverted to above most of these men come from the lower orders of society form- ing the bulk of the artizan and the labouring classes who depend chiefly on manual labour for their subsistence; struggle for life being very hard with them they resort to ganja at first as occasion- al indulgences only to rid themselves of the fatigue to which they are constantly subject in earning their bread. But in course of time when the habit grows it becomes difficult to shake it off, and then they have to take it as sheer necessity. 28. (a) The average daily cost entailed by a habitual moderate consumer of ganja is very small;one pice a day is quite sufficient in the ordinary cases. (b) As to the classes of people, who are habi- tual excessive consumers, some have been known to consume no less a quantity than half a chittack of ganja per diem. This would fix the average daily cost at 8 to 10 annas per head. 29. (a) Ordinarily they mix dried leaves of tobacco with ganja, with no other object but to reduce the strength of the drug. But sometimes they take without mixing it with any other ingre- dients. Bhang is generally mixed with milk, sugar and water, and made into a sherbet. But occasionally sweetmeats are prepared with it by mixing with sugar, milk, cocoanut and some spices, with the object of making the thing palatable. Dhatura is not in common use in this part of the province. It is very rarely used for smoking by persons suffering from asthma, phthisis, and other pulmonary affections with wonderful medi- cinal effect. But when so taken it is never mixed with any other ingredient. No such pre- paration as bhang massala is sold in any part of this district. 30. As a rule the consumption of both ganja and bhang is practised in solitude. The use of both these drugs is mainly confined to the male sex, but not to any particular time of life. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming ganja and bhang is acquired almost as easily as in the case of intoxi- cating liquors. When once the habit is formed, it is difficult, nay impossible, to break it off as experience shows. Neither of these drugs has any tendency, so far as is known, to drive the con- sumers into excess. 32. The religious ceremony of the Sarasvati Puja, occurring annually in the month of Janu- ary, and the festivals of Trinath, already alluded to, have something to do with the consumption of these drugs. The Sarasvati Puja is a well known Hindu festival celebrated throughout the province of Bengal. It is the goddess of learning that is worshipped on such occasions, and the vota- ries at least in some parts of East Bengal consider it to be a religious duty to take bhang in some shape or other in this occasion in moderate quan- tity. The worship of Trinath is of very recent origin; but nevertheless the custom has spread itself very widely into the country. The festival has no particular time fixed for it. It may be celebrated at any day and any hour of the nights at the option of the devotees. Trinath is said to be but another name of Mahadeva, one of the gods of the Hindu Trio. He is said to be the presiding deity of all sorts of narcotics from his supposed liking, according to Hindu legends, for bhang, dhatura 3 R 2
476 and ganja. No particular form or ceremony need be observed on such occasions, except that a number of persons, generally those who are in the habit of smoking ganja, meet together in a certain place in the village, get a quantity of ganja, the chief article of presentation to the god, together with some sweetmeats and betel leaves and betel nuts, offer them to the deity and then help themselves to these. The ceremony is not unusually attended with songs. But the ganja forms the essential element in this festival. Every one present on such occasions is bound to smoke. To decline is considered sacrilege. It is on these assemblies that many persons imbibe the habit. The devotees in their zeal often run into excess, while the in- nocent people attending such meetings run the risk of being converted into the faith and of gradually forming the habit. 33. Any one addicted to the use of ganja is looked down upon as morally degraded, although there seems to be no public opinion against the practice in either a social or religious point of view. But such is not the case with regard to the use of bhang, which is a comparatively innocuous drug. 34. To the labouring classes of people, which form the bulk of the ganja-smoking population in these districts, it would be a serious privation to prohibit its use. 35. As regards ganja, though it may be possible by legislative enactment or raising the taxation to control its use to a certain extent, yet it would not be feasible to prohibit its consumption alto- gether for in that case the inevitable result will be the illicit consumption. The prohibition no doubt will be attended with serious discontent among the consumers, but is not likely to create any political danger. If ganja is prohibited, the consumers will naturally resort to dhatura or some such narcotic drug, but not to alcoholic stimulants, inasmuch as the latter would be more costly luxury. 36. Among the higher classes of people al- cohol has to a large extent taken the place of ganja. This is due to the introduction of Western civilization in our society as well as to the outstill system, which has placed liquor within easy reach of every body. That the use of alcohol is really on the increase is evidenced by the fact that liquor shops are now a days to be seen scattered broad- cast over the country not excepting even the re- mote and outlying mufassal stations. 40. Bhang is prescribed sometimes by native physicians for its medicinal qualities, but it is not known to be used in the treatment of cattle- disease. 41. (a) Moderate use of bhang is beneficial in its effects in cases of disorder of the digestive functions; (b) while ganja used in a moderate quantity, gives considerable relief to those who are fatigued and exhausted under severe bodily exertions. For this property of the ganja the labouring classes of people consider it to be one of the necessaries of their life. 42. Experience shows that those who are in the habit of moderately using either of these drugs do not suffer bodily or mentally to any appreciable extent. It is the excess only that brings on bodily ailments as well as mental deterioration. 43. Yes. 44. Its immediate effect is refreshing. It does not produce intoxication. Instead of allaying hunger it rather sharpens appetite. The effect lasts for a short time, and the after-effect is a slight mental depression. The want of subse- quent gratification produces some uneasiness. 45. A very moderate use of these drugs is not known to produce any of these effects. 46. But the excessive habitual use of ganja affects both the mind and the body injuriously. It often brings on insanity, and sometimes causes death by producing dangerous maladies, such as dysentery, asthma and others. 47. It is neither hereditary habit, nor seems to affect in any way the children of the consumer. 51. Necessarily, the moderate use of ganja or bhang has no connection with crime in general, or with crime of any special character. 52. But when excessively used, it sometimes in- cites people to acts of violence. 53. Yes; in some cases. 54. Not often. 55. When administered in large doses it may induce complete stupefaction, especially in those who are unaccustomed to its use even without admixture. 56. It becomes much stronger in its effects when mixed with dhatura. This is the drug with which ganja is rarely, if ever, mixed by people. The effect of taking such a mixture (a) even moderately is much more pernicious than that produced by it when taken singly. But the use of it in a large dose is attended with dangerous consequences. It acts instantaneously in the brain, and produces temporary insanity. Ganja is generally mixed with tobacco for smoking. When thus mixed it becomes milder in its effects. 67. The incidence of taxation falls rather lightly on the consumers. There is no reason why ganja should not be as highly taxed as the alcohol. An increase in the present amount of taxation may not be unwelcome, as it would augment the Government revenue and at the same time deter many people from ruining themselves by excessive use. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted by the authorities, while granting license for open- ing a ganja shop in any locality, nor is it so much necessary, as the existence of such a shop does not in any way interfere with the public tranquillity. 223. Evidence of BABU TARA NATH CHUCKERBUTTY, Brahmin, Government Pleader, Faridpur. 1. In course of my dealings with the inhabitants of the district of Faridpur, I have gathered the information. 2. I think these definitions may be accepted as correct. The names in use in this district are siddhi or bhang, charas and ganja. 3. The hemp plants from which ganja is pro- duced do not grow spontaneously in this district, but bhang plant grows spontaneously. 4. It is known by name bhang plant; it is the male hemp plant. 6. Wild bhang plant grows dense.
477 7. There is no cultivation of hemp plant in this district. 14. The products (a), (b), (c) are not produced in this district. 18. These three drugs deteriorate by keeping and lose their effects in time. Ordinarily they do not lose their effects within two years. 19. Charas and ganja are used, as far as I know, for smoking only. 20. Generally low class people use ganja. Charas seldom used by the people of this district. 21. Flat ganja is generally preferred here. 23. Bhang not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is very scarcely used for eating, but generally for drinking by a few of the upper class people. 25. I think decreasing, but unable to state any reason. 27. Ganja is generally used by the labouring classes, and also by those who frequent houses of ill fame. Bhang is generally used by people hav- ing bowel complaints. Charas is not in use here. 28. Habitual moderate consumers use about 9 pies worth ganja per diem, and the habitual exces- sive consumers use about 11/2 annas worth ganja. Three pies worth of bhang is used by excessive consumer. 29. Tobacco leaves are ordinarily mixed with ganja. Salt, pepper and water are ordinarily mixed with bhang. Sugar is now and then used. Dha- tura is not used. Admixtures are for making it more palatable. 30. Ganja is generally smoked in company by the male sex. Prostitutes now and then use it. Bhang in solitude only, generally for medicinal purposes by the male sex. Children never use these drugs, excepting bhang for illness; and that also scarcely. 31. Habit is not easily formed; can be easily left off. There is no tendency to develop into excess. 33. The public opinion is against the con- sumers. 34. No serious privation to forego their use. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit their use. It would be difficult to consume them illicitly. The prohibition can be enforced by stopping licenses and importation. Will not cause serious discon- tent. No political danger will follow. Prohibi- tion would not be followed by a recourse to (a) or (b) 36. No. 38. Round ganja not in use here. There is no difference between the other two. 40. Bhang is used by native kabirajes. 42. Moderate use harmless. 43. Yes. 47. These drugs do not produce any hereditary effect. 51. Bad characters use ganja. 53. I know of two or three cases of homicide committed by persons under ganja intoxication during my experience of last twenty years. 62. Wild bhang produced in this district are not used by the bhang consumers, as their quality is not good. 63. I have no objection. I think bhang should be excluded from the list of exciseable articles, as it is generally used in this district for illness only. 64. No, excepting bhang. 65. I think the taxation is good, or else the number of consumers would increase. 66. I think different rates unnecessary. 67. I have no objection to the taxation of ganja and charas, but I think bhang should be excluded. 68. There are no such shops in this district. 224. Evidence of BABU AMVIKA CHARAN MAZUMDAR,* Vaidya, Pleader and Zamindar, Faridpur. 1. As Chairman of the Faridpur Municipality for nearly six years, I have had occasionally to visit ganja shops within the municipal limits, and as a landlord I have frequently come in contact with my tenants belonging to the Chandal class, which supplies the bulk of ganja-smokers in the district. During my fifteen years' practice at the bar, I have besides dealt with some cases in which ganja-smokers were concerned. 2. These definitions may be generally accepted as correct. Siddhi or bhang, charas and ganja are the three narcotic articles obtained from the hemp plant. Siddhi consists of the dry leaves of the male hemp plant. The resin which exudes from the flower and leaves of the female hemp plant is charas. Ganja consists of the dried flowers or flowering tops of the female hemp plant. In this district charas is almost unknown. The flat, the round and the chur ganjas are respectively called chapti, gol and chur ganja. The dry leaves of the wild hemp plant are generally known as bhang. 3. It has been found on enquiry that the hemp plant grows spontaneously in the Dacca and the Rajshahi Divisions, as well as in some parts of the Presidency Division. I have seen it growing in the Backergunge and Faridpur districts. My information is that it grows abundantly in Raj-shahi. 4. Of the hemp plants those that are male, are here called bhang or siddhi, and those that are female are called ganja plants. The two plants are generally distinguished by the following characteristics: 478 dars. Charas, I understand, is imported from the North-West Provinces, and from Nepal. I am not aware of any place where hemp is cultivated for its fibre or seeds. Seeds are however, I know, preserved by some people, and particularly by native physicians, who generally obtain them from licensed shopkeepers of ganja for medicinal purposes. 8. I am unable to say. 9. All that I know of the method of such culti- vation is that the ground is carefully prepared before the commencement of the winter season. The seeds are in the meantime sown in another place where they are allowed to grow. The seedlings are then transplanted to the ground already prepared, somewhat in the same way as boro paddy plants are grown. When the plants grow to a certain height, the male plants are destroyed. 10. Don't know. 11. I am not aware that this is done. 12. I have no reason to suppose this, as I am not aware of the existence of such a practice anywhere. 13. I am unable to answer. 14. As far as I know, ganja is prepared in the Rajshahi Division. I am not aware that bhang is specially prepared anywhere. I do not know anything of charas. 15. The dry leaves of both the wild and the cultivated male hemp are used as bhang, both for eating and drinking, but not for smok- ing. The methods of such preparations are very easy. When the plants become fully grown up they are cut down and dried in the rays of the sun. Then the leaves are gathered and used as bhang. Ganja is smoked, but neither eaten nor drunk. 16. Yes, bhang is generally prepared by people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. But ganja and charas, I am told, cannot be prepared from the wild hemp. 17. Can't say. 18. Yes; they deteriorate by keeping. In time they may entirely lose their properties; but it would require a long time to do so. For about two years they remain good with ordinary care. Exposures in open air and water are the general causes of such deterioration. 19. They are also used, though very rarely, for medicinal purposes, the particulars of which are known only to country physicians and quacks. 20. Low caste people, such as Chandals, fisher- men, washermen, Chamars, Dhangers, and barbers largely smoke ganja. Muhammadans scarcely use it. Among male adults of these lower classes of people, as mentioned above, about 4 to 5 per cent. smoke ganja. 21. Flat ganja is generally preferred for smok- ing in this district. 22. I do not know. 23. Bhang is sometimes used for smoking by habitual ganja-smokers, in case ganja is not available. 24. Bhang is used both by the higher and the lower classes of people. The number of habitual drinkers of bhang is comparatively small in this district, and they generally belong to the higher classes. 25. The use of ganja seems to be on the in- crease as far as the Faridpur District is con- cerned. It might be apparently supposed that this increase is due to the high price of liquor; but I am not inclined to that view, as the classes of people who now form the bulk of ganja- smokers are not evidently those which previously consumed spirituous liquors in any appreciable quantity. 26. Of ganja479 the ganja thus offered to the deity. The consump- tion of ganja in this connection is often very excessive, and numbers of people who first join this ceremony as curious spectators are converted into hard ganja-smokers. 33. The consumption of ganja is generally re- garded as a disreputable and vulgar practice. It is commonly associated with lower classes of people; and the coarseness of the intoxicant, coupled with the depravity which follows its long use and the mental debility arising therefrom, may be taken as the basis of the aversion with which ganja-smokers are generally regarded by the public. I know of no such worship. 34. It would certainly be a privation for some time to the consumers to forego the consumption of the drugs they use. For obvious reasons the privation would be very great, if not altogether serious, in the case of habitual smokers of each class, the precise number of which it is rather difficult to estimate. 35. In places where ganja and charas are not locally produced it might be practicable to prohibit these drugs; but it would be difficult to prohibit bhang, which is extensively produced throughout the country. Such prohibition would, no doubt, create discontent among consumers; but such dis- content could hardly amount to a political danger. Prohibition might, however, naturally enough, be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants, as all intoxicants are found to be more or less in- terchangeable. 36. It is sometimes observed that when people are compelled under pressure to abandon the use of any of these drugs, they avail themselves of the earliest opportunity to take alcohol as a sub- stitute. It is the craving of their artificial system, brought on by long use of these narcotics, that lead them always to search for some stimu- lant. Fancy also leads not a few to court such changes. 37. I have already said that I know nothing about charas; and so I cannot say. 38. None whatever, so long as the exact pro- portion of the different preparations are maintain- ed. 39. It is for medical experts to express any opinion on this. The visible effects are, however, apparently almost the same. 40. Yes; they are so prescribed, though very rarely, by regular physicians. Quacks, however, prescribe them largely in some cases. I am not aware that they are used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. To describe ganja as a food would be a clear fiction. It rather impairs the digestive organs. The fact that ganja-smokers are seen to undergo long fatigue, which, under ordinary circumstances, it would be impossible to sustain, is rather due to the dullness of their appetite and the artificial excitement of their nervous system. In the same way madmen often work very hard, yet nobody would suggest that insanity is a motive power, either mental or physical, of human action. The temporary excitement is rather sedative in its after consequences, and in the long run the consumers of this violent drug succumb much earlier than their sober neighbours. Their end is generally very painful and piteous. Bhang, though not a food, when used moderately, is found to be efficacious in chronic diarrh480 upon the sale. The sale prices of different species should also be fixed. By this method the habitual excessive consumption would be greatly minimis- ed without appreciable loss in revenue. 62. I consider it neither feasible nor necessary to control the cultivation of hemp for the produc- tion of bhang. 63. Already answered. 64. I have no objections to the regulations as working under the present system. But I do think that charas, not being of such general use as ganja and bhang, ought not to be exported out- side its native districts. 65. Yes; I think it is. In this connection I would take the liberty to add that the proposal made in certain quarters for taxing tobacco is unseasonable and improper in the extreme. Such a taxation would prove highly oppressive to the people. Besides, it would be unjust to punish a large number of innocent persons for the vicious habits of a few men. 66. The rates of taxation should vary in pro- portion to the difference in strength between these different kinds of the drug. 67. I cannot say that I have any. 68. There are in this district no licensed dens, as they are called, though I have reasons to sus- pect that consumptions are generally allowed on the premises of the licensed vendors. The licensed houses, wherever they may exist, should be closed, and the practice to which I allude should be vigi- lantly watched and vigorously put down. 69. It is to be deeply deplored that there is no local option in the opening of these shops. They are generally opened upon application of profes- sional men and police report, which absolutely means nothing. I am strongly of opinion that intelligent local public opinion should always be considered in these matters. 70. I don't know. 225. Evidence of BABU BHUVAN MOHUN SANYAL, Brahmin, Government Pleader, Purnea. 1. I have framed my answers from my own experience of what I have seen and from informa- tion obtained by inquiries especially made for the purpose. 2. I think the definitions quoted may be accept- ed for Bengal. Dry leaves of hemp plant is ordinarily known in this district as bhang. The word siddhi is applied to the plant only by the Ben- galis, who form a very small portion of the people of the district. It is not generally known by the names of subji or patti here. The name charas is applied to the preparation described here as such. Flat ganja and broken ganja are gene- rally used by the people of the district. Flat ganja is ordinarily called here thal ganja; it is also known by its vernacular equivalent chipta ganja; when the twigs of the same are small, it is called pungri; round or chur ganja is locally known as such. 3. The plant grows spontaneously in several districts of Bengal. I have seen it to grow in the districts of Jessore, Nadia and Purnea. In Purnea it is abundant. 4. The plant that grows spontaneously in this district is generally known as bhang plant and sometimes as siddhi plant. Both the names refer to the same plant. But in some districts of Lower Bengal I have heard people making a dis- tinction between the two: they would apply the word siddhi to a plant the leaves of which are milder in effect than those of the plant known there as bhang. 5. I have not made a special study of the matter, but as it grows wild abundantly in this district, especially in the Sudder sub-division, where the soil is generally light and sandy and the climate damp and malarious, I would consider such soil and climate to be suitable to its growth. 6. Its growth is rather dense than scattered. 7. There is no cultivation of the plant in this district for any of the purposes mentioned or for any purposes whatever. The plant is cultivated in the district of Rajshahi and Bogra under Gov- ernment supervision. 8 to 11. I would not undertake to answer the questions. 12. My answer to the first question is "no." I am unable to answer the last question. 13. Yes, it is restricted to the districts of Rajshahi and Bogra, I believe. I do not think there is any part of Bengal which I know, where the cultivation of the plant would be impossible, 14. Ganja and charas are not prepared in this district. Some people preserve dried leaves of the plant growing wild and use the same as bhang; they are not ordinarily sold in the district. I have, however, heard that bhang is sometimes taken to the neighbouring district of Bhagalpur, but not to a great extent. 15. Bhang leaves from mature plants growing wild are dried up in the sun and preserved for use. It is generally used as a drink. The dried leaves are pounded in a mortar with a pestle or rod along with a few black-peppers (sometimes other spices, sugar, and milk are also added) and mixed in water. The whole is made into a thin drink. Some up-country people as well as a few natives of Bengal sometimes eat a kind of sweet- meat (called majum) in which bhang is used in some form or other. Bhang is sometimes pre- scribed by kabirajes (native physicians) as medicine for diarrh481 medicinal purposes. It is said that they gene- rally deteriorate by being exposed to air. To preserve them, they should be kept in a dry and air-tight place. 19. Ganja is principally used for smoking, but I have seen some medical men prescribing a pre- paration of it as medicine for dysentery. It has been so used in a case occurring in my family. It is used by doctors in the form of tincture or extract. Ganja pounded and mixed with oil is sometimes used as an external application for skin diseases. I have heard that it is sometimes used by some people as medicine for diarrhoea; it is then used mixed with opium. I know nothing about charas. 20. In this district ganja is largely used by the lower classes of the people, such as coolies, beldars, palki-bearers, guries (fishermen), and the like, as well as by sanyasis and fakirs. The number of Hindu consumers is much larger than that of the Muhammadan. It is used more extensively in villages than in towns, the people in towns pre- ferring alcohol and opium. The use of the drug is nearly confined to males; very few females use it. The number of the female consumers would not be, in my opinion, more than one per cent. It is very difficult for me to give the proportion of the people who use the same. 21. Chur and flat are prepared for smoking. 22. I know nothing about it; it is scarcely used in this district. 23. I have heard that it is so used, but I have never seen it so used. 24. Ordinarily up-country people, Hindus of superior castes, such as Brahmins, Chetris, etc., use it as a drink. Town people use it more than villagers. The number of consumers is very small. I am unable to give the proportion of the con- sumers. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is not on the increase; it is rather on the decrease. I would attribute the decrease of the use of ganja, first, to the gradual increase of its price (the present price is considered almost prohibitive by consumers, who are generally poor people); second, to the present system of outstills prevail- ing in the district, which offers an inducement to people to get spirits at a very low price. As to the decrease of the use of bhang, I would attribute it to a fear entertained by the people of being prosecuted for preparing it from wild plants of hemp growing in the district. It may also be attributed to the outstill system. 26. I am sorry I am unable to answer these questions satisfactorily. 27. Ganja.482 consumers is attributable principally to the disre- putable life and bad character of the majority of the habitual and excessive consumers. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion by any class of people. 34. In my opinion it would be a serious priva- tion to habitual consumers of ganja, both mod- erate and excessive, to forego the consumption of the drug. In case of moderate consumers of ganja of the lower and labouring classes, the use of the drug enables them to undertake difficult and laborious works without feeling much fatigue. In case of the excessive consumers of the drug, a giving up of the habit may produce serious diseases. I am sorry I am unable to give the probable numbers of each class; the number would, how- ever, be very small. 35. Under the present state of affairs, I would not consider it feasible to prohibit the use of the drugs. A prohibition may lead the consumers to consume it illicitly. Besides, it is likely to drive them to the use of more harmful intoxicants, such as alcohol and dhatura. Ganja is certainly bad, but alcohol is worse. I doubt not a prohibition of the use of the drugs would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, though I am not prepared to go to the extent of saying that the discontent may amount to a political danger. 36. There is reason for thinking that alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for both ganja and bhang. I would attribute this change to the following causes:483 an increase of duty on alcohol, which is un- doubtedly greater of the two evils. The change may act beneficially in the interests of morality. 66. In my opinion it is necessary that there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja. Chur or broken ganja should fetch highest duty as it contains no twigs. 67 and 68. No. 69. The police is asked to report before a shop is opened in any locality. I think local opinion should be considered on the subject. 70. Answer is "no" to the first and last questions. Duty is, I believe, really paid in respect to ganja used in this district. 226. Evidence of BABU AMRITALAL RAHA, Kayasth, Pleader, Judge's Court and Talukdar, Khulna. 1. I have taken some interest in this matter, and hence by observation and by collecting in- formation, I have come to know the matters in regard to which my answers have been framed. 2. Most of these definitions may be accepted for my province. 3. My information is that bhang grows spon- taneously in all the districts of Lower Bengal. I am told that in some districts ganja grows spon- taneously. 4. Bhang and siddhi are known to be the same thing. They refer exactly to the same thing, the difference being that bhang, when dried up, is generally called sidhhi, but bhang in its undried state is never called sidhhi in this part of the pro- vince. 5. Wild hemp generally grows on low lands. 6. The growth of wild hemp is generally dense and sometimes scattered. 7. As far as I know, there is no cultivation of hemp plant in this part of the province. 10. No, they do not. They are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 13. (a) No. The cultivation is not common to all districts. (b) I do not think so. (c) I do not think so, as I have seen wild ganja plants grow in some places in my dis- trict. 16. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. 17. By low class people. 18. Yes, it does. No; it does not quite lose its effects. With ordinary care, it keeps good for six months and sometimes for one year. Damp is certainly one of the causes, but I do not know of any other cause. One ganja-smoker has told me that exposure to air deteriorates the narcotic effect of ganja. I think that if it be kept air-tight de- terioration may be prevented. 19. Ganja is generally used for smoking pur- poses, but it is sometimes used for medicinal pur- poses. 20. Low class people smoke ganja. It is rarely used by high class people. The proportion is in my estimation two per cent. Charas is smoked by people of both the classes. The proportion, ac- cording to my information, is very small, say one to a thousand. There is no particular locality, but, on careful observation, I have found that the low class people of the up-country are more addicted to ganja-smoking than that of the lower pro- vince of Bengal. 21. Both. 23. Bhang is sometimes used for smoking by ganja-smokers, when they have not ganja at their disposal. I am told that in rare cases people out of curiosity use bhang for smoking. This is done by people of low class generally. 24. Some females of up-country eat bhang. Both high and low class people drink bhang. It is not confined to any particular locality. The proportion may be two per cent. 25. To the best of my information the use of ganja and bhang is on the increase. The only reason for this that I have been able to ascertain, is the abolition of the out-still system. This sys- tem created a good number of drunkards almost in all the villages, as the country liquor was sold at a very low price. Now that the liquor is no longer available at low price, these people have mostly resorted to the use of ganja and bhang. 27. Labouring classes are habitual moderate consumers of ganja. Vagabonds and low-lived people are habitual excessive consumers. People of high class are occasional excessive consumers. 28. (a) One anna per diem (ganja-smokers). (b) Four annas per diem ( do. ). 31. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. 32. In some part of this province bhang is taken or rather drunk by people of all classes in small doses on the Dasera day, i.e., the day on which the Durga Puja ceremony comes to a close. This use of bhang is not essential. It is generally taken in such small dose that it can never lead to the formation of the habit. It is not otherwise injurious. 33. Bhang drinking is scarcely taken notice of, but the consumption of ganja and charas is generally regarded with hatred. The public opinion (social) is everywhere strong against it. The sentiment may be attributed to the fact that the ganja and charas smokers are always low-lived, have scarcely any sense of honour or of duty, are victims of many filthy diseases and generally meet with early death. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant on certain occasions by certain sects of the people. 34. To those who drink bhang for medicina purposes, I think it would be a serious privation to forego the consumption of the drug. To gan- ja and charas smokers it would be a privation, no doubt, for some time. The bhang-drinkers are likely to suffer in health and spirits if they are to forego its consumption. The ganja and charas smokers will feel some difficulty for a number of days, but afterwards they would be gainers in health, so the foregoing of its use will be of no privation to them. 35. I do not think it feasible to prohibit the use of bhang, as it is sometimes used or drunk for 3 S 2
484 medicinal purposes, but I think the use of ganja and charas can be feasibly prohibited. It may be consumed illicitly. Certainly the prohibi- tion will occasion serious discontent among the consumers. Such discontent can never amount to a political danger. I think where the means will allow, prohibition may be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. But as the people who smoke ganja and charas are generally poor, there is not much reason to apprehend this. 36. No. 37. Ganja-smoking has earlier effect than charas- smoking. 38. Yes. 40. Kabirajes prescribe bhang for certain dis- eases. Bhang is used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) Bhang is beneficial in its effects as a food accessory or digestive. (b) To habitual consumers ganja may alleviate fatigue. (c) It is never used as a febrifuge or preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. I refer to moderate occasional use in (a), and moderate habitual use in (b). 42. I do not think so. Use of any of these drugs is likely to tell on the health of its con- sumers. 43. Yes. 44. (a) The effect is imperceptible. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) No. (e) Yes, to habitual consumers. (f) From three to six hours. (g) Yes, the consumer feels languid and uneasy. (h) Yes, it does. 45. (a) Habitual moderate use of ganja and charas produces noxious effects, physical and mental. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Yes. (e) It induces laziness and habits of immorality to a certain extent. (f) It deadens the intellect. Moderate use of ganja scarcely culminates in insanity, temporary or permanent. 46. Habitual excessive use of ganja and charas generally produces insanity, either temporary or permanent. 47. No. 48. The children of the habitual excessive users of ganja and charas are affected by the habits of their parents. 49. Ganja and charas are used by prostitutes. The moderate use of hemp does not tend to pro- duce impotence. 50. The excessive use of hemp tends to produce impotence. 51. No. 52 and 53. Yes. 54. Not always, but sometimes. 55. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 62. No; the cultivation should not be con- trolled. It will not be feasible. 68. In my province there are shops for the sale of these drugs. They may be consumed on the premises. The premises of these shops should never be allowed for consumption of these drugs. 69. The wishes of the people are never consulted or considered in any way before a shop is opened in any locality. Certainly in a matter like this, the local public opinion should always be taken and considered. 227. Evidence of BABU PARES NATH CHATTERJEE, Brahmin, Pleader, Satkhira, Khulna District. 2. Yes, in the Satkhira Sub-division the three narcotic articles obtained from hemp are known as sidhi, charas and ganja. 20. Fishermen (Jelias, Tiors, Bagdis, etc.), Kahars, Mehtars, Domes, Bunas (coolies), san- yasis and fakirs (Hindu and Muhammadan friars) are ganja-smokers. Nearly 60 per cent. of the above smoke ganja, but those who live near a zilla or sub-division, i.e., in a place where ganja is easily available, are proportionately greater smokers than those who live in the interior. 21. In this part of the country the round ganja is preferred. 23. Bhang is sometimes used for smoking when ganja is not available. 24. Nearly 90 per cent. people of the North- Western Provinces drink bhang, but in Bengal only two per cent. drink it. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the increase. 28. The average cost of ganja-smokers is from one anna to two annas per diem. The average cost of bhang-drinkers is from two pice to four pice per diem. 29. Raw tobacco is generally mixed with ganja. Dhatura is never used. 30. Women, except prostitutes, and children never use to take any of these drugs. 31. The habit is not easily formed, but when it is once formed it is very difficult to break it off. 32. In the Hindu community bhang is drunk on the bijaya of the goddess Durga, i.e., on the day when the idol has been thrown into water. It is a social custom. 40. Yes; bhang is prescribed by native kabirajes for many diseases. They also use it to prepare many medicines. 43. Yes; they are inoffensive. 51. Nearly all bad characters are habitual moderate consumers. Robbers, dacoits, etc., before they commit any crime, prepare themselves by smoking ganja. 54. Yes; criminals by taking one of these drugs fortify themselves before they commit any crime. 69. No. Government ought to consult the opinion of the people before a shop is opened in any place. Generally a petition is sent to the Excise Collector, and a shop is opened.
485 228. Evidence of BABU JADUBANS SSHAI, Pleader and Vice-Chairman, Arrah Municipality. 1. The replies are based on personal experience and information, as well as on facts derived from enquiries from consumers, vendors, and other people likely to know about the subject. 2. The definitions, as given by Dr. Prain, may be accepted for Behar. The following are the Hindi names popularly used in the province by commoners:486 34. It would be a privation to suddenly forego the consumption to all consumers, specially to sadhus who are supposed to derive material help in their jog-sadhan and in concentration of mind. 35. It is quite possible to prohibit the use of charas, specially in Behar, inasmuch as it is used by a small number of people, and that in towns alone, and very rarely indulged in by the respectable class. There is no likelihood, in the case of charas, of its being illicitly used as it is not a local preparation and has only to be imported; and if its use is prohibited, there will be little or no danger of smuggling. The case is quite differ- ent with ganja and bhang. The consumers are numerous and they are used invariably and un- exceptionally by sadhus, who are notoriously held in high reverence by the people generally. The prohibition may come to be regarded as interference with their religious liberties, and a colourable interpretation might be put, which might cause political danger. The illicit use of bhang can never be prevented. It grows wild in every district of Behar, and an effort to practically enforce the prohibition might give those, to whom the duty is entrusted, a handle for oppression. Most pro- bably the prohibition will be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants and other drugs. It may not therefore be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and bhang, and it cannot but cause dis- content if not political danger. 36 and 37. I believe so, as the use of alcoholic stimulants is gaining ground as the trammels of superstitions and prejudice are being shaken off under the influence of English education, and although at present wine is used illicitly by those to whom the use is prohibited by religion, social restraints are being gradually removed. 38. No. 39. Ganja or charas never eaten or drunk. 40. Old bhang is often used by hakims and vaids to cure stomach diseases; it is also administered to cattle and horses to ward off the effects of cold. 41. Moderate use gives a staying-power under exertion and wards off the effects of exposure. The use of these drugs is sometimes considered as a febrifuge in malarious or unhealthy districts, but I am not sure how far this belief is grounded on actual facts. 42. Moderate use of bhang has not been known to do much harm, but ganja and charas are very mischievous, specially in case of weak-brained men. 43. No, not by itself. 44. Refreshing, produces intoxication, creates appetite. The after-effects are yawning, joint-ach- ing, lethargy. Want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 45. (b) Does impair the constitution, if not accompanied by substantial food. (c) Causes loss of appetite in the long run. (d) Ganja has been known to cause bronchitis and asthma. (f) Ganja hardens the intellect and produces insanity of a violent type though generally of a temporary character. 46. Vide last portion of No. 45. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. I believe that although long and habitual use of any drug in a very moderate quantity may not be very prejudicial, yet these drugs are not unfrequently used to enhance the power of sexual intercourse; and the temporary excitement induces a morbid habit and leads to excessive indulgence, and may in that way bring on impotency, if nutritious food is not taken to counteract the effects of the excess and sustain the power. It is used by prostitutes. 51, 52 and 53. No. 54. Yes, may be used by criminals to fortify their nerves before the commission of crimes, but use of drugs for such purposes is less frequent than that of wine. 55. Yes, criminals do induce their victims to partake of these drugs, but complete stupefaction cannot be effected in each case without admixture. Bhang may bring on complete stupefaction even in strong brains, if the drug is boiled with current pice or copper or mixed with dhatura. 56. The effect of bhang is increased by boiling with pice and mixing with dhatura, and that of ganja by mixture with khaini. Cannot say any thing about charas. 57. I do not think they are ever eaten or drunk. Oral evidence. Question 1.487 229. Evidence of BABU GOWREE SUNKER ROY,* Kayasth, Secretary, Cuttack Print- ing Company, Cuttack. 1. Long contract with persons who use the drugs and general observation. 2. Yes. The local names are charas, ganja, and bhang or patti; the ganja being of two sorts, desi or Gurjati (grown in the Tributary Mahals) and Calcutta (imported from Bengal). The distinction between flat, round and chur is not much recognized by the people here. 19. Yes, but charas is almost out of use at present. In rare cases ganja is powdered and eaten with sweetmeat. 23. No. 28. (a) One pice or three pies. (b) About one anna. 29. (a) Tobacco leaf. (b) I am not aware of any. The chief or indispensable ingredients of bhang massala is black-pepper (golmirich); other spices, such as aniseed, mace, cloves, etc., are added accord- ing to taste. 30. Only ganja is smoked in company by male adults; children do not consume any drug. 31. Yes, and it is as easily shaken off. There is no such necessary tendency unless a man chooses to go into excess in the case of ganja- smoking only. 32. The only religious custom among the Bengalis is to take a little bhang on the Bijaya day (last day of Durga Puja). There is no such custom in Orissa. Where the custom prevails it is used very moderately, and it is not likely to form a habit or inflict any injury. 36. None at all, and it is not likely, because alcohol is too expensive and forbidden by Hindu religion. On the contrary, some persons resort to hemp drugs to give up liquor-drinking. 37. Charas, as stated above, is not now used. The effect of ganja-smoking is immediate but transient, while the intoxication of bhang lasts for twelve hours or so. 39. Only ganja is used in smoking, and I believe it is more injurious than drinking or eat- ing bhang. I think ganja-smoking affects the lungs, for I have seen persons using it excessively, constantly coughing and throwing off thick mucous matter. I also know of two persons smoking ganja habitually turning insane. 40. Bhang alone is used as a medicinal drug by all native physicians without distinction. I am not aware of its being used for cattle disease. 41. (a) It is generally believed that the use of ganja or bhang promotes hunger and helps digestion. (b) I have seen that palki-bearers, boatmen, etc., who use ganja are able to do their work well after taking a dose when required to work extra hours. (c) and (d) I have no special knowledge. 42. I consider the moderate use of ganja or bhang harmless, especially the latter. Bhang is preserved by many as a household medicine for all sorts of bowel complaints and colic pain, and as a cooling beverage in the hot season. Indeed, some go so far as to say that the restriction of the sale of bhang by the Excise Department has deprived many of a ready cure in cases of bowel complaints and even cholera. This popular belief and undue restrictions of the department help, I am afraid, to keep up the illicit trade in bhang. 44. Persons using ganja or bhang say that they feel refreshed after taking a dose, and complain of want of appetite and dullness if kept long with- out it. My observations lead me to think that the intoxication must be of a mild nature, as the generality of ganja-smokers look calm and talk properly when under influence of the drug, and the want of subsequent gratification does not seem to produce any unbearable uneasiness. 45. I am not aware of any such effects. 46. I have already said I know of two cases. In one case the ganja-smoker, a tailor, used to get periodic fits of insanity lasting each time for a week or so, at intervals of two or three months. After some years the fits came at longer intervals till he died at the age of about 40 years. The other ganja-smoker was a moharrir in the court. He suddenly resigned his post and became insane. After a few months one of his friends kept him in custody in his house for two or three months and was not allowed to smoke. He got well. One day he went out and smoked ganja and became as insane as before. He is still alive and lives by begging. 47 and 48. I have no reason to think so. 49. I cannot say; but I know that several native medicines directed to that end contain bhang as one of the chief ingredients. Very few prostitutes use ganja or bhang. I have never heard of impotency being produced by use of hemp. 56. I am not aware of any admixture with ganja or bhang. 57. I think when ganja is eaten or drunk the effect is the same as of bhang, the only difference being that it is more intoxicating. In conclusion I have no other information to give. I am of opinion that the habit of using hemp drugs is on the decrease and the means adopted by the Excise Department are sufficient to check its growth. Abolition or undue restric- tion would be considered a grievance and cause needless sacrifice of revenue by encouraging smuggling, and might lead persons addicted to these drugs to resort to more harmful intoxicating substance. * Was invited to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but failed to appear.
488 230. Evidence of BABU GURUDAYAL SINHA,* Kayasth, Honorary Magistrate, Muni- cipal Commissioner and Secretary, Total Abstinence Society, Comilla, Tippera. 1. I consulted many ganja-smokers and native physicians and have some experience in regard to which my answers are framed. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses. It is prepared from the wild hemp plant. Ganja or charas is not prepared from the wild plant. 19. Charas is not used by the people in this district; ganja is used only for smoking. 21. Flat ganja is preferred for smoking. 23. Bhang is used for smoking by ganja-smok- ers when ganja is not available or when they cannot afford to pay for it. 24. Lower classes of people drink bhang as medicine for dysentery. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase in this district. There is no restriction for its sale. It is easily available. Within last few years a god by name Tinnath appeared, and it is worshipped by people as the god of ganja. Ganja-smokers generally sit together, sing, and smoke ganja, and thus the number of ganja-smokers is going to be increased, but it is confined to the lower classes of people. 26. It is very difficult to ascertain the pro- portion of different classes of ganja consumers, but the number of habitual excessive consumers is on the increase. 27. The lower classes of people who are culti- vators scarcely get accustomed to it. But those who serve under others and have time to spare, generally join the worshippers of Tinnath, which lead to the practice. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers of ganja, three to four pice per diem. (b) Habitual excessive consumers, five to six pice per diem. 29. Dhatura is not used or mixed with ganja. Bhang massala is not sold here. 30. One-fourth of ganja-smokers practise in solitude and three-fourths in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex. It is not usual for children to consume ganja or bhang. 31. Yes. 32. There is a religious custom known as Tin- nath mela in which ganja is essential for the wor- ship of the god Tinnath. It is generally temper- ate. It leads to the formation of the habit. 33. The public opinion is strongly against it. The use of ganja is generally in disrepute. The word ganjakhor (i.e., ganja eater or smoker) is now a term used by the people towards bad charac- ters. It is now an abusive term. It (ganja) is very injurious to health. It spoils the system and sometimes leads to insanity. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. I don't think it would be a serious privation to ganja-smokers to forego the consumption. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja. The prohibition may be enforced by stopping import. There is no likelihood of the drug being consumed illicitly. The prohibition may occasion discontent among the consumers, but such discontent would not amount to a political danger. The prohibition of ganja may be followed by recourse to bhang, but not to alcoholic stimu- lants. 40. Bhang is prescribed by native physicians as medicine in cases of dyspepsia, dysentery and diarrh489 2. Doctor Prain's definition of the drugs and the names given by him may be accepted as cor- rect. The drugs are known in and about Calcutta as siddhi or bhang, charas and ganja. 3. The hemp plant grows abundantly in Raj- shahi, Bhagalpur, Mirzapur, Ghazipur and other Districts. Although quite uncared for the plant. grows wild in all places in Lower Bengal where- ever the seeds have been thrown by those who do not care to eat them with the leaves. 4. In and about Calcutta the plant is known as siddhi and the leaves as shabji or bhang. 5. It easily strikes one that a damp soil is favourable to the growth of the plant. In Lower Bengal in places where the soil is laterite stray plants are not. so common as in moist alluvial soils. 6. The plant grows well both densely and scat- tered. 7. In the District of Rajshahi hemp is cultivat- ed for all the purposes mentioned in this question. Nowhere else in Bengal is it so largely cultivat- ed, but in Bogra and Dinajpur there is a consider- able area devoted to the cultivation of hemp. 10. The information of the Commtitee is that cultivators of hemp do not form a special class. 14. All the products of hemp are prepared in the District of Rajshahi. 15. Sir William O'Shaughnessy's description of the process for making the preparations for smok- ing, eating and drinking, appears to the Com- mittee to be fairly correct. The quantities used at a time are however much smaller in Bengal than what are mentioned by him. 16. Bhang is usually prepared by the people in their own houses. The leaves of the plant wherever grown can be used for the purpose. Ganja and charas however cannot be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 18. All the three drugs deteriorate by keeping for more than about six months. They become mildewed and lose not only their flavour but (as it is said by those who use it) also their active properties. Preservation in well-stoppered bottles and exposing them to the sun for several hours from time to time prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Palki-bearers, diggers of earth, night watchmen, fishermen, ascetics and other people following occupation involving hard manual labour or exposure to inclemencies of the weather are more given to smoking ganja than people in other occupations of life. Some, even of the better classes, sometimes contract the habit of smoking ganja, but their number is less than one in, a thousand of low class smokers. Among well-to-do men the habit is less prevalent in Lower Bengal than in Bihar. Charas is rarely smoked by low-class men. It is too expensive for them. Even among the better classes the use of charas, though at one time was more extensive, is dimi- nishing now. 21. The round variety of ganja is the one usual- ly used. 23. The Committee are not aware of bhang being ever used for smoking. 24. Bhang is mostly eaten and drunk by up; country people. In Lower Bengal the largest proportion of consumers consists of ascetics, up- country traders and merchants and other well-to-do people and also men of the darwan class. Among the people themselves in Lower Bengal the proportion does not exceed one in thousands. 25. The use of charas is certainly on the decrease. It is difficult to say whether the use of ganja and bhang is decreasing. Those who have suffered by the use of spirituous liquors, or are unable to pay for it, find in ganja or bhang a cheap and less harmful substitute. 28. The quantity of bhang used by moderate consumers do not exceed two tolas per day, but the average is usually only half a tola a day or even less. An excessive consumer would eat so much as four tolas a day. A moderate allowance of ganja is a quarter tola a day. The outside limit of hard smokers is, in exceptional cases, two tolas a day. 30. In Lower Bengal ganja and charas are rarely smoked by women or children. Women suffering from chronic bowel complaints have re- course to the use of bhang or opium when other remedies prove ineffectual. 31. The habit of consuming either ganja or charas is not easily formed. The use of either is always repulsive in the beginning, but after the habit has been formed it is difficult to break off, not how- ever so much as to break off a habit of drinking liquors. The habit of eating bhang is compara- tively more easily formed, but it is one which can be given up much more easily than either ganja or charas. There is no tendency in the case of any of these drugs for a moderate habit run- ning into excess. 32. The only custom which affects the use of these drugs is the one for the use of bhang on the Bijaya day after the Durga Thakur has been immersed in water. The custom, which prevails more especially in Lower Bengal, is quite harm- less. It is generally believed to be essential, as it is considered to have the sanction of religion and the drug forms a part of the offering made to the Thakur on the last day of the Puja, but bhang is never used in excess on the occasion and it never leads to the formation of a habit. 33. The habitual use of any of the drugs has been always looked upon with disfavor as is the use of any other narcotic. The consumers are generally regarded as men liable to be easily irri- tated, and they are therefore not easily offended. 34. It would be a serious privation to several classes of consumers if they were forced to forego the use of the drugs. Persons suffering from chronic bowel complaints or want of appetite, for instance, would be deprived of a valuable remedy if they were prevented from taking their daily allowance of bhang; persons who have to work in the sun, keep up nights, or undergo hard manual labour, would be deprived not only of a valuable aid to their work but what must be regarded a ne- cessity of a life to men of their occupation if they were prevented from smoking their usual dose of ganja. 35. A compulsory prohibition of the use of the drugs would cause great misery to the consumers and make them seriously discontented. The num- ber of consumers is not large enough to justify any apprehension of political danger, but it would be wrong to create such discontents and to deprive a large number of peaceful men and usefu 3 T
490 members of society of their short spells of enjoy- ment amid the labours, cares and anxieties of life. The use of the drugs is so great a necessity to them that it would be practically impossible to prohibit the use. A late member of the Board of Revenue, Mr. Money, rightly observed.491 16. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) No. 18. Yes. 19. Ganja is used for smoking and medicinal purposes. 20. Ganja, though used by almost all classes of people, is largely and ordinarily used by the lower labouring class of people and by the sanyasis. Charas is only used by few, as it costs more than ganja. 21. Churis, no doubt, preferred; but for want of means the flat ganja is ordinarily used. 23. As far as my experience goes, bhang is not used for smoking. 24. The middle and the lower classes of people and a very small number of them drink bhang. 25. On decrease, I think the decrease is chiefly due to the evil effects they produce on the constitu- tion of men, and partly also due to the poverty to which the lower orders of people have been reduced. 29. Milk and sugar or gur are ordinarily mixed with bhang to make the mixture palatable, and a little more stimulant; roots of pumpkin (lau) and seeds of dhatura are sometimes mixed with the said mixture for the purpose of increasing the intoxicating power of bhang. 30. The consumption of bhang and ganja is chiefly confined to the male sex. Children some- times take bhang for medicinal purposes. 31. Yes. 32. In some localities in which bhang is con- sumed during some religious festivals, such as Bijaya Dasami and Chayet Sankranti, the con- sumption was formerly regarded as essential, but it is not so now. It is always temperate. No, it is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is generally regarded as bad. The public opinion is against the use of ganja. The use of the said drug and charas is generally in disrepute as being immoral and ruinous to health as well as to the intellectual faculties. The habitual ganja and charas smokers generally become depraved and indifferent to their health and worldly prospects. 34. I think not; but a sudden privation to habitual consumers may result in bringing about serious diseases on them. The reason is this. None of the drugs is essential to the maintenance of human life, except where used for medicinal purposes. 35. It would be so in the case of ganja and charas, except in cases where the use is prescribed by medical adviser for the treatment of any parti- cular disease. I think there is much probability of the said drugs being consumed illicitly if the consumption is prohibited. The prohibition will, no doubt, occasion a serious discontent among the consumers for some time, but the discontent, I think, would not amount to a political danger. There is every chance of the prohibition being followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs, which are less injurious to the health and life of men. 40. Bhang is prescribed by kavirajes (native physicians) on account of its medicinal qualities. I have seen many persons suffering from dysentery and bowel complaints using bhang under the directions of the kavirajes. Bhang is also used by the kavirajes in the preparation of medicines for dysentery, grihini (chronic dysentery) and diarrhoea. I had to use such medicines myself for some time for similar affections. Ganja is also prescribed, though very scarcely, by the native physicians. Bhang is used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) Bhang. (b) and (c) Ganja. About half the hard-labouring and lower class of people use ganja for the purposes indicated in (b) and (c). I refer to moderate habitual use. I know almost all the hard-working coolies of the tea gardens, mutea (porters) class of people, and kustiwalas (native illiterate gymnasts) use ganja for the said purposes. The fishermen also use ganja to give staying-power under severe exposure. 42. The answer of this question depends on the relative state of health of the consumer and the qualities of the drugs. To a perfect healthy man, I consider the moderate use of bhang paste with water harmless, as it is soothing, and has the power of giving tone to the stomach and increas- ing the power of activity. I have observed this in persons using it. 43. Yes. 44. I cannot say what is the immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja on the habitual con- sumer, but I am told that it is refreshing. It does not produce intoxication though it makes the consumer a little tipsy at the time. The effects last till the consumer goes to bed and falls asleep. The effect of the moderate use of bhang paste with water is refreshing, and it also creates ap- petite. 45. (a) The moderate use of ganja produces mental and moral depravity. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Yes. (e) It impairs the moral sense in some. (f) No. (g) Yes; I have seen many persons who are deficient in self-control, through weakened intel- lects, fall victims to excessive use of ganja from moderate use and at last die of consumption and dysentery. It may be noted here that I know four or five persons of the middle rank who used to smoke ganja moderately, say once in the evening and once at bed time, died at last of consump- tion and dysentery. 46. Excessive use of ganja produces physical infirmity, mental and moral depravity. It impairs the digestive functions, and often produces dysen- tery and consumption or asthma. It also impairs the moral sense and induces laziness, and some- times habits of immorality. It also deadens the intellect and sometimes produces temporary insa- nity. The symptoms may be re-induced by use of the drugs after liberation from restraint, I know of a particular case in connection with this subject. Bhang also affects the brain if taken excessively. 49. Bhang and ganja are so used. Yes, it is used by prostitutes. Yes, as the consumer is apt to fall victim to excessive use, which in the long run produces the evil effects consequent thereto en the consumers, 3 T 2
492 and brings about poverty and ruin on him. I have been told by some of the consumers of ganja that ganja has the tendency to produce, and it finally does produce, impotence in the case of excessive use. 52. The excessive use of ganja and bhang has connection with crimes relating to properties, human life, and public peace. The excessive smoker having exhausted his resources and having yet a strong craving for the use of ganja, has to satisfy the same by means fair or foul, and he has therefore to secure money by theft, and he is likely to commit a breach of the peace and offences relating to human life when under the influence of the drug. 53. Yes. No, I know of no case. 233. Evidence of BABU AKSHAY KUMAR MAITRA,* Secretary, Rajshahi Association, Pleader, Judge's Court, Member, Rajshahi District Board, Commissioner, Rampur Boalia Municipality. 1. As an inhabitant of Bengal and a resident of Rajshahi, I have had some opportunities of observ- ing the consumption and effects of the various hemp drugs used by the people of my own coun- try. As a pleader practising in the District of Rajshahi since August 1885, I have had occasion to attend the Civil and Criminal Courts at Nao- gaon, the head-quarters of the ganja mahal, which gave me some opportunities of observing the culti- vation and manufacture of ganja. As a Secretary to the Rajshahi Association and a Member of the Rajshahi District Board Sub-Committee appointed to consider the questions circulated by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, I have had some occa- sions to make certain enquiries regarding the sale, consumption, and effects of the various hemp drugs in use in this district. My answers are based chiefly upon such enquiries and personal observa- tions. 2. From personal observations and enquiries made by me from time to time, I find that the definitions given in this question may safely be accepted for the province of Bengal. I have found no scientific difference between a bhang and a ganja plant. The only difference consists in the fact that while bhang is produced from male and female wild plants growing spontaneously in al- most all parts of Bengal, ganja is produced only from the cultivated female plants, the males having been carefully destroyed at an early stage of their growth. In the ganja sold all over Bengal, I have always noticed the presence of ripe fruits or seeds, which show that however carefully the males may be destroyed by the cultivators, they cannot entirely put a stop to fertilisation. This may be due to several causes. It may give rise to the natural and à priori assumption that all males are not success- fully destroyed, or admitting that they are so destroyed, that the abnormal male flowers on female plants cause this fertilisation. Ganja consists of the dried flowering tops of carefully cultivated female hemp plants (Cannabis indica), which have become coated with resin in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely. This object is secured by retarding the course of free fertilisation by weeding out the males. Ganja may be classified thus:493 These seeds, once thickly scattered over the soil, give rise to a dense growth of the plant in the next year. 7. There is an extensive cultivation of the female hemp plant for the production of ganja in a special tract of land about 16 square miles in area comprising parts of thanna Naogaon in Rajshahi, of Adamdighi and Nawabgunge in Bogra, and of Mahadebpore in Dinajpur. So far as I know, there is no cultivation of the plant for the production of charas or bhang in Lower Bengal. Charas is, however, obtained in a very small quantity from the manufacture of ganja in Rajshahi. The plant, so far as I know, is nowhere culti- vated in Bengal for its fibre or seeds. But the seeds obtained from the ganja cultivation are utilised by the people. A variety of hemp, locally called sone-pát, is cultivated to some extent for fibre; but this variety is not known to contain cannabine or any active narcotic principle. 8. There has been some slight increase in the area under ganja cultivation. But the area under actual cultivation varies from year to year, partly on account of the fact that ganja cannot be suc- cessfully grown in the same field year after year, and partly on account of the fact that the cultivators take to the ganja cultivation according to their experience of the next preceding year. 9. While siddhi is obtained indifferently from hemp, whether cultivated or wild, and whether male or female, ganja is obtained solely from the cultivated female plants. The land on which ganja is grown in Rajshahi is locally called the ganja mahal. The entire tract, so far as I have seen near about its head-quarters at Naogaon, is exposed to the direct rays of the sun, not in anyway shaded by any trees. The land for this purpose has to be ploughed with more than ordinary care. The ploughing begins in Bysak and goes on all through the rains from time to time, and cowdung, leaf manure and earth taken from the beds of ditches are added from time to time till the field becomes ready for plan- tation. As soon as the weather clears up in September the seedlings, about half a cubit high, are transplanted at short intervals. When they grow to a certain height, the tops of male plants are broken down by experts, showing what plants have to be destroyed. The females alone are thus left to flower, and these yield the ganja, which consists of the dried flowering tops. 10. The cultivators of ganja do not form a special class. Hindus and Muhammadans of the ordinary cultivating classes cultivate ganja with the assistance of special experts, who again do not belong to any special class. 11. I have no information on this point. The seeds of the ganja sold in the shops germinate freely. Whether the seeds of wild hemp which produces bhang may be utilised for this purpose has yet to be ascertained. The people here do not know that bhang and ganja are the different pro- ducts of the same plant. 12. No. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is restricted in Bengal to parts of the Rajshahi, Bogra, and Dinajpur districts, the whole tract being locally known as the ganja mahal. I am not in a position to say why these tracts were specially selected. I believe ganja, like the mul- berry plants, requires a raised ground with fine sandy soil, rich with leaf manure and unshaded by trees, and it is perhaps this character of the present tract which first drew the attention of the pioneers of ganja cultivation in Rajsbahi. 14. Ganja is prepared in the ganja mahals of Rajshahi at Naogaon, where a small quantity of charas is also obtained by collecting the scrapings from the feet of the labourers who tread down the ganja during its manufacture. I am told that seven to eight thousand maunds of ganja are pre- pared annually in Rajshahi. Bhang is not pre- pared in Lower Bengal. It grows wild, and the people collect some leaves, dry them and preserve them for use. Some people, after collecting these green leaves, boil them in milk and then dry and preserve them, which is said to confer greater medicinal properties to the drug. 15. Bhang is generally prepared, or rather col- lected, by the people from the wild plants. Some people regularly collect these leaves on the last day of the Bengali year, the Choitra Sankranti day, when they are supposed to contain the greatest beneficial properties. It can be prepared from the wild hemp plant wherever grown; but the people generally prefer to use the bhang grown in Bhagalpur, Patna, and Benares. Ganja cannot, in my opinion, be prepared from the wild hemp. In all plants of the Indian hemp the narcotic principle is said to reside in the plants. If the males are carefully destroyed and the females alone are allowed to run to flower, this narcotic substance collects itself in and around the flower- ing tops which produce ganja. As no steps are taken to arrest free fertilisation in the wild hemp, its narcotic substance does not reside in the flower- ing tops, but is distributed over the leaves. Hence no ganja can be prepared from the wild hemp. 16. Ganja is seen to be cultivated by all classes of the agricultural people, and bhang is collected and preserved by any one who has any need of it. 17. I don't know anything about charas, but ganja and bhang are said to lose their intoxicating properties by keeping them exposed. Smokers of ganja would not touch ganja over a year old; but old bhang has some demand, and is said to possess more medicinal properties than the fresh leaves. I have no special means of answering the rest of this question; but it seems probable that the action of air, heat and moisture induces a slow chemical change, which in course of time deteriorates ganja till it completely loses its effects as an intoxicating substance. 18. No means to answer. 19. Ganja is used mostly, if not wholly, forsmoking. It is sometimes, though on very rare occasions, mixed with the preparation of bhang. For purposes of producing a strong intoxication a very small quantity of ganja is mixed with bhang. This peculiar use of ganja is so rare that it does not call for any special notice and is not confined to any special locality. Ganja is used as a medicine by some of the village physicians, but in all such cases the drug is used for external application only. Charas is used wholly for smoking. Any other use of this drug is unknown to this part of the country. 20. Ganja and charas are disreputable drugs and are seldom used by the higher classes of society. The bearers and boatmen of Behar and North-West Provinces, the chamars, domes, muchis, mehters, dosads, bagdis, sanyasis and
494 bairagis are the chief votaries of ganja. The consumers of this drug do not form a large pro- portion of people in Rajshahi. There are four ganja shops in the town of Rampur Boalia, with a population of above 20,000 souls, and the quantity daily sold by all these shops jointly appears, on inquiry, not to exceed two seers or 120 tolas a day. Assuming that each smoker consumes about one- sixth tola a day, which is about the quantity daily purchased by the habitual consumers here, there are, on an average, 720 ganja-smokers in this town or 3.4 per cent. of the population are habitual smokers of ganja. The habit of smoking ganja prevails more in towns and large centres of trade than in rural villages; and as Rampur Boalia is the only town in Rajshahi with a population above 20,000 souls, the sale returns of the ganja shops there lead me to suppose that, although Rajshahi is noted for the production of ganja, it is not equally noted for its consumption. Charas is not sold here, nor is it commonly used by the ganja-smokers. 21. The round variety is not in use in the Rajshahi district. Of the flat variety the mihidal is much in demand, and the poor consumers prefer the chur to any other variety. 22. Charas is seldom used, and those who occa- sionally indulge in it use the foreign drug imported from Calcutta. 23. Bhang is sometimes used as a smoke, but such use of this drug is extremely rare, so rare that it is impossible to obtain any reliable inform- ation on this head. Such peculiar use of bhang is not, however, confined to any locality or class of consumers. I have heard on enquiry of one ins- tance only where the consumer used it on account of his inability to procure ganja. 24. Although the people of Bengal are not ha- bitual consumers of bhang, yet its use as a drink is not uncommon. It is difficult to say what pro- portion of the people use it. It is used more by the low-bred people as a drink, and such use is not confined to any particular locality. All that can be said about the use of bhang with any de- gree of certainty is that it is not usual for the people of Bengal to practise it as a regular habit. It is sometimes eaten; for this purpose the green leaves, or rather the green tops, are fried in ghi and taken as a vegetable, or the dried leaves are boiled in ghi, which is then used in preparing a sweetmeat called majun. 25. The historians of the last century noticed the use of ganja, charas and bhang to prevail to a great extent in almost all the principal towns of Bengal. But the consumption of charas is now almost extinct, that of bhang has greatly disap- peared, and that of ganja has been gradually decreasing. The use of ganja, charas and bhang by the higher classes is now seldom noticed. This, I think, may be due to two causes, namely, (1) the alcoholic drink may have greatly displaced ganja; (2) the spread of education has certainly tended very greatly towards this result. The habit of smoking ganja and charas appears, as will be found elsewhere in my answers, to have been introduced into this country by its Muhammadan rulers, and, with the change of Government, it has gradually been decreasing. The example of the habits of life of the ruling race always exerts a great influence over the common people, and the use of alcohol of the outstill of the present age and its gradual spread among all sections of the peo- ple may be cited as an example. This ambition to copy the habits of life in the ruling race once in- troduced ganja, which is again being slowly dis- placed by alcohol for the same reason. 26. No satisfactory information is available to answer this question with any degree of definite- ness. 27. Ganja-smokers, as already stated, are main- ly taken from the lower classes of the people, mostly non-agricultural. Those who have to undergo fatigues and hard labour are induced by others to get into the habit of smoking ganja as a preventive or relaxation; while in the case of confirmed smokers, evil pursuits and evil company greatly contribute towards the formation of this habit. An honest, hard-working cultivator is sel- dom found addicted to ganja. 28. From enquiries recently made by this Asso- ciation, I was informed that a habitual smoker of ganja can consume from one to three tolas a day; but this is not only very rarely the case, it is also regarded as extremely excessive even by the most veteran smokers. Habitual moderate consumers generally purchase from two to four pice worth of ganja a day, as the ganja vendors admit. But whether this quantity is consumed by one man alone or by several men in company cannot be ascertained. The probability is that every habi- tual smoker has one or two associates to oblige with a gratuitous smoke of the drug. The actual consumption by a habitual moderate smoker may be taken at two pice worth of ganja a day. The people of the class to which such habit is found to exist hardly earn more than ten or twelve pice a day. 29. The ingredient ordinarily mixed with ganja and charas is common tobacco. The object of mixing it is perhaps to sweeten the drug and render it less powerful. Bhang is used in several ways495 30. The consumption of ganja is generally practised in company. A smoker, instead of finishing one chillum (a pipeful) all by himself, prefers to share it with his associates. He takes a few whiffs first, then passes it on to another to take rest, and then smokes again, and when it is over, enjoys a pipe of tobacco with his associates. Bhang or siddhi is, however, taken in solitude as well as in company. A curious case of ganja smoking in company came to my notice in con- nection with a criminal prosecution in the Court of the Sub-Divisional Magistrate of Nator some years ago. There is a Kali-bari at Baksor near Nator, where people annually gather in large number for bathing purposes on the Baruni ganga- snan day in Choitra. An old, ill-tempered Bengali sanyasi, who called himself Gosain Rup- Giri, used to reside in the Kali-bari as its high priest. In the evening previous to the Baruni snan day, he, in company with several others, some of whom belonged to the respectable classes, and two of whom were boys aged from fifteen to eighteen years, was indulging in ganja freely. There was a young prostitute of seventeen or eighteen years of age who was seated in the centre, and the votaries were sitting in a circle round her while smoking on freely. Sometime after the votaries fell fighting with each other with the iron tongs of the sanyasi and with the walking sticks of his visitors; in course of the fight the sanyasi lost two of his foreteeth, got an arm fractured, and received several other injuries. In course of his deposition before the Court, the sanyasi, who was the complainant in the case, called this smoking in a circle a siddhi chakra,meaning thereby smoking of ganja and bhang in that peculiar way. The man was an excessive smoker of ganja beyond doubt and was ugly, rough looking, irritative and half crazy, and wicked. The habit of smoking ganja is not confined to males or to adults alone. Sometimes young boys and low prostitutes are also found addicted to it. Bhang is used indiscriminately by the males as well as by the females, and its use is not looked upon as a social vice, nor does its use expose the votary to any considerable degree of censure. Unlike ganja, bhang is taken in solitude as well as in company. But bhang does not count so many habitual votaries as does ganja. The last clause of this question, namely, "Is it usual for children to consume any of these drugs ?"seems to me rather misleading. As the question stands it must be answered in the negative, but still it is not very unusual to find children addict- ed to, or occasionally indulging in, ganja orbhang. 31. The formation of a habit to consume all intoxicating substances, as a rule, depends more on the nature of the individual votary than on any special attractive inherent quality in the substance. All intoxicating substances are more or less poisonous in their physiological effects, and do produce unpleasant and even distressing feel- ings to the person who takes any of them for the first time. The first impression produced is, therefore, anything but pleasant or tempting to the novice. Even habitual consumers of intoxi- cating substances admit that they suffered more than they enjoyed when they first took the subs- tance. I am informed by several smokers of ganja that all of them when they were initiated into the practice, felt a burning sensation down the throat, a giddiness and general feeling of intoxication, which were distressing and terrifying and in some cases led to complete stupefaction for some time. It is therefore, prima facie, the character of the votary rather than that of the drug which leads to the formation of a habit of smoking ganja or charas. The habit, however, can be easily formed by the smokers of tobacco. Unlike the habit of smoking opium, this habit may be broken off easily if the votary is placed under restraint. I have found ganja smokers behaving well without their drug when laid up with severe illness and confined to bed. The late Dr. Chevers observed in his Manual of Medical Jurisprudence for India, page 222, that he had never been able to perceive any ill effects from sudden discontinuance of the habit of ganja smoking. But, if left to themselves, the smokers of ganja, after a few years' habit, do not generally succeed in shaking it off easily. In the case of ganja, smoked in company, there is a decided tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. In company every one takes a pride in excelling his associates, and the novice is looked upon with contempt. This exerts an influence over the new votary and induces him to run to excess. Ganja smokers supply an ex- ample to the saying that there is a competition and pride even in evil-doing. 32. I know of no social or religious custom in regard to the consumption of ganja, and I believe there is none. But there is a prevailing use in some parts of Bengal of bhang on the last day of the Durga Puja, when some Hindus do take a moderate quantity of bhang. This custom is old and has not wholly died out of the country. It has no religious sanction, and it has certainly no binding force on the conscience of any Hindu. After the immersion of the idols in the evening of the Bijaya day, people go to visit their friends and return many cordial greetings of the day. On such occasions it is customary to entertain the visitors with sweetmeats, sherbet and betel leaves. At some places a little quantity of bhang is also used in preparing the sherbet. But this use of bhang on such occasions is not regarded as essential by any one, and bhang is not offered by every house. All that can be said about this custom is that, if bhang is offered on such oc- casions as a loving cup to any one, he does not consider it unusual. But I know of no custom or rules of society that may be said to require every one to honour the cup at least with a sip. This custom is not, however, in the least degree likely to lead to the formation of any habit. 33. The consumption of ganja and charas is regarded as evil habits, and the consumer is looked upon as a low-bred individual. There has always been a public opinion more or less strong against the use of these two drugs, and the opinion is daily growing stronger than before. This public opinion is social rather than religious. There is no doubt whatever of the existence of this public opinion, which is freely expressed whenever occa- sions arise. The disrepute attached to the use of ganja is mainly due to the fact that ganja-smokers are mostly low class men, always ill-tempered, irri- tative, and often concerned with petty offences of a mean order. I know of no custom of worshipping the plant, as alluded to in the question. But ganja smokers are seen offering their chillum to Mahadeo before they partake of it. This arises from the popular belief that Mohadeo, the god of power and des- truction, counts ganja amongst his favourite drugs.
496 This has, however, nothing to do with religion, for a Baisnava smoker, who belongs to the op- posite sect and owes no. allegiance to Mahadeo, is also seen to do the same before he smokes his ganja. Ganja, out of this belief, is sometimes offered at the temples of Mohadeo as a present to the. deity. 34. I do not think it would be a serious pri- vation to any class of consumers if they were to forego ganja and charas. The habit of using these two drugs is not so hard to shake off as that of opium. No particular class of society is addicted to these drugs as a class, and most of the habitual consumers are only moderate con- sumers of the drug. The hardworking bearers and boatmen of Behar and the North-Western Provinces, and very few low class people of Bengal will no doubt regard its disuse as a pri- vation; but whether such disuse would constitute a real or a sentimental privation has yet to be as- certained. The use of ganja is not essential for their existence; it does not supply a physical need, and its disuse is not known to produce any disastrous physical discomfort of a serious nature. These considerations lead me to suppose that even if it be regarded as a privation by some, it would really be a sentiment rather than a fact. 35. The question of feasibility is a large one. It is not impossible, nor will it be deemed unwise to prohibit the use of ganja and charas; but I do not think that a prohibition, however strict, will stop illicit consumption. This, again, is not, however, a consideration which should be looked upon as a serious stumbling block to its prohi- bition. Illicit consumption may be detected and adequately punished, that is all that can be done, and is even now being done in the case of illicit distillation of liquor. In my humble opinion the real point at issue should be, if I may venture to suggest it, to decide whether the consumption of any and which of these drugs is injurious to public health and morals, and then to find out how to repress with a strong hand the consumption of such drug. The prohibition can be enforced in the same way as the prohibition of unlicensed cul- tivation or sale of ganja is enforced, namely, by law and by the enforcement of the legal penalty. Such prohibition will, no doubt, stop a great source of public revenue, but it will not saddle the Government with any additional expenditure to enforce the prohibition. The Excise Detect ive Establishment, now in force, has not only to keep in check the smuggling in hemp drugs, but it has also to exercise similar functions in respect of opium and distilled liquor of all sorts. The prohibition of ganja will not, therefore, relieve the Government of this Detective Estab- lishment, which, as at present, may be utilised in enforcing the prohibition of ganja without any additional cost to Government. Ganja cannot be successfully grown on any soil, and its cul- tivation and manufacture, from the very nature of the drug, cannot be secretly carried on. The cultivation, which takes about six months from transplantation to reaping, has to be carried on in open fields; the peculiar odour set forth by the plants when in flower travels far beyond the cul- tivated area; and the final manufacture has also to be completed in open places. All these consi- derations tend to shew that its manufacture, once being prohibited, may be very easily detected andadequately punished, The only other question to be considered in this connection is the vexed question of loss of public revenue; that loss may, however, be recovered by slightly increasing the tax on distilled liquor. I am opposed to any scheme of establishing a Government monopoly in the cultivation and manufacture of ganja. That course will not only be met with great opposition by the tenants and landlords, but will also be at- tended with great oppression in its operation, inas- much as it will necessarily take the form of a forced cultivation. The prohibition of consumption of ganja is not likely to affect the bulk of the people, nor is it such a matter that the disinterested majority will take it as a national grievance and make a com- mon cause with the interested minority. There are questions of sectarian importance, which may be taken up by the opposite sects as a matter involving a principle of Law applicable to all. If a public worship of the Hindus of one sect were sought to be repressed by Law, the Hindus of other and opposing sects, nay, Christians, Mu- hammadans and other non-Hindus may join their hands to oppose such repression on principle. But I do not see any reason to suppose that the prohibition of consumption of ganja involves such a principle or is such a cause as is likely to arouse the sympathy of disinterested men. Persons in- terested in the free consumption of ganja are few and far between; and although the prohibition is likely to occasion some discontent among the habitual consumers, it is not likely to take any the least serious attitude. If the evil is there, the only question for consideration should be how to repress it. To think for a moment that such prohibition would create a discontent likely to amount to a political danger is, in my humble opinion, entirely groundless and frivolous. So long as there is a tendency in human nature to have recourse to some form of intoxication, there will always be room for supposing that the prohi- bition of one form will only serve to introduce another form of intoxication; and in the present case the prohibition of ganja is likely to be fol- lowed by the introduction of dhatura to some extent and by increased consumption of alcoholic stimulants to a large extent. 36. That alcohol has now-a-days displaced ganja and charas to some extent and bhang to a large extent, is mainly due to the change of habits of life of the people with the change of times. Even an illiterate man of these days tries and aspires to copy his superiors, and the example of the higher class is thus gradually penetrating the lower strata of society. Ganja is a disreputable drug; its use in this country has always been associated with crimes and misdemeanors; indulgence in this drug is generally regarded as a low habit. Against all these stands its extreme cheapness as the only recommendation of ganja to the poor people. It is poverty which binds them down to ganja, and the moment a man of dissipated habit earns enough to pay for an alcoholic drink, he eagerly begins to copy his superiors. This natural tendency finds a ready satisfaction if the votary gets richer than before or if the price of alcoholic drink is brought down within his means. The cheap liquor of the outstill having supplied one of these conditions, ganja begins to decline in a perceptible degree It was not uncommon to find the use of ganja still lingering among some of the middle classes so long as the price of alcoholic drinks was high, but with the introduction of cheap liquor, ganja has wholly been discarded by the middle class. During the Muharram and Holi festivals, a few years ago, ganja smoking used to be noticed to a large extent, but we find on such occasions now
497 more signs of drunkenness with alcohol than with ganja or bhang. Chapter VI. Note.498 Our body is composed of organs, destined to accomplish the various acts of life, which are scientifically called functions. The functions may properly be divided into two classes:499 are however sometimes found to be quite healthy and well nourished in body. But their other habits of life, their constant roving about in free atmosphere out of doors may be said to help them very greatly in getting rid of the evil effects of ganja. I have seen a mendicant who sits naked day and night on a pile of wood floating in the Hughli near Azimganj, without anything to cover his head or take shelter from the rain, storm or heat of the sun. He is occupied in smoking ganja all day and night, and, though old, seems to keep a good health. But such peculiar votaries have never been placed under regular observation to justify us in holding that ganja produces bene- ficial effects in its votaries. 45. Even a moderate use of any of these drugs, if practised as a daily habit, produces physi- cal, mental and moral [degradation in course of time. The normal physical condition of some votary may be strong enough to withstand con- stant poisoning with these drugs for some time, but in the long run every constitution is sure to break down under the influence of the drug. The use of these narcotic drugs impairs the constitu- tion, injures digestion, causes dysentery and bron- chitis after some years. Their habitual use in- duces laziness and low habits, and by impairing the intellect and the moral sense degrades the votary. The intellect is more or less affected from the beginning of the habit, and as the poisoning goes on from day to day the votary gradually begins to live more and more in the land of hallu- cinations, till the intellect loses its elasticity and produces insanity. The physical effects of habi- tual use of ganja come very soon to be observed by the neighbours. A beginner in a family, how- ever carefully he may try to conceal his newly- formed habits, is sure to be found out by his family members. The mental derangement produced by the constant use of ganja takes some time to appear as a permanent trait, but a long continued habit of this nature generally ends in insanity and very often in dysentery, bronchitis, and sometimes in complete loss of voice. The history of a ganja-smoker, collected and kindly placed in my hands by Dr. Rogers, Civil Surgeon of Rajshahi, is quoted verbatim to show how far the mental derangements, once produced by ganja, last even when the votary has been placed under restraint and how far the habit induces tendencies of a criminal nature. "Facts concerning prisoner Hanif Shah, lunatic, while under observation in the (Rajshahi Central) Jail500 234. Evidence of MR. A. F. M. ABDUR RAHMAN, Honorary Secretary, Muham- madon Literary Society, Calcutta. 32. Among Muhammadans there are no customs, social or religions, in regard to the consumption of these drugs. 33. The consumption of these drugs is not regarded with much disfavour, although its ex- cessive use is considered injurious. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs. The prohibition is likely to cause discontent among the consumers, but having regard to their limited number, there is no likelihood of a political danger. There is every chance of the prohibition being followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 41. For medicinal purposes bhang, ganja and charas possess wholesome properties. The classes of people, who are engaged in hard manual labour or have to expose themselves at night by reason of their occupations, are generally given to smok- ing ganja. Charas is considerably used in yunani or hakimi medicines for aphrodisiacs. A moderate use of ganja or bhang is considered beneficial by the consumers. 43. Yes; generally they are. 45. No. 67. No. Oral evidence. Question 1.501 They would be unable to carry on their profession or work efficiently. 35. If prohibited, they are likely to be used illicitly. Prohibition could be enforced by increasing the price or by punishing them crimi- nally. Yes, prohibition would cause serious dis- content among the consumers. No political danger is expected; might or might not be. 36. No. 40. Yes. 41. (a) Bhang is beneficial for digestion. (Hindustanis consume for that purpose.) (b) Bhang and ganja alleviate fatigue and give staying power under severe exertion or exposure. (c) Yes; (Domes and Haris). 42. Moderate use of bhang is beneficial to elderly people. 43. Yes. 44. No particular effect on habitual consumers. Yes, it is refreshing. Yes, it produces some intoxication. It allays hunger to some extent. Yes, it creates appetite. The effect of bhang lasts about 24 hours, of ganja about 3 or 4 hours; after- effects, weariness. Yes, subsequent non-gratifica- tion produces longing and uneasiness. 45. (a) Bhang does not produce special noxious effects, but ganja does. (b) Bhang does not, but the ganja does. (c) No. (d) Bhang does not, but the ganja does. (e) It may or may not. (f) Excessive use may lead to insanity, tem- porary as well as permanent. Yes, may be re-in- duced. Their eyes get red and contracted. 46. Excessive use of bhang as well as ganja is equally injurious as stated above. 47. Most probably not. 48. Most probably does. 51. Not so. 52. Excessive consumers of these drugs are generally of bad characters. 53. Yes. Yes, I know several cases. 54. Yes, sometimes. 55. No such cases occur in this part of country. 56. Some rich people boil ganja in milk and use the cream. Its effects are moderate. Bhang is mixed with milk and sugar and generally with pepper which does not modify its effects.. Dhatura is not used. 63. No, nothing to suggest. 64. No objection. 65. I think the present taxation is reasonable. 66. There should be different rates. Flat should be taxed less for its woody branches which are thrown away. 67. No objection. 68. Houses or shops are not licensed. Licenses are taken out for selling in certain localities where houses or shops are erected at the pleasure of the licensee. 69. I do not think they are consulted at all. Local public opinion should be considered. 236. Evidence of BABU PURNA CHUNDER MAITRA, Secretary, Band of Hope, Faridpur. In consideration of the fact that it has been un- reservedly condemned by eminent doctors as one of the most dangerous poisons known, as the most potent cause of lunacy, and as the most pernici- ous and deleterious of all excitants ever in use in any country, this Society is humbly of opinion that an entire prohibition of the preparation and sale under Government patronage, and total pro- hibition of ganja cultivation except for medicinal purposes will prove beneficial to the country, of course, under strict vigilance on the part of the local authorities as a safeguard against private cultivation. The principal arguments advanced against abo- lition of Government monopoly by the supporters of the ganja traffic are: (1) it will affect reve- nue which will have to be met by a fresh taxa- tion; (2) it may create a spirit of disaffection among the jogis, sanyasis, fakirs, and mendicants whose number is not small; (3) ganja has the property of destroying malarial poisons and of neu- tralizing the effects of impure water; (4) it is a question whether the use of ganja is really doing more harm compared to other intoxicants; (5) abolition of Government monopoly will increase ganja consumption. The total abolition of the monopoly of the ganja traffic will indeed entail a loss of revenue, an amount compared to the total revenue "is not," as Sir Charles Elliott said in his recent speech at Naogaon, "so great that its loss would plunge the country into financial difficulties." So there need not be any apprehension of a fresh taxation to recoup the loss. There are in truth a number of jogis, sanyasis, fakirs, and mendicants addicted to ganja smoking, but ganja smoking forms no part of their religion, and there is not a single Hindu or Muhammadan religious book which sanctions the use of ganja. On the contrary, the Hindu Shastras and the Muhammadan Koran, like the Christian Bible, emphatically enjoin "touch not, smell not, taste not that which intoxicates and stupefies the brain." No real disaffection can, under the benign rule of the British Government, be seriously appre- hended; and even in the event of there being any such apprehension, the fact should not be lost sight of that the Government in this case will have the support of the bulk of the population, against which the clamours of a discontented few will prove to be utterly unavailing. Ganja may or may not be a preventive for malarial fever. It will be for the medical autho- rities to pronounce whether it is; the Sanitary Commissioner in his annual report does not suggest. But it seems somewhat strange that the habitual use of the pernicious drug that stupefies and often deranges the brain and to an appreciable extent brutalizes the soul can be justified by its advocates as a preventive for malarial fever and a purifier of impure water. The question whether the use of ganja is really doing more harm compared to other intoxicants
502 seems to be simply ridiculous in view of the opinions of medical experts, of the amount of crimes committed under its influence, and in view of the fact which experience tells us that ganja has a "special effect on some of the various animal passions, such as courage, anger, revenge and lust, and in renewing those lost or exciting those exhausted or depressed." Statement VII, of the reports of the lunatic asylums in Bengal for the years 1889, 1890, 1891, and 1892, shew that of the total admissions, 26.72 per cent. in 1889, 25.38 per cent. in 1890, 24.88 per cent. in 1891, and 23.49 per cent. in 1892, are attri- buted to Indian hemp. So in the opinion of Surgeon-Colonel J. G. Pilcher, F.R.C.S., Offi- ciating Inspector-General of Civil Hospitals in Bengal "the use of ganja or other preparation of Indian hemp is by far the most fruitful cause of admissions throughout India. The next potent cause is spirit drinking, .... while the use of opium seems to give rise to comparatively little insanity in the community . . . ." (paragraph 19, Lunatic Asylums' Report, 1889),503 in the Association's letter. I could not have taken any further steps to ascertain the facts of the cases. I did not attempt to see the records, because I believed it would be useless for an out- sider to apply. I wanted simply to give the Commission a clue that they might find out the truth. I did not, however, recommend that the Commission should send for the records. I simply stated the cases as facts. When I found that the Commission was going to hear evidence, and not merely act upon the written statements, I at- tached less weight to written statements. I have, however, no accurate information now to give about these two cases. Note by the Commission appended to the evidence of BABU PURNA CHUNDER MAITRA. (1) Madhab Nagarchi. Madhab Nagarchi was tried by the Sessions Judge, Faridpur, for mur- dering his wife and child and was acquitted on the ground of insanity on 10th July 1893. The only mention of ganja in the record is in the evidence of Mohan Nagarchi, uncle of the accused, who stated that " Madhab smokes ganja." This was before the Committing Magistrate. It was not repeated in his evidence before the Ses- sions Judge. This Mohan Nagarchi was alleged by the accused to have had an intrigue with the murdered woman, on account of which the accused took her life. Mohan Nagarchi and two other witnesses stated that the accused had been mad several years before and had then injured his mother; and six witnesses (including the above) stated that he had been mad for a day or two before the murder. He had also had a quarrel with his wife the day before. The Committing Magistrate attributed the crime to jealousy; but the Judge, to insanity. Neither mentions ganja. The Asylum papers show that "the lunatic's father had tendency to insanity; and that the probable cause of Madhab's own insanity was "natural tendency possibly made worse by smoking ganja." (2) Dhopai Khan. Dhopai Khan, apparently without motive, murdered a cripple boy on 20th October 1889. He was insane and not fit to be tried until 1893. The Sessions Judge acquitted him on the ground of insanity on 9th May 1893. There is no mention of ganja in the record, but the Judge states a letter from the Jail Superintendent in 1889 had given the "probable cause of insanity as ganja smoking:" the grounds for this statement which appears to have been made by an Assistant Surgeon are not apparent. The papers received at the Asylum from the Magistrate of Faridpur in 1890 show that the lunatic was not addicted to ganja or other intoxicants and that no cause could be assigned for his insanity. The Asylum Superin- tendent stated that the cause of insanity was un- known, and that the man was subject to re- lapses. 237. Evidence of BABU GIRISH CHANDAR DE, Delegate of the Total Abstinence Association, Bhawanipur. Oral evidence. I am deputed by the Total Abstinence Society of Bhawanipur, of which I am a member, to state their views on the hemp drugs. I am not aware what steps the Society took on receipt of the Commission's invitation in August. I have not seen the letter dated 19th August, stating that the Association hoped to send in due course a written statement embodying their views. The first that I knew of the matter was that the Vice-President and Secretary met last Saturday and decided to depute two members, myself and another, to appear before the Commission, and represent the views of the Association. I appear, as the other member has sickness in his family. The Society consists of 200 members. As far as I know, there has been no meeting of the Society or of the Executive Committee to discuss the question. I don't know if the Society has ever recorded its views on this question. I have not received instructions as to what I am to say, but the Secretary has given me his personal views, which I have made note of. The Secretary was not the other man appointed to represent the Society. I have come forward to state separately my own views and those of the Secretary. "But of course I cannot say that I in any way represent the Society of 200 members. I have taken a good deal of trouble, since. I was appointed to appear before the Commission, in making enquiries, and hold my own views, which I wish to place before the Commission. My age is 30. I am L M.S. of the Calcutta University of the year 1889. I have been in pri- vate practice in Bhawanipur and Kalighat since that year. I am not M.B., as stated in the letter of the Secretary of the Society. Kalighat is a great seat of ganja smoking, and I have seen many smokers. I have treated nearly a dozen of them for pneumonia, dysentery, and insanity. I have treated nearly half a dozen pneu- monia cases, four or five of dysentery, and two of insanity, one of a violent and one of a mild type in ganja-smokers. One of the latter was debili- tated and afflicted with boils. I have treated not less than 25 or 30 cases of pneumonia altogether. I have treated 100 or more cases of dysentery, and five cases of insanity, including the two ganja smokers mentioned above. This practice has been during the last three years. I should like to see ganja consumption re- stricted more than at present. That is my chief view in coming before the Commission. I do not wish for total prohibition. I do not know to what point restriction has gone at present. What I mean is that I want to see the drug less used by the people than I have seen it used in the places I know504 short of prohibition. This could be effected by making the drug less accessible to the people; but how this could be done is more than I can say. At present every one can get ganja or bhang for a pice or a couple of pice. I should like to see the drugs made dearer. Of the three I should like ganja to be the most expensive, next charas, and then bhang. If it were possible to prohibit ganja alone, I should like to see it done, leaving charas and bhang to be used under restriction; but I am not sure that it would be possible. I don't know at what price ganja is now being sold in Bhawanipur; but I sent a pice, and they gave me a bit of flat ganja about the weight of a quarter tola, enough for one chillum. I know one pice worth goes to fill a chillum. I don't know the price of charas or bhang, and I did not know the price of ganja till I sent for the one pice worth. I would like to see ganja made in- accessible to lunatics and youths up to 16 at least. Government should not allow them to use any. I am not prepared to say that Government should lock up all lunatics. I have seen the patient I was talking of going to the shop morn- ing and evening. There should be a prohibition against sale to a lunatic. I have no other sugges- tion to make in regard to the administration. I have seen so much of the evils caused by the drugs that restriction appears to me necessary. I have found people become pale and emaciated on beginning to smoke ganja, and after three or four months to become thoroughly changed for the worse, mentally and physically. I judge that these are the effects of the drug, because people, before using the drugs, were healthy and bright and intelligent. I have seen these effects in members of families I have visited in the course of my practice. I can remember at least a dozen cases which showed the above changes in three months. All these were sons of families I visited, and, except in one case, the other members of the families did not smoke. The young men were scapegraces who had taken to evil courses against the will of their families. Kalighat is probably worse than any other part of Calcutta in the matter of ganja smoking, and it is the evil effects I have seen there which make my heart bleed and make me wish to lay my views regarding restriction before Government. Ganja is worse than alcohol. Alcohol does not make people so utterly useless and worthless as ganja does, at least among respectable families. Among the lower classes also, I think ganja is the more harmful. This is my experience in Kali- ghat. 238. Evidence of the INDIAN RELIEF SOCIETY, Calcutta. Introductory.505 Government testimony.506 miserable living by their joint labour, and if they fail in it, they curse their fate and mourn. And thirdly, because they have not the power to reckon up their gain or loss, as they keep no account at all for doing it. To their rescue.-507 way of acceptance." This practice is followed by all respectable people. And whenever siddhi is drunk, it is done only for intoxicating purposes. Even supposing that siddhi cannot be suppress- ed altogether, there can be no valid excuse for the non-suppression of the other three drugs which, as has been already pointed out, are positively dele- terious and vicious. Loss508 APPENDIX III A. Year. Number of raiyats engaged in cultivation. Average produce per bigha. Mds. Sr. Ch. Excise Administration Report, 1892-93, page 36. 1888-89 2,449 3 15 14 1889-90 2,480 3 13 5 1890-91 2,882 2 20 2 1891-92 2,517 4 23 10 1892-93 3,429 2 5 9 TOTAL 13,757 15 38 8 Average 2,751 3 7 11 APPENDIX III B. 1 2 Year. Quantity estimated to have been produced. Year. Quantity consumed Excise Administration Report, 1892-93, page 39. Mds. Sr. Excise Administration Report, 1892-93 page 36. Mds. 1890-91 6,681 29 1890-91 6,095 1891-92 6,040 6 1891-92 5,677 1892-93 7,576 5 1892-93 5,451 TOTAL 20,297 TOTAL 17,223 Average 6,766 Average 5,741 APPENDIX III C. Year. Total receipts from Ganja. Rs. Excise Administration Report, 1892-93, page 39. 1890-91 23,11,713 1891-92 22,92,568 1892-93 23,86,066 TOTAL 69,90,347 Average 23,30,116 APPENDIX III D. Year. Consumption. Revenue. Mds. Sr. Rs. Excise Administration Report, 1892-93, page 40. 1891-92 1,064 10 48,464 1892-93 1,033 29 53,558 TOTAL 2,097 39 1,02,022 Average 1,049 51,011 AMRITA KRISHNA MULLICK (on behalf of the Indian Relief Society). Oral Evidence. The Association on whose behalf I appear has connection with Mr. Caine's Temperance Associa- tion and is interested in ventilating the grievances of India; it is a political association. The mem- bers number 200 to 300. The Society's head- quarters are in Calcutta and it has branches in almost all districts in Bengal. The views con- tained in the printed paper are the views of the Association. A special meeting was held in Cal- cutta, at which reports from the various branches were considered and the conclusions framed. A draft was circulated to every member in the mufas- sal and in Calcutta, and the printed paper is the final draft as approved by the Association. A second sentence of the paragraph relating to religious sanction refers to the emphatic terms which were used by the late Viceroy in passing the Age of Consent Bill. The Association wish the name of Kali Das, Gupta, Kabiraj, to be transferred from Appendix I (2) to Appendix I (1), and the names of Gopi Mohun Roy, Benod Lall Sen, and Upendra Nath Sen erased from Appendix I (2). These appen- dices were drafted by one kabiraj and handedover to another kabiraj to get the signature of other
509 kabirajes. The kabiraj who was going to get the signatures informed us that the people whose names appear under the appendices would subscribe to them, and therefore their concurrence was assumed before signature. The opinions of Kabiraj Gopi Mohun Roy and Benod Lal Sen have been sepa- rately submitted to a Committee of the Associa- tion, and are now tendered* as additional appen- dices. The views of the Association are to suppress ganja, charas, bhang and majum, and to prohibit the cultivation of the hemp plant. The Association has considered the extensive use of ganja by devotees and fakirs, and sees no difficulty in depriving them of the drug. We are aware of the extent to which the drug is used by such persons all over India, and are of opinion that it is not necessary for them, and that they will have no real grievance if the supply is cut off. We have considered the use by the labouring classes, and we do not believe in the use remaining moder- ate for any length of time. The members of the Association are pleaders and educated gentlemen in Calcutta and mufassal towns. The devotees and labouring classes are not represented on the Association; but we had talk with some of them. Our experience of the lower classes is entirely confined to Calcutta and the mufassal towns. The difficulty of suppressing siddhi is recog- nised in the paragraph relating to religious sanc- tion. This difficulty arises from the fact that the hemp plant grows wild. Though people in remote villages might use bhang from the wild plants growing scattered about their huts, the use of it by the general public may be almost suppressed by stopping the licensed vend. I include in the general public not only the town people, but all the people of the country. We have considered whether the suppression of ganja and other hemp drugs might lead to the use of alcoholic liquors; and we think that there is little danger of this, because (1) all Hindus and Mahomedans are by their religion- forbidden to take wine; (2) wine is much more costly than the hemp drugs; (3) the raising of the duty on ganja has resulted in a decrease in the consumption of the drug without any corre- sponding increase in the consumption of liquor. With regard to the possibility of dhatura being substituted for the hemp drugs, it has been thought that people are afraid to use dhatura because it is poisonous and likely to produce insanity, and also that it cannot be had in suffi- cient quantity to replace ganja. Both alcohol and dhatura would be more harmful than ganja. I am requested by the Association to draw special attention to that part of their paper rela- ting to the cultivation of the plant, and the pitiable condition of the cultivators owing to their losses. The Association is aware that the cultivators are under no compulsion to cultivate the plant, but thinks the condition of the culti- vators a reason for suppressing the cultivation. * Not received. 239. Evidence of MAHARAJA DOORGA CHARAN LAW, C.I.E., Merchant, Calcutta. 16. Bhang is generally prepared, as far as I know, by people in their houses. 32. Siddhi or bhang is to a certain extent con- nected with the religious customs of this country, it being considered imperatively necessary to lay it as an offering in our pujas. 34. It would be a serious privation if consumers are to forego the use of the drug. 35. The prohibition would certainly cause serious discontent, the evil effect of which I am unable to estimate. 40. Yes; they are prescribed for their medici- nal properties. 41. They are perfectly harmless when taken in moderation, and certainly operate beneficially for the purposes stated in clauses (a), (b) and (c). 42. Moderate use is harmless, as I have already stated. 43. I never heard of any disturbances to neigh- bours resulting from the use of the drugs. 240. Evidence of BABU NITYA NANDA ROY, Teli, Merchant and Zamindar, Chittagong. 1. My experience on the subject depends upon the reports from the persons who seem to have fair knowledge of the trade, use and consumption of hemp drug. As I have no personal experience in many points under notice I have answered them from informa- tion I have gathered. However, trust my glean- ings will be of some use before the Commission. 2. The definitions given here are equally accepted in this district also. These products are called in the same name, excepting bhang which is obtained in this place from a plant, namely, bhang grows spontaneously in Satkaniah and Fallickcherry, It. is indigenous growth of the district, has narcotic virtue. 3. I am told in the Province of Behar and Dis- tricts of Rajshahi and Rangpur hemp grows spon- taneously. This drug is imported article in this district. 4. It is known in Chittagong generally by name of ganja, sometimes called in by terms, amongst hemp-smokers by name of "siddi" and "bara tamook." I do not know different names it bears in different countries. But the above refers to the same plant. 5. I believe, if cultivated, the hemp will grow in all elevated parts of Bengal, and if the seeds are kept in the tree in time when they will be strewn about by the wind, they will grow, though not luxuriantly in the very soil. I am not aware what special climate is necessary to grow wild hemp. 6. I have no idea of it. 7. No. Only for speciality in some gardens scarcely a tree or two are grown under permission of the Excise officer. 8. Never cultivated in the district. 11. I have no idea of it.
510 12. I do not know. 13. I believe it is not restricted, but the people in this part of the country do not cultivate it, as ganja is mostly imported from Upper Provinces. There are many parts of Lower Bengal that would not produce ganja on account of the soil being merged under water for a good portion of the year. 14. Not in this district. Dry leaves of bhang from special bhang tree is sold, but under Excise Act. 15. I have no idea of the difference of prepara- tion in wild and cultivated hemp. So far I know that ganja is smoked after mixing it with tobacco leaf, and eaten by intermixing the ganja with sweetmeat; the preparation is called "Majum;" and the drug is made drinkable by grinding and mixing it with water, sugar, cloves, etc., which is called "Sabji." 16. Bhang is prepared from the special leaves of bhang tree in the house either drinkable or eaten with a lump of sugar. Bhang is not made from hemp plant. I do not know whether charas or ganja can be prepared from the wild plant. 17. There is no special class of people for pre- paring the drugs mentioned. 18. Yes, it keeps good for a year or more. It gradually loses its effect. Dampness is the chief cause of deterioration. 19. Ganja is mostly used for smoking. "Sabji," is occasionally made out of it by grinding the ganja and making "Serbet," for drinking sake. It is sometimes used for medicinal purpose. I have no knowledge where it is more prevalent, and also have no idea of charas as it is not used in the district. 20. Mostly fishermen and low classes of people smoke ganja. About 3 per cent. among the said class use ganja as intoxicating drug. I cannot tell in which localities it is more prevalent. 21. I cannot give correct information about it, but as flat ganja is mostly imported here, I sur- mise this kind is invariably and everywhere used in this district. 22. As said above, the charas is not in vogue here; if there be solitary instances, I do not know whence it is imported. 23. No; I mean the dry leaves of the special bhang tree. 24. People of North-Western Provinces gener- ally use the bhang as refreshment, just as beer, claret, and cider are used in Europe. In the dis- trict this is used by the natives that have bowel complaints. It is efficacious in bringing the bowel in tone. 25. I am not in a position to answer it. 26. I have no idea of it. 27. For excitement and intoxicating purpose low classes of people, particularly those that are living on piscatory profession and the coolies going in the hills, are addicted to smoke ganja under a notion that the use of it gives energy to work and also alleviates pain of hard work. 28. I cannot exactly answer this question. This habitual moderate consumer of ganja not less than two pice a day would suffice, to habitual excessive consumer more than one anna, 29. I am told, among hard smokers when they want to increase the power of intoxication, opium or dhatura is mixed; but it is not generally the case, as they often extend the rounds of chillum for the said purpose. Bhang massala is not sold separately in this dis- trict, but the consumers buy the ingredients from different shops. I am told the ingredients are cloves, pepper, sugar, milk or water, and some- times to make the potation strong adds ganja leaf with it. 30. As far as I am informed, the habitual con- sumers take their daily quantity, but like com- pany, and when gathered they practise more and want to extend the circle of smokers. Females and children do not use the drugs. 31. The habit is formed by evil association with the habitual consumers. It is not very difficult to break the habit. The habit naturally develops to excess when the usual quantity does not pro- duce the required effect by continual use. It is like all other intoxicating drugs when used as a habit. 32. There is no social or religious custom or binding to admit of use of hemp. It is not es- sential at all for any custom whatsoever. Frequent use of it leads to formation of habit, and undoubt- edly it is injurious. 33. By the better and thinking class of people, the use of the drug in all shapes is regarded with disgust and pity. There is no religious binding to use it, and therefore mostly the cultivating class of people and day labourers also look to the practice with abhorrence. I attribute this senti- ment of disgust that people in general express is to the belief and experience that all narcotics muddle the head, injure health and cause unneces- sary expenses; and also under the influence of intoxication often social and moral rules are violated to the great grief and disgrace of friends and relatives of the offenders. No worship of hemp plant is observed here. 34. I do not see any serious privation will ne- cessarily be felt by the consumers, if they forego the habit. But the fishermen, etc., and the iti- nerant jogis or fakirs will feel the want for a time. The whole class makes a great minority against non-smoking class. 35. Prohibition of the use of the whole of the drugs, excepting bhang made out of special bhang plant, is very feasible. No doubt there would be illicit consumption at first, but if the stringent law be enacted and enforced, the practice will gradu- ally fall off. Prohibition can be enforced by stopping the cultivation, importation and export- ation of the drug. I do not suppose there will be serious discontent among consumers; they may grudge for a time and then all will wear off. There is no possibility of political danger. There is every probability that the stoppage would lead to other recourse, such as alcoholic stimulants and other drugs. But if law is also severe in that respect also, the consumers will be satisfied with their lot. 36. Yes; and I attribute this to the newness and relish of the foreign importation of alcoholic drinks. I have had instances of some of my ac- quaintances falling into this error. 37. I do not know. 38. I have no experience of it.
511 39. I do not suppose so. I am of opinion that the smoking of hemp is more injurious than eating or drinking it. Although I cannot give any sound reason concerning the medical operation of it, but my personal experience leads me to believe that smoking invariably deteriorates constitution, loses teeth sooner, and gives always bloodshot eyes. 40. I cannot exactly answer this question. But I know native doctors use the drugs for medicinal purpose. I do not know if it is used for cattle disease. 41. (a) I do not know. (b) It alleviates fatigue, etc., I believe, more through forgetfulness while under the influence of intoxication than in its real effect. (c) I do not know. Coolies, fishermen and fakirs use it. Those that take it as a habit moderately, they think it is necessary for the above purposes. I don't see there is any necessity to take occasional dose of it for the said end. 42. I cannot say even the moderate use of it will be harmless, inasmuch as it will act upon the brain, and every day moderate use of it will gradually lead to excess. 43. Yes. 44. They say that it clears their head and power of vision, and it is refreshing too. It produces in- toxication to a certain degree. I have no experience of the drugs having properties to allay or create appetite. But I am told by the habitual consumer that use of the drug gives them great zest for eat- ing. The effect of intoxication lasts for 4 to 5 hours according to the quantity used. There is after-effect. They say they feel nervous prostra- tion, dryness in the throat and chest. Subsequent gratification is not so much yearned after as in the case of alcoholic drinks, but at regular time a little use of it gives tone to the body and refreshes energy. 45. (a) Yes. (b) No doubt it impairs the constitution, and generally chest disease follows by smoking. (c) I do not know for certain, but 1 believe it will on account of its continual action on brains. (d) Smoking causes asthma and chest disease. (e) It greatly impairs moral sense. (f) It certainly deadens intellect. I have seen persons not exactly insane, but have become idiot. The latter part I can't answer with cer- tainty. (g) I cannot correctly answer to this, but I have seen insanes smoking ganja, and their insanity had burst to highest pitch at the time. 46. I am of opinion that all intoxicating drugs act upon brain. And brain being the seat of all nervous action, nervine prostration will necessarily follow when the brain is overworked by habitual excessive use of the hemp drug. The abnormal; functions of all organs lead to the premature decay of health; therefore it is not strange that the habitual excessive use of hemp drugs will produce the same consequence by working in the brain and exciting the blood. It is true that the re-action follows, but to bring back the system into its normal condition the consumers again have recourse to the drug without seeking any other means to have the desired effect or without suffering the delay for the recovery by means of nature which would bring the system into its former tone. And therefore a continual excitement and action of brain is kept on, without knowledge of the con- sumers that great danger they are running into;idiocracy, insanity, brain and chest disease with their concomitant maladies gradually invade the system impairing both body and mental faculties. The feelings are blunted and reasons diminished, and therefore by loss of both physical and mental energies, laziness of habit and immoralities are engendered in habitual excessive consumers of hemp and other intoxicating drugs. 47. I believe the habitual moderate use of these drugs does not perpetuate the habit in the children of the moderate consumer, nor affect them in any way. 48. I am not sure that the excessive use of these drugs by habitual consumers will reproduce the same habit in their children; but when the physical power is enervated by continual use of it, children born after such enervation will certainly be affected; mostly the intellect is affected rather than the physique of the children. Use of bhang got from special bhang plant, does not materially injure either physique or intellect. It is remarkable among the people of North-Western Provinces to retain health and vigour after habitual use of the drug, even in excessive quantity. Their children do not suffer from their parents' indulgence in the said drug, but are always of healthy and blooming appearance. 49. I am told moderate use of ganja mostly when eaten gives excitement to the sexual desire. It is used by low prostitutes and libertines for the above purpose, because it has retentive properties to some extent as I am told. The use of it for the said purpose is indeed injurious, because it tells upon constitution by muddling the brain as well as by abnormal sexual intercourse. Continual excessive use of hemp by smoking tends to im- potence, I believe, because after-effect of it is very sedative. 50. As I am told by a doctor friend of mine, I am of opinion excessive use of ganja drug cannot be practised as an aphrodisiac, because its sedative virtue appears soon after in the system, and all nervous actions and energies are benumbed under too much narcotic influence which paralyzes the active organ for the time being. Prostitutes ap- parently do not feel the want of function of their nerves or physical powers, for they are passive in their kind and capable of bearing. But actually the feeling, sense and desire are deadened in them by excessive use of the drug. They do not use it for the excitement of lust so much as for the sake of intoxication and forgetfulness of their misery. Ganja being cheaper intoxicating drug than alcoholic stimulant, low and poor persons and prostitutes have recourse to it. I have already shewn how the use of the drug for the sensual purpose is injurious. 51. There are many wily bad characters that use the drug moderately in order to retain their memory sharp, sense keen, eye clear, and ear acute for perpetrating crime with cunning, and at the same time use the drug only to give excitement to the action and to add extra amount of zeal and determination. 52. The excessive use of the intoxicating drugs by bad characters is of little use for consumma- tion of their evil designs. When the head is con- fused, eye dim, ear dull, memory failing, hand benumbed, feet not agile under too much narcotic
512 influence, it will be next to impossibility to com- mit a crime without detection. Therefore the bad characters of true cunning type use the drug moderately and induce the followers to use sparingly before the commission of crime. But invariably the bad characters are addicted to in- toxicating drugs to abandon the remorse of con- science, and to give desperation to their will. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs may sometimes incite to crime not thought of. I have known friends coming to blows under its influence. I have not had instances of homicidal frenzy, but I have seen persons thrown into utter despondency and evading society. 54. Yes; generally the criminals use the drug to fortify themselves for commission of vice as said above, and to suppress all compunction they may feel on account of inborn conscience. 55. Criminals to further their designs induce their victims to take these drugs in such quantity as to produce stupefacation. Large quantity of these drugs will produce the desired effect, but admixture will quicken the action. I need not go far to give an instance of such type of crimi- nals. Case of Tarkeshwar mohanta is a living illustration. 56. Use of hemp in moderate degree is not very serious, but the excessive indulgence of it or compound admixture of it for the purpose of in- creasing the intoxication is very injurious to health. Dhatura is more mixed for administra- tion to others than for personal use. 57. I am told when ganja is drunk, the effect is more active and immediate than when smoked. 58. As it is, it is working well in suppressing smuggling and increasing excise revenue. 59. I have no idea of it. 60. It is not produced in this district, and I have no experience of ganja cultivation. 61. Charas is not produced in this district. 62. While there is separate plant called bhang grown in this district, production and cultivation of hemp for making bhang is not necessary here. 63. I have no objection in the present system of excise working, and therefore cannot suggest any improvement. 64. I have no objection on the present proce- dure of importation, exportation and transport of hemp drugs. 65. I have no idea of it; if increase of taxation could decrease the use of intoxicating drugs I would recommend increase of taxation, or I would suggest abolition of all taxes on all intoxicating drugs with stringent prohibitory law to suppress the use of the said drugs. 66. I don't see any reason to make different rates of taxation on different sorts of ganja while the properties are same. 67. I have no objection of the present method of taxing. 68. In my opinion licensed houses or shops vending the drugs should be few and far be- tween. 69. I am informed the wishes of the people are consulted and considered before the license is granted to any locality. Excise officers make enquiries. Public opinion ought to be considered. 70. I have not come across any facts of im- porting or smuggling the drugs from any Native States to this place. The duty is regularly paid. and there is no untaxed drug as far as my knowledge of it goes. 241. Evidence of BABU NOBIN CAHNDRA SARKAR, Kayasth, Wholesale and retail vendor of ganja and bhang, Barisal. 1. As a wholesale and retail vendor of ganja and bhang at Barisal. 2. Yes; flat ganja is called "chapti". Round is called "gol". Broken is called "chur". Bhang and siddhi are equivalent terms. Charas is not consumed in this district. 3. Ganja is cultivated at Rajshahi. Bhang is brought from Calcutta. The source of supply is not known to me, most probably from Monghyr and Bhagalpur. 4. Ganja is known as ganja, and bhang or siddhi as such. 5 and 6. Not known to me. 7. Yes; (a) at Rajshahi for ganja. (b) Charas not known to me. (c) Bhang probably in Behar. (d) Not known to me. Extent not known to me. 8. Not known to me. 9. Ganja-planting is commenced in Kartik corresponding to November, and the crop is gathered in Mag and Falgun, i.e., in January and February. It is cultivated on selected soil of raised level. The land is thoroughly ploughed and earth beaten down to dust. 10. No, They are ordinary agriculturists. 11. Never. 12. Not known to me, but the male plant, i.e.,of bhang, is extirpated to ensure the prolific growth of the female plant, i.e., of ganja. 13. Yes; at Rajshahi and some neighbouring portions of Bogra and Dinajpur. Possibly under Government orders. Not common to all districts. Not known to me. 14. Yes, except charas. (a) Ganja at Rajshahi. (b) Charas not known to me. (c) Bhang in Behar. Extent not known. 15. (a) Ganja is smoked with huka and chillums. (c) Bhang is drunk by pounding it with water or milk and sugar, and in some cases with spices and scents. 16. Bhang is prepared for home consumption. Bhang can be prepared from wild hemp of spon- taneous growth. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant. 17. Generally by Hindus. Rarely by Muham- madans. 18. Deteriorates by keeping, but is not totally
513 lost. About three years; causes of deterioration not known to me. 19. Ganja is not only used for smoking, but for medicinal purposes also. Extracts and tinctures of ganja are used in the undermentioned diseases:514 and frequently results in temporary insanity, and easily provocating temperament. 57. Never, but they are always smoked. 58. The rules are already stringent in this' dis- trict owing to restricted issue of ganja to the retail vendors and needs no administrative change at present. 59 and 60. I cannot suggest. 61. No charas here. 62. Ganja is already cultivated under Govern- ment control within restricted area. Bhang should also be similarly cultivated. 63. No, no suggestion to make. 64. No, the present administrative regulations are sufficient. 65. Present rate of taxation sufficient. 66. Yes, different rates for different kinds, hut the issue of chur ganja should be discontinued. 67. No. 68. Yes, but not consumed on the premises. 69. In this district local opinion is taken into consideration before opening a shop. Within municipalities the municipal authorities are con- sulted, but in villages public opinion is of little value. 70. No importation from Native States. Yes;no untaxed drug used here. 242. Evidence of BABUS BURGA DAS CHANDRA, Gumasta of Jadab Chandra Das of Calcutta, and ANNADA PRASAD RAI, Gumasta of Prionth De of Calcutta. Oral evidence. We go out into the villages and collect bhang for the goladars. This year we exported 403 maunds515 dhatura with ganja. The leaf of tobacco increases the flavour of ganja. 30. In most cases ganja is consumed in com- pany. Bhang is generally consumed in solitude. No experience about charas. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is not easily formed. It is difficult to break off the habit when once formed. There is no tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There is a custom of consuming ganja on the occasions of Trinath's Puja. Three chillums of ganja are essentially necessary on such occa- sions. The use of ganja on such occasions is essential, and is generally excessive. The use on such occasions is likely to lead to the formation of habit. Bhang is not required for any such purpose. 33. The consumption of ganja is generally held in contempt. The reason for such a feeling is that the indulgence in the drug tells upon the constitution. There is no custom of worshipping the ganja or bhang plant. 34. It would be a serious privation to all classes of consumers to forego the use of ganja. This will produce all sorts of bowel complaints in the consumers. Bhang is generally consumed for medicinal purposes. If the consumption of the drug be prohibited, this will also be the cause of great hardship. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and bhang. If all supply be stopped, there would be no illicit consumption. There will be great discontent amongst the consumers, but such discontent would not amount to political danger. The prohibition would be followed by indulgence in opium. 36. No. 37. No experience. 38. Flat ganja produces more intoxication than the other varieties. 39. No experience. 40. Ganja and bhang are both prescribed by native kavirajes. Bhang is required for the treat- ment of cattle diseases. 41. Ganja516 3. Bhang plant grows wild in Mymensingh, Burdwan, and Nadia. It grows in abundance in Mymensingh. 4. It is known by the names bhang and siddhi. 5. It generally grows on fallow lands which are rather high. 6. Dense. 7. (a) In Rajshahi district. (b) In Rajshahi district. (c) No. (d) No. I am not aware of the extent of cultivation. 14. (a) Produced at Rajshahi, but to what ex- tent I am not aware of. (b) Produced at Rajshahi, but to what extent I am not aware of. (c) Bhang is prepared from the wild plant in all districts. 18. I have no experience about charas. Bhang and ganja both deteriorate by keeping. They lose their effect entirely by time. Ganja keeps good for a year with ordinary care. I have no knowledge about bhang on this point. The resinous substance dries up. A sort of worm also grows in the drug. These are the causes of deterioration. I am not aware how the deterioration can be prevented. 19. Used only for smoking. 20. Ganja is generally smoked by the lower classes of people, and occasionally by people of the middle classes. I cannot say what proportion of these people smoke ganja. I have no expe- rience about charas. 21. Flat ganja is preferred. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase. The reason for this is the increase in the price of country liquor. Many people who formerly indulged in liquor have now betaken themselves to ganja. 28. (a) Half ani, worth two pice. (b) Six anis, worth four pice. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja. I am not aware if dhatura is ever mixed with it. I have no information as to what ingredients are mixed with bhang. 30. Ganja is ordinarily consumed in solitude. The prostitutes are the only females who consume ganja. Ganja is not ordinarily consumed by children. No information about bhang and charas. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is not easily formed, but when once formed it is difficult to break it off. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. The ganja consumers sometimes offer the drug to Mahadeo or Trinath. The drug is not essential for such purposes; the consumption is temperate. It does not lead to the formation of any habit. 33. The consumption of the drug is held in con- tempt. This feeling is due to an apprehension that their example might be followed by others. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping ganja or bhang plant. 34. It would be a serious privation to the labourers who indulge in the drug. The drug enables them to bear fatigue. I can give no idea of the number of this class. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of the ganja. The drug will not be consumed illicitly when the supply will be entirely stopped. It will occasion serious discontent among the consumers; but such discontent will not amount to political danger. I cannot say if the prohibition will be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. No. 37. The intoxication produced by charas is of greater intensity than that produced by ganja. 38. No difference. 40. Bhang is prescribed for bowel complaints. 41. Ganja517 67. No objection. 68. Very rarely consumed on the houses, so that no disturbance is caused to consumers. 69. Wishes of the people are consulted through the Excise Officers. 70. I am not aware of any such smuggling. 245. Evidence of BABU PROSAD DASS DUTT, Zamindar, Calcutta. 20. The mendicants of Upper India, which include jogis, sanyasis, and sadhus as a special class, generally use ganja in excess when in a large party and can afford to pay for the same. The other class, which includes the mendicants of Lower Bengal, and generally the lower class of people of India who have to undergo hard and arduous work and expose themselves to the wea- ther, use it in moderation. Of course there are exceptions to this general rule. 24. The people of Northern India generally consume bhang habitually more or less. The people of Lower Bengal generally do not use it habitually like the people of Upper India. 20. Charas is not a favourite to any class; it is used by a small section, and is not largely used. 33. Few men of the middle or upper class of India use ganja, and very few men of those classes of Lower Bengal are addicted to it. The word "ganja-khor" i.e., the smoker of the drug, has been and is still considered as an abusive term. There is another saying," Ganja khele Lakhi chare," which means goddess of wealth quits him who smokes ganja. In fact the respectable class always try that no member of his family should indulge in ganja. Nevertheless, hitherto some young people of this class who had prejudice to wine used to indulge in it sometimes secretly amongst their party; but now such smoking is considered as degradation, and wine has taken its place. 41. The object of the moderate use of bhang is said to be to keep the digestive functions steady and to enjoy a little pleasure. The object of the moderate use of ganja is said to be to prepare the smoker to perform hard work and to undergo ex- posure. Certainly the smoking, it is said, gives also a little pleasure to drown the contemplation of the hard lot which the poorer classes consider their doom to undergo. 28. Five to six chillums of ganja per day is considered as a moderate consumption. It costs about three pice; but the quantity suffices to satisfy the cravings for smoking of about three men. Half to one lota of siddhi or bhang may be consi- dered as moderate consumption for a man. It is worth about one pice. 31. It is a general rule that the moderate use of every intoxicating drug may develop into excess unless it is restrained by true self-love or want. Ganja and bhang cannot be an exception to this general rule. 32. On the occasion of the immersion of the idols into the water, i.e., on Vasan day, after keeping up the previous night, and exposure, bhang is generally used by almost all the people of India, and it is also given to the deities as an offering. The better class of people, as a general rule with a higher education, sip it only; but the Anglicized natives do not conform to this rule. The people of the North-Western Provinces, more specially of Mathura, take bhang before a sumptuous repast. 41. For a layman it is indeed difficult to say the effect of moderate or excessive use of the drugs. Even a professional medical man cannot answer this question without much observation. So far I have seen that men using ganja either moderately or excessively performed their allotted work easily. I limit the excessive use to the extent which mendicants of the North-Western Provinces in party generally use, say, up to 20 chillums per day. I have heard from two Bengali Brahmans, who are now dead, that they smoked ganja up to 50 to 60 chillums, but that did not incapacitate them from doing their ordinary work. Possibly some men may possess strong constitu- tions to bear such excess. One of them gave it up altogether, and lived long without suffering at all. I have seen excessive use of bhang make men so intoxicated as to be worthless to perform their daily avocations. Of course this is confined to those who are not addicted to it. I am one of those who would like total stoppage of all intoxicating drugs, if practicable, without any injury; but I must candidly admit that the moderate use of ganja by those classes who have to carry palki at a distance on a rainy night, or over a steep hill, or to navigate about over dangerous waters or during the night, or when rain is falling and wind is blowing fearfully, or when a cultivator in the field working in knee- deep water and soft earth during biting rain, is not objectionable, as I have personally seen under these circumstances the labourers after the use of a chillum or two grew invigorated and resumed their work with a desirable heartiness. 29. I am not prepared to answer this question. I have only heard that dhatura seeds are taken unintentionally. Possibly the sellers mix them to produce a more intoxicating effect when they consider regular bhang is below the standard quality. 35. Possibly it would be some benefit to some of the people from my point of view, that mode- rate use may tend to excess, if the use of hemp drug can be prohibited. Excessive use by some, in whose constitution it is not agreeable, I am afraid, leads to madness and increases a propensity to do vice and crime, not excepting murder; but how far it is expedient or feasible to suppress the use of the drugs I am not prepared to say, as so many people are using them for a long time without doing serious harm. It is a serious ques- tion whether it is wise to suppress a thing with the expectation of doing good to some, whilst it may do serious harm to a large class of people who have to perform hard work and undergo great exposure. It is an admitted fact that without some stimulant an exhausted man cannot resume hard work. It is impossible, as a practical man I say, to prohibit ganja altogether. We all know that generally some members of a family or some friends try to dissuade their member or friends who are addicted to them from using intoxicating drugs, but they invariably fail to achieve their object. If it be urged that prohibitory duty may stop consumption, I doubt that very much, and believe that the people who are addicted to them will naturally reduce their other necessary expen- diture to the detriment of the family, but will
518 continue to use the drugs. Furthermore, the smokers will betake themselves to crime to raise money to satisfy their intoxicating propensity. Considering the matter from all points of view, I would leave it as a necessary evil beyond control. 58. I am not exactly aware of the system of excise arrangement with reference to this subject. So far I may say, I have travelled much in the interior, and have never heard in any place that the excise arrangement is in any way inadequate to meet the requirements against abuse. Certain- ly I would not allow excise arrangements to be curtailed. 35. I have an estate in Saugor Island, where I generally reside five to six months continually. I look upon the people as my children, and they in return entertain kind regards for me. Some men- dicants have taught most of my people to smoke ganja. I have tried my utmost to suppress it, but I am sorry to say I have failed. This led me to think that it would be useless to make an attempt to prohibit the use of the drugs. As an economic question, I may point out that this is a cheap intoxicating drug acceptable to the poor class of people, and it is a grave question whether its restriction may not lead the people to resort to expensive intoxicating substances. It should be borne in mind that India is a poor country, and the major portion of the people can- not afford to expend much. It is all very well to advise people what they ought to do; but to make them conform to such advice is a different matter. A horse may be taken to the water; but to make him drink against his wish is impossible. 246. Evidence of BABU MAHENDRA NATH ROY, of Santa, Jessore. 1. The information that I have gathered from the numerous ganja-smoking persons in this part of the country authorize to answer the questions framed by the Commission. 2. As regards Dr. Prain's report, is quite correct, and in our part of the country people corroborate his assertions. 3. Ganja is indigenous in every part of Hindus- tan, but where taken care of and being cultivated, ganja is produced. 4. There are no different names of ganja in this part of the country that I know of. 5. Ganja grows in the mountainous regions as well as in the swampy plains and on the sandy and alluvial soil, and remains throughout the year. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily dense or scattered. 7. There is no cultivation of hemp in our part of. the country, neither do the people produce hemp, bhang and charas, or take out fibre or seed. 8. As there is no cultivation of ganja, so there is no increase or decrease of the area. 9. I do not know the method of cultivation. 18. Yes; it deteriorates after long keeping. It remains well for a year. It is generally worm- eaten. It can keep well if it be kept in a dry place. 19. Ganja and charas are generally used for smoking, and there may be other preparations, but they are not prevalent in this part of the country. 20. It is generally the lower classes of the com- munity that use ganja and charas. 21. The round class is generally preferred by the public. 22. Foreign charas is generally used, and is im- ported from Nepal and Punjab. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. All classes of the community drink bhang, not generally in Bengal, but in the North-West- ern Provinces, where its general use is prevalent. It is also mixed with sweetmeats, and is called majun, and is used by the people of the North- Western Provinces. 25. The use of charas, bhang, and ganja is on the decrease on account of the importation of foreign wine and of its heavy tax. 27. It is the lowest class who generally begets the habit of smoking, such as the palki-bearers, carpenters, and common labourers who, after the day's labour, take it for refreshment. 29. Bhang massalas are known to be cucumber seed, rosebuds, aniseed and round black pepper, with the admixture of milk, rosewater, attar and sometimes dhatura seeds to make it more effective. 30. Ganja and charas are generally smoked in company, and bhang is almost used in solitude and sometimes in company during festivals, such as Bijoya Dasami day. 31. The habit of these drugs is always acquired from company. It is not at all difficult to break off. The tendency of these drugs develops into excess. 32. Bhang and ganja are generally used by the Hindus, from time immemorial, for it is re- garded sacred since their god Siva used them, and it is essentially necessary to some of the re- ligious sects. The moderate use of these drugs is not injurious. 33. Bhang is generally worshipped by Hindus in general, and it is not looked down by the public as with alcohol drinkers, and it is not generally in disrepute. 34. Yes, it is with the mendicants, fakirs, nagas and sanyasis to forego the use of bhang and ganja. 35. It is not feasible to prohibit the consump- tion of these drugs, since it will create serious dis- contentment throughout the country, and no sub- stitute will have recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. Yes; alcohol has, in certain extent, sub- stituted for these drugs, specially to the higher English-knowing middle classes, simply to imitate English habits. 37. Ganja is more strong than charas. 40. It is used for medicinal purposes by kabirajes, allopaths, and homeopaths, adapted to diseases of drunkards of a neurotic character and to the urinary diseases. The characteristic of the intoxication it produces seems to be exaggeration of all perceptions and conceptions (aphrodisiac) and tendency to catalepsy. It is one of the great remedies to gonorrh519 42. Moderate use of these drugs is always beneficial. 43. Moderate consumers are always inoffensive. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use is refreshing; slight intoxication is produced, hunger, and creates appetite. The effect lasts for three or four hours. No after-effects; neither it produces longing nor uneasiness. 45. Habitual moderate use of these drugs never produces any untoward symptoms but on the contrary the excessive use produces all the symp- toms enumerated in the question. 46. The excessive use of these drugs tends to bowel complaints. 247. Evidence of the DISTRICT BOARD, 24-Parganas (Sub-Committee). 1. The answers are framed after discussion at a meeting of the Sub-Committee nominated by the District Board, 24-Parganas. 2. The definitions of the drugs as given by Dr. Prain may, on the whole, be accepted as correct. Bhang, siddhi, subji, or patti consists of the leaves and seeded flowers of varieties of Cannabis sativa supposed to be indigenous. Flat ganja is locally known as chapta,Round " " " " gol,Broken " " " " rora or chur, i.e., by chapta, gol, rora or chur, respectively. 3. The hemp plant grows all over India spon- taneously. Confining our remarks to this pro- vince, ganja has been grown under license in a compact tract of country within a radius of 16 miles lying in three districts, viz, Rajshahi, Dinaj- pur, and Bogra. In the Bengal districts of Sha- habad, Champaran, Monghyr, Bhagalpur, Dacca, Rangpore, Darbhanga, Chota Ngapur, and Orissa the hemp plant grows. 4. Shan, pat, naltapata, kashmiri, subji andpatti. They do not exactly refer to the same plant but to varieties of it. 5. The plant flourishes in the alluvial plains of Lower Bengal. 6. Ordinarily dense. 7. Yes, see answers to question 3. Charas is produced in the North-Western Pro- vinces and not in this province. This has already been answered in questions 3 and 4. 8. The cultivation of ganja in the area lying in Dinajpur, Bogra, and Rajshahi for the last five years has been fluctuating, as the figures below go to show:520 Nepal, and Kashmir. The Mirzapur and Amritsar charas are chiefly used. It is imported from the North-Western Provinces. 23. Yes, but rarely, and principally by the natives of the North-Western Provinces. 24. Men from Hindustan proper living in Bengal are, as a rule, addicted to the use of bhang in various forms. During the hot months 8 per cent. of the inhabitants of the North- Western Provinces consume bhang. In Bengal, people suffering from dyspepsia take it to obtain relief and as an appetiser. It is occasionally used by Bengali gentlemen. It is sometimes used as a substitute for intoxicants. 25. Owing to the high price of country liquor the use of ganja is on the increase in Bengal. As regards charas, there was a further increase of 3 maunds 24 seers 5 chittacks in consumption last year, which may be attributed to increased immigration from the Upper Provinces. The increase in Murshidabad is explained to be the result of the substitution of charas for ganja, owing to the high retail price of the latter. Bhang is also on the increase as a cheap, less harmful substitute for other powerful stimulants. 26. (a) The proportion is 100 to 1 of excessive consumers. (b) Almost the same proportion as indicated above. 27. The answer has been dealt with under 17 and 25. 28. Ganja about 40 grains per diem, take 20 or 30 grains a day. Take 4 oz. Bhang in the case of moderate consumers is about one quarter, and in the case of excessive consumer it raises to four tolas. 29. Charas (a) ordinarily mixed with paste tobacco, and (6) exceptionally with tobacco and molasses, while ganja is mixed ordinarily with dried tobacco and exceptionally with rose leaves. Siddhi is ordinarily pounded to a fine paste diluted with water and sugar. Dried rose leaves, pounded black pepper, rosewater, aniseed, milk are also added to give flavour to the beverage. The above are the ingredients of bhang massala. Dhatura, cucumber seeds, and kuchla are seldom used. These admixtures increase the power of intoxication, and act as poison. 30. Generally in company. Principally521 (f) Excessive continued use deadens the in- tellect. Insanity is met with among the con- sumers of the drugs, but the question whether it is due to the intemperate use of the pure drugs or to predisposition has not been authoritatively stated. The insanity is of a temporary character and is confined chiefly to boys and youths of an excitable nature. The likelihood of the occur- rence of insanity in moderate consumers of the drug is according to the duration of the pratice. The adulteration of the drugs with poisonous ingredients is said not unfrequently to induce insanity, in which case the malady will probably not recur provided the pure drug be used. It is, however, advisable not to resume the practice at all. 46. Habitual excessive indulgence leads to the various evils enumerated in the above question. Its immediate effect, if temperately taken, is to produce the curious mental frenzy which causes Orientals to run "amok." 47. No. 49. (a) Yes. (b) No, but to keep up at night they do use charas. (c) No. 50. The excessive use of the drugs like all excesses relaxes one's nerves and renders the con- sumer useless. 51. No. The connection between crime in general or with crime of any special character is very slight indeed, if it exist at all. 52. Men bent upon the perpetation of violent crimes are known to have recourse to excessive doses of the drugs. 53. Opinions are divided; however, consensus of opinion leans to the hypothesis that immoderate indulgence leads in its remote effects to laziness and generally want of energy522 22. The charas is not procurable at the licensed shops. The Moguls who come from the North- Western Provinces, and from other places in the North-Western Provinces where the use of charas is extensive, bring charas with them, and it is they who supply people with charas. There are people in the city who smoke charas; but the source from which they are supplied can hardly be ascertained. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Bhang is drunk by all classes of Hindus. It is a favourite drink with the Chowbeys, amongst Brahmins, Rajputs, Pavans, and Marwaris. Amongst this class we estimate no less than 50 per cent. who are habitual drinkers. The use of bhang is very great amongst these classes in cities and towns. In mufassal villages it is, however, not so; but it is said that wild growth of hemp in such localities is utilized by the villagers. 25. The liquor ordinarily used by the lower classes being cheaper, it has, to a certain extent, decreased the use of these drugs amongst them. 26. Taking population addicted to these drugs as 100, we give the following proportion:523 that it would affect the Chowbeys as a whole, Rajputs and Pavans. 35. Please see above. Prohibition cannot, we think, be totally enforced. It would in all probability create discontent amongst the sany- asis, who live upon it. We do not think there would be any political danger. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 36. We cannot, of course, furnish any statistics; but our impression is that, notwithstanding the permission to grow and use the drugs, the use of alcohol is on its increase. A common consumer would require at least one anna for ganja; but for the same price a larger quantity of alcohol can be had, and that would be much more intoxicat- ing. Its prohibition would affect, as stated above, the sanyasis and those who cannot use alcohol, and this proportion is much less than those who may indulge in any other drug or alcohol. 37. We are not in a position to answer this. 38. We are not in a position to answer this. Flat ganja is preferred, and it is said that it is the best of its kind. 39. Smoking of ganja is less injurious than eating or drinking the same. But it is seldom eaten and drunk. We can give no particular reason for it, but such is the impression. 40. We are not in a position to give any reply to this question. Bhang is prescribed by the native school of doctors for indigestion. In cattle diseases bhang is also used. 41. (a) The result is temporary. Its after- effect is bad and brings on indigestion. (b) Yes; and for this reason it is recommended amongst day labourers and sanyasis. (c) In damp climate the people usually resort to it; but we are not sure of its efficacy. (d) We know not. We mean moderate use amongst the lower class and sanyasis. 42. We do not consider its use either beneficial or harmless. Besides sanyasis, its use amongst others is, we think, injurious. 43. Yes. 44. It is said that the immediate effect of ganja is instantaneous intoxication. The smokers describe that it creates an agreeable and refreshing sensation, and it lasts for an hour or so. The intoxicating effect of bhang commences in about half an hour and lasts, both according to the ingredients used and the temperament of the con- sumer, from four to six hours. The effect of charas is much the same as that of ganja, only in a milder degree if taken alone; but, if mixed with ganja, is more than the effect of ganja pure and simple. It does create appetite in the beginning; but in the long run it fails. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing to habitual consumers of ganja; but not to that extent in bhang drinkers. 45. Moderate use. It does not produce any noxious effect, physical, mental, or moral. Those who are well fed do not suffer; but the poor do suffer in constitution. No loss of appetite is perceptible amongst moderate consumers. Moderate consumers scarcely suffer from these diseases. Moderate consumers are not found to suffer physically or undergo moral degradation. It does not bring on insanity. 46. By excessive use it does produce physical deterioration. It does injury to digestion. Some- times it causes dysentery, bronchitis, and asthma. Though moral sense does not leave the con- sumer, its excessive use is likely to impair it. Cases of insanity do occur, but very rare. 47. It is not hereditary, but the association is likely to affect the children. 48. In case of an excessive consumer the effect may be the same in a greater degree. 49 and 50. Yes; by low class of prostitutes. Yes; it is. The popular belief is that in the long run those who use it as an aphrodisiac and carry it to excess suffer from impotency. 51. Yes; it has connection with crime and committal of petty thefts. 52. Yes; it has connection with crime, and when under excitement, and there is a premedi- tation, they commit heinous offences. It would thus be seen that the offence is not the direct effect of ganja. 53. No. We know of no case, 54. Yes. 55. Yes; but not without admixture of certain strong narcotics, such as dhatura, kuchla, etc. 56. Please refer to paragraph above. 57. Please refer to paragraph 39 above. 58. In respect of hemp drugs the present system is working well. 60. Not produced in this district, and we are unable to say if the system of control requires modification, 61. Similar. 62. It should be controlled in the way that cultivation of ganja is controlled. 63. License fees for wholesale vend may be imposed. 64. None. 65. No suggestion. 66. Yes; because the quantity fit for use is different. 67. None. 68. None, as we are told and understand. 69. Yes; the authorities do not open a shop where it is disliked; but people seldom have any opinion on this point. 70. No; all ganja used is taxed, but not bhang. 3 Z 2
524 249. Evidence of the DISTRICT BOARD, Mymensingh (Sub-Committee). 1. Practical knowledge, coupled with inform- ation collected from friends and books and news- papers, forms the basis of our answers to such questions as are comprehensible and could be dis- cussed freely. 2. Yes. The definitions enunciated by Dr. Prain in his report of 21st June 1893 as to siddhi, bhang, charas, and ganja are acceptable for this province, and these products are locally known as such. 3. Ths districts in which the hemp plant grows spontaneously are (1) Dinajpur, (2) Jessore, (3) Rajshahi. It is abundant in the Naogaon Sub- division. 4. As far as we are aware, this plant is known as Cannabis indica. 5. Beds of rivers, low lands, and a warm cli- mate favour the growth of the wild hemp. 6. As a rule, the growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily dense. 7. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant in our province. 8. No cultivation, hence no increase or decrease in the area. 10. There is no regular cultivation of the plants; but some people rear those that grow spontane- ously. 12. No special cultivation of the wild hemp for the production of ganja has been brought to light. Spontaneous growth in the Darjeeling Terai has led some cultivators (Mumis by caste) to use the stems of the plant as drugs in curing bad legs and foot-sores. 13. Yes; for other particulars, vide answer to question No. 5. 14. Not in this district generally; but (c) bhang is now and then kept for use by low class people. 15. Ganja and charas are not prepared in this district. 16. No. 17. By the lower class of Hindus and Muham- madans. 18. Yes; the drugs do deteriorate. The de- terioration is large when they are exposed to air and damp and not properly secured. With ordi- nary care, the drugs keep good for years. Proper packing goes a great way in preventing deterior- ation. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking. But ganja is not unfrequently used as medicine. 20. The up-country men who have migrated to our district mostly use the drugs. The lower class of Hindus and Muhammadans have also largely taken to use them. The sanyasis, vaish- navas and brahmacharis do also use these drugs. 21. Chur ganja is preferred to flat and round ganja. But the flat one is ordinarily used, the price being much less than the other two kinds. 22. As a rule native charas is used. Foreign charas does not find its way here. 23. Bhang is seldom used for smoking. The occasion is very rare. Ganja-smokers failing to have a supply of ganja, smoke bhang, though reluctantly. 24. Bhang is mostly drunk by the up-country men. Sometimes small balls of bhang are pre- pared and distributed amongst people as a mark of respect to the goddess of cow when a new calf is born. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the de- crease. This decrease is partly attributable to the rise in the duty and partly to scarcity. Charas is not used in this district. 26. Seventy per cent. of the consumers are habitual moderate consumers; 20 per cent. coming from the class of sanyasis, vaishnavas and brah- macharis are habitual excessive consumers, and 10 per cent. are occasional moderate consumers. 27. Seventy per cent. of the consumers come from among the low class of Hindus and Muham- madans. 28. Average allowance and cost of bhang and ganja per diem525 the drug for the above purposes in a moderate dose. 42. No; moderate use of these drugs is said to be conducive to health in certain circumstances. But generally the use is injurious. 43. Certainly they are. 44. Moderate use of these drugs is refreshing. It does not allay hunger but alleviates fatigue. It certainly creates appetite. The after-effects are not so telling as the use of liquor. One who is habituated to use these drugs feels uneasiness, when in want of them. 45. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Cannot say. (e) Cannot say. (f) It is refreshing, and makes the consumer all life and vigour for the moment. Cannot say is it produces insanity. Moderate use of these drugs never makes the consumer insane unless excessive use is resorted to. 46. Habitual excessive use of ganja or bhang is a fruitful source of brain disease. It brings on torpor, and insanity is its inevitable result. 47. Habitual moderate use of the drugs, is not a hereditary habit. It does not affect in any way the children of the moderate consumer. 48. Nil. 51. Yes; there does not seem to be any connec- tion. 52. Excessive use of these drugs may give rise to offences less heinous than those committed under the influence of liquor. 53. No. 54. No. 55. (a) No. (b) Cannot say. 56. The effects of hemp do not seem to be particularly modified by the admixture of other substances. No such information could be given. 57. These cases are rare, and call for no remarks. 63. There can be no objection to the system of vend of preparations of ganja, charas, or bhang if the system of vending is at all to be retained. But, as a rule, the system in injurious. 64. Cannot answer. 65. These drugs have been already too highly taxed. 66. Certainly. The existing rates are generally approved. There is scarcely any ground for the rates being different. 67. Certainly not. 69. Wishes of the people are never consulted or considered. Local public opinion ought to be con- sulted and considered. 70. Cannot say. 250. Evidence of the DISTRICT BOARD, Monghyr (Sub-Committee). 2. These definitions may generally be accepted for this province. Ganja is not cultivated in this district. Bhang grows wild here, and both male and female plants are collected for the preparation of bhang. Siddhi is locally known as bhang. 3. Bhang grows wild in this district, and plants are scattered. 4. Not known by any other name in this district. 5. Climate temperate, elevation low. 6. Ordinarily scattered, grows ordinarily in low ground, such as ditches and in uncultivated lands. 14. (a) Not prepared. (b) Ditto. (c) Prepared from wild plant in this district. In the northern parts of this district, about 200 to 300 maunds annually. 15. None prepared from cultivated plant, as plant is not cultivated. Wild plant collected and dried for some days in the sun. Leaves then shaken off (seeds separated as far as possible) and sold for eating and drinking. (A) Charas is smoked. Prepared tobacco is mixed with it. A small quantity is put into the centre of a small ball of tobacco, which is then heated on a fire till it cracks. The two are then rubbed together and are ready for use (smoking). (B) Eating.526 substitute for ganja and then mixed with tobacco leaves (surti). 24. Rajputs, Babhans, Chhattris, Banias, etc., use bhang, but most drink it. The proportion between (a) and (b) cannot be specified, as the drug is used privately, much as Europeans use tea, only not so widely of course. 25. Ganja-smokers seem to increase in number, but the amount used per annum seems lessening, owing probably to rise in duty and price. Use is becoming moderate. For bhang nothing can be said, as it is used as prepared privately from the wild plant. Only about 1 per cent. of those using hemp drugs in this district use charas. 26. For ganja527 51 to 55. Vide memorandum by District Su- perintendent of Police, to Inspector-General of Police, Bengal. 56. The effects of all these drugs are modified by the admixtures noted in previous answers. Dhatura is not used in this district. 57. Ganja is sometimes eaten by sanyasis to produce greater intoxication. 251. Evidence of the DISTRICT BOARD, Arrah. 1. Enquiries from the vendors and consumers of the drugs. 2. Yes. Bhang, bang, subji and siddhi. 3. Monghyr and Bahraich (Oudh). 4. (Vide reply to A. 2.) All refer to the same plant. 5. Damp climate, moist soil and rainfall. 7. No. 10. The vendors of narcotic drugs are Sunris. 14. No. 18. All. They lose their effects in time, and keep good with ordinary care for a year only. 19. Yes. 20.. All classes of Hindus, specially the vil- lagers; nearly one-third of the population smoke ganja. Charas not used in this district. 21. Flat. 22. Charas not used in this district. 23. Never in this province. 24. All classes of Hindus; about one-fourth of the population consume bhang. 25. On the increase. 26. (a) One-half. (b) One-fourth. (c) One-fourth. (d) One-twentieth. 27. (a) and (c) from all classes of Hindus, and (b) and (d) from orders of mendicants (sadhus, jogis). No particular habit of life or circumstance leads to the practice. 28. Ganja529 EVIDENCE OF ASSAM WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of MR. G. GODFREY, Commissioner, Assam Valley Districts. 1. I have had no special opportunities of obtain- ing information on the subject; all I say is based upon recollection in my experience as a district officer. 3. In all the districts of the Assam Valley. It is not specially abundant in any district as far as I know; it seems to thrive in places where there are homesteads or where there have been home- steads. 4. The Assamese call it "bhang;" it is the wild ganja plant, I believe. 5. It seems to grow anywhere. I have seen it growing abundantly in Orissa and parts of Bengal. 6. In dense patches. 7. It is surreptitiously cultivated for production of ganja, chiefly, I think, by tea garden coolies, all over the Assam Valley; but this sort of culti- vation is of course kept in check by the district officers, and people who are found so cultivating are prosecuted under the Excise Act; so there is no considerable area under this sort of cultivation. 9. I think the plant springs up of itself, some- times perhaps from the seed of the cultivated Rajshahi ganja, which is consumed in the prov- ince. It is then tended by being kept weeded; beyond that there is no care, I think, taken of the plant. 10. Chiefly imported coolies from Bengal or immigrants from that province. 12. What I have said above refers to the so- called wild hemp. 13. It is not allowed at all. 14. No; (a) is prepared530 I have been in all parts of Assam except the Naga and Garo Hill districts. As Commissioner I am in charge of the six districts of the Assam Valley. I was two months in the Surma Valley. I officiated as Commissioner of Excise for six months, and at the same time held the office of Inspector General of Police and Jails. Question 3.531 villages, but always near villages or on abandoned village sites. 4. Bhang and ganja. Yes, I think it is the same plant. 5. It grows in the hills up to, say, 5,000 feet, also in the plains; but I think the best ganja is produced in the hills from one to three thousand feet. 6. Dense. 7 to 10. The cultivation of the hemp plant is strictly prohibited. 11. Illicit cultivation is from the seed of the excise ganja; but where the seed has once been sown, the plant reproduces itself. 12. It is cultivated surreptitiously in every district and in the adjoining hills, and more largely by the Nagas on the Sibsagar frontier and Miris on the Lakhimpur frontier. I cannot say if the male plant is extirpated: 13. Cultivation is prohibited altogether, but would be quite practicable in every district. 14. No. 17. None made in the province. 18. Damp and white ants affect ganja if not properly stored. I have known ganja in store- houses fit for use after two years. Protection against damp would prevent deterioration, I think. 19. Charas not used. Ganja is almost invari- ably smoked, occasionally diluted and drunk as a sherbet. 20. In the Assam Valley districts consump- tion of ganja is confined almost entirely to foreigners, garden coolies, carters, traders, sepoys, etc. In the Surma Valley it is used by the population more generally. 21. It is difficult to answer this question. One year there is more demand for flat ganja, another year for round or chur. Much depends on the price at which the vendors can obtain it from the goladars, and the duty. In this province flat ganja is chiefly used. See figures at page 36 of the latest Provincial Excise Report. 22. Charas is not used. 23. Yes. But to a small extent only, and is not confined to any classes or locality. 24. Bhang is rarely used. It is eaten, drunk, and smoked by no special classes or in special localities. 25. On the decrease, owing to higher prices due to increase of duty and license fees and to reduc- tions in the number of shops. 26. I cannot give any information, but am in- formed that habitual moderate consumers form by far the larger portion of consumers. 27. Coolies in gardens, carters, and foreigners are the consumers. 28. Ganja532 insanity is much exaggerated, and is a good deal due to the fact that the police in the case of a lunatic have to fill up a form and state the supposed cause of insanity and they give the popular reason533 country is under our political control and is visited yearly for a few days by the Deputy Commissioner with a strong armed guard, but beyond that, and over the Nagas, on the south of the Lakhimpur district, we exercise no control whatever. In the Naga Hills ganja grows profusely. Proceeding further we come to the Khamptis and Singphos, over whom we exercise no jurisdiction; and thence to the north of the Brahmaputra Valley we have various tribes; first the Mishmis, against whom we sent an expeditionary force a few years ago; then the Abors, with whom we are now at war. Then proceeding westwards come the Miris, the Daflas, and the Akas, all savage races, who are practically independent. We consider that all the territory inhabited by these people is British territory, but we have never extended our control over the people in any way. In all these hills ganja is grown and is brought down to the plains 534 shown by the Statement* I now put in, are most active in Sibsagar and Lakhimpur. These dis- tricts have the largest foreign or imported popu- lation. There is an account of a seizure of fifty-nine seers in one case in paragraph 72 of the Excise Report for 1887-88. It was in the La- khimpur district. I was then Deputy Commis- sioner. At times, in certain districts, considerable energy has been shown. I do not believe it has resulted in oppression or false charges. But it has resulted in great increase of revenue. The nature of the offence is such that you cannot easily fix it on any one who has not the plant on his land. The circumstances, of course, show whether a plant has been accidentally or intentionally sown. My position would be to throw the onus on the accused of proving that the plant was accidentally there if it was his homestead. Question 20.535 who was not, however, a Government servant. I brought up the ganja at Government expense from Gauhati and issued it to the vendor at Rs. 29 per seer, a price calculated on the basis of aver- age consumption yielding sufficient to pay the cost of the ganja, duty, carriage, and the average license fees. All profits went to this vendor. This system is still in force, but will cease from the 1st of April, as for 1894-95 a good settlement has been effected. 3. Evidence of MAJOR M. A. GRAY, Deputy Commissioner, Khasia and Jaintia Hills. 51. (a) Not in this district. (b) None in this district. 52. There is no excessive use of these drugs known in this district. 53. No; not here. No. 54. Not in this district. . 55. No; not in this district. 4 Evidence of MR. J. D. ANDERSON, Deputy Commissioner; Officiating Commissioner of Excise. 1. I have been in charge of the Excise Admin- istration of nearly every district in Assam, and am at present officiating as Commissioner of Ex- cise. 2. Bhang in Assam has acquired an ambiguous meaning. Officially it bears the meaning given to it in the question, but in popular parlance bhang is wild ganja, whether dried or undried. Of the three varieties of ganja, flat ganja is sometimes called mota dál, and round ganja is called mihidál. 3. The wild hemp plant grows abundantly all over Assam as a weed, but, like many other weeds, it is not a jungle plant. It follows in the tracks of cultivation. It is commonly found in deserted clearings and in the vicinity of growing crops. It is especially abundant in the hill districts, where the plant seems to be richer in the resinous matter which makes it intoxicating. Ganja is smuggled into the plains by hill people both from the Khasi, Naga, and North Cachar Hills in our own territory, and also from the Bhutan Hills and from Hill Tip- pera outside the area of British rule. It is also grown by the Miris in Lakhimpur and Darrang. It is largely consumed to the prejudice of excise ganja by the many immigrants, tea garden coolies, syces, etc., who live in the province. 4. It is known indifferently as ganja and bhang, but when a native of the province contrasts ganja with bhang, by the former he means the excise drug, by the latter the wild variety. In Sibsagar the plant when brought from the Naga Hills is called "Naga mohoni." 5. The plant is said to grow more readily in the hills and to, require a considerable rainfall. But, as aforesaid, it is a common weed all over the pro- vince. 6. Where it grows, it grows densely, and I am told that it is a weed which it is extremely diffi- cult to eradicate. I know of a garden in Shillong the owner of which has endeavoured for years to choke out the weed, but in vain. 7. The plant is not cultivated in the proper sense of the word, but it is occasionally fenced in and cared for when it springs up spontaneously. 8 to 10. See above. 11. No; but the contrary often occurs. I have frequently prosecuted ganja-smokers for raising plants from the seed of excise ganja. 12. The Miris, a hill tribe in Lakhimpur, un- doubtedly fence in the wild plant on a large scale for consumption and vend. In 1887-88 some Miris were punished for selling no less than 59 seers of bhang. The informant was one of our licensed vendors of excise ganja. Such cases are very difficult of detection, as Miris, Kacharis, and other semi-savage people live in the midst of dense grass jungle, and have obvious facilities for con- cealing cultivation. I am not aware that the male plant is ever extirpated. 13. Cultivation is forbidden all over the pro- vince, but there is no part of Assam where culti- vation would be impossible. 14. The drugs mentioned are not prepared in this province. 15. So far as I know, ganja and charas are in- variably smoked in Assam. 16. See answers to questions above. 17. Not made here. 18. Ganja is stored in small bonded warehouses as in Bengal. Its strength deteriorates rapidly. It will keep fairly good for about a year if protect- ed from white ants, etc. But the damp climate of Assam rapidly removes its toxic effect. 19. So far as I know, hemp is only used for smoking, except on rare occasions, when fire or the chillum are not available. 20. The Sylhet Musalmans and bairagis are the only portion of our indigenous population who consume ganja. They are, in fact, a portion of the ganja-smoking population of Eastern Bengal. Any facts which the Commission may gather as to the use of ganja in East Bengal will apply equally to the districts of Sylhet, Cachar, and Goalpara. In the remaining districts the use of ganja is almost entirely confined to immigrant coolies, to the Gurkha sepoys in the Assam regi- ments, and the up-country constables, in the police. Charas is not much used in Assam. 21. Since the duty has been increased, the proportion of chur and round ganja imported from Rajshahi has steadily increased. I append a table showing the extent to which this change has taken place. This Table (A) should be compared withTable (B).* 22. Charas is only used as a smuggled article, and I personally only know of it from hearsay. I have never even seen the drug. Not printed.
536 23. Bhang is occasionally smoked when people cannot get ganja, but it is said to be very deficient in intoxicating qualities. 24. All ganja-smokers consume bhang when they cannot get the true ganja. But this rarely happens. 25. Table B and the appended district tables will show that the diminution in the number of shops, the competition for these shops, the increased rate of duty, and the resulting increase in retail prices have greatly reduced the consumption of excise ganja. That these causes have also led to an increase of smuggling is very probable. On this point I would call the attention of the Com- mission to column 8 of the district tables appendedto Table B. 26. I have no means of answering this question. All consumers probably take ganja to excess on special occasions, such as, among Hindus, the Sivaratri Puja, the Bijoya Dasami day, etc. Again, habitual consumers on the eve of, or after, violent exertion take an extra dose of the drug. But I cannot say now what proportion of the total num- ber of consumers may be regarded as moderate or immoderate consumers. This is a point on which only vendors could give us information, and even their replies would be subject to obvious limit- ations. 27. Coolies from Behar and the North-Western Provinces and servants from those districts, Nepalese in the Assam Regiment, traders, cow- herds, etc., the indigenous (Bengali) population of the districts of Sylhet, Cachar, and Goalpara all consume ganja. The use of the drug is chiefly restricted to the lower and labouring classes, and when gentlemen do, as they occasionally do, use ganja, they do so secretly, there being some stigma of disrepute attached to the practice. 28. A moderate consumer will take, say, two chillums a day, say, ¼ tola, which would cost from three pice to two annas in different districts. An excessive consumer would get through at least twice as much. 29. Only tobacco is mixed with ganja. 30. The drug is usually consumed in company. It is much more usually consumed by men than women. I have never heard of children using it. 31. A friend of mine (a former Deputy Com- missioner in this province) tried the effect of one pipe of ganja. He said that he had an extremely disagreeable sense of giddiness and oppression followed by violent headache. I believe this is the usual effect, but that it disappears at the second and third smoking. I do not think that the craving for ganja is so strong as, for instance, the opium habit. The possession of ganja is a much less rare jail offence in this province than the illi- cit possession of opium. Opium, on the other hand, is more portable. 32. In Sylhet the Vishnuvites use ganja at all their religious ceremonies. At the Bijoya Dasami and the Sivaratri its use is imperative. On other occasions it is optional, but the practice is com- mon. A common mode of holding a ganja carousal is for a number of men to meet for a "Trinather Seba" (the worship of Mahadev). This involves chanting of hymns, beating of drums, and consumption of ganja during the live- long night. There is also an obscene puja called "Kishori Bhojan," in which both sexes take part. In this I believe ganja is used. But this rite is practised only by initiates, and with the utmost secrecy. It is said to be extremely indecent. On the Sivaratri and Bijoya Dasami days many people who never touch ganja, bhang or charas at any other time take a little bhang or charas. In this case the rare indulgence does not seem to start a habit, but the great body of ganja- consumers are habitual consumers. 33. The hemp plant is not worshipped in Assam, so far as I know. The habitual (and open) use of ganja is restricted to the lower classes, and is so far disreputable. 34. It would be a very serious privation to all habitual consumers to deny them the use of the drug. But our experience in jails and lunatic asylums shows that the habit can be broken within walls. A man who has no sufficient strength of mind to abandon ganja is apt to have relapses. I have known cases of this kind. 35. To prohibit the importation of ganja from Rajshahi would be easy. The result would be the increased use of the wild ganja, which is said on doubtful authority to be less intoxicating. There would be enormous discontent. But in this matter Assam may be regarded as part of Bengal. If it is possible to prohibit the use of ganja in Eastern Bengal, then it is equally pos- sible to do so in the precisely similar districts of Sylhet, Cachar, and Goalpara. If the immigrant population of Assam proper were to be deprived of their supply, the result undoubtedly would be an increased recourse to country spirits and opium. There are, of course, many other drugs available, such as dhatura. 36. I do not think that alcohol is taking the place of hemp. Hemp is still a much cheaper mode of getting intoxicated. 37 to 50. I would rather not answer these questions. I have my views as to the effect of ganja, but they are based on hearsay information, and the Commission will no doubt have full and complete details from medical men on these points. 51. The only habitual criminals in the province are the Musalman river dacoits of Sylhet, and foreigners of bad character in other districts. All, or nearly all, of these consume ganja habitually and to excess. 52. See above. 53. I have known of cases in which the im- moderate use of ganja among tea garden coolies has brought about insane and unreasonable jealousy, resulting in crimes of violence. 54. I cannot quote specific instances. 55. I know no instances. 56. I do not know. 57. Ganja and charas are rarely, if ever, eaten or drunk in this province. But see above. 58. Our excise administration of ganja follows that of Bengal. When our neighbour raises her duty, we raise ours. The only branch of adminis- tration as to which we have any doubt or difficulty is that which relates to the number of licensed shops. We have largely reduced the number of shops of late years, as will be seen from the accom- panying tables. The one drawback to doing this is that we make the use of the wild hemp more difficult to detect. The more vendors, the more spies, on the illicit use of ganja. Of late the police have bestirred themselves in investigating cases of the illicit use of the wild plant. But even to this day I have heard officers in charge of districts in which the plant runs riot declare that it is un- known to them. I cannot suggest any improve-
537 ment in the manner we administer the excise of ganja in Assam. Any improvement (including the heroic step of prohibiting the cultivation of hemp altogether) must come to us through Bengal. 60. Neither ganja nor charas are produced in Assam. 63. I have no improvement to suggest so far as this province is concerned. 64. None whatever. 65. We are gradually raising the duty on ganja, and will go on doing so till its retail price assimi- lates to that of opium and liquor (see Table B). I think that is all that can or should be done. 66. Table A seen with Table B shows the necessity of differential rates on the three different varieties of the drug. But this is a matter on which the Rajshahi authorities will be most compe- tent to speak. 67. No objection. 68. Ganja is not consumed on the premises in Assam. 69. If objections are raised, they are carefully considered. As a rule, petitions for the opening of new shops are more common than petitions desiring the closing of existing shops. 70. Bhang, as I have already said above, is largely smuggled into the plains districts of this province. The district tables appended to Table B will show the number of prosecutions for such smuggling. But the practice is very common, and at such bazaars as Tharia, Jaintiapur, Bhola- ganj, which stand on semi-independent territory, a fairly large trade is done in the dried wild plant. Successful prosecutions make the trade unprofit- able for a time, but it always revives, and, like the hemp weed itself, never quite dies out. Oral evidence. Question 1.538 Question 58.539 border villages that the offence would be serious- ly punished in future. No attempt has ever been made to exterminate the plant in the hills. In the plains any officer seeing a plant is, as a matter of fact, bound to cause it to be uprooted or to prosecute according as the plant is found in unoccupied or occupied land. There has been no organised attempt to exterminate the plant on unoccupied lands in the plains. I do not think such attempt is necessary, because the quantity of such growth is very small, and has a tendency to decrease as lands become occupied. There is practically no growth in occu- pied lands now. Penalties were necessary at first to make the people understand the law; but now the difficulty of concealing the plant and the ex- istence of the prohibition are sufficient to prevent the growth. I think that, upon the whole, there is more con- sumption by foreigners than by the Assamese in the six districts of the Assam Valley. In the Kamrup district there are few foreigners, and the majority of consumers are Assamese. The con- sumption of the current year will be higher than that of the last, owing to the influx of foreign labourers for the railway works, by some 11 maunds. The Bhutias smoke ganja extensively, as the Raja has told me, and his territory extends 200 miles along the frontier, and covers the lower ranges to a depth of three or four days' journey. I have never seen the people in the higher Naga Hills and the Lushai Hills smoke ganja. I have lived for years with these people and am sure that they do not use ganja. About the Naga tribes of Mani- pur, I can say that they do not use ganja, and they probably cover half of the territory. I can- not say anything about the Khasia and Garo Hills. I have had Khasia coolies who smoked ganja540 6. Evidence of MR. R. S. GREENSHIELDS,* Deputy Commissioner, Lakhimpur. 51. In this neighbourhood the Assamese proper are as a rule non-consumers of ganja. The ganja consumers are generally foreigners, and as a rule belong to the very lowest grades amongst such foreigners, and, as might be expected from their social position, they do furnish a considerable pro- portion of the bad characters of the neighbour- hood. I do not consider that the moderate use of ganja exercises (more than any other intoxicant) any direct influence on the production of crimes. 52. I have known crimes of violence to be com- mitted on little or no provocation by persons labouring under the peculiar delirium produced by a long continued course of ganja In fact, people in this condition are in my opinion particularly dangerous, being extremely easily provoked to commit crimes of violence. 53. See answer to preceding question. Yes, most undoubtedly. Persons labouring under the peculiar delirium produced by the excessive use of ganja are particularly liable to commit man- slaughter on little or no provocation. I have known more than one such case. 54. As a rule, ganja is not used by the Assam- ese for this purpose. Instances, however, have from time to time occurred where ganja has been used for this purpose by foreigners resident in Assam. 55. I have heard of such cases, but have not actu- ally had experience of any. Complete stupefaction cannot be produced by ganja alone. * Summoned to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but unable to attend. 7. Evidence of MR. P. H. O'BRIEN, Deputy Commissioner, Sylhet. 51. I cannot answer. 52. I cannot answer. 53. I recollect a case of a murderous assault being committed by a person under the influence of ganja, but I cannot give particulars. I pre- sume that excessive indulgence in these drugs does incite to unpremeditated crime, inasmuch as they appear to produce mania under such conditions. 54. I have heard of such a case, but never came across one personally. 55. I cannot answer. 56. I know nothing about any admixture. I never came across the use of dhatura except as a cattle poison in Tirhut. 8. Evidence of MR. J. L. HERALD, Deputy Commissioner, Silchar, Cachar. 1. I have had ten years' experience of district work541 compared with opium and alcohol is the frequent accompaniment of mania with homicidal or in- cendiary tendency. The prolonged use of ganja often produces a lasting mania or melancholia." 45. I do not think it causes bronchitis or asthma, but ganja consumers do not shake off these diseases as easily as others. See Dr. Powell's reply to last question. Dr. Dundee of Labac says:542 of smoking after several days of forced absten- tion. 53. No personal knowledge of any case of the sort. 58. I consider it to be working well. 62. I doubt if it would be feasible, as the hemp grows wild luxuriantly in all parts of the Assam Valley. 63. No objection. 64. No objection. 65. I am not sufficiently acquainted with the comparative strength of each drug to say if the taxation on each is reasonable with reference to the others. We generally follow the lead of Bengal in fixing the price of flat and round ganja and of charas; but my impression is that the price now charged has a considerable effect on consumption, far greater than the effect produced by the taxation imposed on alcoholic drinks. 67. No. Oral evidence. Question 1.543 bunch of ganja, which he told me he was taking as a present to the Parbutia Gosain. I am told the said Gosain drinks a decoction of bhang nightly. I dare say you know all this, but my statement before the Commission went rather against the view that wild ganja in any form is used by Assamese, other than Doms, and so it seems as well to take an early opportunity of modifying what I said; not, however, that my statement went for much, because, as I told the Commissioners, I have never made any study of the subject, and do not profess to know anything about it. I hear Mr. McCabe says that he stops the cultivation of wild ganja. It is growing luxu- riantly all round the Kamalpur rest-house, and within a mile of the one at Tambulpur, which are two of the four camps I have stayed in since I entered this district. After writing to you I saw two more patches of ganja544 11. Evidence of CAPTAIN A. E. WOODS, Officiating Deputy Commissioner, Naga Hills. 51. Not in this district. Most of our bad characters do not use drugs at all. No connection with crime in this district. 52. No experience of any excessive use of drugs in this district. 53. Cannot say, as there is no excessive in- dulgence in drugs in the district. No. 54. Certainly not in this district. In other parts of India doubtless in some cases they are used for that purpose. Sepoys often before run- ning amok drug themselves. 55. (a) Have never come across a case of it. (b) Cannot say, having never tried it. 12. Evidence of MR. C. W. E. PITTAR, Officiating Deputy Commissioner of Kamrup. 1. Such slight information as I have on the sub- ject has been obtained by conversation with native gentlemen in a position to know facts about the use and effects of the drug, and by questioning one or two ganja-smokers who were willing to give information. It is therefore with the greatest diffidence I offer my opinions and have accordingly confined my replies to the questions in Chapter V and a few in Chapter VI, neglecting other chapters as relating to matters of which I have not sufficient experience or about which such information, as I have obtained, is not wide enough in its range to carry weight. 19. Ganja is only used here for smoking. Charas is scarcely known. 20. The poorest classes both in towns and in the interior. 21. All kinds are in demand. 22. From Rajshahi. 23. Used but so seldom as to be inconsiderable. 24. There are no regular consumers. 26. Mostly habitual moderate consumers. 28. (a) One or two pice worth, representing about the one-sixteenth or one-eighth of a tola. (b) Four pice worth or 1/4 tola. 29. Chiefly tobacco. It is said that ganja mixed with tobacco becomes deleterious, is more intoxicating and has after-effects, while pure ganja has no after-effect. Smokers, however, say tobacco makes the preparation milder. 30. Smoking ganja is ordinarily practised in solitude but often in company. Smokers some- times have a sort of partnership in their ganja and smoke together from the same pipe. It is mainly confined to the male sex. Children do not smoke. 31. The habit of smoking is easily formed after the first experience. It is easy for moderate consumers to break off the habit. An excessive consumer informed me he had once left off the habit and taken to it again. An excessive consumer feels rheumatic pains for a period and requires medicine, but otherwise the habit can be given up without much difficulty. 32. A little siddhi is drunk by the better classes on the last day of the Durga Puja for its cheering effect; this does not lead to the habit. Women drink it on this occasion. 33. Eating and drinking are not thought much of. Smoking is considered vulgar. 34. It would; for this reason that not only they but non-smokers look upon the habit as harmless. Smokers themselves firmly believe that they work better when under the influence of the drug. 35. It would be very difficult and the drug would probably be obtained from the hills. The discontent would not amount to a political danger as the class affected are not powerful. Profes- sional agitators might perhaps make capital of it. 36. No; the relative price of alcohol and ganja will affect their consumption. Ganja- smokers sometimes indulge in liquor as a treat. 37. Charas is said to be more intoxicating. 38. They are said to be less intoxicating and generally less harmful in the order named. 39. Smoking is considered more injurious than the preparations that are drunk here. 42. I have known ganja-smokers whom I never suspected of being addicted to the habit until I found them out. I cannot say what the effect would be in such cases in the long run. 43. Yes. 44. The drink is said to be refreshing and ex- hilarating. Smoking induces a kind of intoxi- cation which is not so much marked in old con- sumers. I saw two men smoke an anna's worth of ganja together. The one who smoked the larger share of the pipe, admitted that his vision was slightly affected. There was nothing parti- cular in his appearance to indicate intoxication. I have gathered from smokers and others, who have tried the drug, as siddhi, through curiosity, that the effects resemble to some extent those of alcohol in so far as they tend to bring out a man's real character. The moderate use of the drug is not supposed to be more harmful than the moderate use of alcohol. 46. The excessive use is not supposed to have the same ill after-effects as alcohol when used in excess. 47. No. 51 and 52. In my experience as a Magistrate, I cannot recall a single case in which it was sug- gested that there was any connection between either the moderate or excessive use of the drug and a particular crime. I have not therefore had occasion to enquire how far bad characters coming before my notice were ganja-smokers. 53. I cannot cite any instance, but I can ima- gine it doing so in the same way as excess of alcohol in an individual of a naturally violent temperament, but not in a peaceful subject. 54. Not in my experience. 55. Not in my experience.
545 13. Evidence of ISHAN CHANDRA PATRANAVISH, Bengali, Brahmin, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Sylhet. 1. In my official capacity as Extra Assistant Commissioner in charge of the Excise Department of the district, I have to deal with matters con- nected with hemp drugs. 2. Hemp plants are not cultivated in this district. In some places, however, a species of plant grows spontaneously, which is called bhang and which never produces ganja of any description. Ganja is imported from Rajshahi in Bengal, and the description given in the ques- tion of the three several kinds is the description of the kinds of ganja brought here for consump- tion, and they are known and sold by these very same names. 3. I have no knowledge of any other districts of this province than Sylhet in regard to the spontaneous growth of hemp plants. In Sylhet, ganja plants are not known to grow spontaneously; but, as I have stated above, a plant called bhang, perhaps of the same species with the hemp plants, grows spontaneously in some parts, but nowhere abundantly. In the Khasi Hills, however, I understand ganja plants grow wild; but their quality, I am told, is inferior to that of those imported from Rajshahi. 4. Bhang is known as bhang all over the district. 5. It appears that a moist kind of land is more congenial to the growth of bhang plants. 6. Growth of bhang seems to be scattered. 7. No. 11. I do not know. 12. No. 13. No. 14. No. 16. Bhang from bhang plants is sometimes pre- pared, but not generally, and only for the purpose of drinking as a medicine in bowel complaints. On the Sarswati (goddess of learning) Puja day some people also drink a preparation of this drug, called "ghuta" or siddhi, or eat a preparation called "laddu;" but the practice is gradually going out of use. The method of preparation is very simple. Some leaves of the plant are crush- ed and mixed with milk and sugar or sugar and water and then drunk. "Laddus" are made of leaves and gur boiled together and made into small balls. The preparation for medicinal pur- poses consists only of crushed leaves and powdered black pepper mixed with water. 18. Yes, ganja deteriorates by keeping. It begins to lose its effect after one year's keeping. After two years it is not at all sought for. It keeps good up to one year with ordinary care. The cause of its deterioration is dryness on account of exposure and long keeping, making the aggluti- nated flower tops drop off. This causes the loss of its intoxicating power and makes its smell bad. To prevent deterioration it is kept in wooden ware- houses or golas lined with tin in bundles wrapped up in straw and gunny. 19. Charas is not used in this district. Ganja is only used for smoking. 20. The people of lower classes, generally such as charal, zugi, patni, tea-garden coolies, sweepers, malis, dhobas, dhulis, etc., and fakirs and sanyasis or mendicants smoke ganja. Some people of other classes also sometimes smoke this drug; but their number is very limited. Ganja-smoking is not confined to any particular locality of the district. I am unable to say what proportion of the people smoke ganja. 21. Mostly flat ganja is smoked here. 23. No; so far as I know. 24. The residents of the district, as I have al- ready said in my answer to question No. 16, only drink this drug for medicinal purposes, and some- times eat it also, making a preparation of it with gur (called "laru") on Sripanchami Puja days. But the use of neither of these can be said to be universal. When the residents of the district use bhang, they use the stuff grown here. But the up-country men, such as Deswalis and Kayans, generally use the bhang, which they get from Calcutta. This is a better stuff, and is grown in upper provinces. The up-country men questioned by me say that the bhang which grows here is stronger than the stuff which they get from Calcutta, and its leaves also are bigger than those of the bhang which grow in upper provinces. 25. I give below the quantities of ganja sold in this district during the last three years546 But in Siva Puja some few people use ganja. A puja has, however, sprung up in recent years among the lower classes of people, which is called "Trinather Seva," in which ganja is said to be essential. But it is a puja for which, so far as I know, there is no Shastric injunction. This puja, I am afraid, is likely to lead to the habit or prove injurious. 33. The consumption of neither of these drugs is regarded with favour by the public. The con- sumers in consequence always observe secrecy in using them. I am not aware of any public opi- nion based on religion in favour of the practice. I think that the use of all the forms of narcotic is generally in disrepute owing to their injurious effect, real or supposed. Nowhere in this district, so far as I am aware, the hemp plant is worshipped on any occasion by any section of the people. 34. The mendicant class and those of other classes who have acquired a regular habit will, I am afraid, consider it a serious privation to forego the consumption of ganja. The reasons are obvious. I am unable to give any idea of the probable numbers of these classes. 35. It would not, I suppose, be feasible to prohibit the use of all of these drugs. A total prohibition would, I think, tend to provoke at- tempts at illicit consumption. If ganja is allowed to be used, the use of its other forms may be done away with. Total prohibition will, at least in the beginning, occasion great discontent among the consumers; but I do not for a moment think that it will amount to anything like a political danger. It does not seem to me probable that the prohi- bition of the use of the narcotic will be followed by a recourse to alcoholic stimulants, but will, I am afraid, lead to the use of other drugs. 36. No. 37. I cannot say. It is not used here. 38. No; so far as I know. 39. Ganja is only smoked here, and I am not aware that it is drunk or eaten in any form. 40. The bhang, so far as I know, is prescribed by kabirajes in cases of diarrh547 more often than not leads to crime amongst the lower classes. 53. Most certainly it does. I know of many for each of my twenty years' service. I can quote several during the three months I have held charge of this district. 54. Yes, more often than not, but more especial- ly to fortify themselves to commit premeditated crime with violence, such as dacoity, highway robbery, rioting, murder, etc., etc. 55. Very seldom indeed, if ever, with these drugs alone, but sometimes with them mixed with dhatura for instance. Complete stupefaction can be induced, I believe, without admixture. Oral evidence. Question 1.548 him. He called out; and his father came up. In the subsequent fight, the father had his arm broken. The man that struck that blow was sent to jail for three months: the others were fined. There was no evidence that the men were intoxicated or that they had been smoking to excess. 2. Bartola case No. 9. In this case, the accused Latua, a garden coolie, branded his wife, pursued her and her mother (who lived next door), and then attempt- ed suicide by hanging. His plea was, that his wife was unfaithful. The woman and her father stated that he was constantly beating and ill- treating her, and charging her with unfaithful- ness, though naming no particular person. She was a girl of 15 who had just reached puberty after being married to this man for four years. Ganja was not mentioned as the cause of the offence; but the Jemadar who cut the man down said: "Accused is a ganja-smoker and takes li- quor also. I had got smell of ganja in accused's mouth when I reached the rope from his neck." A fellow coolie says: " Accused is a very bad man. He has got a very bad temper.** Accused smokes ganja, but not much or too frequently." No other witness was asked about ganja or men- tioned it. 15. Evidence of MR. J. RIVETT-OARNAO, District Superintendent of Police, Cachar. 51. I have no reason to think that the propor- tion of habitual moderate consumers of ganja is larger among the criminal classes than any other class. I believe that the moderate use of ganja has no connection with crime. 52. I should say that the excessive use of ganja is proportionately more common among persons of bad livelihood than among the law-abiding class, It is a fact that the term ganja-smoker (in the sense of an excessive indulger) has come to be re- garded as synonymous in police usage with bad character. 53. I have a distinct impression that excessive indulgence in ganja does excite to unpremeditated violent crime. I cannot call to mind at present any particular instance of this, but I am pretty certain that I have met with several cases in the course of my 16 odd years' experience as a police officer. 54. I think not. 55. Ganja by itself is, I believe, not so used and would not, I think, cause complete stupefac- tion. I have an impression that bhang is occasion- ally used by professional poisoners, but the propor- tion of cases in which any of the hemp drugs or admixtures thereof were used for these purposes would be small compared with those in which, say, dhatura, for instance, was used. 16. Evidence of MR. E. MUSPRATT, District Superintendent of Police, Lakhimpur. 51. I think a very small proportion of bad characters take any of these drugs. The moderate consumption of these drugs has no connection with crime at all. 52. The excessive use of these drugs has no con- nection with crime. 53. The excessive use of bhang does occasion- ally incite to violent unpremeditated crime; but such cases are very much fewer in number than those caused by excessive drinking of intoxicating liquors. 54. I can call to mind no such case. 17. Evidence of MR. W. D. ABERCROMBIE, District Superintendent of Police, Sylhet. 51. The large proportion of bad characters are not ganja consumers. Ganja has no connection with crime. 52. When a man is convicted of an offence, I have heard it said " Oh, he was a ganja-smoker," as people often give as a reason for crime com- mitted in England " he was a drunkard." But how many people are there who smoke ganja or drink who are not criminals ? 53. None. 54. No. 55. No; dhatura is used in such cases. I know of no such case. 18. Evidence of MR. E. C. S. BAKER, District Superintendent of Police, Cachar Hills. 51. There are very few villages in these hills which use siddhi or bhang, and then only in very small quantities, None. 52. Excessive use unknown in North Cachar, 53, 54 and 55. No.
549 19. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR J. MULLANE, Civil Surgeon, Dibrugarh. 1. Observations on the prisoners committed to prison in the Gauhati Jail extending over a period of seven years. 3. In the Kamrup district the hemp plant springs up spontaneously in almost every patch of cultivated ground. 4. This ganja was simply called jungly ganja. 6. Dense. 7. No. 16. The wild plant is commonly used as an in- toxicant by those who cannot afford to purchase the cultivated article. 40. Yes. Native physicians prescribe ganja. I have frequently seen the wild plant being dried on the roofs of native houses and on question- ing the inhabitants was informed that it was intended as a medicine for cattle. 41. (a) No. (b) Yes. The use of ganja enables the consumers to withstand severe exertion and exposure. (d) Its continued use wards off sleep. 43. Yes, moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 45. During my experience as a Jail Superin- tendent, cases have frequently been sent to me as dangerous lunatics (to be passed on in due course to the lunatic asylum). Such lunacy being the result of the long-continued and excessive use of ganja, these cases invariably recover in Jail within ten days. This variety of delirium is gene- rally of a noisy, violent character, the patient being much exhilarated. I never knew of any other treatment than total deprivation of the drug having been tried; this, however, was uniformly successful. Among natives there is a widespread belief that the mortality among ganja consumers from bowel complaints is heavy. 51. In this neighbourhood the Assamese proper are, as a rule, non-consumers of ganja. The ganja consumers are generally foreigners and, as a rule, belong to the very lowest grades amongst such foreigners, and, as might be ex- pected from their social position, they do furnish a considerable proportion of the bad characters of the neighbourhood. I do not consider that the moderate use of ganja exercises (more than any other intoxicant) any direct influence on the production of crime. 52. I have known crimes of violence to be committed on little or no provocation by persons labouring under the peculiar delirium produced by a long-continued course of ganja. In fact people in this condition are, in my opinion, parti- cularly dangerous, being extremely easily provoked to commit crimes of violence. 53. See answer to preceding question. Yes, most undoubtedly. Persons labouring under the peculiar delirium produced by the excessive use of ganja are particularly liable to commit man- slaughter on little or no provocation. I have known more than one such case. 54. As a rule ganja is not used by the Assamese for this purpose. Instances, however, have from time to time occurred where ganja has been used for this purpose by foreigners, resident in Assam. 55. No. Complete stupefaction cannot be pro- duced by ganja alone. Oral evidence. I have been nearly seventeen years in India. I was four years in military employ (generally com- bined with civil in the Punjab), and have been thirteen years in the plains districts of the Assam Valley. I have had no experience of insanity, except the jail work in India, and six months in a District Asylum in Ireland. I have not special- ly studied insanity. Question 16.550 diagnostic mark of hemp drug insanity. If I had a case of these symptoms and a short duration and no ganja history, I should in this country be very slow to believe that it was not due to ganja. I should regard these symptoms as proof positive that it was ganja intoxication. I call it intoxication for want of a better word. It is more like delirium tremens and produced in the same way, only the character of the peculiar insanity being different. I believe that permanent lesions occur in ganja as with alcohol; but it has not fallen to my lot to have any proof of this placed before me. I think there must be perma- nent lesions, because that condition of things could not, in my opinion, be frequently produced in the human brain without producing permanent lesions. Question 52.551 with the ganja theory. Besides, he had a curiously malformed head, and I associated his insanity with that. It is possible that the adjec- tives and expressions used in a brief certificate might be the same while expressing what would appear to the observer different symptoms. Thus "noisy" and "delusions" might be used. But the character of the noise and of the delusions in ganja insanity are peculiar in themselves. All I had to certify was enough to show the man insane, so I did not go into detailed distinctions. All that is required is to leave no doubt in the Magistrate's mind that the man is insane. You would, of course, in such cases, omit any doubtful matter. I remember the case of Saheb Ram (1892). I knew the garden well, and got a full account of the case. It was a case of religious mania only, and there was no suspicion of ganja in the case. The symptoms were not consistent with ganja insanity. I do not think so. I remember the case of Bapu Ram very distinctly. It had a very tragic ending. The man was discharged cured from this asylum, and cut off his wife's head a fortnight after. He was sent back. He was suffering from phthisis at the time, and whether he is alive or not I cannot say. I do not think ganja had anything whatever to do with his case. He had been a head constable in Sibsagar, and had been discharged for insanity many years ago. I formed no opinion as to the cause. He had a remarkably small brain develop- ment, and a curiously smiling expression con- stantly on the face. The symptoms I have described as characteris- ing temporary insanity or intoxication from ganja would, I believe, be found in a modified form in permanent ganja insanity. I think that, in the acute stage, experience is most necessary to enable a man to diagnose a case from the symp- toms. Even then it is not easy, though some old jail officials hardly ever make a mistake. After the acute stage has passed, diagnosis from symp- toms would, I should think, be impossible. Note by the Commission appended to Dr. Mullane's evidence. The records in the two cases referred to in Answer No. 52 were sent for. 1. Empress versus Ramchandra Puri. In this case the accused, a religious mendicant residing near Gauhati, had a quarrel with the de- ceased in the middle of the night, and caused his death by a blow with a dao. In his charge to the Jury, the Judge (Mr. Ward) said: "The prisoner was at the time, I have no doubt, under the in- fluence of ganja, but this is a point which you need not consider in giving your verdict." The man was convicted and sentenced to transporta- tion for life. This was in 1885. 2. Empress versus Jadu Murha. This man, a garden coolie, was charged under section 325, Indian Penal Code. He had suddenly attacked people in the Dumduma Bazaar with a dao and wounded some thirteen persons. The wounds were slight. There was some evidence as to his habits. The Native Doctor, who was one of the wounded, said: "I have known him two years. He has been two years on the garden* * He eats opium. He drinks like other coolies. I never knew him take ganja. I have seen him buy opium; and people said he took opium* * At the time of the attack I do not know if he was drunk. I did not smell any spirits about him. I did not make out he looked mad; but I was in fear of my life." This evidence was corroborated by some other witnesses. The prisoner himself said, "I had drunk nothing, nor touched opium, nor any other drug." In his charge to the Jury, the Judge (Mr. Luttman Johnson) said: "He says he had not been drinking that day, or eating opium; and there is no evidence to disprove his statement* * He admits he went to the bazaar to cut people." The man was convicted and sen- tenced to three years' rigorous imprisonment in March 1891. 20. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR J. W. U. MACNAMARA, Civil Surgeon and Super- intendent, Lunatic Asylum, Tezpur. 1. I have for thirteen years been among people who make use of hemp products to greater or less degree. 2. Whether dry or fresh, the name bhang is applied to the leaves as well as to the growing plant. Yes. (1) Bhang. (2) Charas. (3) Ganja (or mohini bhang among the Assamese). 3. It grows spontaneously in the districts of Sylhet, Kamrup, and Darrang (the three districts of Assam of which I have personal knowledge). I know for certain that it grows profusely in the Khasia Hills. 4. The names generally understood in Assam are552 plants, so luxurious is the growth. The aggluti- nating material which enters into the formation of the bhang cake or ball is never produced, and the plants run into seed, when they are unfit for ganja. 17. Not limited to any one class. 18. I think so. There is a popular idea that ganja deteriorates rapidly, but perhaps this is due to the fact that it is destroyed annually by Gov- ernment. Bhang is not stored. Of course, the small quantity of volatile oil the leaves contain dis- appears on keeping. Bhang deteriorates more rapid- ly than ganja, while charas retains its properties twice as long as ganja, or about two years. I believe there are no two independent specimens of these drugs identical in strength. Exposure to the air alone causes deterioration, most likely by disappearance of the oil, which is volatile. I think that, like tobacco and pepper, the drug con- tains, besides the oil, a principle which is volatile, and most probably liquid and quite different from the oil. If this is so, the deterioration can easily be explained as in the case of tobacco, hemlock, and pepper, the three drugs which are known to have volatile liquid alkaloids (nicotin, conin and piperidin). 19. Charas is not used in any shape in Assam. Ganja is generally smoked, mixed with tobacco or alone. It is occasionally drunk, as bhang is, mixed with milk and sugar. 20. Women don't take either. Children don't take either. The use of ganja, with few excep- tions, is confined to the lower (not necessarily the poorer) classes. I should say about 5 per cent. of the population of the Assam Valley use ganja. The greatest consumption is on tea gardens and among foreigners. 21. Flat is the kind available, and it is used generally; but for smoking chur, or broken ganja, is preferred as being stronger. 22. None. 23. Yes, not limited specially to any locality in the plains. Probably not more than one or two per cent. of the people of this district (Darrang) smoke bhang. 24. Bhang is generally eaten or drunk. It is occasionally smoked, and mostly by those who can't afford ganja. Unable to give proportions or to fix local peculiarities. 25. Yes; on the increase as regards ganja. I think the increase in the number of shops where it is sold shows greater consumption. The ing ess of garden coolies may account for the increased demand; but, as far as I can judge, the practice of smoking ganja is on the increase. The Assamese were an opium-eating race, but they find ganja consumption a less expensive habit, and are taking to it. 26. Occasional consumers are rare in case of ganja. Bhang is taken occasionally. It is im- possible to get figures or to define what moder- ation is. 28. Bhang has no local value. 29. See reply to questions 14 and 19. Dhatura is sometimes, but rarely, mixed with bhang when drunk, to increase the effect. Bhang massala is not sold, but black pepper is at times used to make bhang palatable. Tobacco is mixed with ganja to make it light. 30. Ganja is enjoyed most in company. Habi- tual takers of bhang take it in solitude, or in com- pany if they get it. The use of all the hemp products is confined to men almost entirely. Women rarely take bhang, and children never take either bhang or ganja. 31. (a) Yes, but less so than in the case of opium. (b) Not difficult. (c) Yes. Every beginner is moderate. 32. I know of none among the people of Assam proper. I am aware that Siva is believed to have used bhang and ganja, and that consumers of these drugs invoke Siva when they take them. 33. The use of any of the hemp drugs is looked on as immoral in Assam by the respectable natives of the province. I attribute this sentiment to the fact that their use is an innovation largely intro- duced by low caste outsiders, such as garden coolies. The result of the use of these drugs is palpably bad to all uninterested non-consumers. 34. It would be a privation, but not a serious one. It is a luxury rather than a necessity even in the case of habitual consumers of any of these drugs. 35. Government could stop the ganja godowns and prevent the cultivation of hemp, but the wild plant is so abundant that its use could not be stopped. No doubt there would be discontent, but it would never amount to political danger. I think it possible that opium would take the place of hemp products if restriction was practised. It is worth noticing that Assam hill people, who don't use hemp, indulge freely in fermented liquors, and that hill people in the plains give up alcohol for opium to some extent. 36. I do not think so. 37 and 38. Can't say. 39. I have no personal experience or knowledge on this point. 40. Bhang is used in stomach and bowel com- plaints. It is said to assist digestion and act as an antispasmodic and narcotic. It is also used as an anodyne by native practitioners. With regard to the use of these drugs in cattle disease I can give no information. I am told they are used. 41. I think the moderate use of bhang bene- ficial (a) as a digestive, (b) to give staying power, but that its habitual use has no power for good in fever or in any other way. I can't give parti- culars of the classes, and I merely imply that it resembles alcohol in this much, that its moderate use in those accustomed to it is beneficial. This reply so far refers to the drinking of bhang. Ganja consumption is the way in which the de- praved use of the hemp products is generally met with. 43. Yes. 44. (b) Yes, refreshing. (c) Yes, intoxication. (d) Yes, on a journey when food is not ob- tainable. (e) and (f) Yes, by its stimulant action. Effects in habituals last about 3 hours. (g) After-effects depressing. (h) Yes, longing and uneasiness. The foregoing replies refer more or less to all the drugs, but the effects are more lasting in the case of the internal use of them.
553 45. I can't define moderation no more than I can in the case of alcohol. The limit is reached when any ill effects are apparent, when the limit is crossed. The constitution is impaired and diges- tion is injured. Dysentery, bronchitis and asthma find an easier victim. The moral sense is de- graded and habits of immorality formed. In ex- treme cases insanity result. Of 102 lunatics now under my charge, the insanity in two cases is said to have been due to bhang. Sixteen cases are believed to have been caused by ganja smoking, while opium is held responsible for six. It is noteworthy that two of the latter are females, whereas no female apparently has become insane from the use of bhang or ganja. I think there is no evidence to show that the hemp drugs are resorted to, to gain relief in dis- ordered mental states, and I think that they are generally fairly credited with being the initial exciting cause of insanity. I have seen more than one case of a single booze causing violent acute mania of a month's duration. The insanity is often permanent. If temporary, it may be re-induced. No typical symptoms. Yes, insanes confess to having used the hemp drugs when they have no recorded history. 47 and 48. No. 49. Don't know. Can't answer these questions. 51. A very large proportion of the prisoners in our jail at Tezpur have been addicted to the use of these drugs in some shape. Of 239 male pri- soners, 15 consumed ganja. Crime, it would appear, goes with the use of these drugs: I can't ascertain whether ganja consumers are addicted to any special crime. 52. It is in occasional consumers I have noticed the most serious consequences. The words moder- ation and excess have no meaning for me in this connection. 53. Yes. It leads to homicidal mania. A case occurred in the Tezpur Lunatic Asylum, in which one of the lunatics, who was believed to have be- come insane from smoking ganja, killed the com- pounder in a fit of excitement. He smoked 5 annas worth daily. 54. Not to my knowledge, but I have heard that they are so used, and it is quite certain that they are so used. 55. I do not know. 56. Tobacco is the drug most frequently mixed with ganja to make the effect mild as well as to economise. Dhatura is mixed with bhang to in- crease the effects in cases where habit has rendered the dose large, and the use of the drug has been very excessive. I can give no further infor- mation about the effects of modifying additions. 57. I can give no information not contained in the answers to the preceding questions. Oral evidence. Question 1.554 They are dotted all over the place. Where there is not a tea garden, you have either a howling wilderness of grass jungle or an Assamese village; and in such an Assamese village you would be almost sure to find it. I cannot say, of course, that there was any general sowing of the plant, except perhaps by the wind. The. Assamese are certainly not now a bhang-consuming people whatever they were. I doubt if they ever were. Question 14.555 men whose insanity was ascribed to ganja. Some refused to answer. But some said their insanity was due to ganja. I do not think any said it was not. I do not remember how many said their insanity was due to ganja. Of course, if such men got a hint beforehand that I was going to ask about ganja, they might say ganja, whatever the facts were. The men I examined were the sixteen men then shown on my register as ganja insanes. They were not promiscuously selected. I have asked other insanes whether they used ganja outside. They usually say "no," even those who did use it. I did not ask any other insane whether his insanity was due to ganja. The fact that all of those sixteen who answered said they used ganja, and that other lunatics denied it even when they had used it, does not lead me to conclude that the former had got a hint, for I sent for them one by one. I am not prepared to say that I knew that any of those who denied it had really used it out- side; but I say they would deny it even if they had used it. On the whole, then, I think that when the police ascribe insanity to ganja it may be fairly accepted as reliable. When a man is received at the asylum, I receive with him the medical certificate and descriptive roll. The cause is entered in the general register from the police statement, i. e., from the descrip- tive roll. We have nothing whatever to do with it. It is entered by the overseer in charge of the asylum, and ought to correspond with the entry in the descriptive roll. I compare it when the page of the case book is being prepared. I never compare the entry in the general register. Where the descriptive roll showed that the man was addicted to ganja, but that the cause was "un- known," "unknown" should be entered in the general register and case book. For these books are filled up when the man comes in. I never alter any entry in the general register. The state- ments of the annual report are prepared from the general register by the asylum overseer. I have no doubt that the statement* of asylum procedure given by the witness, Betha Ram Surma, asylum overseer, is quite accurate. If the Super- intendent tried to keep the register, it would be constantly in arrears when he was out; so the overseer must be held responsible. I certainly do not approve of the procedure described. I think that, whatever is entered in the papers, should be put on the books; and nothing should be altered except by the Superintendent. The thing goes on now as it did. There is no order for change. But if I found out that such alterations were made I should have forbidden it. I have no reason to think that the register entries are at present more in accord with those of the descrip- tive rolls than they were in 1892, for the two men are the same. I think that the register entries are inaccurate as they stand. The entries of the descriptive rolls should have been copied. It is wrong to enter cause merely from the statement of habits in the descriptive roll. If, on the other hand, the over- seer were to alter an entry from enquiry from the lunatic, that would make the entry in the register more accurate if the original entry were "un- known." I think the lunatic's opinion as to what made him insane would be well worth having. If the man admitted the use of ganja it would be nothing; but if he attributed his insanity * Read over to witness. to ganja it would be of value. I do not think we ever discover the cause of insanity in the asylum, therefore we never alter the heading in the regis- ter. The register does not concern me in the very least as far as the point of cause goes. There are no typical symptoms of hemp drug insanity. We never diagnose the cause in the asylum. The diagnosis of cause is wholly based on information received in the descriptive roll. We have nothing to say to it once the man is admitted. I sometimes make enquiries as to cause, such as asking a man about his habits, and so on, for my own satisfaction in regard to the case before me. But I make no record of them at all. I think the "general register" of the asylum very inaccurate, and that any return prepared from it would be very inaccurate. Even if the entries in the register had corresponded with those in the descriptive rolls, I think the returns would not form a sound scientific basis for any theory regarding the connection of hemp drugs with in- sanity. There is nothing scientific about it. At the very best the information is from miserable units, the police enquiry or the statements of luna- tics themselves at the best. The views that I have set forth regarding in- sanity of a permanent nature resulting from hemp drugs are based solely on my asylum experience and my knowledge of the effects of these drugs. My opinion, based on asylum experience, is that insanity of a permanent type may be produced by ganja. The asylum experience I refer to is my conversation with lunatics every day. Some of the hopeless cases in the asylum are, so far as I can judge or ascertain, truly ganja cases. I base this on the statement of the lunatic alone. This is the sole basis of my opinion as to the cause; and I know one case of permanent insanity where the lunatic says it was due to ganja. There is no other case. In regard to the effects of the drugs, I mean what I have seen in people taking the drugs just as I know the effects of alcohol. I have never seen a man actually take the ganja, although I have tried to get people to do so. I have only had the statement of the man himself as to having taken the drug. This experience is outside the asylum. I have not had the cases for observation for any length of time, not more than half an hour. The result of any observation is that he is like an ordinary drunken man. He yells and shouts and gesticulates wildly, and is often violent to those about him. I have never heard of any of these cases becoming insane. My own personal experience, therefore, does not prove to me that the drug causes insanity. I never saw any man take the drug; and I never had a man sufficiently long under observation to see the development of insanity. I do not think I could distinguish between the intoxication of liquor and ganja from the appearance of the man. Smell of course would show. I think a little touch of dhatura would not be at all unlike ganja intoxication. Dhatura might lead to insanity. I had a case of a man in Sylhet who became insane from dhatura. I do not think that dhatura insanity could be distinguished from ganja in- sanity. But it would be possible to diagnose dhatura intoxication from hemp drug intoxication. The dhatura case above referred to had gone past the intoxication stage and become chronic. My statement as to there being no case of a female whose insanity is due to ganja is based on a census I caused to be made in the asylum. I 4 D 2
556 told my overseer what I wanted, and sent him round to make it out. I was not aware that there were three females in the returns for 1892. These had all been released before I made my census, and there were none then under my charge. Question 51.557 47. No. 48. Generally speaking ganja-smokers of this class have very few children and they often suffer from impotency or a tendency to it; there are however instances where a son of a habitual excessive ganja-smoker has contracted the vice, but this might be more from constant association than from any hereditary taint in the blood. 49. Ganja558 tioner, and has been working in Sylhet for some seventeen years, so that I place reliance on his statements. I did believe that the cure was due to this, and therefore put it down. I did not enquire what the dropsy was due to. I have heard that effusion into cavities does undergo spontaneous absorption, but I have no experience. Question 46.559 excessive, I should enter excessive in certificate which goes to the Deputy Commissioner. What I have stated above describes my proce- dure. I have read the abstract of my reports in the case of Madharam Deo in the memorandum of cases admitted into the Dacca Lunatic Asylum in 1892, and I see that in this case I did not follow this procedure, inasmuch as I appear to have entered "consumption of ganja" without the word "excessive" as the cause upon the informa- tion "that the lunatic used to take ganja." I am unable at present to explain why I should have departed from my usual practice. The above procedure relates to cases arisingwhen I am in the station. I am absent from my station about ten days in each month. In my absence a case would be investigated by my subordinate after my own method, and the papers would be left for my signature on my return, and occasionally I sign them hurriedly. I did not know Juma until he was in the con- dition described, viz., a helpless pauper suffering from dementia. I learnt his history from people in the place. He had probably been in that con- dition for some time when I came to know him. The case never came under my professional notice. The case of Babu B. Sen did not come under my professional notice. He had recovered and was in practice six years before I knew him. I got his history from himself and others, including Dr. Sanyal. I accepted the statements of these persons, and consider that they justify me in forming the opinion that the case was one of ganja. I attach special weight to the gentleman's own statement and that of Dr. Sanyal, who, however, did not treat him professionally. Golak Chandra Das was unable to make his defence, and is now in the Dacca Lunatic Asylum. 22. Evidence of DR. T. D'O. PARTRIDGE, Civil Surgeon, Silchar. Oral evidence. I have been in the Uncovenanted Medical Ser- vice since 1868 in India. I have had no special experience in insanity. I have not made it a special study, nor have I had any special charge connected with insanity. I am now Civil Surgeon of Cachar. My service, all but two years, has been in Assam. I have had considerable experiences of cases of lunatics under observation. The case is sent to me with an order from the Magistrate to observe the man and state whether he is sane. This con- tains only a few words containing a short sum- mary of the case. It is generally sent by the Deputy Commissioner, but occasionally by a Sub- ordinate Magistrate. I have no recollection of receiving any paper filled in by a police officer. What I get is in the form of a docket from the Deputy Commissioner. In almost all cases there is a statement as to violence and so on; but in most cases it is impossible for me to ascertain from the papers what the cause is. As a general rule, then, I have no material at the first to judge of cause. I get no descriptive roll or anything more than the letter. I have to fill in the cause of insanity in the "Medical History." I do not see the man when he comes; and I never see friends or others accom- panying him. I know nothing of the Hospital Assistant seeing the friends. I go down to the jail in the morning and see the patient who was brought in the day before. If the docket shows cause, well and good. If not, I ask the Magis- trate if he can give me any information. As a rule, the result is rather negative evidence. You do not get much information as to the cause. Some- times the cause is shown, but sometimes only as a possible cause not strongly put. I should simply put that down and say "possibly from such or such a cause." If in any case ganja was put down either in the original letter or in any paper afterwards received through or from the Magis- trate, I should enter it as the probable cause. If ganja was not assigned as the cause, but it was stated that the man used ganja, I should enter ganja as the probable cause with a query. It is never stated how much the man takes, except that it is occasionally put that he is "a confirmed ganja-smoker." The amount can never be found out. I do not consider that I am called on to make further enquiry, and I never do make any further enquiry. I think this procedure is fairly satis- factory. I have no better information. I do not think that the information is very reliable. I believe that it comes from the friends of the in- sane and from police enquiry. The friends will give the cause as far as they can judge. I think they can fairly well judge. The ordinary con- stable, so far as I know, conducts the enquiry. I am not certain who does it. I think he can pretty fairly judge. The form I use contains the words "probable cause." It is only that that I have to certify. I do not think that it is fair to put down ganja as the cause of insanity merely because a man is a smoker, but it is done. I would do it if I could find no other cause. I do not think that ganja frequently causes insanity560 23. Evidence of DR. H. A. MACLEOD, Civil Medical Officer, Garo Hills. 1. Only general observations. 2. As far as I know, the names are the same. 19. Used for smoking. 23. Sometimes by lower classes when ganja is not obtainable. 29. (a) With ganja, tobacco leaf, and rose water. With bhang, molasses, pepper, cucumber seeds, ghi, milk, and aniseed. (b) Dhatura is mixed with bhang to increase the narcotic effect. 30. Bhang is generally used in solitude; ganja and charas in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex. Children don't usually consume any of these drugs, but learn to smoke by imitation. 31. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) I believe not in the case of bhang. 32. Ganja and bhang are used by jogis to enable them to perform their religious vows. During Durga and Lakhi Pujas, it is customary to offer sweets and bhang when friends visit. 36. Yes. Causes are imitation and the slight narcotic effects produced by alcohol. 37. The effects of charas are more rapid than those of ganja. Bhang causes inebriation of a cheerful kind, a desire to eat food with relish, and to seek aphrodisiac enjoyments. It causes no nausea or sickness, and has no effects on the bowels. Its effects are more lasting. Ganja causes agreeable reveries, heaviness, and laziness, but the man can be roused to discharge routine occupations, such as punkah-pulling. Its narcotic effects are felt sooner than those of bhang. 40. Bhang is used for its medicinal properties. It is also used for colic in cattle. 44. Is partly answered by the above Bhang is refreshing, produces intoxication, creates appe- tite, and the effects last for about three hours, when narcosis is produced. The after-effects are slight giddiness and vascularity of the eyes. Ganja is stimulant, anodyne, and narcotic. Its effects lasts from one to two hours. The want of subsequent gratification produces a longing and uneasiness. 45. Causes bronchitis and asthma, and induces laziness. 47. Does not appear to be hereditary. 49. Bhang is used as an aphrodisiac, and is used by prostitutes. 24. Evidence of DR. J. MCNAUGHT, Civil Medical Officer, Nowgong. 1. None special, beyond enquiry from people who use hemp. 2. The only sort obtainable in Nowgong is the flat ganja. Charas is not imported. Round ganja is not now imported. The broken ganja is not imported. 19. No other uses than for smoking are known. 23. The wild hemp is said to be used for smoking sometimes by people who cannot afford to buy the excise ganja; but this is to a small extent, as it is not so palatable. 28. Not known. 29. Not as far as known. No. 30. As the excise ganja only is imported, it isused. The use of the drug is not very prevalent; mainly confined to the male sex, principally adults. Not given to children. 31. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Slight. 32. None known personally. 36. No. 37. Not known. 39. Not known. 40. Not known. The wild ganja is used for cattle diseases by the people of Assam. They do not buy the excise ganja for this purpose. 41. (a) Cannot say. (b) Probably does so. (c) Not. 42. It is said that in whatever frame of mind or disposition the consumer of ganja happens to be in, the use of the drug enhances or increases that disposition, i.e., if there is a tendency to be pleased or happy, the person becomes more pleased or happy; if brooding over wrongs, these assume an extreme form; if in a violent or quarrelsome mood, this is increased so that assaults or murder may result. 44. At the time of smoking the drug, whatever tendency there is in the mind is then exalted. The person feels refreshed, and there is in propor- tion to the quantity consumed some intoxication. The feeling of langour and weariness is not noticed for the time. Want of subsequent grati- fication produces uneasiness. 45. Every drug used regularly, and ganja also has an effect upon the system that becomes a habit, and whatever its effect, or relief, is sought for at the usual time. Persons who have slight control over their desires are liable to increase the quantity or the times that it is used. The extra stimulation of the brain with its symptoms of intoxication must be prejudicial to a healthy condition of body and mind. Those who are deprived of it for a time feel uneasy or sometimes suffer much from a weary feeling and aching of the whole body, and they will make special efforts to obtain it. Its use enslaves the person. The habit of inhaling the smoke into the lungs causes cough and irritability, and the gradual deposit of carbon, even in small quantity, tends to obstruct the air passages, and tends to bronchitis. It deadens the intellect and moral sense, and conduces to lazy habits which are tempered by fits of extra exertion when the drug is used. The drug tends to produce insanity if used in excess. This is curable, but the use of the drug again may re-induce insanity. 46. All the foregoing are more enhanced. 47. There is every probability of hereditary tendencies in such cases. 48. Ditto. Enhanced.
561 49. Not as far as known, but undue stimulation by any drugs tends to produce a lessening of power eventually. I have found from experience that ganja-smokers are put under the influence of chloroform with much more difficulty than non- users. 50. The same; but enhanced. 56. No experience of admixtures. 57. Not known. In conclusion, a ganja-smoker is not a trust- worthy person as a rule, and there are many objections to its use. Its use tends to excite, and causes a desire for exertion; it helps to exalt the mind's tendency at the time, and the person may thus be dangerous. The complete stoppage of its cultivation, importation, and sale in Assam would be no hardship, but rather a great benefit. 25. Evidence of ATUL CHANDRA ROY,* Bengali Vaidya, Assistant Surgeon, Emigra- tion Department, Tezpur. 1. I am a Bengali by birth, and have lived in Assam for about 11 years. In both the provinces I have had opportunities of seeing people using hemp drugs and also the drugs themselves in wild state. I was also for some months in charge of the Lunatic Asylum of Tezpur. 2. The name bhang is applied in this province as well as in Bengal to the leaves, both fresh and dry, of the hemp plant, whether male or female, and ganja is known here as mohini bhang. I have seen both ganja and bhang plants in wild state. They look as different plants; the leaves of the former are broader and larger than those of the latter, and I have never heard of ganja plants growing from bhang seeds; charas is unknown in this province. 19. Charas is not at all used in Assam. Ganja is usually smoked, but is also occasionally drunk mixed up with milk and sugar after being moder- ated with water. There is, as far as I know, no speciality as to places where it is so used; i.e., it is used more or less all over the province, although to a very small extent. 23. Yes, used for smoking occasionally562 case of bhang, which is usually drunk, the effects usually last for hours together, but in case of ganja smoking not more than half an hour or so. There are no after-effects. Yes, the want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness in a habitual consumer. 45. It is very difficult to draw a line of demar- cation between moderate use and immoderate use. As far as my experience goes, habitual consumers scarcely keep within such a bound as not to be more or less sufferers in the long run. In such cases the constitution, the appetite, and the moral sense are more or less impaired. Moderate habi- tual use has not, I believe, much to do with dysen- tery, bronchitis, asthma, or insanity. But immoderate habitual use sometimes brings on these diseases, especially the latter. In cases of insanity personally known to me, it appeared to me to be the exciting and not the predisposing cause of the disease, and the disease pertained to the characters of mania. I have seen both per- manent and temporary mania resulting from the use of ganja. In temporary cases the symptoms may be re-induced by the use of the drugs after liberation from restraint. The symptoms are in most cases those of mania, and have no speciality apart from that. Yes, insanes having no recorded history confess to the use of the drug. I have never come across any cases in which insanity has resulted from the use of the drug by persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease to relieve pain; neither am I in a position to produce any evidence to indicate that insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs, etc., etc. 46. Vide my answer to the question 45. 47. No, it is not. 48. My answer to the question 47 does also apply to this question. 49. Bhang and ganja are said to be aphrodisiac, but I know of no instance in which any of these drugs has ever been used for this property. I can- not say if it is so used by prostitutes. 50. My answer with reference to the question, of moderate use does also apply to the question. 56. I have no personal knowledge on the subject except in cases of ordinary admixtures, such as sugar and milk, etc. Sugar at least seems to increase the intensity of the effects. I have only heard of dhatura being mixed with bhang for consumption or for administration to others, but not of nux- vomica or opium being so used. 57. I have never heard of charas being drunk or eaten. When bhang or ganja are so used, the symptoms are more intense and more lasting than those of smoking the drugs. With this difference they are the same in character. 26. Evidence of BAIKUNTHA KUMAR NANDI, Hindu Kayasth, Assistant Surgeon, Nayasarak, Sylhet. 1. From the ganja smokers and from the cases of insanity brought to me for treatment. 2. Yes; the definitions may be accepted for Sylhet. They are called charas, ganja, bhang or siddhi by the Sylhet people. Ganja and bhang are consumed in this district. Charas is not used in Sylhet as far as I know. 23. Yes; I met with a ganja-smoker who told me that bhang is used for smoking by the poorer classes of people in the Mufassal when the shop runs short of the stock of ganja. 28. (a) Cost from Re. 1 to Rs. 2(b) " " 5 " 10 or more. 29. (a) Dried tobacco leaves are ordinarily mixed with ganja to make it mild. (b) Dhatura seeds are sometimes mixed to intensify the intoxi- cating power of ganja. I have heard of the bhang massala, but have never seen it, nor do I know the ingredients of which it is made. 30. The ganja-smokers seem to take special delight in smoking the drug in company. But they do not refrain from consuming when no other smoker is at hand. Yes, it is mainly confined to the male sex. But the females are not free from it. No, it is not usual for children to consume these drugs. The women of the cooli and mehtar class and the prostitutes do smoke ganja. 31. Ganja smoking is easily formed. It is very difficult to break off the habit. I know one or two cases where the consumers have given up the habit; but such instances are few. Yes; modera- tion grows into excess in some cases. 32. Ganja smoking is resorted to mostly by the lower class Hindus in what is called Trinath's Seva or the worship of "three-nath," i.e., Seva. This is a religious custom in which a group of friends meet at night. The least cost of such a custom is said to be only three pice, but this limit is exceeded very often. Ganja smoking is essen- tial and every one present will smoke. This is the first step, and most of the confirmed ganja-smokers are initiated into this baneful habit here. It is generally temperate. Pills made of bhang, dha- tura seeds, sugar and milk are taken on Saraswati (goddess of learning) Puja day by the devotees. They indulge in excess. The pill is not essential for the Puja. 36. I do not know that alcohol is being to a certain extent substituted for any of these drugs. 37. The symptoms come on later in cases of the drinking of bhang. I am not aware of any other difference in the effects of these drugs. 40. Ganja is prescribed by the native quacks in cases of cholera. A clerk in the Deputy Com- missioner's Office tells me that he was given ganja to take internally by a quack when he was attacked with cholera. He was under the influ- ence of the drug for three days, after which he was well. Ganja is prescribed in the disease of elephants, in what form and for what disease is not known to me. 41. (a) and (b) Yes, in cases of those who are addicted to the habit. (c) I have no experience about this. 42. Not harmless, because moderate habit may grow into excess, and that continued excess may impair the nervous system and throw the mind out of balance. 44. Ganja smoking produces exaltation of the mental functions and pleasurable kind of hallucina- tion. It acts as a stimulant, thus refreshing the system. Yes; it produces intoxication. It allays hunger and also creates appetite. Duration of effect depends on the dose. It lasts generally
563 about three or four hours. It produces a longing, and its want causes a sense of laziness. 45. Undermines the vigour of the body. Ganja smoking causes asthma and bronchitis. Yes; to some extent it impairs the moral sense. Yes, it produces insanity. In one case brought to me last year the exciting cause was ganja smoking. In two others there were hereditary taint of in- sanity from the parents. The first one is still insane and had no lucid interval since the onset, because he is always smoking ganja. I met with a fourth case in which the type is a melancholic kind of mania. The subject has taken to ganja smoking afterwards. 46. Excessive use undoubtedly produces insanity which is generally of a violent nature. There was lately a case here in which an insane caused the death of a native gentleman by striking him with a piece of wood on the head. But this insane person is not only a ganja smoker but also a drunkard. 47. One ganja smoker tells me that his father was a moderate smoker. He and his brother have learnt to smoke from him in boyhood. Both the brothers are moderate smokers now. 49. Yes; ganja smoking is common among the prostitutes for its aphrodisiac action. Yes, the use of hemp tends to produce impotence. 27. Evidence of AZHER HOSSEIN, Hospital Assistant, Gauhati. 1. I carefully questioned men who are habitual consumers of the drugs, and collected information from them. 2. Ganja and siddhi are not produced in this province. The general name of ganja and siddhi is locally known as bhang. Charas and subji are scarcely used by the people here; hence they have no particular name. 19. Ganja is used for smoking only, but it is occasionally used in diarrh564 and asthma. It impairs moral sense, and creates tendency to laziness and for debauchery, as the tendency of the mind is after the doses. Its effect helps the mind towards that direction to which it is turned. Yes. Insanity has always appeared as from the effect of smoking. The insanity from ganja is milder, and sometimes temporary and sometimes permanent in some cases. Melancholia as well of a violent type; in some cases permanent and in some cases temporary. Yes; it may re-induce. Yes, they sometimes confess. In case of brain disease or mental anxiety it does not give any relief. Yes, it produces insanity in a person who is naturally of weakened intellect. There are few men still in a state of insanity under the influence of ganja smoking, and they seem to be permanent and harmless. 46. Those who use the drug excessively and habitually, it may sometime in some cases pro- duce insanity, other sickness, and poverty. 47. It is not an hereditary complication, and does not affect the children of moderate con- sumers. 48. The same as above. 49. So the taker of drugs says that it gives pleasure (aphrodisiac). Yes; used by prostitutes. Yes; more injurious if it is taken always for the purpose than the ordinary narcotics. Yes, causes impotence by over use of the organ under the influence of the drug. 50. Excessive use rather produces the effect more rapidly. 56. Their effects depend on the quantity of drug used according to the choice of the taker to make it milder or stronger. Dhatura, quarter of a grain is sometimes used to induce intoxication, but nux- vomica, cantharides, opium, or betel-nut are never used as admixture for personal or other consump- tion. 57. Ganja for the purpose of medicine only is known to be eaten, but not for pleasure's sake. In conclusion, the people generally contract the habit of smoking ganja and bhang generally in the following circumstances:565 33. In society it is not considered immoral or a social crime. No. In higher sphere it is con- sidered disreputable to get addicted to any sort of intoxicating drug, nor is it intended for such society. I do not know of any custom prevailing in any parts of the county of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. Certainly. It would operate very hard with the labouring classes, who, after their day's hard work, indulge in the smoke of a chillum of ganja as a good refreshment. 35. (a) I think so. (c) By stopping the issue of large quantity of ganja at a time to consumers. (d) Yes. (e) Perhaps most probably. (f) No. Certainly. 36. In rare cases in which excessive consumers, being laid up with some sort of disease or other arising from the excessive consumption of this drug, had to take alcohol in substitution of ganja by way of refreshment. 37. I don't know much of this. 38. Yes, of the three classes chur is the best in quality; then comes next round, and last theflat. 39. The best method of procedure of consuming this drug is to drink the siddhi or bhang, which is more wholesome than the smoke of ganja, which affects the brain directly, whereas the siddhi affects mildly. 40. Yes. Yes. 41. Yes. (a) Very slight. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Yes. Almost among the labouring classes, say, 25 per cent. I mean moderate habitual use. 42. Moderate use is beneficial, inasmuch as it serves as a restorative. 43. Yes. 44. (a) Nothing remarkable, it revives their strength. (b), (c), (d), (e) Yes. (f) An hour at the utmost. (g) Yes; feels little sedation. (h) No. 45. (a) Yes; weakens the brain to some extent. (b) Yes. (c) Yes; in advanced ages. (d) Yes. (e) No. (f) No. 47 and 48. No. 49. Yes, by some. Yes; it affects the organs of generation. Yes; excessive indulgence in this drug brings about impotence. 50. The result of excessive use of these drugs is more deplorable than that recorded in answer to the foregoing question. 51. (a) Very few. (b) None, that I am aware of. 52. The excesive consumers get easily excited, and are apt to cause mischief to others. 53. Yes. No such case has come to my notice. 54. Yes. 55. Yes. Yes. 56. (a) Refreshment of the mind. (b) Injurious. On religious festivities, exces- sive consumers of bhang are accustomed to mix dhatura seed, which is a poisonous drug, to pro- duce immediate intoxication, the after-effect of which is deplorable, as it is a very sedative sub- stance, and shortens life. 57. I know nothing of this. 58. I am not acquainted with the system of excise administration. 63. Yes. The existing system of issuing of these drugs in large quantities by vendors to con- sumers is highly objectionable for the reason that persons using these drugs have a tendency to in- dulge themselves in it as much as their means can afford. In my opinion some hard-and-fast rules should be introduced, and measures adopted to diminish the consumption of it, which, like all other intoxicating drugs, is more or less injurious to health. 64. I have no remark to make on this. 65. Yes. 67. No. 68. None. 69. No. According to distance from one shop to another. In no case is a shop located in a place within the radius of 100 yards from the other. I think local opinion should be considered. 70. No. Yes; duty is paid in British India, but not in Manipur State (where I am stationed), where the Excise laws have not been enforced. No; there is no use of untaxed drugs that I am aware of. 29. Evidence of BETHA RAM SURMA, Overseer, Tezpur Asylum. Oral evidence. I am overseer of the Tezpur Asylum. I have been in the asylum since 1881. I was jemadar up to 1884, when I was promoted to be overseer. I have had no medical training. There are two general registers of patients in the asylum566 ation with my own hand. I have the general permission of the Superintendent to do this. I asked Dr. Borah, and he said I might do this; so I always do it. I do not now ask anybody's per- mission in any particular case. What the lunatic tells me, I enter on my own judgment. I make the entry. I do not intimate it to the Superin- tendent. The jemadar has no authority to do this. All his entries are merely copied from the De- scriptive Rolls. I obtain my further information from the luna- tics only. I very rarely see friends of lunatics. The lunatics are some from tea gardens, and some from other districts than this; so it is very rarely that friends come to see a lunatic. I do not examine them when they come; nobody does so. Any friend would have to go to the Superintend- ent for permission to visit the lunatic. But I have never heard of the Superintendent examining any friend; and I have never got any order to make any entry in consequence of any such examination. The Superintendent himself never makes any entry in the General Register. Nor does he ever alter any entry in it. Sometimes, when a Descriptive Roll has not information, we send it back to the Magistrate to be filled in under Rule 8 of the "Revised Rules for Management of Asylums in Bengal." We only send a Descriptive Roll back when the entries are left blank. If the word "unknown" were entered, we should not send it back. This has been my practice all along. It is from the entries in the General Register that the statements in the annual report are filled up. Statement VII is filled up from column 11 showing "alleged cause" and Statement VI about type from column 9. On looking up the admissions for the year 1892, I observe that in the case of Akhilanand (No. 12) the Descriptive Roll shows both the habits of the man and the cause of insanity as "unknown." Yet the jemadar has entered ganja smoking as the cause. He is present now, and says he thinks he must have asked the lunatic when he was received into the asylum. All such entries are made then. He has not authority to act thus. His duty is to enter what is on the Descriptive Roll. I find that similarly the cause is entered by the jemadar as "ganja" in the cases of Mussamat Bedoma (No. 2), and Mussamat Kitni (No. 11), though the Descriptive Rolls show the cause as unknown, and there is no mention of ganja in the papers. I see that the jemadar has made the entry of "ganja" in the case of Uchit Ram (No. 8). The jemadar says he took it from the entry regard- ing habits in the Descriptive Roll. I think, on the whole, that he ought not to have done this when the Descriptive Roll distinctly said "No cause can be ascertained." But at the same time, if a man takes ganja, it is possible that he may become insane, and this is why the entry was made. It is better to enter a possible cause than none at all. The Superintendent was not told. I find also that entries have been similarly made by the jemadar in column 11 (cause) from the entry in the Descriptive Rolls regarding habits in the cases of Sahebram (No. 15), Jagannath (No. 17), Khadu (No. 19), Chadi (No. 23), Jogai Surma (No. 28), and Mussamat Major (No. 1). The jemadar did this on his own responsibility. In another 1892 case, that of Kristo Dass (No. 20), I find ganja entered in my handwriting as the cause. The Descriptive Roll shows smoking dhatura leaves mixed with ganja. The jemadar was sick that day, so I made the entry. I saw ganja mentioned, so I entered that. I did not think of the dhatura specially. I understood that ganja was the cause. Thus, out of thirteen cases shown in the returns for 1892 as the ganja cases admitted that year, there are eleven in which the entries do not cor- respond with the Descriptive Rolls. Of these, ten were made by the jemadar on his own respon- sibility, and one by me. The only two cases in which the Descriptive Rolls show ganja as the cause are those of Jalim (No. 14), and Bapu Ram (No. 26). Dr. S. Borah was in charge of the asylum in 1892. But no change has taken place in our procedure since he left in May 1893. In the General Case Book the entries at the head of each case are made by the jemadar or by me from the General Register. The history of the case after admission is all that the Superintendent writes. He writes that in his own hand always. 30. Evidence of PROSUNNO KOOMAR DAS, Baidya, Medical Practitioner, Silchar, Cachar. 1. The experiences which I obtained during my career as medical servant under the Tarapur Tea Company and also as an independent medical practitioner of long standing enable me to sup- ply the information herein noted regarding the effects of the use of hemp drugs generally; but especially of ganja the use of which is chiefly pre- valent in the district of Cachar. 2. Dr. Prain's definition can be accepted for the province of Assam. The dry leaf of the male plant whether cultivated or uncultivated is locally known by the name of bhang or patti. The word siddhi is not in use in the district of Cachar. Charas is not in use generally and there is no license for its sale here. A few up-country people who use the drug import it from elsewhere. The three varieties mentioned by Dr. Prain are used here, although flat ganja has the largest consump- tion. The round ganja is used by a few Hindu- stani or up-country coolies and the chur ganja only by poor people who buy it in very small quantities. Distinction in the name is made much more by the licensee than by the consumers. All the three varieties are designated by the latter under the general term ganja. 19. Ganja is generally used in smoking. Habitual consumers chew it sometimes like betel- nut. Occasionally it is made into a beverage with milk, sugar and spices, etc. The first method however is the prevailing one in the dis- trict, Charas as has been mentioned above is used only by a few up-country people who import it from other districts. 23. As far as my experience goes I have not found bhang being ever used for smoking. 28. The average per diem is about, half a tola worth about 1 anna 6 pies. The general average for habitual consumers is about half a chattack worth 7 annas 6 pies. In
567 rare cases the average rises up to one chattack which costs annas 15. I knew of a consumer who required sometimes more than a chattack, but that was an exceptional case. 29. (a) Ordinarily dry tobacco leaf is mixed as an ingredient in preparing a chillum of ganja. Some people (up-country men generally) use mollaas a substitute in filling up the chillum with ganja. (b) The other ingredients mentioned in the question are not used here. Some people are sus- pected to mix dhatura to make the drug strong, but that is done privately. Tobacco leaf is mixed with the object of making ganja burn well in the chillum and also to make it more tasteful. Bhang massala is not known nor sold here. 30. Ganja is generally smoked in company. In rare cases females (generally prostitutes) are found addicted to ganja smoking, otherwise it is confined to the male sex. It is not confined to any limit of time in age. Tea garden coolie children sometimes smoke ganja, but that is not an usual practice. 31. Habit is not easily formed. It is difficult to break up. Moderate habit does not generally develop into excessive. At least there is no such tendency in the use of these drugs. 32. The use of siddhi or bhang is considered essential on the fourth day of the Durga Puja, the day when the worshippers bid farewell to the goddess. It is usually used also on the Sri- panchami Puja day. Ganja is prepared in chillums and offered to the god Siva and Trinath and afterwards the company of consumers assemble and smoke it by turns. Generally on such cere- monies, which are purely religious, the quantity used varies according to the number of consumers assembled. In the Surma Valley ganja is offered also in the name of Pir (Muhammadan saint) for the benefit of the cattle. 36. I know of one or two cases in which ganja or bhang has been substituted for alcohol, the latter being more expensive; but I am not aware of a single instance in which alcohol has been substituted for ganja. Ganja smoking is looked upon by the middle and higher classes as a degra- dation, and it is naturally confined to the lower classes, and as they can hardly afford the cost of alcohol they scarcely choose to change the habit. 37. Both charas and ganja produce instantane- ous effect in making the smoker intoxicated. The intoxication under the effect of the former is how- ever stronger. Bhang acts slowly and its intoxi- cation lasts for a longer duration. All these drugs work upon the brain, and the consumer instantly after the use feels a whirling sensation all around, and his optical nerves are affected also to a great extent. The eyes generally shrink after the effect has been produced and the consumer sees before him a cloudy space filled in with moving branches of yellow flowers similar in shape to those of the mustard crop. 39. Smoking, in whatever method it may be, is more injurious than drinking. Bhang is a cool drink and when moderately used it improves diges- tion and general health of the drinker. It has no tendency to insanity, but smoking ganja, if carried to an excess, produces temporary insanity by affect- ing the brain. 40. The native physicians use bhang with other medical ingredients to make different kinds of stomachic and nervous tonics. It is used more especially in dyspepsia. Bhang is used also in the treatment of cattle disease when horses or ponies suffer from kurkuri.Bhang is prescribed with other carminatives. 41. Moderate use of these drugs is beneficial. (a) Digestive. (b) Gives staying-power and alleviates fatigue. (c) Are anti-malarious. (d) Improves general health and weight. 44. Moderate use is refreshing. Produces in- toxication. Does not allay hunger, rather increases it. It creates appetite; generally the effect lasts two or three hours. There are no after-effects after moderate use. No longing or uneasiness isfelt. 45. Moderate use does not produce any noxious effect. The constitution is not impaired. Does not injure the digestion or cause loss of appetite. Does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma; rather moderate ganja smoking allays hard breath- ing in asthma. Moderate use does not impair moral sense or induce laziness, rather a moderate smoker can concentrate all his attention to a work undertaken, and can labour harder. Does not deaden intellect or produce insanity. 46. All the evil effects mentioned in question 45 are caused by the excessive use of these drugs. The insanity produced is exciting and temporary. 47. The habit is not hereditary and the children of a moderate consumer are not affected in any way. 48. Even in excessive use the habit is not hereditary, neither are the children of an excessive consumer affected in any way. 49. The drugs are used more with the object of getting intoxication than for their aphrodisiac effects. The prostitutes also use for the same purpose. I do not know of hemp ever causing impotence. 50. Excessive use may cause impotence, but no such case has come to my notice. 56. I am not aware of any of the substances mentioned being ever used as admixture with ganja or other drugs. 57. I have never known of charas being ever drunk or eaten. Ganja is rarely eaten or drunk. Eating and drinking act more slowly than smok- ing. In conclusion, if the use of any of these drugs be checked, or restricted, the use of alcohol will correspondingly increase, which will impoverish the poor people who generally satisfy their desiro for intoxication by the use of these drugs.
568 31. Evidence of KRISHNA CHANDRA SANYAL,* Brahmin, Medical Practitioner, Sylhet. 1. I am a native of Rajshahi, where hemp drugs are cultivated. I have in my professional ex- periences come across with patients who are addicted to hemp drugs. I had an up-country servant for some time who used hemp drugs. 2. Yes. Ganja, bhang, and charas. 3. Rajshahi, Jaintia Hills, Laur in Sylhet. In Rajshahi it is abundant. 4. Ganja, bhang, and charas. Yes. 5. I have no definite idea about it. Possibly it grows better in marshy soil. 6. Dense. 7. No. 10. No special class. 13. Yes. All the districts of the province. 14. No. 16. Yes; I have seen in Rajshahi. Possibly bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. 17. I know only of bhang made by all classes. 18. I know bhang deteriorates and possibly loses its effect in time. It keeps good a year. Cold and damp cause deterioration. The leaves may be packed up and kept at a place free from moisture to prevent deterioration. 19. No. Ganja is used in the form of pills or drink in Sylhet, where people generally do not distinguish between ganja and bhang. Charas is used in sweetmeats at Rajshahi and Berhampur. 20. Ganja is used by the lower classes, middle classes, rarely higher classes. Charas is unknown here. At Rajshahi middle classes use charas; but a greater proportion of the middle and lower classes use ganja. 21. Flat. 24. In Bengal the middle and upper classes generally drink bhang. In the North-Western Provinces eating of bhang pills in sweetmeat prevails. Drinking of bhang is the ordinary form of use. 25. The use of bhang is on the decrease and has been replaced by that of alcohol. The middle and higher classes of men, in imitation of the West, have mostly renounced bhang and taken to the whisky bottle. The use of ganja is on the increase. The lower classes who use it are growing more luxurious than before. 26. (a) Out of ten persons, eight consume ganja, two siddhi. (b) Ditto. (c) The proportion is equal between ganja and siddhi consumers as five to five. (d) Ditto. 27. (a) Working men, fishermen, bearers, men- dicants are moderate habitual consumers of ganja and siddhi. They take to them on account of the damp and cold they are subject to. Each of the drugs, specially ganja smoking, has staying power. (b) Sweepers, some mendicants, Doms, licen- tious youths, etc., take to habitual excessive ganja smoking. (c) Upper and middle class men consume ganja and siddhi in company of friends in festivi- ties. (d) Higher, middle, and lower classes on bereavement, in festivities, and as an anodyne to kill pains. Ganja and siddhi are taken too. 28. (a) Ganja costs half an anna per day. (b) Four to six annas per day of ganja. 29. (a) Dried tobacco leaf with ganja, and milk and sugar with siddhi. (b) Dhatura with both ganja and siddhi. Dhatura is used to increase intoxicating power. No. I do not know bhang massala. 30. Habitual moderate consumers of ganja and siddhi practise in solitude. Excessive habitual consumers practise in company. The number of the former is greater than the latter. No prosti- tutes use ganja. Siddhi and ganja are indulged in from youth to any time of life. The habit is contracted in youth. Children do not consume. 31. (a) No. (b) Not without uneasiness. (c) Ganja has this tendency; siddhi slightly so. 32. In Bengal people drink siddhi on Dasara day. It is not socially binding. There is no social or religions injunction as to the consumption of ganja or siddhi. Mendicants use either or both of them to procure abstraction of mind for the purposes of deep meditation. It is generally temperate. Yes, it is likely to lead to the forma- tion of the habit. 33. As disreputable, except in the case of mendicants who do no mischief to any one. Siddhi is supposed to increase intelligence; ganja drives away the star of fortune. The sentiment is due to health and morality. I don't know any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. For some time, of course. But they can quite get rid of the habit in a month or so. Habitual moderate consumers and habitual exces- sive consumers will be mainly affected; they form the larger number of consumers. Occasional moderate and excessive consumers will not suffer any privation by altogether renouncing the drug. 35. (a) Not quite feasible. (b) Probably so. (c) By restricting the cultivation and sale of hemp drug. (d) Some uneasiness and murmuring for a time. (e) No. (f) To some extent, of course. 36. Siddhi, in days gone by, used to be drunk by the upper and middle classes, who having now been saturated with Western civilization find alcohol a better substitute. 39. No; because smoking carries its injurious effect more rapidy and directly into the brain than the drinking of the same drug does. The nar- cotic action is moderated in its way through the stomach and alimentary canal. I refer to ganja and siddhi. * Invited to attend at a sitting of the Commission for oral examination, but failed to appear.
569 40. The Hindu school of medicine use bhang in diarrh570 and therefore strictly prohibited, although some Muhammadan fakirs are known to use them of their own accord. I doubt whether it is permitted by any other religion. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is, I believe, injurious both for the society and for the religion. It is generally the thoughtless young men who catch the corruption in bad com- panies. I do not know if the hemp plant is ever worshipped by any sect of the people. 34. Yes; specially to the lower classes of con- sumers. 36. I had no opportunity of knowing this. 37, 38 and 39. I do not know. 40. I am told the use of these drugs is some- times prescribed by native physicians on account of its medical qualities. I do not know if they are used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. I do not know. 42. I cannot say. 43. I do not think that the moderate consumers cause any offence to their neighbours. 44. I cannot say. 45. (a) Yes, to certain extent. (b) Yes; I believe. (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) Can't say. 46 and 47. I cannot say. 49. Yes; as I am told. 51. I can't say. 53. I do not know of any case. 54. Can't say. 55. I do not know. Yes, it is possible. 56 and 57. Can't say. 58. I have not done any excise work here, so I cannot give any opinion as to the excise adminis- tration, nor can I offer any suggestion for its improvement. 60. Ganja is not produced here, so I cannot give any opinion on this. 61. Charas is not produced here, so I cannot give any opinion on this. 62, 63 and 64. I do not know anything about it. 65, 66 and 67. I can't say. 68. I cannot give any opinion. 69. I think it is necessary to consult the wishes of the people before a shop is opened in any loca- lity. I do not know whether any steps are taken for this purpose. 70. I do not know. 33. Evidence of MR. F. C. MORAN, Tea Planter, Khoniker, Lakhimpur. 1. From vendors, native doctors, and consu- mers. 3. I only know of Upper Assam, and that scat- tered. 4. It is known by the name of bhang, and is of the same species. 5. So far as I have seen it grow, Assam cli- mate seems to suit it well. 6. Scattered, except where the seed is collected and planted. 7. No. 10. No special class; all classes alike use it. 11. Yes. 14. (a) No. (b) No. (c) Yes. Not to any great extent, only a few people using it. 15. Bhang, which is made from the wild plant, is used by the people mixed in its green state with tobacco and smoked, and I have never heard of its being eaten or drunk. 16. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) No. 18. Deteriorates after a year or so. 19. In Assam used only for smoking. 20. All classes. 21. Ganja is the name given to the imported article. 23. Always smoked and by all classes. 24. Fakirs are the only people, I am told, who drink bhang. 25. Steady. 28. (a) 2 annas weight. (b) 4 annas weight. 29. Only tobacco that I know of. I do not know bhang massala. 30. In company. Males and a few females take it. Have never heard of children taking it. 31. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Not necessarily. 33. So far as I can gather, the high as well as low class of people take it; there is no disgrace attached to it. I have not heard nor know of any form of worship to the plant. 34. No; I do not think it would be a serious privation to any class of consumers to forego it. From personal experience I have seen men who used to take it largely give it up, and felt no bad consequences. 35. I do not think it would be possible to pro- hibit the use of the drug, as it grows wild, and habitual smokers could always arrange to get a supply. 38. 1. Bhang. 2. Ganja. 3. Chur; this is the strongest. 39. Smoking is less harmful than drinking. 40. Bhang and ganja are taken for dysentery, catarrh, colic, etc. No, they are not used for cattle disease. 41. (a), (b), (c) Yes. Moderate occasional use. 43. Yes. 44. (b) It is refreshing. (c) If taken to excess, same as other drugs. (d) No. (e) Yes. (g) No. (h) No. 45. (b) No. (c) No. (d) No; the reverse.
571 (e) It induces habits of immorality and debau- chery. (f) Yes; it does, if taken to excess for a long period, produce insanity, but of a temporary character, and can be checked or cured, so far as I have seen, from forced abstention. Insanity may be re-induced by use of the drug. I know the case of a cooly on my tea garden who was temporarily insane from using the drug, was kept in the Lunatic Asylum at Tezpur for six months, returned quite cured, and has had no relapses since. (g) Have no information, but there is evidence that insanity may tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. 47. No. 48. No. 49. (a) From what I can gather, yes. (b) Not known. (d) Bhang smokers generally have fairly large families, say, four or five children. 53. Yes; murder. I had a case * of a man in my garden who cut off his wife's head whilst tem- porarily insane under the effects of the drug. 68. Yes. 69. So far as I can gather, the people are not consulted as to the site of a shop proposed to be opened if sold by public auction. I certainly think local opinion ought to be considered. Note by Commission appended to MR. MORAN'S evidence. EMPRESS VS. LALA KAMAR. There is only one mention of ganja in this case, and that is in the evidence of a witness, Mohidhar, who stated both before the committing Magistrate and before the Sessions Judge that the accused was sometimes "like a man who takes ganja." On the other hand, it is in evidence (Mr. Moran) that accused and his wife "had frequent quar- rels;" also (Mohidhar) that he was "imprisoned for assaulting her" on a previous occasion, two years before, on which (Puttu) "he was drunk." To this is added: "He is not a drinking man; he drinks sometimes." Mr. Moran, in a long state- ment made before the Magistrate giving a detailed history of the prisoner, made no mention whatever of ganja. 34. Evidence of Mr. ALFRED SPICER,572 43. Fairly inoffensive, but it must be taken very moderately. 44. It is taken to produce intoxication. 45. (b) It seems to be always injurious. (d) It produces bronchitis and pneumonia. The Doctors state that ganja does not produce bronchitis and pneumonia, but that any ganja- smoker catching these diseases is more likely to die than others who do not indulge. (f) It produces insanity if taken to excess. Temporary, if the ganja is kept away from the patient. (g) No. There is no evidence to indicate that insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. 47. No. 60. Yes. 63. I think the licensed shops should not be allowed near to coolies' houses. They should be at least two miles away and confined to only the large bazaars. 68. I would never allow such houses. It is bad enough when it is sold for consumption elsewhere, but it would be a great deal worse if ganja were consumed where sold. 69. Wishes of the people are never consulted. There is a shop at our shipping ghat at Tikulpar, and the manager of Tikulpar and every manager whose tea is shipped there must consider it a nuisance. 35. Evidence of MR. JOHN PHILLIPS, Tea-planter, Suffry, District Darrang. I have pleasure in giving you the extent of what information I have been able to collect regarding the use of bhang in this part of Assam. Cannabis indica, Indian hemp, bhang, siddhi. Products called ganja, charas, majum. Used extensively in all forms by imported coolies as well as by indigenous population. It is the cheapest and most convenient intoxicant procurable, and is credited with aphrodisiac properties which make its use attractive and is the cause of its being used first. Imported coolies use the drug, about three out of four. It is smoked with tobacco or drunk with water, sugar and milk. Its use is general amongst the coolies in this estate, who are all imported. Moderation is the rule. Excess is very exceptional. I have no indigenous labourers, but have had a long experience of Assamese of all classes. They use the drug, but not so extensively as imported labourers from Bengal and other parts of India, as they are more outwardly observant of rules for conduct laid down by the priest class and more afraid of the penalties which follow their infrac- tion. The form in which bhang is most generally used is what may be called home-made. The leaves, stems and young shoots are all used. The nearest licensed shop is four miles off and the retail price is six annas a tola. This shop is the only legiti- mate source of supply to factories employing about 6,000 imported labourers and a scanty indi- genous population. The licensee pays R1,200 a year to Government, so that his profits must be considerable, due no doubt to surreptitious sales at markets and shops in the neighbour- hood, which is not permissible by the terms of his license. The price, however, is so high as to sti- mulate consumption of the home-made and pre- pared article. The plant is to be seen everywhere, not purposely cultivated, but apparently self-sown and tolerated as a weed. It would be impossible to extirpate it or stop its growth without a large increase to the staff at disposal of administrative affairs, and such addition to oppression and malpractices as would be intolerable to an otherwise peaceable and law- abiding populace. Character and effects of indulgence:573 these liquors is constantly apparent in mortality from choleraic diarrh574 37. Evidence of MR. G. A. DOLBY, Tea Planter, Modopee, Tezpur. Ganja is not very extensively used in this district, and bhang only on occasions. There are over 500 imported coolies on this estate. I would put down the proportion of habi- tual smokers at 20 per cent. Women never use it. It is generally smoked. Assamese and Cacharis, whom I would term indigenous labourers, are not ganja-smokers. Very few smoke it. Would estimate the pro- portion at 2 per cent. in the villages, and say 7 per cent. in stations. On occasions, such as the Sivaratri Puja, Assamese use bhang mixed with milk, sugar, and flour made up like sweetmeats, when all present partake of it, even women and children. A few well-to-do Assamese drink bhang made up like sherbet, with milk and sugar, not to intoxicate, but as a refreshing drink and to do honour to the guest. I have made careful enquiries to enable me to give you accurate information on the following points: so far as my own coolies are concerned, I would put the proportion of non-smokers at 80 per cent; of habitual smokers who use it in moderation at 18 per cent; and 2 per cent. of those who use it to excess. Ordinarily, I should say, the drug is used in moderation and not to excess. We are daily com- ing in contact with our coolies at work, and have many opportunities of finding out the cause of their illness when in hospital and also when they absent themselves from work. I have noticed the few who take the drug in excess have a wild look, their eyes are generally bloodshot, and their general manner tends to show that they are under the influence of some intoxicating drug for the time being. I have found those who use it in moderation work better under its influence and are more light-hearted and cheerful; these very men would work indifferently if prevented from using it, and I believe would suffer from indigestion and other bowel-complaints; it must therefore act as a tonic and a digestive if used in moderation by habitual smokers. I have two or three cases of asthma on this estate which, I believe, is chiefly attributable to the excessive use of the drug. These men were moder- ate ganja-smokers, but have of late years used it to excess; they are unable to do any hard work; they were able-bodied coolies some years ago; asthma is not prevalent among non-consumers. I cannot attribute the general debility of these men to any other cause. The wild plant grows luxuriantly in most of the villages in this district. It is fond of a rich light soil, and can be seen growing with vegetables in most of the gardens belonging to the villagers. The plant generally dies away on the approach of the rains. Those who have used it say it causes nausea and headaches. It is seldom used; other- wise the consumption of ganja would be nil. It would be as difficult to exterminate this plant as the "Lantana" plant would be in Ceylon, and would not be worth while to extirpate it. It would be difficult to compare liquor with ganja: they have such opposite effects on the individual who drinks the first or smokes the other. Either taken in moderation does little harm. Of the two evils I would vote for ganja so far as work is concerned. I have generally found those who drink liquor suffer temporarily more than those who smoke ganja. By this I mean coolies seldom drink in moderation, and naturally feel the bad effects next morning. Liquor has not the same injurious effect which ganja has on those who use it to excess. I would not advocate the total prohibition of ganja. So far as my experience goes, I am of opinion that it should not be interfered with. It would be a pity for the sake of a few who take it to excess to deprive the labourer of an indulgence and to him a luxury. There would be a feeling of discontent if those who used the drug were de- prived of it. It would be difficult for me to suggest any measure to restrict the sale of the drug; I believe the present system to be a good one. It would be practically impossible to limit the sale or use of the drug, and I doubt if the licensed vendor would endeavour to prevent it. Those using the drug could easily purchase the quantity required by evasion and fraud. I hope the above will be of some use to you. 38. Evidence of MASDAR ALI, Pleader, Sylhet. 1. I have been a pleader of the District Court from December 1885. Before this I was Sub- Inspector of Schools, Midnapore. I have been Vice-Chairman of the Sylhet Municipality for three years, and will complete my term of office as Chairman of the same Municipality in Marchnext. 2. People here smoke only ganja which is im- ported. Yes. Flat ganja is known as chipti. Round ganja is known as gol. Broken ganja is known as chur. 7. No. 14. No. 18. Ganja deteriorates by keeping. It quite loses its effects in time. It keeps good for about a year. 19. Ganja is here used for smoking only. 20. Ganja is smoked by fishermen, boatmen, cultivators, palanquin bearers, day-labourers, cer- tain fakirs and sanyasis. 21. Flat is preferred, because it is cheap; other- wise chur is preferable. 25. Neither is remarkable. 26. (a) Three-fourths. (b) One-fourth. (c) One-eighth. (d) One-sixteenth. 27. (a) Fishermen, boatmen, palanquin bearers, cultivators, and day-labourers. (b) Fakirs, sanyasis and people suffering from incurable maladies. (c) People observing Sivaratri or Janmasthami or other Ekadasis or fastings, or desirous of pleasures.
575 (d) Any of the above under exceptional circum- stances576 26. It is difficult to distinguish between the proportion of the different classes of consumers of ganja. The great majority of consumers of ganja are habitually moderate as far as my experience goes. 27. The excessive consumption of ganja is the largest among the ascetics and those consumers who are in the habit of hard drinking. The rural classes and hard-working people are generally moderate in its indulgence. The number of occa- sional moderate consumers is very few. These belong to those classes of people who would not smoke ganja without putting in offering to Mahadeb, a deity of the Hindus. The cases of occasional excessive consumption are few and far between. Some got into the habit of ganja-smoking for pleasure, which its intoxication brings on. Some began it under a belief that it gave them strength and enabled them to go through hard work; but the majority started the habit from the contagion of bad examples. 29. Water and tobacco are the ingredients ordinarily mixed with ganja by different classes of consumers, but rosewater and milk are exception- ally added to it. I have not seen any one using dhatura with ganja. 30. As a general rule ganja is smoked in com- pany. Ganja-smoking is mainly confined to the male sex. Our women are remarkably free from it. It is quite uncommon among children. 31. Ganja-consuming habit is easily formed. It is difficult to give up the habit of consuming ganja. The consumers cannot give up the habit of their own will, but they would do so if com- pelled to it. It creates a hankering after it. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. Ganja is used on the occasions of Siva- ratri festival and Sarasvati Puja. It is gen- erally used on these religious festivals, but it is not regarded as essential. Trinather Seva is a religious entertainment among low class men of Sylhet and Cachar. This Seva is usually cele- brated in fulfilment of promises made for the purpose especially when anyone be in trouble. It takes place at night. The ganja-smokers as well as spectators meet together at the appointed hour and employ themselves in celebrating the so-called fête. They put ganja in offering to Mahadeb, a deity of the Hindus, who, it is said, used to smoke ganja, and then invoke him to come and share the offering; when the invocation is over, the ganja offered is smoked by the consumers and some of the spectators who profess themselves to be the followers of the deity. This is followed by dis- tribution of sweetmeats and fruits among the spectators as well as the smokers. Ganja is essential in this Seva, and it is likely to lead to a habit. The moderate and excessive use of ganja on this occasion depends on the nature of the consumers. 33. The general feeling of the people is against the use of ganja. The term "ganja-smoker" is a term of reproach. Even the ganja-smokers are ashamed to admit the habit of ganja-smoking; but it is not regarded as a degrading habit when contracted by the ascetics. It is said that Maha- deb, a deity of the Hindus, used to smoke ganja, and his followers consider the smoking of ganja to be a sort of religious service. Ganja-smoking is generally confined to the dregs of the society and is looked down upon by the respectable people. The ganja-smokers are considered to be useless members of society, because the habit of smoking ruins mind and body. I therefore attribute that sentiment to this. I am not aware that hemp plant is ever worshipped on any occasion by any sect of people. 34. Yes, it would be a serious privation where the habit of using ganja has become established. I have noticed restlessness and depression in the ganja-smokers, and found them to be quite unfit for work when deprived of their accustomed use of the drug. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja. Any attempt to restrict its consump- tion would lead to smuggling and the clandestine sale of the drug (ganja), and the people would consume ganja of inferior quality. It would be very difficult to enforce the prohibition. The prohibition would cause, I believe, discontent among the consumers; but I am not prepared to say that it would amount to a political danger. If the consumption of ganja be prohibited, the poorer classes will, I believe, take to other drugs, and the richer to alcohol. The prohibition could be en- forced by stopping cultivation, manufacture and importation of ganja. 36. As far as my experience goes, the tendency of the people to indulge in liquor has become very great at the present time, but I do not think that the people take to it as a substitute for the drug(ganja). 42. My observation is confined only to ganja. The moderate use of this drug is not, in my opinion, harmless. It makes man quarrelsome and irrit- ant and produces emaciation, and causes bronchitis or asthma in old age. 43. So far as my experience goes, moderate con- sumers of ganja are inoffensive to their neigh- bours. 44. I am not a consumer of ganja, and therefore I do not feel competent to give any definite answer, but I was told by the smokers of ganja that the intoxication of ganja brings on pleasure, and it gives them vigour and capacity for hard work. I have seen people eating to excess when under the influence of the drug (ganja). The labourers are more inclined for hard work after a smoke. The above effects take place, I am told, while the smokers are under the influence of the drug. They say that the want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness and creates a longing for the drug. 45. As regards the effects of the moderate ganja-smoking on the physical and mental condi- tion of the people, I have observed that injurious effects are produced by its moderate use. It produces emaciation, and in many cases it causes dysentery and bronchitis or asthma in old age. It also weakens the intellect and enfeebles the mind; but I was told that these deleterious effects take place for want of good food consisting of milk and its preparations, besides other articles of food, which the generality of the smokers of ganja can ill-afford to have on account of their straitened circumstances. I know of no case where ganja-smoking has produced moral depravity of any kind. No case of insanity pro- duced by the moderate use of ganja has come under my notice. It also causes loss of appetite, and injures the digestion unless accompanied by good food, and induces laziness. 46. I have observed that excessive use of ganja ruins body and mind. I have heard of several cases of insanity produced by the excessive use of the drug (ganja). Yesterday I read in
577 paper some cases of insanity produced by excessive use of ganja. I have also observed that excessive and habitual use of ganja has produced the aforesaid noxious effects within a shorter period of the indulgence. 47. The habitual moderate use of ganja does not appear to be a hereditary habit. I think it may affect the children of the moderate consu- mers when its use causes bronchitis or asthma. 48. The habitual excessive use of ganja too does not appear to be a hereditary habit, but, in my opinion, it will affect the children of the con- sumers as it causes bronchitis or asthma. 49. I do not feel competent to give any answer to this question. 51. I cannot distinguish between the propor- tions. I have never heard of any connection between crime and the moderate use of ganja. 52. The excessive use of ganja seldom leads to crime. 53. I know of no case in which the use of ganja was the direct cause of crime. I have never seen nor heard any man committing unpremeditated crime of violence under the influence of ganja. 54. I have never heard of any case in which criminals used ganja to fortify themselves to com- mit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 57. I have no knowledge of charas, but, as far as my experience and observation extend, ganja is never eaten, but it is always smoked. 58. I think the present system of Excise Ad- ministration in Assam in respect of hemp drugs is on the whole the best, and, in my opinion, it is working well. The weak point in it is that Government does not take middleman's profit. In this respect it is capable of improvement. 59. In my opinion the Excise system is capable of improvement from financial point of view. Government should take middleman's profit. 40. Evidence of BISHUN CHANDRA CHATTOPADHAY, Pleader, Dhubri. 1. Have had to deal with many consumers and dealers of the drugs, and personally have seen the consumption. 2. The flat, round, and broken are locally known by mota, mihi, and chur respectively. 3. Hughli, Rangpur, and Goalpara. It is abundant in Hughli and Goalpara. 4. Siddhi and bhang. They refer exactly to the same plant. 5. Damp and fertile soil favours the growth. Abandoned places of cow-sheds have been seen covered with these plants. 6. Ordinarily scattered, but I have seen places where the plant grows spontaneously every year in the form of dense jungle. 7. No. 14. No. Bhang grows spontaneously. 18. All these drugs deteriorate by keeping. Ganja and bhang will lose much of their effect in a year. 19. Ganja and charas are generally used for smoking, but I have known of ganja being drunk also when bhang cannot be had or a stronger drink is required. 20. Ganja is chiefly confined to low classes of the people, while charas finds its way even among the higher classes in towns and sadar stations. 21. Chur is the most favoured of the three, but owing to the difference in their prices the con- sumption of the flat is the highest. 23. Bhang is used for smoking sometimes by people who have contracted the habit of smoking ganja, but cannot get it. 24. Bhang-drinking is very rare in Assam. 25. Ganja: use is gradually on the increase owing to greater facilities being offered for pro- curing the drug by the increased number of retail shops. 27. The habitual ganja-smokers are those who are exposed to the inclemencies of the weather, and more especially who have to work in water, such as fishermen and boatmen. Then there is another class of excessive ganja-smokers. These are religious mendicants and ascetics, who expose themselves most. 28. The average cost will be from two to four pice a day. 29. I have known of bhang drink being mixed occasionally amongst higher classes of people with rose-buds, cucumber seeds, and spices and sugar to make the drink fragrant, cool, and taste- ful; and have heard of dhatura being mixed to increase the effect of ganja, but had no experience of it. 30. The consumption of ganja and bhang is freely practised in company. It is mainly con fined to the males. Females, old and degraded, are occasionally seen to indulge in ganja-smok- ing. Children rarely consume these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed, but it can be as easily given up. The habit continuing is, like all others, liable to develop into the excessive. 32. The religious custom of the Bengal Hindus enjoins the touching of the bhang plant leaves on occasions of distant and auspicious journeys and the drink of the drug on the last day of the Durga Puja. It is not essential. Such use does not generate habit and cannot be injurious. 33. Ganja-smoking is disreputable, it being chiefly confined to the lower classes. I know of no custom of worshipping the plant. 34. I do not think it would be a serious priya- tion. The habitual consumers may temporarily feel a want of appetite. 35. All these drugs may be dispensed with, but not as long as we have the more pernicious liquor traffic. The spontaneous growth of bhang may tempt a few to have recourse to it, but this may be easily prohibited. There is no apprehension of a political danger, but some may take to alcoholic drinks. 36. The ganja-smokers have generally an aver- sion to liquor-drinking. Alcohol-drinking is gra- dually increasing no doubt, but I do not think that it is being substituted for ganja or bhang. 37. I have not much experience of charas; my answers refer to ganja and bhang. 40. Native physicians do prescribe bhang for bowel complaints, and ganja is used by them for preparation of certain oils. I have heard of bhang being used for treatment of cattle disease. 4 G
578 41. I have seen people using ganja and bhang to sharpen their appetite, but, like all stimulants, by frequent use they fail to produce the desired effect and act prejudicially on the natural system. Ganja and bhang ward off cold, but it is not taken with the intent of protecting against fever. I refer to moderate occasional use. 42. I do not consider any use of the drug harmless. The beginning of moderate use gene- rates habit and gradually goes to excess. 43. Even moderate consumers get a very irri- table and easily excitable temper. 44. The immediate effect is the satisfaction of the longing. It is refreshing. It produces in- toxication. It does not supply the place of food. The effect varies with the length of the habit. The after-effects are injurious. 45. Habitual ganja-smoking impairs the con- stitution, injures the natural digestive functions, and the end of a ganja-smoker is death, generally of dysentery or affections of the organs of respira- tion. I have known of instances in which ganja- smoking produced insanity, and the patients have generally been violent. 49. Both ganja and bhang are moderately used for this purpose, but it is a mistake. The con- stant use of the ganja produces impotence. 51. I have known many bad characters who are addicted to ganja-smoking. 53. I know of a case in which an excessive ganja-smoker killed a friend of his with a lathiwithout any apparent cause for such action. The culprit was then detained in the lunatic asylum. 54. Heard of such being done, but had no per- sonal experience. 55. Bhang drinking can produce complete stupefaction with admixture. 68. There are retail ganja shops in almost all the important hâts, where it is freely consumed. I object to such consumption, as it induces people who never tasted it to give it a trial. 69. Wishes of the people are never consulted to my knowledge. Local public opinion should be considered. Before opening a new shop subor- dinate police officers are requested to make a report and these officers know how to report on the matter. N.B.579 is difficult to get correct figures, but may be roughly estimated to be over 60 per cent.) of the working classes use it, and sanyasis, ramayats and garden coolies, and also Hindu sepoys. 23. No. 24. Generally people of the North-Western Provinces and also lower classes of Hindus drink bhang and also eat it. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase. Al- though persons known as bhadralog, i.e., country gentlemen of the middle classes, do not now attend what may be called smoking booths, as some of them used to do formerly, the lower orders as a body use the drug. I do not think it will be less than 75 per cent. of the people of the work- ing classes. 26. I would put them as follows:580 They feel refreshed after some time, and it is this refreshed feeling that induces them to take the drug again. It does not intoxicate the habitual consumer, that is, moderate use. 45. Yes, it impairs the constitution generally. It causes dysentery and bronchitis. It induces laziness. 46. The effects are more visible in this case. Insanity has been known to result from ganja- smoking. 47 and 48. Children of ganja-smokers do often take to the drug. Whether from heredity or not I have not been able to learn. 49. I have not been able to learn whether prostitutes use ganja as an aphrodisiac, but they use it. I am told bhang is supposed to produce impotence. 51 and 52. I have not been able to collect reliable information in regard to this, but I find in the Excise Report for the Province for the year 1882- 83 at page 21:581 Sugar and milk are mixed with bhang both to sweeten its taste and to enhance its effects of intoxication. (b) Dhatura is exceptionally mixed with ganja, mainly to enhance its intoxicating effects. Spices, such as clove, etc., exceptionally mixed with bhang to have its intoxication further enhanced and lasting. Bhang massala is unknown. 30. For the most part the consumption of these drugs is practised in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex. No time of life can particularly be fixed after 12 years of age. Children (such as spoiled students) are the general consumers of the ganja drug. 31. The habit is very easily formed. It is difficult to break off; but not so difficult as opium habit. The tendency in the case of all of these drugs for the moderate habit is to develop into the excessive. 32. Among the Hindus the consumption of these drugs is essentially necessary for the sol- emnization of the Sivratri festival. Without some sort of preparation of these drugs the god Siva cannot be worshipped on this occasion. Among the Muhammadans, although the consumption of these drugs is restricted by religion, the use of ganja is seen at the time of circumcision instead of chloroform. In both the cases above alluded to the use of these drugs is regarded as essential. It is excessive. It is not likely to the formation of the habit. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is generally regarded with hatred. Among the Hindus the public opinion is against it in en- lightened circles from social point of view, and among the Muhammadans, the public opinion is against the practice both from social and reli- gious points of view. The use of this narcotic is generally in disrepute on the following grounds, viz.:582 49 and 50. The moderate use of any of these drugs is never practised as an aphrodisiac except by prostitutes, night chowkidars, and so forth. The use of hemp tends to produce impotence. 51. Habitual moderate consumers are not generally to be seen to be bad characters. The moderate use has not had any connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 52. About one-third of bad characters are habitual excessive consumers. Most of the petty thieves are habitual excessive consumers. 53. The excessive indulgence in these drugs (bhang excepted) incites occasionally to unpreme- ditated violent crime. There are cases in which it has led to homicidal frenzy. 54. I do not think they do. 55. Yes, they do occasionally. Complete stupe- faction may be induced by this drug with or with- out admixture. 56. (a) The effects of hemp used in moderation are modified by the admixture of tobacco leaf; and (b) the effects of hemp used in excess are modified by the admixture of dhatura and sweet things. The admixture of dhatura for personal consumption is practised specially by the fakirs and for administration to others by criminals. 57. Eating and drinking of charas are never known to me. Ganja is sometimes eaten or drunk. When ganja is used in such a way, its effects are more severe than bhang or siddhi. 58. The excise administration is capable of a good deal of improvement. 59. It is capable of improvement by prohibiting the sale of these drugs to young boys, the injuries suffered by whom have already been expressed. 60. Ganja is not produced in my province. 61. No charas is produced in my province. 63 and 64. Nil. 65. In my opinion the taxation of these drugs should be enhanced so that the consumers are not encouraged. 66. There should be different rates according to their demand. 67. The present method is not objectionable. 68. In all the houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs, these drugs are consumed on the premises. In my opinion this system is per- nicious. 69. Before a shop is opened in any locality the wishes of the people are neither considered nor consulted. The shops are opened according to the demand. Local public opinion ought to be con- sulted where it is expected to be intelligent. 70. There being no Native States in the vici- nity of this province, there is no importation or smuggling of hemp drugs from this source. Importation of these drugs is suspected from be- yond the inner lines from hill tribes by the savage tribes residing in the British territories, such as Miris and Deories. 43. Evidence of REVD. J. P. JONES,* Missionary, Sylhet. 1. Only by mixing with the natives for over six years and coming in contact with many who take ganja. 2. Bhang and ganja only are in common use in this neighbourhood. Very rarely charas is used. As far as I know, the above definitions describe the plants in this neighbourhood. 7. Not that I know of. 14. Not to my knowledge. 19. Ganja is used for smoking only in this district, except when mixed with other things, when it is sometimes eaten. 20. Nearly 25 per cent. use ganja. Chiefly among the lower classes. 24. Bhang is only used occasionally at feasts, etc., and then it is chiefly in drink that they take it. 25. I believe the use of ganja is on the increase. This is the opinion of the people generally. Some years ago people were ashamed of taking it, but now the people take it openly. 26. Of ganja only583 35. I cannot say whether it would be feasible or not to prohibit the use of ganja. It would certainly occasion great discontent among the consumers, but would not amount to any political danger. 36. I do not think that alcohol is in any way being substituted for ganja in this neighbour- hood. 41. (a) Not in any way I believe. (b) Yes, it does this. Men often work well when taking ganja, e.g., I have heard of men giving a few pice to buy ganja for boatmen and others where they require a little extra work from them. (c) I do not think it acts in this way atall. Those who are moderate habitual consumers and those who are occasional consumers take it as described in (b). 42. Those that work are not injured as far as I have seen; but those who smoke ganja and are idle suffer greatly from the effects of it. 43. When they take ganja and work they are quite inoffensive, but those who are idle often be- come very offensive. 44. It certainly gives a feeling of pleasure to the consumer, and allays hunger. I never heard of it creating an appetite, but it eventually cre- ates a craving for the drug itself. 45. (a) I believe it does584 25. No appreciable increase or decrease. No particular reasons can be assigned. But in the case of ganja tendency is to the increase, because it is preferred to bhang for facilitating labour, and it is a protective against cold. Charas is not used. 26. The proportion cannot be exactly ascer- tained. 27. It is used mainly by the lower class people for facilitating protection from cold; not used for luxury. 28. Cannot be exactly ascertained. 29. The tea-garden coolies sometimes mix dha- tura seeds in small quantities with ganja or bhang to increase intoxication. Tobacco is also mixed to increase the quantity. Yes, bhang massala is prepared out of the fol- lowing ingredients, viz., poppy-seed, black pepper, mauree, dried cucumber, dried rose petals, chest- nut. Most of these can be obtained from the local bazaar. 30. Generally both smoking and drinking are used in company, and occasionally in solitude. It is confined to the male sex, without any fixed time of life. Children do not use. 31. The habit is generally and easily formed by company, and not very difficult to break off. Tendency is to increase. 32. No social custom. But religiously amongst Hindus ganja is given in form of worship to Mahadeva in the shape of ladus or balls, and smoking on the Sivaratri once a year. The custom does not seem to be essential. It is generally temperate. It may lead to the formation of habits. 33. Generally regarded as bad. No public opi- nion of any kind. The use is generally in disre- pute. I attribute this to the evil effects of the drug. Hemp plant is not worshipped. 34. The tea-garden coolies and doms will seri- ously feel for the drug, as they consider it is useful to them. The probable number of the class cannot be stated. 35. Prohibition is feasible. The consumers will be discontented for a time; but there is no politi- cal danger. The prohibition may be followed by alcoholic stimulant or opium. 36. No, because alcoholic drinks are valuable and cannot be easily available. 37. Cannot say, as charas is not used. 38. Cannot say, as we have only flat ganja. 39. Smoking is more injurious, because it easily affects the brain. 40. The preparation called modak is prescribed by native kabirajes. Bhang is used in cattle disease treatment. 41. (a) Bhang-smoking is accessory and diges- tive. (b) Smoking gives staying power under severe exertion or exposure, and alleviates fatigue. (c) No. (d) No. The Brahmins, Kayasthas and other classes use it for the above purposes. Can't say proportion. I allude to the moderate habitual as well as moder- ate occasional consumers. 42. Even moderate use is not harmless, because the tendency is to increase. 43. Yes. 44. Feels better. Produces intoxication. Creates appetite. Can't say how long the effect exists; it depends upon one's constitution and habit. The after-effects are weakness. Want of subse- quent gratification produces longing and uneasi- ness. 45. Constitution is impaired. Eventually diges- tion is impaired. Smoking causes dysentery, bronchitis and asthma. It impairs the moral sense and induces laziness. It does not produce insanity. 46. Habitual excessive use impairs the consti- tution, injures digestion, causes dysentery, etc., etc., impairs the moral sense and induces lazi- ness eventually. Sometimes deadens intellect and sometimes produces insanity. Persons suffering from mental anxiety and brain disease easily fall victims. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. Yes. Not used by prostitutes. Used as an aphrodisiac is more injurious. It pro- duces impotence to excessive users generally, and sometimes to moderate users. 51. Not very large proportion. Proportion not known. 52. To a limited extent. 53. May incite unpremeditated crime. Don't know any special case. 54. Don't know. 55. Heard only of such cases. If given in excessive quantity, stupefaction may be induced. 56. Admixture sometimes moderates and some- times increases intoxication, according to the quantity and quality of ingredients. Sometimes sanyasis mix dhatura seeds. 57. Know nothing of charas. Have no experi- ence in this matter. 58. It is capable of improvement. 59. Reduce the number of shops and increase the duty. 60. No ganja cultivated in my district (Dar- rang). 61. No charas produced in Darrang. 62. Cultivation is already prohibited in Dar- rang. 63 and 64. No objection. 65. The taxation ought to be increased in each kind. 66. It is necessary that it should be increased according to the quality of the drugs. 67. I have objections, as I am of opinion that the use should be gradually abolished. 68. No. 69. Probably considered. 70. Can't say.
585 45. Evidence of DEVI CHARAN BARUA,* Kayastha, Pleader, Jorhat. 1. I am a permanent resident of Assam, as a pleader by profession. I come in contact with numerous persons, and as Secretary to the Jorhat Sarbajanik Sabha I am in touch with large classes of people. NOTE.586 43. Moderate consumers are even not inoffen- sive to their neighbours. 44. I have no experience. 45. Ganja-smokers are generally weak in physique. Mental power is also affected by it; morality is also depraved. I am told that in the beginning the use of ganja increases appetite, but afterwards decreases it. Yes; it impairs the moral sense and induces laziness and habits of immoral- ity, and deadens the intellect. 46. Excessive smoking produces insanity. I know of one case in which a man of this district having taken to excessive ganja-smoking became insane; he survived the lunacy for seven years, during the last four years of which he was in the lunatic asylum, and he died of dysentery before recovery. 53. Excessive indulgence in ganja-smoking incites unpremeditated crime, such as assault and murder. 56. So much as is known to me has been answered in question 29. 58. As far as I know, the present system of excise administration in respect of hemp is work- ing well, and it requires no further improvement. 60. No ganja is produced in this province. 61. No charas is produced in this province. 62. There is no cultivation of hemp plant in this province. 63. In my opinion the present system of whole- sale and retail vend requires no improvement. 64. No. 65. The taxation of ganja is, I think, reason- able. 66. Yes; chur or broken ganja contains no stick, whereas the flat contains enough sticks than the round; therefore in my opinion different taxation is necessary for these three kinds of ganja. 67. No. 68. There are only shops licensed for sale of these drugs. In my view this kind of licensed shops are better than any other system of selling ganja. 69. Before opening of a ganja shop the wishes of the people are not consulted. When anybody applies to open a new shop in certain locality, the district Officer considers it; and after getting sanction of the Excise Commissioner, he puts it to auction on some dates fixed, and sells it to the highest bidder. Before opening a ganja shop, local public opinion is necessary. 70. It is not known to me that hemp drugs are imported from Native States. In my opinion the duties of the ganjas used are really paid. I don't think that there is any general use of un- taxed drugs. Oral evidence. Question 1.587 5. The wild hemp is seen to grow abundantly in damp and submerged places. 6. It grows densely in such places where cow- dung are thrown. 7. No. 8 to 18. Do not refer to my district. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking; the green leaves of the wild hemp are used ex- ternally in some cases in rheumatic pains, etc. 20. The up-country men. 21. Flat and round ganja is preferred for smoking. 22. Foreign charas is used and imported from those districts in India where it is manufactured. 23. Yes, by people of Upper India. 24. Hindus of Upper India are greatly addicted to drinking bhang. 25. The use seems to be on the increase in my district. The present excise system, under which easy accessibility to the drug is available, is attri- butable to the increase. 26. Cent. per cent. of adult male Hindus who come from Upper India are excessive consumers of bhang. Among Assamese the percentage of con- sumers is inappreciable, may be five per cent.; but considering the easy accessibility to the drug, there is every likelihood of this percentage being on the increase. 27. From lower classes and religious mendicants. Their habits of life are indolence and quarrelling propensity, and the consumers say that the use of bhang helps the engagement of the mind upon any subject, and in some instances the bhang is used for immoral purposes. 28. (a) One-and-a-half anna. (b) Six annas. 29. Ordinary curry spices, but principally nut- meg, cloves, and musk are mixed by well-to-do luxurious consumers. Heard of dhatura being used. The object of these mixtures is only to show luxury. No, I do not know bhang mas- sala. 30. Ganja is practised in solitude by young beginners. There is nothing to prevent children to consume bhang when in bad company. 31. Easily formed. Difficult for young men to break off. There is a very marked tendency for the moderate consumers to develop into the exces- sive. 32. Amongst Assamese the custom is consi- dered religious in the case of Sivaratri or the an- nual puja of the god Siva. The use then is re- garded essential. The use is generally temperate, but it is likely to lead to the formation of thehabit. 33. In Assam, the use of not only hemp, but all other intoxicating drugs, is religiously prohi- bited. In the sastras or the convents of the prin- cipal gosains or spiritual guides in Assam the rule against the use of any intoxicating thing is strict- ly enforced. 34. The prohibition of the drug may be a seri- ous privation to the religious mendicants as well as to other habitual consumers. The percentage of the former will be one per cent. and that of the latter nearly three per cent. 35. Of course the prohibition of the drugs is strongly recommended, and it would no doubt be feasible. If the police use proper vigilance, and the reward system to the informants is continued, illicit consumption will be totally impracticable. The number of consumers is so insignificant that not the slightest political danger or discontent can be anticipated. The consumers being up-country Hindus and ascetics and low-class people who are so conservative in point of religious observances that they will not use any alcoholic stimulants if the prohibition of the hemp drugs is enforced. 36. No. 37 and 38. Do not know. 39. Both smoking and eating are injurious. 40. No native doctor to my knowledge ever pre- scribes these drugs for medicinal purposes, neither they are seen to be used in the treatment of cattle- disease in my district. 41. (a) Said to be beneficial by the consumers. (b) No. (c) Never. (d) Application of the green leaves of the hemp plant in pains, etc., is said to be beneficial. Dyspeptic invalids use the drug as a food accessory, and their number is quite inappreciable. I refer to the moderate occasional use of the drug. 42. I do not consider the moderate use of any intoxicating drug to be harmless, because no man, however strong-minded he is, can ever be expect- ed to be always moderate. In case of illiterate persons who form the majority of the consumers of the drug, the terms moderate and excessive may be said to be synonymous. 43. Believed to be so. 44. To the moderate habitual consumers the drug is said to be refreshing; it does not produce intoxication, nor allays hunger; on the contrary it creates appetite. The effect lasts for nearly a couple of hours, and it produces longing for subse- quent gratification and uneasiness if it cannot be had. 45. All the bad effects of the use of the hemp drug enumerated in this question are visible even to habitual moderate consumers of tender age. One of my cousins, who took to the habit of smoking ganja when a school-boy of some twelve years of age, became a permanent insane of the worst type and died ten years afterwards, and I know many other similar cases. 46. Above answer proves that discussion of this question is not necessary. 47. Does not appear to be a hereditary habit. 48. Discussion unnecessary. 49. Said to be so practised, as well as used by the prostitutes. The use for this purpose is said to produce barrenness in case of women and impo- tence in case of men. 50. Discussion not necessary. 51. Yes. Old moderate consumers are not seen to be associated with any crime. 42. Excessive use of the drug even by habitual consumers is no doubt apt to lead to crime in gene- ral. 53. Yes. Yes. 54. Yes. 55. Yes. Yes; more completely in case of non- consumers. 56 and 57. Do not know. 58. Working well, but capable of improvement. 59. In my district the ganja golas are in charge of traders who are not above scruples. In my opinion the principal medical officer of the district
588 should be authorized with the charge of the drugs, or they may be kept in Government treasury like opium. 60 and 61. Not produced in Assam. 62. Not cultivated in Assam 63 and 64. I recommend for the total prohibi- tion of the hemp drugs, and therefore need not discuss this question. 65. Vide answer to question No. 63. 66 and 67. Discussion not necessary. 68. Yes. Considering the illiterate, immoral, and low class of men who are licensed to sell these drugs, there is nothing to prevent people consum- ing them on the premises. 69. Never consulted to my knowledge, and no measures are taken. By all means local public opinion ought to be thus considered. 70. Do not know. Oral evidence. Question 1.589 15. Madak as sort of medicine made by native doctors, mixing bhang finely powdered with sugar and few other spices as stimulant and promoter of digestive power; these are eaten as pills. Siddhi or ghota is made with powdered bhang mixed with milk, water and sugar, and used in certain religi- ous occasions for drinking, and so also with sugar and rice powder used as sweetmeat in Sivaratri day for the worship of god Siva. 16. Bhang can be prepared from the wild hemp plant; ganja cannot be prepared from them. 17. By all classes, generally by Brahmins for religious affairs. 19. As far as my knowledge goes, ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. Smoking ganja among Assamese is scarce in present days. Two per cent. would be number. It is most common among the up-country people and coolies, and all fakirs and monks consume it considerably as one of the necessaries to stick to their holy devotions, more especially as because god Siva was using it. 21. Flat ganja generally gets easy sale here. 23. I did not see any using bhang for smoking. 24. Among Assamese in religious days, espe- cially by Brahmins, and few of all other classes. 25. Use of ganja is on the increase. Assamese' seeing its use by the up-country traders, coolies, etc., gradually copying and learning it. 26. (a) 60 per cent. (b) 30 Ditto. (c) 10 Ditto. (d) Nil. 27. Labourers, songsters and fakirs. The la- bourer and songster classes to stimulate them to work, and fakirs to stick their minds to devotions. 28. (a) Two pice to one anna. (b) About two annas per diem. 29. Tobacco leaf for smoking ganja; dhatura never seen used. 30. Practice is more in company than in soli- tude. It is confined to male only, to whole time of his life. It is scarcely usual amongst the Assamese children to consume these drugs. 31. Yes. It is difficult to break off. There is tendency to develop into the excessive use. 32. In Assam it is customary among princi- pally Brahmins to use bhang in way of sweet- meat for worshipping Siva once a year in the day of Sivaratri, and siddhi or ghota in the last day of Durga Puja. For Siva worshipping on that day it is considered to offer ganja sweetmeat in the puja, but it is not compulsory for the de- voters to eat them. The preparation is temperate, but excessive use is injurious. 33. These drugs are generally regarded as hate- ful and injurious to mental power. The public opinion in regard to the practice of the drugs is quite against for the use of all forms of narcotic. I attribute general disrepute to the ganja. No custom of worshipping the plant in Assam. 34. There will be none in Assam. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs and would be a blessing to the people in my opinion. I don't think they would be con- sumed illicitly. Stopping importation and sale and prohibiting cultivation, a small quantity being kept for sale with restrictions for religious occa- sions and medicinal purposes. The prohibition might occasion little discontent among the fakirs for some time and shall never amount to a poli- tical danger in Assam. None shall follow to other stimulant, as, excepting fakirs, ganja is being now considered as ruinous drug by the general public here. 36. No. 37. Effect of charas is heard to be not stronger than ganja. 38. No. 39. Smoking is more injurious than drinking, as the former affects in lungs and brains sooner. 40. Assam Bez Borooahs, Kabiraj, use bhang in few stimulant medicines, and raw bhang as digestive medicine in some cattle-diseases. 41. As far as I find, it is especially used to give staying power under exertion by the labouring class, and for pleasure only by the youths of higher classes; at first as moderate occasional use and afterwards habitual. 42. I don't think moderate use even harmless, as it is liable to gradually become habitual, and it harms the weak brains easily, though moderate. 43. Nothing much heard against them. 44. Generally believed to be refreshing; it pro- duces intoxication and lasts from two to three hours, and want of subsequent gratification pro- duces uneasiness. Creates appetite to the begin- ners only. 45 and 46. (a) Yes. (c) No. (d), etc. Yes. I saw three cases of dysentery and bronchitis caused by habitual smoking. It impairs moral sense, but induces no laziness to my know- ledge. It does deaden the intellect, and eventually produces insanity to those with weaker brains, I witness two cases of two youths of respectable Assam families becoming insane by smoking ganja for pleasure; one since died after ten years' lingering and the other still alive. 53. I believe so in certain cases. I saw a cooly in my garden and a pensioned sepoy, the former attempting to kill his wife with a dao, and the other seriously beating his wife. 54, 55 and 56. None to my knowledge. 58. Working well. 60. Ganja not cultivated here. 61. No. 62. Present control is good enough. 63. In my opinion, if ganja is not altogether abolished, the present system is good. 64. Existing regulations are quite satisfactory. 65. I prefer heavy taxation to lessen consu- mers. 66. No. 67. No. 68. Yes. I have nothing to object againstthem. Oral evidence. Question 1.590 prosecution is instituted by the police. People are in the habit of rooting up the plant for fear of prosecution. The police will step in if the plant is allowed to grow big enough to be used for smok- ing. Even if the plant is not cared for, the people will pluck it up fearing that the police will inter- fere when it is found growing near the houses. This is the action the police take in Dibrugarh and Lakhimpur, I cannot speak about other dis- tricts. The wild plant used to grow in Assam before the ganja shops were established. Question 20.