REPORT ON THE CULTIVATION OF PROTEOSOMA, LABB, IN GREY MOSQUITOS. BY SURGEON-MAJOR RONALD ROSS, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1898.
?REPORT ON THE CULTIVATION OF PROTEOSOMA, LABB , IN GREY MOSQUITOS. BY SURGEON-MAJOR RONALD ROSS, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, IND\ill\ 1898.
?CONTENTS. I.-PRELIMINARY.   PAGES 1. Abstract of Former Researches .............................. 1 2. Abstract of Recent Researches ............................. 1 II.-RESULTS OF FEEDING VARIOUS INSECTS ON BLOOD CONTAINING VARIOUS SPECIES OF  GYMNOSPORIDIA.  1. List of Former Results .......................................... 1 2. Discovery of Pigmented Cells in Grey Mosquitos fed on Larks with Proteosoma .......... 2 3. List of Recent Results ........................... 3 4. Abstract of Recent Experiments with Grey Mosquitos ................................... 5 5. Some Particular Experiments .......................................................... 5 6. Deductions from the Feeding Experiments .............................. 6 III.-THE STRUCTURE AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROTEOSOMA-COCCIDIA IN GREY  MOSQUITOS.  1. Technique ......................................  6 2. Growth and Structure of the Coccidia ...............................  8 3. Staining ...................... 15 4. Some Miscellaneous Observations ........................... 16 IV.-SOME DISCUSSIONS.  I. Theories regarding the Flagella ............ 17 2. The relation between Proteosoma and the Coccidia ........ 17 3. The Parasites of Human Malaria in Mosquitos ...................... 18 4. Outline of further Researches required .......... 19 V.-CONCLUSIONS.  References .................................... 20 Appendix-Description of the Grey Mosquitos ......... 21 Plates .................................. 21
?REPORT ON THE CULTIVATION OF PROTEOSOMA, LABB, IN GREY MOSQUITOS. I.-Preliminary. 1. Abstract of Former Researches.-In a Report to the Director General, Indian Medical Service, dated 19th September 1897, I described some peculiar pigmented cells found by me in August 1897 in two dappled-winged mosquitos fed on blood containing crescents, and anticipated that they were a stage of the parasite of malaria in those insects. An abstract of the report was published in the British Medical Journal (1), to which were appended some remarks by Dr. Manson, Mr. Bland Sutton, and Dr. Thin on the original specimens, which they had seen. While Dr. Manson thought that the cells might be the extra-corporeal phase of the parasite of malaria, it was, on the other hand, considered possible for them to be either normal cells of the mosquito, or some parasite in it quite independent of malaria. In September 1897, however, the cells were seen again in two ordinary mosquitos fed on malarial blood; and the fresh light which these new observations threw on the subject enabled me to show (2) that they must be at least some kind of patho- logical growth in the insect; indeed, little doubt now remained in my mind that they actually were what I had from the first supposed them to be. 2. Abstract of Recent Researches.-I have lately been able to obtain con- clusive evidence to this effect by having succeeded in producing these pig- mented cells at will in grey mosquitos by feeding them on birds infected by proteosoma, Labb-a parasite very similar and closely related to the hmamb of malaria in man. Numerous control experiments in which mosquitos of the same species were fed on healthy men and birds, or on men and birds with other gymnosporidia (to which order all these parasites belong), invariably yielded negative results. Further examination of the cells showed them to be the early stages of parasites, which infest the external wall of the insect's stomach, which in six or seven days reach a growth of no less than 60  or 70 , and which are finally extruded from the organ into the general body-cavity of the host. There is no doubt then that these parasites are a development in the mosquito of proteosoma in birds; and to judge from their structure and mode of growth so far as yet observed, I take them to be coccidia. II.-Results of Feeding Various Insects on Blood containing Various Species of Gymnosporidia. I. List of Former Results.-Before describing recent experiments it is advisable to record briefly those made since I first took up the subject in May 1895, up to the end of February 1898. Each set of experiments or observations will be entered as a separate series.
?2 Series I.-From May 1895, out of a very large number of mosquitos of many species examined unfed, none contained pigmented cells. Series 2.- From May 1895, out of a number of brindled and grey mosquitos fed on healthy persons, none contained pigmented cells. Series 3.-From May 1895, out of a very large number brindled mosquitos fed on patients with crescents, pigmented cells were not observed in any. Series 4.-From 1896, out of a large number of grey mosquitos fed on patients with crescents, pigmented cells were not found in any. Series 5.-In August and September 1897, out of four dappled-winged mosquitos fed on a case of crescents, pigmented cells were found in three. Series 6.-In August and September 1897, out of a considerable number of small dappled-winged mosquitos fed on healthy persons, pigmented cells were not found in any. Series 7.-In September 1897, one grey mosquito caught feeding on a case of mild tertian contained pigmented cells. Series 8.-In January 1898, out of 30 horse-flies (Tabanus) and some lice fed on pigeons with halteridium, Labb, none contained pigmented cells. Series 9.-Early in February 1898, out of 34 brown brindled mosquitos fed on a case of triple quartan, none contained pigmented cells, 2. Discovery of Pigmented Cells in Grey mosquitos fed on Larks with Pro- teosoma.-In February 1898, I was placed by the Government of India on special duty to prosecute these researches and was given the use of Surgeon- Lieutenant-Colonel D. D. Cunningham's laboratory in Calcutta for the purpose. Steps were immediately taken to find again, if possible, the pigmented cells by feeding different species of mosquilos on blood containing different species of gymnosporidia. It was found that Calcutta abounded in the grey or barred- back species of mosquito, which is the filaria-bearing species, and with which I had already experimented in Series 2, 4 and 7 above. These had uniformly yielded negative results in Secunderabad when fed on blood containing cres- cents. Nevertheless, owing to difficulties in the way of obtaining other varieties, both of mosquitos and of malaria cases, numbers of this kind were again fed on a patient infected with crescents. Out of 41 of these searched exhaustively for pigmented cells, not one contained them (Series 10). An unrecorded number, say 50 more, examined unfed, or, after feeding on healthy persons, gave similar negative results. As it was not the malarious season of the year, and as cases of hmam\ill\biasis suitable for these experiments were not at all easy to procure, it was thought advisable to commence work on the so-called malaria parasites of birds. Accordingly, a crow (corvus splendens) and two tame pigeons infected with halteridium were obtained; and on the night of the nth and 12th March these, with four short-toed larks (calandretta dukhunensis) and six sparrows (passer Indica), whose blood had not yet been carefully examined, were placed in their cages, all within the same mosquito netting, and a number of grey mosquitos of the species I had lately been experimenting with were released within the net. Next morning, numbers of these insects were found gorged with blood and were caught in test-tubes in which they were kept alive for two or three days. On the 13th March I commenced to examine them. Out of fourteen of them, pigmented cells were at last found in one.
?3 Believing as I did that these cells are derived from the gymnosporidia, I judged from this experiment that the grey mosquito which now contained them had fed itself on one of the birds which happened to be infected by a parasite capable of transference to the grey species of mosquito. As all the birds had been placed together in the same net, the question now was which of them had the mosquito fed herself upon. This could be easily ascertained. A number of mosquitos of the same species had meanwhile been fed separately on the crow and two pigeons with halteridium ; but out of 34 of these examined not one contained pigmented cells. Hence I came to the conclusion that the mosquito with pigmented cells had not derived them from the crow and the two pigeons. The larks and sparrows remained. The blood of these had not yet been carefully searched. I now found that three of the larks and one of the sparrows contained proteosoma, Labb, and therefore thought it possible that the mosquito had been infected from one of these. Accordingly, on the night of the 17th and 18th March, a number of grey mosquitos were released on the three larks with proteosoma, and next morning it was found that nine of these had fed themselves. On the morning of  the 2oth  March, that  is  from  48 to  60  hours  after feeding, these nine insects were examined.   Pigmented   cells were found in no less than five of them.    After  the long   continued   negative experiments   with this kind of mosquito (and indeed, I may say, after three years' doubtful attempts to cultivate these parasites) this result was almost conclusive.   It  indicated,   as was surmised before, that when a certain  species   of mosquito is fed   on   blood containing  a  certain species of  gymnosporidia, pigmented cells are developed. Hence it would follow, as an easy corollary, that the cells are a stage in the life- history of the gymnosporidium in the mosquito, It was now necessary, however, to confirm and amplify this observation, and obtain formal proofs of the theorem, by repeating these experiments and by studying the pigmented cells themselves. Accordingly from the 18th March to the present date many differential experiments have been completed by feeding grey mosquitos as follows :- (a) On larks, sparrows and a crow with proteosoma. (b) On crows, pigeons and other birds with halteridium only. (c)  On a lark and a sparrow with immature proteosoma only. (d)  On a healthy sparrow, Only the insects fed on group (a) have contained pigmented cells. I will now give a list of these experiments, dividing them into series numbered in succession to those already recorded in paragraph I of this section. They will be found to illustrate in a striking manner the restricted association between the proteosoma in the birds and the pigmented cells in the grey mosquitos, Beginning from the commencement of my employment on special duty the series are as follows. 3. List of Recent Results. Series 10. Out of 41 grey mosquitos fed on a case of crescents (4th to 21st March), none contained pigmented cells. Senes II.-Out of   15   dark, greenish dappled-winged mosquitos fed  on a  case  of crescents,   none   contained  pigmented cells.    These insects  were probably of the same genus, but not of the same species as those employed in Series 5, in which pigmented cells were found after feeding on blood containing crescents (4th to 21st March).
4 Senes 12. -Out of 6 grey mosquitos fed on a case containing immature mild tertian parasites. (night of 7th to 8th March) none contained pigmented. cells (compare series 7). Senes 13.-Out of 14 grey mosquitos fed on I crow and 2 pigeons with halteridium and 4 larks and 6 sparrows, some with proteosoma (night of 11th to 12th March) one contained pigmented cells. Series 14.-Out of 34 grey mosquitos fed on I crow  and 2 pigeons with halteridium (12th to 15th March), none contained pigmented cells. Series 15.-Out of 17 grey mosquitos fed on 3 larks all with proteosoma (17th to 19th March), 10 contained pigmented cells. Series 16.-Out of 46 grey mosquitos fed on 2 larks and I sparrow all with proteosoma (19th to 23rd March), 27 contained pigmented cells. Series 17.-Out of 58 grey mosquitos fed on I crow with proteosoma caged together with I crow with halteridium (19th to 27th March), 40 contained pig- mented cells. Series 18.-Out of 3 grey mosquitos fed on 2 pigeons with halteridium (night of 2oth to 21st March), none had pigmented cells. Series 19.-Out of 18 grey mosquitos fed on 3 sparrows, two of which had proteosoma, while the third was healthy (24th to 26th March), 6 contained pigmented cells. Series 20.-Out of 13 grey mosquitos fed on 2 sparrows, both with pro- teosoma (25th March to 1st April), 12 contained pigmented celt's. Series 21.-Out of 12 grey mosquitos fed on 2 larks, both with proteosoma (26th to 31st March), 7 contained pigmented cells. Series 22.-Out of 10 grey mosquitos fed on 2 crows, both with halteridium only (night of 3oth to 31st March), none contained pigmented cells. Series 23.-Out of 25 grey mosquitos fed on a healthy sparrow (2nd to 7th April), none contained pigmented cells. Series 24.-Out of 21 grey mosquitos. fed on a sparrow with a moderate number of proteosoma (2nd to 3rd April), 21 contained pigmented cells. Series 25.-Out of 26 grey mosquitos fed on a sparrow with numerous pro- teosoma (2nd to 11th April), 25 contained pigmented cells. Series 26.-Out of 34 grey mosquitos fed on two sparrows (subjects of series 24 and 25 above), both with proteosoma (7th to 10th April), 30 contained pigmented cells. Series 27.-Out of 9 brindled mosquitos fed on 2 sparrows (subjects of series 24, 25, and 26 above), both with proteosoma (7th to 9th April), none con- tained pigmented cells. Series 28.-Out of 10 grey mosquitos fed on 1 lark and 1 sparrow, both with immature proteosoma (night of 9th to 10th April), none contained pigmented cells, Series 29.-Out of 14 grey mosquitos fed on 1 lark with immature pro- teosoma (night of 10th to 11th April), none contained pigmented cells. Series 30.-Out of 102 grey mosquitos fed on various crows with halteri- dium, only (3rd April to 8th May), none contained pigmented cells. Of these 68 were fed in Calcutta and 34 in the Darjeeling district. Series 31 -Out of 5 grey mosquitos fed on a maina (acridotheres tristis) with halteridium (night of 6th to 7th May), none contained pigmented cells. Series 32.-Out of 5. grey mosquitos fed on a crested bunting (melophus, melanicterus) with.halteridium (night of 10th to 11th May), none contained pig. \ill\ented cells.
5 Seres 33.-Out of a few lice and horse-flies (Tabanus) fed on pigeons with halteridium (May), pigmented cells have not been found in any. 4.  Abstract  of Recent Experiments   with    Grey   Mosquitos.-Thus  we find:- Out of 245 grey mosquitos fed on birds with proteosoma, 178, or 72 per cent., contained pigmented cells. Out of 41 grey mosquitos fed on a man with crescents, 5 on a case o immature tertian parasites, 154 on birds with halteridium, 25 on a healthy sparrow, and 24 on birds with immature proteosoma, or a total of 249 insects altogether, not one contained a single pigmented cell. 5.  Some Particular Experiments.-These experiments, then, are sufficiently decisive ; it remains to discuss some of them more particularly.    After the pig- mented cells  had been found in large numbers of insects fed on birds, with pro- teosoma (Series 15, 16 and 17), it was thought time  to  commence some formal control  experiments.    Three fresh sparrows had been  examined on the 23rd March after a day of fatiguing work with the oil-immersion lens, and no  parasites were observed in them.    A stock of mosquitos fed on them, however, showed pig- mented cells in 6 out of 18 insects (Series 19).    The birds  were  examined again, more carefully, when it was found that two out of the three- did contain proteosoma. after all.    Indeed, when re-examined,  one  contained large  numbers   (namely, about 1 parasite to 50  corpuscles),   the second  contained a moderate number (about 1 parasite to 1,000 corpuscles), while in the third no parasites at all could be found.    I now placed these three birds in separate cages, and put  each  cage within a separate mosquito-netting.    A number of mosquitos caught in the larval stage in the same part of the same drain and hatched  out in  the same breeding, bottle were now liberated at the same time (2nd April), partly on the first bird, partly on the second, and partly on the third.    Next morning  those which  had bitten  each  bird were confined separately in test-tubes.    On examination (Series 24, 25 and 26) it was found that out of 20 mosquitos  fed at the  time  on, the sparrow with  many  parasites,   and  out of the same number fed on, the sparrow with a moderate number, all without exception, namely, 40, contained pigmented cells ; while out of 15 insects fed on the sparrow with no parasites, not one con- tained  any  pigmented  cells.    Moreover, the stomachs of ten insects of each of- these series were preserved and the number of  pigmented  cells in  each  series counted by means of a low power.     The result was as follows :- (a)  Ten mosquitos fed on the sparrow with numerous  proteosoma con- tained 1,009 pigmented cells, or an average of 101 each. (b)  Ten mosquitos fed on the  sparrow with moderate  proteosoma con- tained 292 pigmented cells, or an average of 29 each. (c)  Ten mosquitos fed on the sparrow with no proteosoma contained   no pigmented cells. I could not afford time to count with the oil-immersion lens. Had I done so, the number of cells found would doubtless have been larger. One of the mosquitos of series (a) contained no less than 445 of the cells. This expeiiment was repeated later with a few mosquitos and similar results were obtained. Numerous experiments of the same kind were now carried on, by feeding; mosquitos out of the same breeding bottle at the same time, (a) on birds with proteosoma, (b) on birds with halteridium. A large percentage of the former always possessed pigmented cells ; none of the latter ever did so. For in stance, on. the night of the 12.th. to 13th April, a stock of mosquitos was  fed party Bi
6 on the two sparrows with numerous and moderate proteosoma put together, and partly on a young crow with halteridium. Out of 23 of the former 22 had pigmented cells ; while out of 16 of the latter none had them. Crows gave interesting results. They are subject both to hlteridium and to proteosoma ; but I have found only one crow with the latter. In that one, however, the typical round sporulating form of proteosoma was observed. For some time the feeding experiments, for which I used various combinations of two or three crows at a time, had been giving contrary results ; at one time positive, at another negative. On referring to my notes it was seen that the positive experiments occurred only when the crow with proteosoma had been present in the net (Series 6). According to Manson's theory, infection of mosquitos should not take place unless flagellate bodies are present in the blood of the subject. Some ex- periments were designed to test this by means of feeding grey mosquitos on birds with immature proteosoma. No pigmented cells were found (Series 28 and 29). Further observations are, however, required in this connection. Some of the experiments, namely, those on birds known to contain ripe proteosoma (Series 24, 25 and 26) yielded almost invariably positive results, namely, 76 mosquitos with pigmented cells out of 81 fed, or 94 per cent. Hence I think it quite possible that in future experiments made on carefully selected subjects, positive results may be obtained in 100 per cent. of the mosquitos, An explanation may be required as to why insects were so often fed on groups of birds. The reasons are that wild birds become frightened and restless if caged all night alone, and that more mosquitos can be fed at once on several birds than on one, since, as I have actually experienced, small birds can be killed from loss of blood abstracted by too many mosquitos, Moreover, according to theory, the presence of flagellate bodies is necessary to infection of the second host ; so that, especially when we have not had time to make a previous exhaustive study of the subjects' blood, the chances of causing infection are increased by using several birds at once instead of one. For more exact work, however single feeding must be adopted. 6. Deductions from the Feeding Experiments. - There can be no question, then, that the pigmented cells are derived directly from the proteosoma. We can, however, already go further. The fact that similar cells were not found in control insects of the same species fed on blood containing other gymnosporidia will convince any one acquainted with parasitology that we are not dealing here with any mere physiological absorption of pigment by the stomach cells of the mosquito  but with a vital phenomenon in the life-history of proteosoma, with a remarkable transformation by which the pigmented parasite in the blood of the bird becomes a pigmented parasite of some kind in the stomach tissues of the mosquito. It remains to add another mass of evidence to the same effect, deduced from the location, structure and growth of the pigmented cells in the mosquito ; and to show how they undergo a development similar to that of filaria-embryos in the same host. Some details of the technique are however, required as a preliminary. III.- The structure and development of the Proteosoma-Coccidia in Grey Mosquitos. I. Technique.-Mosquitos are obtained by catching the larv, or better the pup, in pots of water, drains, and puddles. These are placed in wide-
7 mouthed glass vessels  covered  with  muslin or stopped with a plug of cotton wool, and will soon hatch out into the perfect insect. The subject, whether a man or a bird in a cage, is put on a bed. The ordi- nary mosquito-netting (in good repair) used in tropical countries is suspended over the bed and is tucked under the mattress on which the subject has been placed. The jar of mosquitos is introduced under the netting and is opened, thus liberating as many of the insects as we wish. For birds a special netting may be devised. Mosquitos gorged with blood are easily recognised at sight. They are caught by an assistant entering the net and placing a test tube slowly over them as they sit on the gauze. A number of tubes containing a given stock of fed mosquitos is kept in the manner used in bacteriological laboratories for tube cultures ; and the insects are killed by chloroform or tobacco-smoke. Tubes containing mosquitos should be lightly plugged with cotton-wool ; should have a few drops of water at the bottom for the inmates to drink (sic), and lay their eggs in, and should be changed for fresh clean tubes every morning. The females are fecundated shortly after feeding. Grey mosquitos fed at night remain gorged and asleep for all the next day and night. Towards the end of the second day, however, the stomach begins to " clear," that is the meal has bsen partly digested and partly evacuated, leaving the organ empty. The eggs are usually laid on the third day (with grey mosquitos), after which the insect generally dies if it has not been fed again in the meantime. In order to keep them alive for long periods they must be fed again every two Jays. In this manner I have kept them for twelve days ; and, even after that, saw by the state of their ovaries that they could have lived longer. As with other animals, feeding is necessary to their existence. In order to refeed a stock, the test-tubes are simply opened under a mosquito-net containing a crow or sparrows, and the insects are caught again next morning as usual A mosquito is dissected for examination of the stomach in this manner. A needle, held in the left hand, is passed through the thorax, the legs and wings are pulled off, and, if necessary, the scales of the body brushed off with a camel- hair brush. The tail is then lowered into a drop of water, salt solution or weak formalin placed on a glass slide ; and with another needle held in the right hand, the last two segments of the tail are partially separated and held down upon the slide. The left hand is then moved in such a manner as to draw away the insect. If done skilfully, the alimentary and generative apparatus will remain on the slide attached to the last two segments of the tail. If necessary, as when the stomach is full, the last two segments may be entirely separated and the alimentary apparatus drawn out by the cesophageal end, The alimentary canal consists of an oesophagus, a single sac, the stomach, and a short, straight (?) intestine leading to the anus and containing six heart- shaped glands near the rectum. Five long tubes, the malpighian tubes, open into the stomach at its junction with the intestine. The stomach is roughly about 2.5 mm. long and between .5 mm. or 1.o mm. broad when uncompressed by the cover glass. Its ends terminate suddenly in the oesophagus and intestine respectively, the latter end being easily recognisable by the junction of the malpighian tubes (see plate I, figure 23). Beginning at its outermost surface we have first the ramifications of the air vessels ; next a series of parallel bands of annular and of longitudinal muscular fibies, crossing each other at right angles and leaving square interstices (which B 2
?8 must not, of course, be mistaken for epithelium), and also some oblique bands; then a delicate homogeneous membrane which does not stain easily; then several layers of large cells which do stain easily and contain nucleus and nucleolus; and lastly the lumen, containing blood, debris, water, bacteria, or nothing notice- able. I think that the outer coat is homogeneous, because I have observed no cellular structure in it; but this may nevertheless really exist. The cells beneath it have a diameter of about 30   when uncompressed and contain, besides the nucleus, numerous refractive granules of different sizes which are particularly large shortly after digestion. They often contain as well certain irregular but definite bodies lying close to the nucleus, which may be of a para- sitic nature; but I have never observed within them any of the granular debris from the cavity. Often, on the outer surface of the organ and among the branches of the air-vessels we find greenish, yellow or colourless globules of a high refraction, from I  to 10  in diameter, free or enclosed in cells, and probably of an oily nature. I have never observed gregarines in grey mosquitos-they seem to be parasites only of the brindled genus-but the intestine is often packed with hosts of monoflagellate organisms, about 6  in length, exclusive of the flagellum. These may be seen adhering to the wall of the gut, but breaking loose and swimming about actively on the addition of water. They have already been described by me as swarm-spores (3). 2. Growth and Structure of the Coccidia.-I can now proceed to a descrip- tion of the development of the pigmented cells. It will be useful to suppose that a stock of grey mosquitos were fed on a sparrow with mature proteosoma on a Saturday night; and that at the same time control insects, whose larvae were caught in the same drain and hatched out in the same breeding bottle, were fed on a healthy sparrow, on a man with crescents, and on a crow with halteri- dium, separately. Thus, insects dissected on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, .... may be said to be dissected on the first, second, third .... day, respectively, after feeding. As the insects were released upon the subjects, say, at 6 P.M. on Saturday night and were not caught again until, say, 6 A.M. on Sunday morning, and as they may have fed themselves at any time, or at several times during the night it is clear that when they are killed the period after feeding will have a margin of uncertainty of twelve hours. An insect killed between 6 A.M. and 6 P.M. on Sunday, however, must have a period after feeding of between o and 24 hours; and one killed between 6 A.M. and 6 P.M. on Monday must have a period of between 24 and 48 hours; and so on. This method is wanting somewhat in precision, but unfortunately it is not easy to feed and capture a number of night-biting mosquitos all precisely at the same time, and it is exact enough for my present purpose. First day-Sunday.-Taking a control insect fed on the healthy sparrow, we dissect it in the manner described above. The stomach full of blood, with the sophagus, intestine, malpighian tubes and ovaries attached, lies before us on the glass slide. With the point of a needle we open the side of the organ, and the contained blood runs out freely into the water of dissection. On a cover glass being now applied, its weight drives out almost all the rest of the blood through the rent we have made in the containing wall, and on holding the slide up to the light, we shall see the oval tissues of the stomach lying com- pressed, white and almost free from blood in the midst of the dark red-brown mass of its expressed contents. We can thus easily examine with the highest
?9 powers the stomach tissues or their contents, separately; or, if we wish, we can wash away the latter by irrigation with water or weak stains, and study the tissues alone, unstained or stained. In the case of the mosquito fed on the healthy sparrow we shall find that the contents consist of blood from which most of the serum has been abstract- ed, leaving the red and white corpuscles crowded together. What serum re- mains is densely coloured with exuded haemoglobin, in the midst of which the white lencocytes, still living, can easily be distinguished. On examining the tissues we find the cavity still containing traces of haemoglobin-stained serum and perhaps a few lencocytes and red corpuscles; but of course, neither the tissues nor the cavity show any sign of the characteristic pigment of proteo- soma or halteridium. Taking, however, an insect fed on blood containing gymnosporidia, whether hmamba, proteosoma, or halteridium, we shall find in the contents, besides the condition of the blood just described, not only traces of these para- sites, but also entire parasites still enclosed in the corpuscles, or lying free in the yellow serum. In some of these the pigment is still oscillating. If filari or trypanosomes be present, some will be found living, others dead. I will for the present make no attempt to describe further the condition of the parasites on this day, though the subject is one of the highest interest (Section IV, paragraph 1). I have thought it best to forego the study for the time, partly for this very reason, partly because the differential experiments noted above have necessitated the insects being reserved to a later stage at which the presence or absence of the pigmented cells becomes determinable with certainty, and partly because the enquiry was not absolutely necessary from a practical point of view, since an older development of the parasites had al- ready been discovered. I will then pass at once to a study of the appearances of the second day. Second day-Monday.-The blood in the cavity of the stomach is still further disintegrated. Early in the day we can indeed often distinguish a few red corpuscles and some rounded and dead lencocytes, but later on, as a rule, even these disappear, and the contents consist of a fairly homogeneous reddish- black mass of multitudes of granules with brownian (?) movement. It should be noted, however, that the temperature of the air seems to have an appreciable effect on the period of these changes. Sometimes as early as the morning of this day, but more generally towards the afternoon, the stomach pours almost its entire contents into the intestine, which in its turn shortly evacuates them. From this point the alimentary canal becomes practically empty, but for a few traces of the meal, and the insect is ready to feed again. Meanwhile the eggs have been developing apace and the ovaries now appear as two thick yellow masses loosely attached to the alimentary apparatus and to the terminal segment. Examining insects fed on blood infected with any of the pigmented gym- nosporidia, we shall generally still find in the stomach contenis some distinct traces of the parasites amongst the granular mass of the disintegrated blood. These traces consist either (a) of small clusters of pigment, (b) of scattered pigment granules, or (c) early during this day, of pigment contained in a yellowish, hyaline cell, the remains of the entire dead gymnosporidium. Pigment may also be seen in the dead lencocytes. Filari, if present, are dead. If examining the tissues of the stomach in grey mosquitos fed on blood containing crescents, halteridium or immature proteosoma, after the contents have
?10 been evacuated either naturally or artificially, we shall, as a rule, find no trace at all of the parasites. Sometimes, however, we do find an occasional small bolus of pigment or some scattered granules of it; but these will be seen on careful examination to lie invariably in the cavity, in association with such small traces of the former meal of blood as have not succeeded in escaping from it-as indeed was to be expected. But the tissues themselves, whether the cells, the homogeneous outer coat, or the muscular coat, disclose no sign whatever of the parasites or of their typical pigment; they remain as entirely free from such as if the insect had been fed on healthy blood, or not fed at all; and it is quite clear that in insects fed as just described, the remains of the parasites which have escaped digestion have been voided amongst and as part of the normal excreta. If, however, we now examine at the same stage a grey mosquito fed on blood containing mature proteosoma, a very different spectacle awaits us. On looking at the tissues of the stomach we shall find the external muscular and homogeneous coats to be studded with small clusters of pigment identical in ap- pearance with the characteristic pigment of proteosoma. These constitute the youngest forms of the pigmented cells yet observed by me. It is necessary to examine them very particularly as regards (a) their position in the tissues, (b) their appearance and structure. With a little skill, it is very easy to distinguish the various structures of which the mosquito's stomach is composed, especially when measures have been taken to prevent the cover-glass from unduly flattening out and crushing the tissues. On depressing the focus of the oil-immersion lens we shall come upon successively, first the ramifications of the air-tubes, with clusters of oil-globules; then upon the crossing bands of muscular fibre; then upon the outer homo- geneous coat, in which no appearance of cellular structure is observed; then upon the layers of distinct cells; and lastly upon the cavity, containing bacteria or traces of blood. Going further down we shall reach the other side of the stomach, with the cells, the homogeneous coat, the muscular fibres and the air vessels, all in a reverse order. We shall find, then, no difficulty in locating the young pigmented cells. They lie invariably either in the external homogeneous coat or, still further outwards, actually between the strands of muscular fibre, which they separate in a manner with which we are familiar in the case of trichina embryos (Plate I, figure 5). I have never yet found them lying in or amongst the cells of the stomach; still less in the innermost layer of cells which we may perhaps consi- der as epithelial cells, or in the cavity of the stomach itself. This rule appears to be without exception. If the pigmented cells do not actually lie between the muscular fibres, they lie just beneath them (Plate III). In appearance, the most elementary forms seem at first sight to consist of nothing but clusters of about 20 grains of pigment arranged within a small oval area, the longer diameter of which is about 8 , and the shorter diameter 6  or 7 . The pigment granules are however often seen to be arranged on the circumference of the oval; from which fact taken together with the observa- tion that all similar clusters in the same insect appear to be of much the same size, we infer the fact that the pigment is contained within a cell. This is easily confirmed by further observations in which the containing cell is clearly visible. In fact, taking insects killed on the morning of the second day, we shall generally find several varieties of these youngest pigmented cells. One variety presents the appearance just described of a mere cluster of pigment (Plate I,
?11 figure 1). Another variety consists of a delicate oval homogeneous plasma of a faint greenish colour, about 8  X 6  in size and containing about 20 granules of pigment variously arranged (Plate I, figure 2). In a third variety we have the cluster of pigment, within either a visible or an invisible plasma, and interspersed with some distinct vacuoles, and also some rather refractive granules, both of about 1  or 2  in diameter (Plate I, figure 3). In a fourth variety, somewhat larger in size, there are the pigment, the vacuoles and the granules, all enclosed within a very distinct oval outline (Plate I, figure 4). These varieties have three things in common, their pigment, their oval shape and, approximately, their size. Often all the pigmented cells in one mosquito belong to the same variety and are nearly of the same size. Owing to the ambiguity in the time of feeding referred to above, it is difficult to pro- nounce as yet upon the question as to which of the forms is most elementary; but I think that the order of the varieties as just given is also the order of development. Thus the youngest cells would belong to varieties 1 and 2; later the vacuoles and granules appear; and lastly we have the definitive outline. By degrees, towards the end of the second day, the earlier varieties disappear and the fourth form only is found, to remain as the type for some days (Plates II and III). In some mosquitos of this day several varieties of the young cells are found together, and there is considerable variation in size. Such insects, I fancy, must have fed themselves on several occasions during the night. The pigment consists of about 20 granules which have almost exactly the appearance of the pigment of proteosoma. The granules may perhaps be blacker and smaller and do not tend to form the little masses found in proteo- soma, although they do tend to collect together in certain portions of the cell. Very often they are subject to a rapid oscillatory motion. Their arrangement is variable. The vacuoles, when they appear, are very distinct and apparently full of clear fluid, I take the present opportunity for stating that throughout this paper I use the term "vacuole" only as a descriptive one. Their size often varies largely even in the same cell. The granules appear to have more substance than the vacuoles, are usually all of much the same size, and look very like Labb's "granules chromatoides" of halteridium. The staining reactions, so far as observed, will be given in paragraph 3. As we advance toward the evening of the second day, the cells become larger and larger; the vacuoles and granules become more numerous; the pigment tends to collect round one, or two, or more large vacuoles; and the outline is more and more marked. It is proper to notice, however, that there is a variety apparently descended from the early varieties without apparent plasma or outline, in which the outline is finer than in the ordinary forms, while the vacuoles and granules are much less visible. These seem to belong to the type of the "hyaline" forms of the third and fourth days. At the end of the second day, that is, 48 hours after feeding, the cells may, I think, already reach a long diameter of 20  in a few cases. Third Day-Tuesday.-Grey mosquitos generally lay their eggs during this day on the surface of the water at the bottom of the test-tube, where they are to be found as small black floating "rafts" of eggs. After this the insects frequently die if they have not been fed again on the previous night. In insects which have not been re-fed, we find stomach and intestine almost free from contents and the stomach cells very clear and hyaline. The eggs, if not laid, are fully matured.
?12 On examining control insects fed on blood containing crescents and halteridium, no pigmented cells will be seen. In those fed on blood with mature proteosoma we shall find them in various numbers, and occupying exactly the same position as on the second day. They are, however, markedly larger and their outline is rounder; at the same time, it will be noted that they belong to one or the other of two varieties-they are either vacuolated or hyaline (Plates IV and V). The vacuolated cells have generally a very marked and rather thick outline. They contain vacuoles and granules similar to those found in the larger cells of the previous day, but these are more numerous and more closely packed within the capsule. Some of the vacuoles are much larger than before, often reaching a diameter of 6  and even more; while the granules retain their former dimen- sions. Altogether these cells present a very substantial appearance and are at once distinguishable, even when out of focus, from the delicate tissues of the stomach. The hyaline cells consist of a fine, sharp outline containing a perfectly clear plasma, in which however wecan just discern some very faint vacuoles toward the centre of the cell. In both varieties alike, the pigment tends to accumulate round and outside one or two large vacuoles, though scattered granules are generally present. The number of granules is, moreover, less than on the previous day, and their size is perhaps smaller. In some mosquitos nearly all the cells belong either to the one or the other variety, and that at the moment when the specimen is first made; in others the two varieties are found side by side. I have frequently observed that hyaline cells have become vacuolated after ten or twenty minutes, but nave never been so fortunate as actually to witness the change. This might lead one to infer that the latter are a post mortem form of the former, were it not that both varieties may certainly be observed immediately after dissection and that perfect hyaline cells occur in insects which have been dead some hours. I can therefore offer no conjecture as to the nature of these differences in appearance between the two varieties. As the third day advances, the pigment continues to decrease in amount; while, in some of the largest cells, a new element begins to appear, namely, a few bright refractive points scattered through the plasma. I take these to be minute globules of an oily nature comparable to those described by Leukart in coccidium oviforme; and shall in future denote them as such, although I am by no means confident in my opinion. Meanwhile, the cells continue rapidly to grow in size until at the end of the day (72 hours) they may reach a major diameter which I put down at 30  in the largest cells. The average sizes for the day, however, lie between 16  and 25 , while cells so small as even 10  may occasionally be seen. Indeed, I have often noticed great variations of size on this day. Fourth day-Wednesday.-The cells have grown still more, and on the evening of this day (96 hours) may reach 40  in diameter; The averages lie between 25  and 35 , and I think that there is more uniformity of dimen- sions on this day than on the preceding one (Plate I, figures 13, 16; Plate VI). If the insect examined be one which has survived to this day without refeed- ing, the cells may, I think, be stunted in growth and may scarcely exceed those of the third day in size.
?13 If the mosquito has been fed again, say on the night of the second day (Monday night), the condition of the stomach and of the new crop of eggs (if present) will be that of the second day already described. If it has been fed again on a bird infected with proteosoma, as on the bird on which it was origin- ally fed, the stomach will most probably be found to have on its external coat a fresh generation of young pigmented cells, in every way similar to those already found on the second day. On the margin of Plate VI, one such is figured lying next to some cells of an older generation. The new cells are evidently derived from the second feeding. The two varieties of cells, vacuolated and hyaline, still exist. In both the pigment is arranged as before, and may still oscillate within a small area; but it is greatly reduced in amount, being sometimes reduced to only one or two granules lying close to a large vacuole and difficult to find. As the cells reach a major diameter of about 35  , namely half the growth which they are destined to arrive at, the pigment disappears altogether, while the bright refractive points referred to as beginning to appear on the third day increase in number and per- haps in size. In the vacuolated variety the number of vacuoles and granules increases with the growth. A noteworthy phenomenon manifests itself at about this stage. If the cover- glass has been placed so lightly on the stomach-tissues as not to crush them, and if a medium power be used, the pigmented cells will be seen protruded from all parts of the external wall of the stomach like warts on a finger (in Plate I, figure 23, this appearance is given, though the bodies there shown are of later growth than those now described); that is they protrude, not into the cavity of the stomach, but into the general body cavity, the coelom. This might perhaps have been inferred from the first position of the cells on the external coat of the organ. From this point, then, the parasitic nature of these bodies becomes obvious, and we may, I think, venture to assume, at any rate provisionally, that they are coccidia. I will therefore now call them proteosoma-coccidia. The identity of the cells of over 35  in diameter without pigment with those of under 35  with pigment is easily established by the similarity of structure in other respects. In many cases pigment may still exist in the cocci- dia which protrude from the tissues; and there is no possibility of mistake with regard to the continuity of development. Fifth day-Thursday.-The coccidia continue to grow, and may reach a diameter of 50  at the end of this day (120 hours). Some of them not only protrude beyond the tissues, but may be seen to be almost distinct from them. The difference between vacuolated and hyaline cells is not so marked as before; and each coccidium now consists of a capsule containing a more or less granular and vacuolated substance studded with the numerous small bright points which I take to be minute oil globules. If the insect has been fed again on blood containing proteosoma, pigmented coccidia of a younger generation will generally be found interspersed among the older and non-pigmented ones. (Plate VII). Sixth day-Friday-and Later.-At the end of this day the coccidia arrive at a growth of 60  (144 hours), while some increase still further and may reach a size of nearly 70 . The largest cells seen by me measured, when compressed by the over glass, 73  by 62 . These coccidia are figured in Plate VIII after preservation in weak formalin.
?14 Beyond this point I have observed no further growth, although I have ex- amined coccidium-infected mosquitos kept alive to the twelfth day. Hence, I think, the diamensions here given may be considered as the maximum size reached by these bodies, at any rate in the living host. They are now easily visible by a magnifying glass, and are therefore nearly visible to the naked eye. If mosquitos of this stage (or indeed earlier) be dissected in plain water, a curious phenomenon will be observed when microscope examination is com- menced at once. The coccidia will be seen bursting in all directions, pouring out their contents slowly into the surrounding fluid, and leaving behind a collapsed and wrinkled capsule still attached to the stomach wall. This is pro- bably due to the difference in specific gravity of the medium in which they now find themselves, and can be checked by dissection in weak formalin (10 per cent.), or perhaps in salt solution. On examining a  stomach   immersed in formalin with  a medium  power of about 300 diameters, the coccidia will be seen everywhere, not  only protruded but often extruded from the  tissues,   though still attached to them by some in- isible adhesions. Each coccidium will have the appearance of a little, clear ball of glass containing numerous brilliant points, the oil-globules previously  noted. Some of them in  addition possess a more  refractive but ill-defined central core, which in a few cases I have observed to  have the  appearance of being divided into six or eight portions.    These appearances, however, vanish on the imposi- tion of the cover-glass, after which the  coccidia, probably from being slightly flattened, present only  a granular  structure as shown in Plate IX.    Seen by a still lower power, the stomach studded with coccidia has the appearance given in outline in Plate I, figure 23; where the mosquito has been re-fed on proteosoma- infected birds, younger generations of coccidia are seen embedded in the tissues or just emerging from them. On applying the oil-immersion lens, the largest coccidia of the sixth and seventh day are observed to have a structure similar to that of the fifth day, namely, a more or less granular and vacuolated plasma studded with numerous brilliant points. In many of them, especially after preservation, there is now however a very marked contraction of the contents within the capsule (Plates VII and VIII, and Plate I, figures 16, 17 and 21); which, indeed, is to be seen in preserved specimens of an earlier stage of growth. I have said that after this point I have witnessed no further growth of the coccidia, even in mosquitos kept alive to the twelfth day. Hence we may per- haps expect that they have become ripe for sporulation. No such thing has however been observed; and we may therefore conjecture, unless I happened to have overlooked it, that it may occur either (a) in the living insect after twelve days, or (b) some time after the insect's death. Further research is therefore required on this which now becomes the most important and  interesting  period   of  the  life-history  of  the  gymnosporidia, because on it depend our chances of future progress.  To plunge into hypothesis for a moment, we may remark that since the mature coccidia find themselves in a closed cavity, namely, the body cavity of the host, there appears to be no means by which they can escape from that host during its life to undergo sporulation in external nature, as is the case with  coccidium   oviforme.    It would appear then that sporulation should occur either within the living host, as with Eimeria, or within the dead host.   The first would point to a completion of the life cycle by a direct infection of men and birds by the coccidium-spores in the mosquito;
?15 the second to a more  circuitous infection, perhaps  by a second generation living free in water. I will now close these descriptions, by giving a few notes on three peculiar forms of mature coccidia seen by me and figured in the plates. Plate I, figures 18 and 19, and the lowest coccidium shown in Plate VIII, are seen to have a peculiar striated structure. Two of these were found in mosquitos of the 6th to 7th day, and one (Plate I, figure 19) in a mosquito of the 12th day. The striations appeared to arise chiefly from one or two defined particles placed near the foci of the oval parasites, but were also present in other parts. In Plate I, figure 18, the bright oil-globules were arranged very regularly round and a little within the circumference, as seen on a plane through the centre of the cell. Plate I, figure 20, represents the shrivelled capsule of a burst coccidium in a mosquito of the 12th day. It contains ten or eleven black sausage-shaped bodies. Similar bodies were seen in another collapsed capsule in the same mosquito; and also in a broken capsule in a mosquito of the 7th day. Plate I, figures 21 and 22, represent two coccidia found in a mosquito of the seventh day which had lain dead in water for some hours previous to dis- section. The surface of both just under the capsule contained numerous small elongated bodies, as figured. In figure 21 they were regularly placed with the long axis pointing outward, but in figure 22 they appeared to be turned in different ways and interspersed between superficial vacuoles. The inner part of each coccidium was hyaline and contained two or three large oil-globules as figured. It should be remarked that the stomach tissues were decomposing and full of bacteria not unlike these small bodies in the coccidia. I refrain from comment on these forms, Other peculiarities in some of the coccidia were noted, but need not be described here. 3. Staining.-My experiments in this line are as yet very imperfect, but a few salient facts have become evident. The coccidia, certainly in their younger stages, are readily coloured by most stains, nuclear or plasmic, simple or compound, eosine, methylene blue, hmatoxylin (Delafield's or Erlich's acid solution), saffranin, and others. The stomach is first flattened (for the smaller coccidia) by the cover glass and the specimen then irrigated by a weak, watery solution of the stain, which generally colours the coccidia in advance of the basis. I have generally employed weak formalin (3 to 10 per cent.) or glycerine with arsenious acid for mounting; neither is very satisfactory. Whether we use plasmic or unclear stains, the results appear the same (pending further study). The younger cells consist of an ectoplasm which colours readily, and an entoplasm which is more or less indifferent to the stain. The granuies take the stain mildly, while the vacuoles seem to be lost sight of after colouration. In the coccidia of the second day I have often noticed a peculiar division (?) of the entoplasm, each chamber of which appears to contain one of the granules, not in its centre, but at its margin, and seemingly attached to the ectoplasm (Plate I, figures 6). This arrangement is lost, or multiplied (?), in the older coccidia, in which the entoplasm looks as if it contains only a mass of colour- able granules (Plate I, figures 12 and 16), an appearance which is maintained, so far as I have examined, to a late stage. A large stained coccidium may easily be burst by pressure, when the stained contents will be forced out leaving the unstained capsule behind. The hyaline and vacuolated cells of the third and fourth days present the same appearance after staining (?). Simple C 2
?16 preservation in formalin brings out these details as well as any staining process yet used by me. Efforts to stain the largest coccidia have not yet been made. The youngest coccidia appear to have a structure and staining reactions closely similar to those described by Labb (4) for proteosoma. I note especially the "coloration un peu gristre" with hmatoxylin, mentioned by him; but I am unwilling to speak definitely on these points without much more study than I have as yet been able to afford them. 4. Some Miscellaneous Observations.-The number of coccidia found in different mosquitos fed on the same birds varies from none, or one or two, in a few cases, to several hundreds exceptionally. The largest number counted by me has been 445. To judge from the experiment on the three sparrows recorded in section II, paragraph 5, their number depends on the number of parasites in the blood of the subject, or more probably on the number of parasites ripe for transference to the mosquito. No sign of movement has been ever observed in the cells. The capsule of the coccidia is well defined from the third day. It is exten- sible, as shown by exerting pressure on the cover glass. As already explained, it bursts readily on the sixth day and later on the addition of water. Manson noticed a similar fragility in water in the early "pupal" stages of filaria-a fragility which was overcome toward the sixth day when the pupa becomes fit for free life; and he suggests, in a letter to me, that if there arrives a stage in the history of the coccidia when they no longer burst in this manner, it will be a sign, as in filari, of a possible further life in that medium. Are these bodies intracellular ? We should expect so from their general structure, but I may say that no certain evidence of it has shown itself as yet even in the youngest forms. On one occasion, however, while watching a hyaline cell of the third day in a newly made specimen, I observed  something collapse round it, upon which it immediately acquired a coarser contour and shortly afterwards became vacuolated. It may be that the external "homo- geneous" coat consists of very delicate cells, which are occupied by the coccidia. I have often thought that the proteosoma coecidia derived from crows, larks and sparrows, respectively, differ in some minor particulars; but am not prepared for any statement on the point. I have often mentioned the  "bright points" in the older coccidia, I think them to be of an oily nature, because they appear to run together in preserved specimens-just as Leukart observes in the similar objects seen in coccidium oviforme. The resulting large drops of "oil" are shown in some of the illus- trations, notably in Plate I, figures 21 and 22. It is most necessary to mention that in preserved specimens, especially in those mounted in formalin of too great a strength, the pigment undergoes a very curious enlargement-so much so that it may almost fill the smaller cells. This is evidently some chemical alteration. I have not had time to apply tests for pigment to the coccidia. The nuclei of the cells  of the malpighian tubes sometimes escape  into   the cavity of the stomach, where they may be mistaken for coccidia of the third day. They are, however, round, possess a marked nucleolus, and have no pigment. I wish particularly to reiterate, in order to avoid future misunderstanding, that there is no possible doubt as to the continuity of development from the \ill\ pigmented to the later unpigmented forms.  Apart from a general similarity
?17 in structure which cannot be mistaken, the older coccidia have never been seen in grey mosquitos except when fed on birds infected with proteosoma. IV.-Some Discussions. I. Theories regarding the Flagella.-I have alluded to the great interest attaching to the events of the first day, on which the transformation of the pro- teosoma of the bird into the coccidium of the mosquito must evidently take- place. According to Manson, this should be effected by the direct migration of the flagella into the stomach tissues of the insect, According to MacCallum and Opie (5), however, the flagella should fecundate large individuals of pro- teosoma which then become vermicules or their homologues. As a matter of fact, as regards Manson's mosquito theory, which is based chiefly on the fact that exflagellation occurs only after the blood is drawn from the circulation, it is immaterial, as he himself has pointed out to me, whether his former view of the flagella, or MacCallum and Opie's, is to be accepted. Indeed, their most interesting observations would appear to add weight to the mosquito theory, in- asmuch as they seem to show more forcibly than ever that the gymnosporidia make some extraordinary preparation for some unknown eventuality a few minutes after the blood is drawn. Directly I read MacCallum's paper, I found vermicules at once in the stomach of a grey mosquito killed within an hour of feeding on a crow with halteridium. It was also observed long ago by me that about 30 per cent. of crescent-derived spheres remain unchanged for a long time in the stomach of brindled mosquitos, and I have often been struck by the differences noted by MacCallum in the two classes of these bodies. I have frequently seen flagella attacking leucocytes. Manson described one of these observations two years ago (6), and since then I have witnessed the phenomenon several times. On one occasion lately I observed four, if not more, flagella swarming round an ordinary lymphocyte exactly in the manner in which MacCallum describes them as behaving in regardto the parasites which, accord- ing to him, it is their function to fertilise. There was no mistake about the observation. The entry of an entire vermicule of proteosoma into the external coat of the stomach of a grey mosquito and its development there into a pigmented coccidium afford indeed an explanation fascinating in its simplicity of the con- version of proteosoma into coccidium which must take place on the first day; and it is very likely the true explanation. Above all, it gives a simple solution of the question why the young coccidia contain pigment. I think it should be noted, however, that the pigment of the youngest coccidia seems (?) to differ slightly from that of the largest proteosoma (section III, paragraph 2). The size of the former, moreover, namely, 8  after some thirty hours (and I think I have observed them as small as 6  or even 4  at that period), would seem to be scarcely as great as we should expect on the supposition of their being derived from bodies so large as vermicules or their homologues. I trust that further study of the events of the first day in grey mosquitos fed on blood containing proteosoma will lead to a solution of this highly in- teresting problem. 2. The relation between Proteosoma and the Coccidia.-Whatever that solu- tion may be, however, there can be no doubt, after the numerous facts given above, that the coccidia constitute the mosquito-stage in the life history of proteosoma. The deduction is based on exactly the same principles as convince us that
?18 Manson's stages of development of filaria in the mosquito truly constitute a phase in the life-history of that parasite-namely, (a) the absence of similar forms from control insects fed on healthy blood; and (b) the continuity of development from the filaria-embryos in the insect's stomach to the large worm of the sixth day in its tissues. It is true that in the case of the proteosoma- coccidia there is the break just referred to, occurring on the first day, in our observations of continuity of development; but this break is easily bridged over. That the young forms of coccidia of the second day are directly derived from the ingested proteosoma is proved beyond doubt by the following facts:- (1) That they contain the characteristic pigment, and have an appear- ance and structure very similar to those of proteosoma. (2) That they are to be found in a large percentage of grey mosquitos fed on blood containing proteosoma, and are never observed in the same species of insect fed otherwise. (3) That they occur again, and always on the second day, after the insect is re-fed on proteosoma blood; and that they occur only on the second day after such feedings and re-feedings. From this point the observations of the development of the coccidia are continuous. It is scarcely necessary to remark that the older stages of these bodies are never observed on dates anterior to their proper periods. But it may perhaps still be asked whether the bodies which I call coccidia are not really ordinary stomach-cells which have undergone some extraordinary pathological change in consequence of absorption of pigment from the cavity of the stomach. I have already dealt with this question (2); and the reply is that it is quite impossible. The reasons are:-(1) that there is no evidence that the stomach-cells of the mosquito take up solid particles from the cavity at all, and no reason why they should take up gymnosporidium pigment to the exclusion of other particles, much less proteosoma pigment to the exclusion of crescent and halteridium pigment; (2) that the coccidia are found in the ex- ternal wall of the stomach, remote from the cavity and outside the layers of stomach-cells; (3) that the youngest coccidia are much smaller than the stomach-cells and grow to a size much exceeding theirs, and (4) that there is no evidence or likelihood that the mere absorption of pigment would cause ordinary physiological cells to und rgo such extraordinary changes, to grow to such a size, and finally to pass bodily out of the stomach tissues as we must suppose it capable of doing on this hypothesis. The dependence of the pigmented cells on the ingestion by grey mosquitos of blood containing proteosoma is established by the differential experiments; their parasitic nature is determined by the accidents of their position, structure and growth in the insect: the only possible inference is that they are a develop- mental stage of the gymnosporidium. 3. The Parasites of Human Malaria in Mosquitos.-As pigmented cells closely similar to those now found resulting from proteosoma were formerly observed in mosquitos of a different species fed exclusively on blood containing the stivo-autumnal parasites, we have every reason, apart from the close rela- tionship of the gymnosporidia, for believing that hmamba has a development in mosquitos very like that of proteosoma. The law may very probably extend to halteridium, perhaps to cytamba, and perhaps even to the gregariniform blood parasites: admitting always that the second hosts need not necessarily be mosquitos.
?19 4. Outline of further researches required.-The cultivability of proteo- soma becomes then a fact of great practical importance, implying, as we may reasonably hope it does, the ultimate solution of the problem of the life-history of the parasites of malaria outside the human body. It remains however to find- (a) the sporulation of the proteosoma-coccidia, and further stages; (b) the appropriate second hosts for each species of gymnosporidium. To judge from my past experiences, the latter enquiry promises to be no easy one. V.-Conclusions. Proteosoma, Labb, of crows, larks and sparrows is cultivable in grey mos- quitos. The resulting stage in the mosquito appears to be a coccidium. The youngest coccidia yet seen by me have been found in mosquitos killed on the second day after feeding on birds containing proteosoma. They are small oval bodies of 8  or less in the long diameter; they occupy the muscular or sub-muscular coat of the insect's stomach; they consist of a colourable ecto- plasm and an indifferent entoplasm; and contain pigment like that of proteo- soma, and also vacuoles and granules. They now grow apace, retaining a simi- lar form; and add about 10  of diameter for every twenty-four hours of their life. A capsule is speedily formed; the contents consist of a larger and larger number of vacuoles and granules; and the pigment, which generally surrounds one or more large vacuoles, gradually diminishes in amount until, on about the fourth day, it vanishes altogether. From this time also the contents are studded with numerous small oil globules (?); and the whole cell begins to protrude markedly from the external wall of the stomach into the ciom of the host. Growth continues until, on the sixth to the seventh day, the size reached may be 70  ? 60 . At this stage the coccidia are often quite separate from the stomach tissues, to which, however, they remain attached by some invisible adhesion. From the seventh to the twelfth day after feeding, no further development has been observed. The early stages of similar coccidia have been found in mosquitos fed on blood containing two of the parasites of malaria. These observations prove the mosquito theory of malaria as expounded by Dr. Patrick Manson (6): and, in conclusion, I should add that I have constantly received the benefit of his advice during the enquiry. His brilliant induction so accurately indicated the true line of research that it has been my part merely to follow its direction. RONALD ROSS, D.P.H., M.R.C.S., Surgeon-Major, Indian Medical Service. PANKABARI, DARJEELING DISTRICT; The 21st May 1893.
?20 References. 1. ROSS.-Pigmented cells in mosquitos, British Medical Journal, 18th December 1897. 2. ROSS.-Pigmented cells in mosquitos, British Medical Journal, 26th February 1898. 3. ROSS.-Report on Investigation into Malaria, published in Indian Medi- cal Gazette, April and May 1898. 4. LABB.-Parasites Endoglobulaires du Sang des Vertbrs. Archives de Zoologie Exprimentale et Gnrale, 1894. 5. MACCALLUM.-On the Flagellate Form of the Malarial Parasite, Lancet, November 13th, 1897. 6. MANSON.-Goulstonian Lectures, British Medical Journal, 14th, 21st and 28th March 1896.
?21 APPENDIX. Description of the Grey Mosquitos. The following description of the mosquitos which carry proteosoma, and which I call "grey" mosquitos, has been very kindly furnished me by G. C. Dudgeon, Esq., of Pankabari, whose ento- mological experience is well known:-  " ?, ? head, thorax and abdomen umber brown. Palpi dark brown, 2/3 length of abdomen, antenn pale umber brown with the pectinations much larger in the male than in the female; terminal joint of the antenn long; other joints ringed with dark brown at the origin of the tuft of cilia, most distinct in the male. Mesonotum cover ed with rather long squamul. Abdo- men with eight distinct whitish rings and a pair of black spots on the second segment. Venter with a whitish central double line broadest on the proximate segment. Legs brownish, with obscure dark mottlings on the tibi and tarsi. Wings with rather long cilia on the inner margin, becoming shorter towards the apex; veins with scanty brownish hairs along them. Length 4 millim." I may add that the eggs are elongated, taper toward one end, and are laid in "rafts." A brief differential description would be-wings and legs plain; back of abdomen barred with white; venter whitish. It is very interesting to note that from inform- ation given me by Surgeon-Colonel Maitland, this appears to be also the filaria-bearing species, or one of them. Description of the Plates. NOTE.-All the figures and plates were drawn by me accurately according to scale from actual prepar- ations, most of which were preserved in formation. Plates II to IX are faithful represent- ations of entire fields. For descriptions see also Section III, paragraph 2. Plate I.-Drawings of proteosoma-coccidia from the second to the twelfth day. Figures 1-5, coccidia of the second day. Figures 6, stained. Figures 7-11, coccidia of the third day. Figure 12, stained. Figures 13, 14, 15, coccidia of the fourth day. Figure 16, stained. Figure 17, coccidium of the fifth day. Figures 18-22, coccidia of the sixth day, and later. Figure 23, drawing in outline of the stomach of a mosquito studded with proteosoma- coccidia of the sixth day, seen by a low power. Plates II-VIII.-Fields of Leitz oel imm. 170 minim (1/12th inch). Plate II.-External coat of stomach studded with young coccidia of about 30 hours. Air-vessel, crossing muscular fibres, and some oil-globules are seen. Plate III.-External coat of stomach studded with young coccidia of about 40 hours, Plate IV.-Coccidia of third day. Vacuolated forms. Plate V.-Coccidia of third day. Hyaline forms. Plate VI.-Coccidia of fourth day. One vacuolated and three hyaline forms. One coccidium of a second generation derived from a second feeding. Plate VII.-Coccidia of the fifth day. Plate VIII.-Coccidia of the sixth to seventh day. One coccidium of a younger generation. Plate IX.-Pyloric end of stomach studded with proteosoma-coccidia of the seventh day, seen by a power of medium strength. RONALD ROSS, Surgeon Major, Indian Medical Service. D
PLATE I.
39 PLATE II. PLATE III.
40 PLATE IV. PLATE V.
PLATE VI. PLATE VII.
PLATE VIII. PLATE IX. Reg. No. 246 Print., I.-June 98.-104. Litho., S. I. O., Calcutta.
