?BENGAL PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT. Preliminary Report of a Malaria Survey of Calcutta and Environs by M. O. Tirunarayana Iyengar, B. A., Entomologist to the Department of Malaria Research, Bengal. The author has conducted a mosquito survey of Calcutta and its environs during the past two years and this paper deals with the results, more especially from the point of view of sanitation and disease-prevention. No thorough survey of the culicid fauna of Calcutta has up to now been made. Previous work in this direction has either been too local or admittedly incomplete. Stephens and Christophers made some observations in regard to Calcutta anopheles during the year 1900. Since then, Sir Leonard Rogers and Dr. U. N. Brahmachari have also made certain observations of the ano-phelines of the city. Dr. Brahmachari made periodic observations of the anophelines breeding in the Campbell Hospital tank. During 1912-13 Major McGilchrist conducted a Stegomyia survey of the Port of Calcutta, but this is far from complete as it was conducted for a few months only, and that at a period, viz., December and January, when the Stegomyias had practically stopped breeding. The surveys of Paiva and Nandi, chiefly in regard to Stegomyia, were concerned only with certain parts of Calcutta. In 1914, Major Christophers pointed out the necessity for a complete scientific survey, and suggested that such a survey should be undertaken extending over five years. This proposal, though endorsed by the conference convened for the purpose of framing a "scheme for securing better sanitary control over the Port of Calcutta and environs," has not yet been carried out. This paper is the result of the author's attempt to make a survey of Calcutta from the point of view of mosquito-borne diseases. Kidderpore.-Various parts of Calcutta have been surveyed. The first work undertaken was in the area of the new docks at Bracebridge Hall near Kidderpore. This area was surveyed in great detail during 1917-18, every species of mosquito found here being identified. The area, which is 4 miles by 3, contains innumerable collections of water. Few of the numerous ponds and pools which afforded plentiful facilities for the collecting entomologist, were found free from mosquito larv. Six species of anophelines are very common in the area, viz., A nopheles rossi (Giles), A. barbirostris (Van der Wulp), sinensis (Wied), jamesi (Theob), fuliginosus (Giles) and listoni (Liston). The variety of A. listoni is not the type species but the variety described by Theobald as var. alboapicalis. This variety is more common in Bengal than the type species, and in some places, as in the Dooars, both kinds occur. A single specimen of A. jeyporensis (and one of what I believe to be a variety of A. gigas) were also collected. A winter variety of A. jamesi, comparable to the adeyi variety of A. fuliginosus, was also found, but, as the type specimens were all destroyed by mites when I was away from duty, the publication of this description has been withheld. As regards the non-anophelines occurring in Kidderpore we have about eleven species, including Desvoidea obturbans (Walker), Stegomyia fasciata (Fabr), Radioculex clavipalpus (Theob), Leucomyia gelida (Theob), Culex impellens (Walker), C. fatigans (Wied), C. concolor (Desvoidy), Mansonioides annulifera (Theob), A edeomyia squam-mipenna (Arri), Mimomyia minuta (Theob) and a species not yet identified. The Stegomyias occur wherever coolie lines exist. The various other species occur in less inhabited portions of the area under survey. Other suburbs of Calcutta.-Other parts of Calcutta have not yet been surveyed in such detail as Kidderpore, and the work so far done relates especially to the anophelines present. Much attention has not yet been paid to culicines other than Stegomyia. Stegomyia is plentiful in some localities and is found to occur more frequently in thickly populated parts like Entally
?2 than in the thinly populated and jungly localities like Tengra. But throughout Calcutta, A nopheles rossi is very fairly prevalent, increasing much in parts bordering on "Central Calcutta," like Entaliy, Circular Road and Belgachia, and also some parts south of Park Street. By "Central Calcutta" is meant the area north of Park Street and enclosed by the Circular Road. This area shows fewer A. rossi and culicines. It is noticeable that in Entally we get a sudden enormous increase of Culex impellens and fatigans during the months of January and February. These mosquitoes tend to occur in such numbers as to make life almost unbearable. Other species like the stinging Mansonioides and the huge Culex concolor, both of which bite during daytime, add to the terrors of life. A similar increase is noticeable in several of the southern and eastern suburbs of Calcutta, and this sudden invasion of mosquitoes occurs at a time when the easterly winds blow from the Salt Lakes. So far, the chief breeding areas of these species have not been discovered and we cannot say whether they come from the Salt Lakes or from the stagnations from the tanneries. At other times of the year, Anopheles fuliginosus, jamesi, sinensis and barbirostris, and also some rossi were commonly found in all the suburbs of Calcutta. Near Kidderpore, A. listoni is also present, as also in Sibpur and Ramkristopore on the other side of the river. The tank in the Campbell Hospital is a source of a considerable number of A. fuliginosus and rossi in varying proportions at different times of the year and occasionally some listoni also.* In the Fort Maidan, the tanks breed A. fuliginosus and rossi; and some of the ponds inside the Eden Gardens breed A. listoni besides. In Sibpur and Ramkristopore the number of listoni (and also fuliginosus) appears to have increased since last year. The beautiful ponds in the Royal Botanic Gardens of Sibpur form large and fertile breeding grounds principally for A. fuliginosus and sinensis. It has long been known that malaria occurs in this neighbourhood, and the breeding places mentioned are undoubtedly a contributory cause of infection. Central Calcutta.-It is usually supposed that the central parts of Calcutta are mostly free from mosquitoes other than the domestic species like Stegomyia fasciata and observation shows that this is true. This is because there are no breeding places other than the few ponds and tanks in public squares and private houses; though in certain areas, cesspools and pits afford suitable breeding places for Culex fatigans. The majority of the mosquitoes that enter this area come from the outer regions of the city. There is, however, one important exception this rule. Anopheles stephensi, (a virulent carrier of malaria), has been found by the author to be very prevalent in Calcutta, even in its densely populated areas. This species has been previously recorded from Calcutta by Stephens and Christophers as early as 1902 (Reports to the Malaria Committee of the Royal Society). I also learn that some specimens were bred out of larv collected from an old tub by Dr. U. N. Brahmachari and identified as A. stephensi by Christophers. Up to now, no one appears to have suspected the fact that this dangerous carrier of malaria is to be found breeding in large numbers throughout the city and no doubt giving rise to a considerable amount of autochthonous malaria among the population. The principal breeding places of A. stephensi in Calcutta are the cisterns for storing filtered and unfiltered water on the house-terraces. In every house in Calcutta, there is at least one cistern for storing unfiltered water for use in flushing the lavatory; and in others there are, besides, several cisterns for storing filtered water. Garden-tubs and old unused cisterns also breed this species profusely. These cisterns are the permanent breeding places of A. stephensi in the city, year in and year out, though the percentage of infection of these cisterns increases during and soon after the rains, i.e., August to October. Further, the temporary breeding places increase remarkably at the same time. Garden-tubs, old unused cisterns and shallow pits on terraces form abundant breeding places. On the third floor of a building near Dalhousie Square, a trough-like basin (5' x 3' x 3") was formed as a result of the blocking of a small drain, in *Some specimens of Anopheles albimanus were collected from this tank by Dr. U. N. Brahmachari.
?3 which rain-water collected. Some days later, I noticed very large numbers of larv of A. stephensi and Stegomyia fasciata breeding in it. Some of the larv and pup were collected and no less than 68 adult A. stephensi were bred out in the course of three days. This observation gives an indication as to the numbers a small breeding place of this kind may produce during a single season. It will be remembered that in Bombay, A. stephensi, which is a domestic mosquito, breeds profusely in wells, cisterns, and garden-tubs. In Calcutta, fortunately, there are practically no wells. The wells formerly existing have been mostly replaced by the cisterns, which are present possibly in larger numbers even than those in Bombay. For example, in a certain moderately populated part of Dharamtola Street, an area a little over 4/9 ths of a square furlong in extent, had about 36 cisterns. This gives a rough idea of the number of cisterns existing in Central Calcutta, which is nearly 31/2 by 11/2 miles. The infection of cisterns by A. stephensi, although most obvious in Central Calcutta, is not confined to this part of the city, as there are localities south of Park Street and east of Circular Road where similar conditions exist. The majority of the cisterns examined are found to be defective for one or more of the following reasons:-(1) badly fitting or absent lids, (2) holes in the top or sides of the cistern and (3) presence of a tube to allow surplus water to overflow. All these defects allow mosquitoes to enter and lay their eggs within the cisterns. The cisterns examined in various parts of Calcutta give a varying percentage of infection with A. stephensi:-Amherst Street, 12 per cent., Shambazar 12.5 per cent., Nebutolla Street, 26.5 per cent., Bagh-bazar 32 per cent., Strand Road (Nimtolla) 31 per cent., Nimtolla Ghat Street 41 per cent., Nimtolla Street 35.5 per cent., Dharamtola Street, (Central) 50 per cent., Bow Bazar Street 43 per cent., Machua Bazar Street 57 per cent., Cross Avenue Road 62 per cent., Chorebagan 50 per cent., Corn-wallis Street 60 per cent., Jhamapukur 66 per cent., Clive Street 62 per cent., Canning Street 54.5 per cent., Wood Street 31 per cent. (Vide Appendix.) The respective percentages have been marked in the accompanying map. It is not claimed that these figures are complete, as only portions of the city were examined; but a sufficient number of cisterns have been examined in the various localities mentioned to show the seriousness of the condition. The survey of the cisterns was by no means easy. The chief obstacle was the sus-piciousness of the house-owners who, anticipating some trouble, often refuse to allow us to enter their houses. The lack of the necessary leisure and the want of assistance prevented my making the survey as complete as I could wish. But a beginning has been made and it is to be hoped that better facilities will be given to complete the work in future. In any case the figures noted show to what an extent the city of Calcutta has already been invaded by A. ste-hensi, and the point to the need both for active measures of prevention as well as for further investigation. Measures suggested.-The prevalence of A. stephensi in Calcutta reminds one of the conditions existing in Bombay which eventually led to an outbreak of epidemic malaria in 1907 and 1908 unprecedented in the history of that city. In Bombay the chief breeding places of A. stephensi were the open wells, cisterns and tubs.* In Dhobi Talao and in the north Fort area there were on the average nearly four wells per acre. But in Calcutta, in many parts, there are 7 cisterns for every acre and in some parts more; and in some cases, over 60 per cent. of these cisterns are breeding A. Stephensi. Thus we see that the condition of things in Calcutta is serious, threatening as it does the health of the city and exposing the population to the risk of epidemic malaria, just as in the case of Bombay. While people in the central parts of Calcutta are exposed to the attacks of A. stephensi, those in the suburbs have to meet in addition the onslaughts of other malaria carriers, such as A. fuliginosus, listoni and sinensis. No wonder, therefore, Calcutta is never free from malaria. The apparent freedom of the city from epidemic malaria is probably due to the fact that the ratio of dangerous anopheles to the population is still relatively low, and it is only in certain localities that it exceeds the "malaria point." The number * C. A. Bentley. Malaria in Bombay, 1911, Government Central Press, Bombay.
4 of new infections is therefore ordinarily balanced by the number of cures and the so-called " endemic index " of the city remains low, although every year numbers of people continue to contract the disease. In 1900, Christophers found the spleen index of Calcutta to be zero. A spleen census is now being taken but is not yet complete. So far it has been found that although in several parts the splenic figure is zero, certain localities show a spleen index as high as 4 per cent. Personal inquiries in such cases generally show that the cases found have been imported from the malarious parts of Bengal and not contracted inside the city. But the suburbs of Calcutta show varying spleen indices. Parts of Tollygunge give figures from 4 to 10 per cent. averaging 5 per cent. Kidderpore 2 per cent. Entally nil, Sibpur 2 per cent. The figures for the central parts of Calcutta are not yet complete. During recent years, medical men in Calcutta have observed that malaria is to some extent prevalent in the city, and that people who have never left Calcutta have contracted a virulent type of malaria. But this malaria, though appreciable, has not been large enough to attract the attention of the public. Many medical men believe that malaria has been increasing during the last few years, and malarial fever is certainly very common in the suburbs at present, although the spleen index is low. The malaria parasite is therefore always present, and we now see that there is a great risk of the anopheline factor being increased. So long as the present conditions are allowed to exist and in these circumstances, Calcutta runs the risk, sooner or later, of being overrun by malaria. The city is developing rapidly, and this development is leading on the one hand to the increase of potential breeding places for A. stephensi in all directions, and on the other to the influx of workers from many places, a proportion of whom are almost certain to be already infected with malaria. If this sort of thing continues we may suddenly find as the result of an epidemic of malaria as they did in Bombay a few years ago, that Calcutta has become malarious almost before any one is aware of the fact. Two points require to be emphasized: firstly, a more complete mosquito survey of Calcutta is essential and, secondly, necessary measures for the control of A. stephensi breeding in Calcutta should be carried out, supported by adequate legal powers. With regard to A. stephensi, a scheme on the lines of that suggested for Bombay in 1911 by Dr. C. A. Bentley * would appear to be advisable for combating malaria in the city. For the other species a proper system of tank-cleaning, reclamation, oiling, etc., may have to be adopted, and these steps will have to be continued indefinitely and without relaxation. Otherwise, matters will soon regain their original condition. It is probable that something of this kind has happened in Bombay to account for the epidemic of malaria recently reported during September and October of this year (1919). The breeding places of Stegomyia and the extent of their prevalence in Calcutta, though surveyed, have been omitted from this paper and will be communicated at a later date. Habits of the mosquitoes.-I have already mentioned the breeding of Anopheles stephensi in cisterns, but it is not possible to say whether it prefers filtered water to unfiltered water; as present observations show, it occurs equally in both, though to a varying extent. In cisterns in which the unfiltered water has remained for some time, it appears to occur more profusely. But this increase is due not so much to the cleanness of the water as to its non-disturbance. Algæ appear in filtered water more rapidly than in unfiltered water, and this is significant as these algæ and the minute organisms that abound and feed upon them that form the favourite food of mosquito larvæ; and this explains the greater tendency shown by cisterns with filtered and settled unfiltered water to harbour anopheles larv. In the rural areas of Bengal it has been found that the entrance of silt-laden water into tanks, pools, drains and other water-courses tends to diminish the number of malaria carriers. We do not as yet know the explanation of this phenomenon; and we now find that A. stephensi appears to be an exception. The presence of silt in the water does not prevent its breeding, as it is found to breed readily in the unfiltered-water cisterns. There also appear to be some variations in the number of larv found in the same cistern at different periods, I am not in a position to conjecture * C. A. Bentley. Ibid.
5 into the causes that produce this variation, but I believe that sunshine, temperature and rainfall contribute towards such variations. In certain places this species was found to breed in water which had some foul smell about it. When the larv of A. stephensi are disturbed, they all disappear from the surface. It is generally believed that they go to the bottom of the cistern or well. I have observed that the larvae go to the bottom in most cases in which the water is not over about two feet deep. But in deeper waters, most of them do not reach the bottom. They go into the water and then stick to the sides of the cistern or tub, with their tail end upwards; and considerable disturbing was required to dislodge them from their resting places. I then suspected that there was some gripping organ in their tail. An examination of the tail-end showed no such structures, but the tips of the hairs in the supra-anal tuft on the ninth segment of the abdomen were curved and hook-like. It is with these hairs that the larva clings to the sides of the cisterns; and in doing so, its dorsal surface is in contact with the wall of the cistern. If this were not the case, the larvae when disturbed would be compelled to go to the bottom and thus run the risk of being killed by the enormous pressure of water. Hence perhaps this adaptation of the tail-hairs. These hooked hairs are not peculiar, however, to A. stephensi alone. A. fuliginosus and sinensis also have them. Whenever the water in a tank or pond is disturbed, the larv rarely go to the bottom, as thereby they run the risk of being caught by their ever-wary enemies, the fish. But they get in between the roots of the water-plants and hang therefrom by their tail-hairs. Very often they also make use of their mandibles for this purpose. When holding on in this way, head upwards, from the submerged parts of the water-plants or alg, it is with great difficulty that they can be dislodged. This fact is significant with regard to Stegomyia fasciata which breeds in almost all domestic situations in which A. stephensi breeds, but which rarely breeds with it in the wells. If Stegomyia were to breed in wells, when the water is disturbed, the larv would have to go to the bottom of the well because they lack these tail-hairs of A. stephensi with which to hold on to the sides. It is likely that mosquito larvae being air-breathing organisms cannot ordinarily stand much pressure at the depths of a well. Stegomyia is a bottom and side-feeder; therefore it has to go to the bottom of its breeding place, unlike A. stephensi, which feeds on the surface. These facts explain why Stegomyia has rarely been found in waters which are over three feet deep. In the cisterns on the tops of houses, in which A. stephensi breeds, few of them breed Stegomyia also. Out of ten cisterns breeding A. stephensi, one perhaps may have Stegomyia also. In several garden-tubs, Culex concolor (a species whose larva resembles Stegomyia in all outward appearances) was found to breed along with A. stephensi. This species is destructive to all forms of mosquito larv; it is a very active and voracious creature, often attacking its own kind when no other food is available. In some tubs, at first, both A. stephensi and Culex concolor were found to be breeding together, and some days later it was found that the number of A. stephensi was rapidly diminishing. Some days thereafter, there was nothing other than Culex concolor in the tub. A similar observation was made by Dr. Bentley in Bombay. Unfortunately, this enemy of A. stephensi does not breed in cisterns on house-tops. This is probably because Culex concolor is a low flier; it attacks man doggedly while walking or standing on the ground, but it rarely gets even to the first floor, even though the locality had plenty of it. This species is essentially a wild mosquito and occurs in jungly tracts. Desvoidea obturbans is another predaceous species occurring in the suburbs of Calcutta. It breeds in foul water in company with Leucomyia gelida and Anopheles rossi, on both of which larv it feeds. It is also very cannibalistic; we can never keep several of them together without missing many of them. I have also observed them to breed in stagnant water inside a bad latrine in Tengra.
6 Toxorhynchites is another kind, the big larva of which is destructive to other species. It occurs in garden-tubs which contain fresh-water. They are very dull creatures as compared with the larv of Culex concolor or Desvoidea, but they have very powerful mandibles with which they grip their victims. They destroy Stegomyia larv with which they breed. But I have not observed them to attack anopheline larvae; nor do they feed upon one another of the same kind. They have considerable ability to go starving for days together. In conclusion, I have great pleasure in acknowledging my indebtedness to Dr. C. A. Bentley, Sanitary Commissioner, Bengal, and Dr. R. B. Kham-bata, Special Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Malaria Research, Bengal, for considerable help received from them during the progress of the investigation.
APPENDIX I. Locality.   Cisterns  Cisterns  Percentage.     examined.  breeding        A. Stephensi.  Cross Avenue Road  ... ...  16 10   625 Jamapukur  ... ... ...   6  4   660 Cornwallis Street ... ... 26 16   615 Mechua Bazar Street  ... ...  9  5   570 Clive Street  ... ... ...  8  5   620 Baghbazar Street  ... ...  43 14   325 Strand Road and Nimtollah ... ... 54 17   314 Nimtollah ghat Street  ... ...  34 14   322 Shambazar Street ... ...  8  1   125 Dahímtolar Street ... ...  11  6   545 Dharamtola Street (West) ... ...  29 11   379 Dharamtola Street (Central)... ... 24 12   500 Wellington Street ...  ... ...  8  5   625 Wellesley Street ...  ... ...  8  5   625 Amherst Street  ... ... ...  33  4   121 Chorebagan  ... ... ...  14  7   500 Bowbazar ...  ... ...  14  6   430 Nebutala Lane ... ... ... 15  4   266 Wood Street  ... ... ...  45 12   311 Lower Circular Road (near Ballyganj)...  28 13  464  Total ... 433 171 395 B. S. Press-11-5-1920-4346J-200-D. L. K.
