?Resolution on Dr. Rogers' Report on Kala azar. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner of Assam in the General Department, No. 6960G., dated Shillong, the 30th September 1897. Read- Surgeon-Captain L. Rogers' Report on Kala azar. Read also- Letter No. 836S., dated the 16th July 1897, from the Principal Medical Officer and Sanitary Commissioner, Assam, forwarding the above Report. RESOLUTION. The disease known as kal zr was first noticed officially in the Assam Sanitary Report for 1882, where it was referred to as a very severe form of malarial fever, which had been prevalent in certain parts of the Garo Hills district since 1869. In 1883 it spread from the Garo Hills into the adjacent portion of the Goalpara district, and in 1884 it had become so prevalent, that relief work was started and numerous dispensaries were opened in the affected tracts. Since that time it has advanced slowly, but surely, through the Goalpara subdivision, the part of Kamrup which lies on the south bank of the Brahmaputra, and the district of Nowgong. The portions of the Goalpara and Kamrup districts on the north bank of the Brahmaputra have suffered very slightly, except in populous localities, such as. Barpeta and Hajo. In the Darrang district, which lies entirely on the north bank of the river, the Mangaldai subdivision has been badly affected, although by a less severe type of the disease. The sadr subdivision has hitherto suffered little, but cases have been reported in villages near Tezpur and Bishnath. Kal zr has not, as yet, travelled beyond the eastern boundary of the- Nowgong district, and Sibsagar and Lakhimpur are still untouched. In each newly- affected tract the disease has taken two or three years to reach its height, which it maintains for another three years, and then gradually declines and disappears. The mortality attending its progress has been very great, and tracts, which before its advent were densely populated and highly cultivated, have been left by it deserted and waste. The Annual Sanitary Reports from 1882 onwards contain the record of the gradual spread of the disease, the mortality attending it, and the opinions of the local medical authorities as to its causation and origin. 2. In 1888 the Principal Medical Officer and Sanitary Commissioner (Surgeon- Colonel C. P. Costello) applied for the appointment of a specialist to investigate both kal zr and the so-called beri beri or anmia of coolies, which was causing a consider- able mortality amongst the tea-garden coolies of Upper Assam. His recommenda- tion was accepted, and Surgeon-Captain G. M. Giles, M.B., F.R.C.S., was selected to make the enquiry. Dr. Giles commenced work in the cold weather of 1889-90, and almost immediately formed the opinion that the two diseases, which he held were absolutely the same, arose from the attacks of anchylostoma or dochmius duodenalis, a small worm about half an inch long, which lives in the small intestine. This was the view already held by Dr. Ruddock and others in the case of beri-beri, but was widely opposed to the opinions of all previous observers, so far as kal zr was concerned. The latter was generally held to be a form of acute malarial fever com- plicated by something else, which gave it contagiousness. Dr. Giles's views gained a temporary and somewhat hesitating acceptance from some of the medical officers in the province, but the general opinion soon reverted to the theory of a wholly or partially malarial origin. The view that anchylostomiasis was accountable for the mortality was greatly weakened by the work done by Surgeon-Major E. Dobson at Dhubri. In the course of four years that officer examined a great number of
?persons for the presence of anchylostoma, and the statistics recorded by him showed that out of 797 healthy persons examined, no less than 620, or 77 79 per cent., har- boured anchylostoma in numbers ranging from 1 to 230; they also proved that the worm in question is more commonly present in natives of other provinces than it is in those of Assam. In the Sanitary Report for 1894 the Principal Medical Officer and Sanitary Com- missioner (Surgeon-Colonel A. Stephen) recommended that the services of another specialist should be obtained to investigate the disease. This recommendation led to the appointment, in April 1896, of Surgeon-Captain Leonard Rogers, M.B., B.S., F.R.C S., who, after most painstaking enquiries, submitted his report in May last. The delay on the part of the Chief Commissioner in dealing with his report is due partly to the dislocation of work caused by the earthquake of the 12th June, which destroyed the Secretariat, and partly to delay in the receipt of the plates and chart prepared in the Surveyor-General's office. 3. The first portion of Dr. Rogers' report deals with the theory advanced by Dr. Giles that kal zr was identical with anchylostomiasis, and the conclusion arrived at is that this theory is entirely untenable. Dr. Giles observed that all cases which he admitted to be kal zr were found to be infected with the dochmius duodenalis. It was not then known, as Dr. Dobson has since shown to be the case, that this parasite is very common in healthy persons, both Assamese and foreigners, and does not cause any apparent injury to health unless present in very large numbers. Dr. Rogers states that the parasite is not present in greater numbers in persons suffering from kal zr than in those not so suffering, and he also points out that anchylostomiasis is not a very fatal disease. The death-rate rarely reaches 8 per cent., whereas in kal zr recoveries are very rare indeed. Moreover, though anchylostomiasis might perhaps spread as kal zr has done, it would not again die out as the latter does without any alteration in the sanitary conditions; but, on the contrary, it would tend to become more and more prevalent. It is added that, while thymol is a specific in cases of beri-beri, it is of no use against kal zr. This was admitted by Dr. Giles himself, but was explained on the ground that patients of the latter class came too late for treatment. 4. Leaving these general considerations, Dr. Rogers states that Dr. Giles was in error in holding there was no special fever history in kl zr, and urges that it is the most essential and constant feature of the disease. He illustrates this by twelve typical cases, of which he gives a full clinical history. Dr. Giles's failure to observe the fever symptoms is ascribed partly to the fact that his observations were made in the cold weather, when the fever frequently disappears for a time, and that Dr. Giles had no case under observation for more than a month, and partly to the fact that after a time the sufferers lose reaction to the fever, and have fairly high fever on them without knowing it. Dr. Giles's assertion that there is no abnormal enlargement cf the spleen in kal zr is similarly controverted, and Dr. Rogers says- It is then evident that the spleen is enlarged four times as frequently in kil, zr as it is in healthy persons in Nowgong; while if the size be taken into account .......this organ is markedly enlarged 15 times as often as it is in the ordinary inhabitants of Nowgong. 5. Dr. Rogers points out some marked differences in the symptoms of anchy- lostomiasis and kal zr, viz.- (1) In the former all the constituents of the blood are destroyed equally, whereas in the latter the haemoglobin or colouring matter is not lost to the economy, but is converted into pigment, which accounts for the darkening of the face noticeable in kal zr. (2) The anmia in kal zr is in direct proportion to the fever. (3) dema or dropsy occurs usually in the feet and rarely in the face, whereas the reverse is the case when dema is a result of anchylostomiasis. (4) Diarrha is very common and constipation is very rare in kal zr, but in anchylostomiasis diarrha is rare and constipation common. (5) In kal zr the heart is smaller than normal, while in anchylostomiasis it is- enlarged. 6. The general arguments adduced against the identity of kal zr with anchylostomiasis apply, it is said, with almost equal force, against the theory that the former disease is a combination of the latter with malarial fever. Moreover, if anchylos- tomiasis were the propagating agency, it would be a constant and marked feature, while the malarial complication might be sometimes absent, but Dr. Rogers reports that the
?3 reverse is the case. He also states that anchylostomiasis is not more prevalent in Nowgong than it is in other districts where ordinary malarial fever is equally prevalent, and says that he found one garden in that district where there were many cases of anchylostomiasis and much malarial fever without a single case of kal zr, although that disease was raging on another garden only three-quarters of a mile away. 7. Dr Rogers next proceeds to expound his own views as to the nature of kal zr. He holds that it is nothing more or less than a very intense form of malarial fever. The weight of medical opinion has always been in favour of a malarial origin, but it has been felt that its communicability, which has always been believed in, and which is most clearly established by Dr. Rogers in Section VII of his Report, indicated some complication of communicable disease, it being thought that malarial fever by itself could not become communicable. To this belief was probably due the partial acceptance of the anchylostomiasis theory discussed above, and the typhoidal complication attri- buted years ago to the Burdwan fever. Dr. Rogers, however, does not share this belief, but holds that ordinary malarial fever may become so intensified in a succession of very unhealthy years as to become communicable, and he points to the introduction of malarial fever into Mauritius in 1865 by coolies from India as an instance of proved communicability. In order to show that there is nothing inherently improbable in the view that the poison of malarial fever may become so intensified as to become communicable, he brings forward the fact that certain bacteria can be artificially intensified, and he notes that some persons are of opinion that pneumonia, and perhaps the plague, may have two types,-one contagious and the other non-contagious. Dr. Stephen points out, however, that these diseases are believed to depend on vegetable micro-organisms, whereas malarial fever is supposed to be caused by an animal micro-organism. 8. There can be no doubt of the very close resemblance which kal zr bears to malarial fever, from which in the early stages of the disease it is impossible to differen- tiate it. The cases of chronic malaria found by Dr. Rogers in Sylhet differed in no apparent respect from kal zr : but it took some days' search over a wide tract of country to collect them; their history showed that it had taken as many years, as in kal zr it takes months, to produce the extreme state of malarial cachexia, and no two cases occurred in the same family. The fever of kal zr has no special characteristic type, but the disease spreads along lines of communication without reference to water-logging of the soil or other conditions favouring or impeding the spread of ordinary malarial fever. It also diminishes in intensity, and disappears without any change in the sanitary conditions. It is peculiarly resistent to quinine, and the villagers often recognise the very first case in their midst as something quite different from anything they had previously experienced within the memory of the oldest. The symptoms are nevertheless in no way different from those of a very intense form of malaria, and Dr. Rogers says that the malarial organisms (plasmodium malari) are a constant accom- paniment of the fever of kal zr, and that they do not differ from those seen in the blood of sufferers from ordinary malarial fevers in Assam, except that they are possibly less frequently pigmented. He does not, however give diagrams of the forms determined, and he does not say that he determined that there was no specific bacterium in kal zr which could produce the disease. Dr. Stephen is of opinion that in this most important branch of the enquiry, Dr. Rogers' investigations were incomplete, and that he has consequently lailed to establish his contention that kal zr is nothing more than malarial fever, which by intensification has become communicable. Dr. Rogers himself admits that he was not able to devote as much time as he would have wished to the microscopical part of the work. It is noticed that Dr. Rogers says he has the material by him for a future discussion of this, the more scientific side of the question, and it is possible that he may have more evidence than he has adduced in his report. But if so, it is unfortunate that he did not adduce it; as, unless and until this evidence is given, it cannot be taken as proved that kal zr is simply "a very intense form of malarial fever and nothing else." 9. It is unnecessary to discuss Dr. Rogers' theory of the origin of kal zr viz., by introduction from Rangpur, nor his comparison of the disease with Burdwan fever, to which it is very similar in the manner in which it spread, although the latter was of a more acute nature and was more rapidly fatal, with cerebral symptoms. It may be noted, however, that Dr. Jackson, who enquired into the causation of Burdwan fever, came to the con- clusion that its contagiousness was due to a typhoidal complication. 10. But whatever the nature of the disease may be, Dr Rogers has removed all doubts as to its communicability, and the measures suggested by him in Section X of his Report to prevent its spread are eminently useful and practical. The most
?4 important point, as he correctly observes, is to bring home to the villagers themselves the extreme danger of the disease spreading when once it appears among them, and to explain to them the preventive measures which they should take. He has written for translation into the vernacular a pamphlet on the subject, and this will be printed and distributed widely in all the affected districts and the dis- tricts adjoining them. He proposes to use the provisions of the recently passed Epidemic Diseases Act to compel certain precautions, but this proposal is not recom- mended by the Principal Medical Officer, and the Chief Commissioner is unable to accept it. The principal recommendation put forward is that the people of affected villages should be enccuraged to move their houses to new sites during the cold- weather months, when the disease is at a minimum. The suggestion that, in order to facilitate the removal of village sites when affected by kal zr, Government should remit the revenue on the new site in the year of removal (when revenue will be payable on the old site) and the year following, seems reasonable, and orders will be issued to District Officers accordingly. Mr. Cotton trusts that the measures proposed by Dr. Rogers will be of use in hinderirg the further spread of the disease, but apart from this, he thinks that there are grounds for believing that it has now reached its limit. Between the inhabited portion of Nowgong and Sibsagar there is a stretch of many miles of waste and jungle, and although this is traversed by the trunk road, intercourse is rare, and communication infrequent. Moreover, the villages in Sibsagar differ much from those of the western districts. There are no special village sites where the houses are closely built, but each man makes his house wherever it suits him, and he readily moves it, often for no very obvious reason, to some new site on his land. The houses of the different villagers are thus well separated, and a communicable disease would, therefore, not spread so freely as in the more crowded villages of Lower Assam. As regards the Tezpur subdivision, the comparative sparseness of the population and the fact that, except in Mangaldai, kal zr has never spread much on the north bank of the Brahmaputra seem to afford reasons for thinking that it will not suffer very severely. 11. The Chief Commissioner accepts Dr. Rogers' suggestion, which is supported by the Principal Medical Officer and Sanitary Commissioner, that the heading Anchy- lostomiasis and the sub-head Beri-beri should be omitted from the return of deaths, but that kal zr should continue to be shown separately. 12. In conclusion, Mr. Cotton desires to express his obligations to Dr. Rogers for the thoroughness with which he has conducted the investigation entrusted to him, often at great personal inconvenience, and for his interesting report. He has followed up all branches of the enquiry, except possibly that of microscopical examination of the blood, with exemplary diligence, and has stated the facts ascertained and the conclusions arrived at by him with great fullness and lucidity. The Chief Commissioner is also indebted to Surgeon-Colonel Stephen, the Principal Medical Officer of the province for the able review with which he has submitted Dr. Rogers' Report. By order of the Chief Commissioner of Assam, E. A. GAIT, Offg. Secretary to the Chief Commissioner of Assam. A. S. P. O. (Genl.) No. 398-500-3-10-97.
?No. 836S., dated Shillong, the 16th July 1897. From-Surgeon-Colonel A. STEPHEN, M.B., Principal Medical Officer and Sanitary Commissioner, Assam, To-The Secretary to the Chief Commissioner of Assam. I have the honour to forward Surgeon-Captain Rogers' report on his investigation into kla-azr in Assam, with the following remarks. 2. Before proceeding to Assam to commence his enquiry into this disease, Dr. Rogers spent a few days in Calcutta, in order to study the literature of kla-azr and allied subjects available at that place. Leaving Calcutta on the 16th of April 1896, he visited Dhubri, Gauhti, Shillong and Tezpur, in order to learn the views of the Civil Surgeons of those places on the disease which he was about to investigate, and, on the 27th of that month, he arrived at Nowgong, the capital of the district in which the disease was at that time most prevalent, and which he was requested to consider as, for the time being, his headquarters. He spent the next five months in the Nowgong district in investigating the disease. During these months he studied the cases of the disease which he met in the Nowgong dispensary and jail, and in a large number of infected places in that district, including a considerable number of tea gardens. In October he proceeded to Shillong, in order to study the minute pathology of the organs of persons who had died of kla-azr in the Nowgong district, and on whom he had performed post-mortem examinations. He afterwards visited Sylhet to study cases of ordinary chronic malarial fever there, and to notice the differences, if any, between them and kla-azr. After leaving Sylhet, he paid a short visit to the Gro Hills, and then made tours in the Nowgong district, in the Mangaldai and Tezpur subdivisions of the Darrang district, and in the Golght subdivision of the Sibsgar district, and in March 1897 he proceeded to Shillong to complete his report. 3. In the first section of his report, Dr. Rogers gives a short history of kla-azr. The disease was first described in the Assam Sanitary Report for 1882, in an appendix to which it is stated that the attention of administrative officers became directed to it in the Gro Hills as far back as 1869. The disease gradually spread up the Brahmaputra river, especially on its south bank, and, when Dr. Rogers commenced his investigations, it had reached the eastern portion of the Nowgong district, and was beginning to make its appearance in the Bishnath portion of the Darrang district. Dr. Rogers points out that for several years, after the disease was first described in 1882, medical officers were of opinion that kla-azr was of malarial origin, and that it was not contagious. In 1889, Dr. Giles was appointed to enquire into, and report on, the cause or causes of kla-azr and beri-beri of Ceylon, and in October 1890 he published his report. In this report he gave it as his opinion that the increased mortality in the districts invaded by so-called kla-azr was due to anchylostomiasis. It was afterwards ascertained, especially through the investigations of Dr. Dobson, that anchylostoma were found in the majority of healthy people in Assam, and that the worm was present in persons not suffering from kla-azr in as great numbers as in those affected with that disease. At the time when Dr. Rogers was appointed to enquire into the nature of kla-azr, the majority of medical officers were of opinion that the disease in most respects resembled chronic malarial fever, but, as there seemed to be evidence that it was contagious, they considered that there might be some other factor in it besides malaria. All medical officers, with one exception, believed that the disease was quite distinct from anchylostomiasis. 4. In the third section of his Report, Dr. Rogers gives a clinical description of kla- azr. He defines it as a chronic and relapsing form of fever of an intermittent or irregularly remittent type, very resistent to treatment, producing progressive anmia, great wasting, and, in many cases, dropsy, and terminating either in a final attack of fever or in asthenia, often accompanied by diarrha or lung complications. He states that the disease usually attacks several members of a household, and spreads slowly in a wave of increased fever mortality, and dies out in about six years from its com- mencement. He is of opinion that the disease may last from two months to three years, and that its usual duration is from four to nine months. From what he saw on tea gardens, he came to the conclusion that the number of cases begins to increase in April, that the disease is most prevalent during May, June and July, and that the months of minimum prevalence are December, January and February. He states that this seasonal incidence agrees closely with that of ordinary malarial fevers, except that it is more
?2 extended. He found that the disease attacked persons of all ages, but that children were, on the whole, more liable to be attacked than those of a more mature age. Both sexes suffer equally from the disease, and all classes are attacked by it, though, in his opinion, the mortality is greater among the poorer classes. He had reason to believe that opium- eaters did not suffer so much from the disease as those who were not addicted to that habit. 5. He found that the principal symptoms of the disease were the following: (a) Fever is the most constant feature of the disease, and is of an intermittent or irregularly remittent type. The fever usually relapses several times during the course of the illness, and a marked characteristic of it is that, after two or three attacks, the patient is often not aware that he is suffering from fever, though his temperature may be as high as 103. (b) The spleen is enlarged in every well-defined case of kla-azr, and in most cases it is very much enlarged. (c) The liver was found to be enlarged in 93 per cent. of 70 cases examined, and in about one-quarter of the cases the enlargement was very great. (d) Anmia, as shown by the pallor of the conjunctiva, was present in 93 per cent. of the cases examined, and was markedly present in 62 per cent. of the cases. (e) Dropsy was met with in about one-third of the cases. In some cases there was slight dema of the feet, and in others there was marked swelling of the lower extremities. dema of the face was found to be very rare. This is a marked contrast to the dema of anchylostomiasis, which is most frequently seen in the eye-lids and cheeks. (f) The heart was found to be smaller than normal, chiefly due to the general wasting of the body. Cardiac and venous murmurs were very rare. In anchylostomiasis hmic murmurs are frequent. (g) Changes in the nervous system are very slight. (h) Pneumonia and diarrha are frequently met with in the later stages of the disease, and often play an important part in bringing about a fatal result. These symptoms are very similar to those of chronic malarial fever, and, in order to observe cases of chronic malaria in a place in which kla-azr was not known to exist, Dr. Rogers visited Sylhet, and the Civil Surgeon of that station, after several days' search, was able to collect six well-marked cases of that disease. Dr. Rogers found that the symptoms were almost identical with those of kla-azr, but he found that in Sylhet chronic malarial fever required as many years to develop the extreme form of malarial cachexia as kla-azr produced in as many months. Dr. Rogers found that the mortality from kla-azr was very great. He was of opinion that in villages in Nowgong and Mangaldai the death-rate was over 90 per cent., and in a severe outbreak in a garden in the Nowgong district he found that 96 per cent. of those attacked died. This is a marked contrast to the mortality from anchylostomiasis, in which disease the death-rate is stated not to exceed 8 per cent. In pages 57-76 of the report he gives the notes of 12 cases of kla-azr. These notes give a clear idea of the symptoms of the disease as observed by him. Opposite page 57 there is a photograph of ten persons who were suffering from kla-azr in the Nowgong dispensary in August 1896. This photograph shows in a very graphic manner the general appearance of advanced cases of kla-azr. 6. In Section IV, Dr. Rogers compares the blood changes found in kla-azr with those observed in anchylostomiasis. As he was under the impression that the blood of healthy natives of Assam differed from the European standard, he first made experi- ments in order to find the standard of ordinary natives of the country. By a series of experiments he found that the average composition of the blood in healthy natives and in cases of kla-azr, chronic malaria, and anchylostomiasis was as under: -                  Amount of hmoglobin. Number of red corpuscles in a cubic millemetre. Hmoglobin value. Number of white corpuscles. Proportion of white to red. Specific gravity.  1 2 3  4 5 6 7 Healthy natives 62 per cent. 4,734,000 65 7,325 1 to 684 1,054 Kla-azr 3345  2,462,000 65 2,600 1  1,170 1,048 Chronic malaria 316  2,000,000 73 1,600 1  1,400 1,042 Anchylostomiasis ... 1516  1,145,000 31 5,338 1  524 1,034
?3 The averages for chronic malaria were obtained from five cases, too small a number to be of much value. As far as they go, the experiments show that the blood in chronic malaria was, on the whole, very similar to that in kla-azr, except that in chronic malaria the number of white corpuscles was very much less and the specific gravity of the blood was considerably lower than in kla-azr. The character of the blood in anchylostomiasis and in kla-azr was, however, found to be very different. The blood in anchylostomiasis was found to contain about half as much hmoglobin and half as many red corpuscles in a cubic millemetre as kla-azr blood did, and the hmoglobin value was only half that in kla-azr. On the other hand, the blood in anchylostomiasis contained twice as many white corpuscles in a cubic millemetre as kla-azr blood did. Hence Dr. Rogers formed the opinion that, by examining the blood, a diagnosis can be at once obtained between cases of kla-azr and anchylostomiasis. He observes that in anchylosiomiasis blood is sucked by worms, and all the elements of the blood are equally lost. In kla-azr, on the other hand, red corpuscles are destroyed by the plasmodia, but the other elements of the blood are not directly affected, and the colouring matter of the red corpuscles is converted into pigment, which is deposited in the spleen, liver and other organs. 7. In Section V, Dr. Rogers discusses the pathology and nature of kla-azr. In the beginning of the section he states that he was not able to devote as much time to the microscopic part of the work as he should have liked to do. It is unfortunate that he was not able to devote more time to this portion of his work, especially the bacteriological portion of it. The microscopic pathology of kla-azr was already well known, and a principal reason why the services of an expert were asked for was that, from the micros- copic examination of the blood and organs of the body, and more especially from a bacteriological examination, the nature of kla-azr might be once for all determined. Had Dr. Rogers, in addition to what he did find out, after careful examination, determined that there was no specific bacterium in kla-azr which could produce the disease, he at the same time stating the methods which he resorted to with a view to determining the presence of such bacterium, with diagrams showing the principal micro- organisms detected, and had he demonstrated that the only plasmodium found in the blood in kla-azr was identical with the plasmodium malari, which is usually believed to be the specific cause of malarial fever, diagrams of the plasmodium detected being also given, he would have succeeded in absolutely demonstrating that kla-azr was nothing more than a modified form of malarial fever. On making a microscopic examination of sections of the liver, spleen and kidneys, he found deposits of pigment distributed in a similar manner to that figured by Kelsch and Keiner in cases of chronic malaria examined in Algeria. He sent portions of the liver of five cases to Calcutta for determin- ation of the amount of iron contained in them. Unfortunately, the anchylostomiasis case was complicated with malarial fever, and three of the four kla-azr cases were complicated with anchylostomiasis. The results obtained were thus of little value, and the liver in the anchylostomiasis case was found to contain more iron than the liver of the three kla-azr cases complicated with anchylostomiasis. He states that he detected the plasmodium malari in nearly all the more advanced typical cases of kla-azr during the presence of the fever, and that the forms found included most of those figured by Italian authors as typical of quotidian fever, but he does not give diagrams of the forms determined. In the notes of the cases of kla-azr, given in pages 57 to 76, he states that the micro-organism was observed in five of the twelve cases. 8. In the second portion of Section V, Dr. Rogers states that the facts given prove incontestably that, whatever kla-azr may be, it is not anchylostomiasis, and that anchylostomiasis is not an essential factor in its production, and I quite agree with him in that opinion, He goes on to say that the facts given in the clinical and pathological portions of his report prove that kla-azr is nothing more than a very intense form of malarial fever. As the bacteriological portion of his investigation was incomplete, he, in my opinion, fails to prove that there is not something in addition in the disease, causing its characteristic spread and excessive mortality, which he has failed to discover. 9. In the first portion of Section VI, he gives an account of the ravages caused by the disease in the Golpra Kmrp and Nowgong districts, partly from the decrease in the population in affected tracts in 1891, as compared with the population when the census was taken in 1881, and partly by the decrease in the amount of land under cultivation. He also discusses the monthly mortality of the disease, which is illustrated by a chart. He remarks that the seasonal distribution was the same as in ordinary malarial fevers, except that it was a more extended one. I found that there was considerable difference in the monthly distribution of the diseases in 1896, as determined
?4 by the registered mortality in places in which kla-azr was prevalent in that year. From the statistics it appeared that kla-azr was most prevalent in May, June and April, and that February and January were the months of minimum prevalence. Only 1007 per cent. of the deaths occurred in May, the month of maximum prevalence, and as many as 733 per cent. of the deaths occurred in February, in which month fewest deaths were registered. The months of maximum mortality from fevers, other than kla-azr, were June, May and July, and fewest deaths were registered in April, September and October ; 1244 per cent. of the deaths occurred in June, in which the largest number of deaths were registered, and 717 per cent. in each of the months of April, September and October, the months of minimum prevalence. He notes that in the Nowgong district kla-azr was not most prevalent in terai lands, but in the villages on both sides of the Rullung river, and he also notes that the sanitary condition of that district, including drainage and water-supply, was certainly not worse now than it was before kla-azr made its appearance. 10. In the second portion of Section VI, Dr. Rogers has very clearly indicated the distribution of the disease, especially in the ?owgong and Darrang districts, noting that the disease has generally travelled along the principal lines of traffic. There are, how- ever, exceptions to this rule, as may be seen in the case of Silght and the villages beside it. Silght is situated on the bank of the Brahmaputra, is 32 miles from Nowgong, and is in daily communication with it, and yet the disease is only beginning to appear in Silght, though it was prevalent in the town of Nowgong in 1891. I agree with the summary of the broad facts relating to the spread of the disease given in pages 145 and 146, except that the seasonal distribution of malarial fevers and kla-azr in 1896 was not the same. In that year the mortality from kla-azr was comparatively high in the months of minimum mortality from malarial fevers. 11. The communicability of kla-azr is discussed in Section VII. The facts given in this section are very interesting, and Dr. Rogers walked hundreds of miles, in a very difficult country, in places in which the disease had recently broken out, in order to find out the circumstances under which the disease had appeared in individual villages. The facts ascertained by him tended to prove, what was already held by many medical officers who had considerable experience of the disease, that kla-azr appears to be frequently conveyed from one village to another by human intercourse. That communi- cation is frequently not readily effected is shown by portions of villages remaining un- affected for months after other portions of them have been severely affected, when all intercourse between the affected and non-affected portions of villages could not have been prevented. Silght, on the bank of the Brahmaputra, is at present only slightly affected, though Nowgong and Puranigudam, with which it is in daily direct intercourse, were severely affected in 1891. 12. In the beginning of Section VIII, on. the origin of kla-azr, Dr. Rogers states that he is of opinion that kla-azr could not have appeared in epidemic form in the Gro Hills before 1875, as up to that year the revenue had always been collected in full. He, however, states that the greater part of the country was not taken over till 1871-72, so that the revenue registers could give little information regarding the state of matters in the district as a whole previous to 1871. That the disease had committed great ravages in portions of the Gro Hills previous to 1875 is shown from what the Sanitary Commissioner states in an appendix to the Sanitary Report for 1882, that as far back as 1869 the attention of administrative officers had been directed to kla-azr, which had decimated, and, in some instances, almost depopulated, numerous villages in the district. Dr. Rogers gives no proof that the outbreak which was prevalent in 1875 was different to what was observed in 1869. Further on, in this section Dr. Rogers attempts to prove that the outbreak of Kla-azr in the Gro Hills, which appears, from informa- tion given by Colonel Maxwell as quoted in page 169 of the report, to have been very fatal in one portion of the Gro Hills soon after 1872, if not in that year, and to have been so prevalent in 1875 as to cause a deficiency of revenue in that year, was produced by malarial fever spreading by contagion from Rangpur to the Gro Hills district. Malarial fevers were very prevalent in Rangpur during the years 1872-77. From the extracts from the sanitary reports of this district, it appears that in 1873 and 1874 the fever in that district was of the character usually seen in severe outbreaks of malarial fever, the majority of the population (in 1874, 80 per cent. of them) having been prostrated by the disease. This is very different to the incidence of kla-azr as seen in Nowgong and Mangaldai, where the inhabitants of many villages remained in a normal state of health long after the disease was very prevalent in neighbouring villages. In 1875, the fever mortality in Rangpur was about the same as it was in 1874, but the remittent type of the disease seems to have been more prevalent than it was in the previous year. The fever mortality in that district was very high in 1876 and 1877, and began to fall in 1878. No one seems to have questioned that this prolonged
?5 excessive mortality in Rangpur was due to ordinary malarial fever of a severe type, and was ascribed to scantiness of rain and excessive heat, which intensified and concentrated the marsh poison. As the mortality from kla-azr in the Gro Hills was sufficiently great t? produce a reduction of revenue in 1875, the disease was probably prevalent in 1874, and, from what Colonel Maxwell says, was possibly very fatal in certain places in 1872. 1 cannot, therefore, see how this outbreak of a type of fever, the symptoms of which are so characteristic that, when several cases occur in a village, the ordinary native at once recognizes them as kla-azr and as quite different to ordinary malarial fever, could have been caused by persons crossing the Brahmaputra from Rangpur to the Gro Hills, suffering from a fever which, up to 1874 at any rate, was ordinary malarial fever, and which appears never to have been considered by medical officers in Bengal to have differed in any respect from severe outbreaks of ordinary malarial fever. 13. In pages 182 to 192 of the report, Dr. Rogers gives the resemblances between Burdwan fever and kla-azr. The distribution of the two diseases seems to have been in many respects similar, but the character of Burdwan fever appears to have been very different from that of kla-azr. Many cases of Burdwan fever suffered from severe head symptoms, which are not seen in kla-azr and death in those cases often occurred after an illness of from three to ten days. Kla-azr is essentially a chronic disease, and death rarely occurs under a period of two months. 14. In Section IX, while discussing the communicability of malarial fever, Dr. Rogers quotes as an analogous case the outbreak of fever in the Mauritius in 1865. It is certainly the case that a very severe outbreak of what was generally believed to be malarial fever occurred in Mauritius in that year, and that some poeple were of opinion that the disease was introduced by coolies from India. In order to show that there is nothing inherently improbable in the view that the poison of malarial fever may become so intensified as to become communicable, he brings forward the fact that pathogenic bacteria can be artificially intensified, and he notes that some persons are of opinion that pneumonia, and perhaps the plague, may have two types, a contagious and non-contagious one. These diseases are believed to depend on the presence of vegetable micro-organisms, and, therefore, it is scarcely logical to draw any analogy between them and malarial fever, which is supposed to be caused by an animal micro-organism. 15. In Section X, Dr. Rogers makes certain recommendations, which, if carried out, he believes, would put a stop to kla-azr in affected places, and would prevent the disease spreading to places in which it has not appeared up to date. The recommenda tions are the following: (a) In affected tracts of country, he recommends that the people of affected villages should be encouraged to remove their houses from affected to new sites, which need not be more than 200 yards from the old ones, during the cold weather months, when the disease is at a minimum. To encourage them to do this, he recommends that they should be obliged to pay rent for only one site for the year during which the change is made. As the sites of villages, which have been in existence for some time, are usually in a very insanitary condition, this recommendation might, when practicable, be carried out. Too much should not, however, be expected from the change, as Dr. Rogers has shown that kla-azr frequently breaks out in previously-unaffected villages when single cases of kla-azr take up their residence in them, and the inhabitants of affect- ed villages, when they make the change, must take their sick along with them. Though the mortality from kla-azr is at a minimum during the cold-weather months, the death-rate even then is very little below the average of the year. In 1896, 23.21 per cent. of the kla-azr deaths occurred during the months of December, January and February. (b) He recommends that means should be taken to prevent the entry into tracts, not affected with the disease, of persons suffering from the kla-azr, and with a view to giving effect to this proposal, he suggests that the provision of the lately-passed Epidemic Diseases Act, which renders this action possible, should be put in force. It is certainly the case that kla-azr has usually been checked when it reaches a broad belt of uninhabited country, and there have been many examples of outbreaks of the disease in villages soon after the arrival in them of persons suffering from kla-azr, but as, in order to be
?6 effectual, the provision would have to be in force for a considerable time, and as even medical men can with difficulty recognise single cases of the disease, I am very doubtful whether the provision of the Epidemic Diseases Act referred to should be put in force for this purpose. The inhabitants of non-affected villages might, however, be encouraged to prevent people, believed to be suffering from the disease, visiting their villages. (c) Appendix II attached to this report is a note on the spread of kla-azr and how it may be checked. Dr. Rogers recommends that this note should be translated into the languages of the inhabitants of the Upper Assam Valley, and distributed gratis to the heads of villages in both the affected and threatened tracts of country. I strongly recommend that this suggestion be given effect to. 16. I agree with Dr. Rogers that the heading of anchylostomiasis should be omitted from the return of deaths. Deaths from kla-azr should, however, be given in a separate column from "Fevers." I also agree with him that heading "Beri-beri of Ceylon" should be omitted, but deaths from anmia should be returned as a sub-head under "All other causes." 17. Towards the end of this section, Dr. Rogers gives the measures which, in his opinion, should be taken on affected tea gardens in order to put a stop to outbreaks of the disease. The measures are, in my opinion, very suitable, and I recommend that they be given effect to. 18. Surgeon-Captain Rogers was engaged for upwards of twelve months in investi- gating the cause, spread, treatment, and prevention of kla-azr, and the result of his work is given in the accompanying full report on the disease. He showed great enthusiasm in the investigation of the subject, sparing no trouble in determining the actual state of matters for himself, often walking 20 to 30 miles a day in very difficult and unhealthy tracts of country, in order to examine the sick in affected villages and to find out, if possible, on the spot how different villages became affected. During his investigation he was able to prove that kla-azr was quite distinct from anchylostomiasis, thus confirming the opinion held on this subject by almost all medical officers in Assam. He also showed that kla-azr was very closely allied to malarial fever, but, by not making a systematic bacteriological investigation into the pathology of the disease, giving diagrams of the results obtained, he failed to prove whether kla-azr was, or was not, identical with malarial fever. He also, in my opinion, failed to prove that kla-azr was carried by human intercourse from Rangpur to Assam, and that it arose from an intensification of the ordinary malarial fever of that district. The measures which he has recommended for cutting short the disease in affected villages and for preventing its spread into tracts which have up to date been free from the disease, are to the point, and, when practicable, they should, in my opinion, be carried out. Surgeon-Captain Rogers is, in my opinion, entitled to much credit for the enthusiastic and painstaking manner in which he has carried out this important investigation, and for the able and interesting report which he has submitted. A. S. P. O. (Genl.) No. 212-100-3-8-97.
