ARMY REGULATIONS, INDIA. REGULATIONS FOR THE MEDICAL SERVICES OF THE ARMY IN INDIA 1930. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74905176.tif] CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1930 Price Re 1-2 or 2s
IP/FA,43. Vol. VI 3727430
ARMY REGULATIONS, INDIA. REGULATIONS FOR THE MEDICAL SERVICES OF THE ARMY IN INDIA 1930. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74905188.tif] CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1930 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74905188.tif]
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 3 Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents:Register of corrections. Year. Number and Month. Initials of person by whom corrected and date of correction. Year. Number and Month. Initials of person by whom corrected and date of correction. ( iii )
Register of corrections. Year. Number and Month. Initials of person by whom corrected and date of correction. Year. Number and Month. Initials of person by whom corrected and date of correction. ( iv )
PREFACE. This volume contains the orders of the Government of India on military medical and sanitary matters. The book has been rewritten and this has necessitated the rearrange- ment and renumbering of paragraphs. The volume contains all corrections up to 1st September 1929. Officers are expected to interpret the regulations contained in the volume reasonably and intelligently, with due regard to the interests of the service, as it is not possible to pres- -cribe for necessary and self-evident exceptions, nor for matters of detail which must be left to the discretion of local authorities. G. R. F. TOTTENHAM, Offg. Secretary to the Government of India, Army Department. SIMLA, The 9th September 1929. ( v
DEFINITIONS. Extras.ABBREVIATIONS. A. B. Army Book. A. D. Corps Army Dental Corps. A.D.H. & P. Assistant Director of Hygiene and Pathology. A.D.P. Assistant Director of Pathology. A.D.M.S. Assistant Director of Medical Services. A.F. Army Form. A. G. Adjutant General in India. A.H.Q. Army Head Quarters. A. M. S. Regs. Regulations for the Medical Services of the Army. Appx. Appendix. B.O. British Officer. B.O.R. British Other Rank. B.M.H. British Military Hospital. C. S. Regs. Civil Service Regulations. C.-in-C. H. E. the Commander-in-Chief in India. Coy. Company. C.M.A. Controller of Military Accounts. C.R.I. Central Research Institute. D.A.D.H. Deputy Assistant Director of Hygiene. D.A.D.P. Deputy Assistant Director of Pathology. D.A.D.M.S. Deputy Assistant Director of Medical Services. D.D.M.S. Deputy Director of Medical Services. D.G., A.M.S. Director General, Army Medical Service. D.G., I.M.S. Director General, Indian Medical Service. D.H. and P. Director of Hygiene and Pathology. D.M.S. Director of Medical Services in India.. D.P.H. Diploma of Public Health. E. R. India Equipment Regulations, India. G.O.C. General Officer Commanding. G.O.C.-in-C. General Officer Commanding-in-Chief. H.Q. Head Quarters. I.A.D.S. Inspector of Army Dental Services. I.A.F. India Army Form. I. A.O.C. Indian Army Ordnance Corps. I.A.S.C. Indian Army Service Corps. I. H. C. Indian Hospital Corps. I.M.D. Indian Medical Department. ( vii )
I.M.N.S. Indian Military Nursing Service. I.M.S. Indian Medical Service. I.O. Indian Officer. I.O.D. Indian Ordnance Department. I.O.R. Indian Other Rank. I.M.H. Indian Military Hospital. K.R. King's Regulations. m. c. Medical Certificate. M.E.S. Military Engineering Services. M.M.S. Military. Medical Services. M.N.S. Military Nursing Services. M.O. Medical Officer. N.C.O. Non Commissioned Officer. N.Y.D. Not Yet Diagnosed. O.C. Officer Commanding. p.a. Private Affairs. Para. Paragraph. P. & A. Regs. Pay and Allowance Regulations. P.U.O. Pyrexia of Uncertain Origin. P.V.M.S. Priced Vocabulary of Medical Stores. P.W.D. Public Works Department. Q.A.M.N.S.I. Queen Alexandra's Military Nursing Service for India. Q.A.I.M.N.S. Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service. R.A.F. Royal Air Force. R.A.F.M. S. Royal Air Foroe Medical Service. R.A.M.C. Royal Army Medical Corps. S.A.S. Sub-Assistant Surgeon. S.M.O. Senior Medical Officer. S. of S. Secretary of State for India. T.A.B. Typhoid and Para-Typhoid A. and B. Vaccines. T.F. Territorial Force. U.K. United Kingdom. I.U.L. Indian Unattached List. W.O. Warrant Officer. ( viii )
CONTENTS. PAGES. Section IAPPENDICES. PAGES. Appendix I.PAGES. Appendix XXI.REGULATIONS FOR THE MEDICAL SERVICES OF THE ARMY IN INDIA. SECTION I.Paras. 4-7 Military Medical Servces. Officers approved as specialists are posted by the C.-in-C. as re- quired to fill vacancies: the location of specialist officers in the command is determined by the G.O.C.-in-Chief Command. 4. Tour of service.Military Medical Services. Paras. 8-14. as such is responsible for the administration and technical training of R.A.M.C. and A.D. Corps other ranks, as laid down in Standing Orders for the R.A.M.C., R.A.M.C. (T.A.) and A.D. Corps. 8. Company officer No. 31 Coy. R.A.M.C.Paras. 15-19. Military Medical Services. his commission and of his promotion to higher ranks will appear in theGazette of India. 15. The Royal Warrant.Military Medical Services. Paras. 20-22. 20. Exchange between I.M.S. and R.A.M.C. officers.Paras. 23-24. Military Medical Services. 23. Effect of promotions during the Great War.Military Medical Services. Paras. 25-29. in which case they will be eligible for further promotion on the civil side, and will continue to belong to the war reserve, provided that they do not hold residuary appoint- ments; also they will be eligible to receive promotion in military rank, as at present, on the basis of the civil administrative posts which they hold; (5) An officer who desires permanent civil employment, but does not succeed in obtaining it, will be guaranteed employ- ment in the military medical services, unless he is unfit for active service, or there is some other equally valid impediment to his being employed on military duties. 25.Special promotions.Paras. 30-36. Military Medical Services. Such extensions will only be granted provided an officer is physi- cally fit and is reported to be efficient. 30. Liability to recall.Military Medical Services. Paras. 37-42. (ii) Members of the Queen Alexandra's Military Nursing Service for India who have elected to serve under their existing conditions of service. The members of the above services are employed in military hospitals for British troops and their families. (iii) Members of the Indian Military Nursing Service. This service is employed in military hospitals for Indian troops. 37. Tour of service of lady nurses in commands.Paras. 43-50. Military Medical Services. 43. Furlough and leave.Military Medical Services. Paras. 51-51A. A lady nurse will be permitted to re-engage for further terms of 3 years service or until reaching the age of 55 years, provided that she is pronounced by a medical board to be physically fit for further service and is reported on satisfactorily at the end of each term and subject to her re-engagement being finally approved by the Govern- ment of India. 51. Retirement.Paras. 52-58. Military Medical Services. When privilege leave is due, the period of such leave will be in- cluded in the period of leave shown in the above table. NOTE I.Military Medical Services. Para. 59. Candidates must be Europeans or members of Domiciled Com- munity. NOTE.Paras, 59A-59B. Military Medical Services. Military S.A.Ss. employed in civil appointments will be super- numerary to the establishment shown under(a) and (b) and will be seconded; they will not be transferred to military duty unless their services are required by the C.-in-C. or unless their services are no longer required by the departments employing them. NOTE.Military Medical Services. Paras. 60-63. NOTE (i).Military Medical Services. Paras. 64-71. 64. Re-examination of a Sub-Assistant Surgeon restored to his former class after removal from that class.Military Medical Services. Paras. 72-74. service, but the rates of pay will in no case be less than their civil pay. While drawing rates of pay not in excess of those admissible to military S.A.Ss. of the same grade, they shall be granted both compensation for dearness of food and clothing allowance under the rules applicable to the latter. Examinations passed while in military employ will not absolve them from passing the tests to which they are ordinarily subject, unless it is certified that the tests are equi- valent. 72. Retirement and half pay.Military Medical Services. Paras. 75-79. 75. Tour of service in commands.Military Medical Services. Para. 80. (iv) Leave on ¾ salary (pay of grade and compensation for quarters when the individual elects not to retain his quarters) for 12 months (or 18 months if invalided on account of active service or exceptional work) whether on p.a. or m.c. for each five years' service by the district commander. (v) Leave on full pay for three months by the brigade or brigade area commander in lieu of the sixty days mentioned in (ii) above, when ordered for duty with troops in Chitral, before proceeding to Chitral and a similar period on return to the normal station. During service in Chitral, leave on ¾ salary may be given in special circumstances, on medical grounds or private affairs by the district Commander. Any leave taken in excess of the above will not count towards promotion or pension. NOTE 1.Paras. 81-84. Military Medical Services. 81. Organization.Military Medical Services. Paras. 85-86. 85. PromotionsParas. 87-91. Military Medical Services. (except sweepers) other than those extensively enlisted for the com- batant ranks of the Indian army. Not less than 50 per cent. will be Hindus of which 30 per cent. will be Hindus of classes from which all other Hindus will accept water. Castes of recruits for the nursing section will be the same as those enlisted for the combatant ranks of the Indian army including Gurkhas. 87. Retention in the Corps.Military Medical Services. Paras. 92-95. Except casual leave which may be granted to all ranks by the officer under whom they are serving, all applications for furlough or leave must be submitted for disposal to the O.C. company con- cerned. 92. Corps Records.Paras. 96-98. Duties of the Military Medical Services. SECTION II.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 99-104. 99. Private practice.Paras. 105-8. Duties of the Military Medical Services. In all departmental matters relating to the R.A.M.C. and A.D. Corps and Q.A.I.M.N.S. he is subject to the authority of the D.G., A.M.S. He will refer departmental matters relating to the I.M.S. and I.M.D. to the D.G., I.M.S. See also Appendix XXIX, Regula- tions for the Army in India. Duties of Deputy Directors of Medical Services, Commands. 105. General.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 109-12. (3) Submisson of I.A.F. M-1194. (4) Holding of a medical board on all men reported as perma- nently unfit for general service, with a view to deter- mining whether they should be invalided, or retained as fit for garrison duty in India. (b ) He will arrange that officers of the Medical Services with Indian experience give lectures on the preservation of health to all officers and men of newly arrived units and drafts. 109. Military Engineering Services necessary on hygienic grounds.Paras. 112-16. Duties of the Military Medical Services. as to their condition. Unless the examination shows the dressings to be in a bad or doubtful condition it will not be necessary to open more than one sealed tin, which should be an old one. The tin, if the dressings are found serviceable, will be resealed. (iv) He will ensure that officers of the R.A.M.C. and I.M.S. and members of the I.M.D. are trained in the use of Roger's cholera outfit and Horrock's water-testing apparatus. (v) At places where medical arrangements connected with embar- kation and disembarkation of troops exist he will inspect them once a year, in consultation with the Embarkation Commandant except at ports where there is a D.A.D.M.S. (D. & E.). (vi) He is responsible for the medical arrangements of troops moving by rail, road or river, within the area under his medical administration. Duties of Deputy Assistant Directors of Medical Services, commands and districts. 113. D.A.D.M.S. Command.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 117-21. (ii) When handing over his duties he will ensure that the inco- ming officer is put in possession of the details of such medical problems and works in progress as affect the health of the troops in the station as a whole. (iii) The senior executive officer R.A.M.C. or I.M.S. at the headquarters station of a district or independent brigade to which an A.D.M.S. is appointed will be instructed in the routine duties of the A.D.M.S., in order that he may be able to carry on these duties during the absence of the latter from his headquarters. 117. Health officers of Cantonments.Paras. 122-33. Duties of the Military Medical Services. 122. Inspections.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 134-37. 134. Annual Report.Paras. 138-44. Duties of the Military Medical Services. Duties of executive officers of the Military Medical Services. Duties of the officer commanding a military hospital. 138. General duties.Duties of the Military Medical Service. Paras. 145-52. 145. X-ray apparatus.Paras. 153-58. Duties of the Military Medical Services. 153. Admissions and discharges to be notified to O.C. units.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 159-66. notification will be sent to the O.C. unit concerned and daily progress reports will be submitted. (Vide I.A.F. Z-2000 and Appendix XI of these regulations.) 159. Soldiers admitted for injuries.Paras.167-71. Duties of the Military Medical Services. usually supplied from the public store and are ordered for those allowed medical attendance in the station are available and supplied from the dispensary of the hospital. He will also be responsible that the outdoor prescriptions as copied into I.A.F. Z-2068 agree with the prescriptions filed by the dispenser. He will arrange for the dispensing of prescriptions and the issue of medicines, etc., at fixed hours to suit the convenience of those concerned. In cases of urgency medicines, etc., will be supplied at any time, in such cases the prescriptions must be marked "urgent". by the officer prescrib- ing the medicines. 167. Patients' diets and extras.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 172-78. 172. Cash payments to soldiers in hospitals.Paras. 179-84. Duties of the Military Medical Services. 179. Responsibilities for ward management.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 185-94. 185 Injuries.Paras. 195-203. Duties of the Military Medical Services. They will report to the O.C. any defects in cooking, quantity or quality of diets and extras. 195. Prescriptions.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 204-08. Duties of officers in medical charge of troops. 204. Appointment.Paras. 209-13. Duties of the Military Medical Services. 209. Transfer of sick to hospital.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Parkas. 214-18. (iv) He will examine men for transfer to the Reserve. (a) British troops.Paras. 219-23. Duties of the Military Medical Services. charge will report verbally to the O.C. the unit concerned any defects, noticed, and will make necessary recommendations for remedying them. The hygienic defects found and the recommendations made to the O.C. will also be recorded in a sanitary diary (A.B.-39), which will be submitted to the O.C. hospital and passed to the 0.C. unit concerned who after recording in it the action taken will return it to the officer in medical charge. N.B.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 224-29. 224. Copies of recommendations.Paras. 230-31. Duties of the Military Medical Services. He will be guided in the performance of his duties by the regula- tions contained in paras. 207 to 227. At stations where the services of a Civil Surgeon are not avail- able, the duty of examining proposers for the Postal Life Insurance will be performed, free of charge, by the Staff Surgeon or the medical officer performing the duties of the Staff Surgeon. Duties of Recruiting medical officers. 230.Recruiting medical officers are appointed at certain stations to examine recruits as to their physical fitness for the Indian army. They will perform these duties in addition to their normal duties. They will be guided in their examination by rules contained in " Ins- tructions for the physical examination of recruits for the Indian army " issued by A.H.Q. from time to time. Records.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 232-34. Officers appointed to the charge of cantonment hospitals or dispen- saries. 232. Appointment and duties.Paras. 235-36. Duties of the Military Medical Services. (ii) He will be responsible to the 0.C. the hospital that the duties are conducted in accordance with routine orders and that discipline and regularity is maintained. NOTE -In hospitals where members of the military nursing services are employed he will in no way be relieved of full responsibility for discipline but will be careful, in carrying out these duties not to interfere with those assigned to the matron and nursing. establishment. 235. Assistant and sub-assistant surgeons " doing duty."-A member of the I.M.D. will be placed in sub-charge of a ward or wards- or of special departments of the hospital and will carry out the orders- of the officer in charge of the ward for the treatment, dieting, etc. of the patients. He is responsible to the officer in charge of the ward:- (i) for the general cleanliness and condition thereof. (ii) that the ward and the patients are in readiness for the medical officer's daily visit. (iii) that the personnel detailed for duty in his ward or depart. ment perform their duties efficiently. (iv) for the discipline of patients and personnel. He will report without delay to the orderly officer of the hospital all cases of serious illness. He will be responsible to the officer in charge of the ward or de- partment for the maintenance of all equipment and stores, medicines, dressings, etc., on charge of or in use in his ward and will report imme- diately any loss or damage. He will see that patients are properly and cleanly clothed and will be responsible for any clothing on charge in his ward, He will be responsible that no patient is in possession of any un- authorised articles of clothing, etc., or of any unauthorised money or valuables. (See para. 437, Regulations for the Army in India.) He will be responsible for the hospital clothing and the disposal of the regimental clothing of any patient too ill to look after his- clothing himself. 236. Orderly assistant or sub-assistant surgeon, British or Indian military hospitals.(i) The O.C. hospital will detail a member of the I.M.D. for orderly duty. The tour of duty will be 24 hours. The orderly assistant or sub-assistant surgeon will be available for duty both day and night and will not leave the precincts of the hospital during his tour of duty. (ii) He will be present at the morning and evening roll call, and will see the I.H.C. personnel detailed to their respective duties. He will make a tour of the hospital kitchens and precincts of the- hospital during his tour of duty. (iii) He will visit the wards at intervals after hospital hours, and see all detained patients and those seriously ill. He will immediately report to the orderly officer cases of death and any emergency with which he cannot himself deal. 48
Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 237-400. (iv) He will perform all necessary and urgent duties towards the sick in hospital during the absence of a medical officer or manters of the I.M.D. in sub-charge of-wards. He will see and deal with fresh cases reporting for admission to hospital. (v) He will parade and see all discharged patients prior to their leaving the hospital. (vi) He will in the absence of an officer or the senior member of the I.M.D. in sub-charge of the hospital be responsible that the hospital duties are carried out in accordance with routine orders and that discipline and regularity are maintained. (vii) On the completion of his tour of duty he will report in writ- ing to the 0.C. that he has performed his duties and will record any unusual occurrence, vide I.A.F. M-1200. 4. DUTIES OF THE MILITARY NURSING SERVICES. 237. Status.-In the absence of the officer in charge of a ward or of the orderly officer, the assistant surgeon or sub-assistant surgeon in sub-charge of the ward or the member of the I.M.D. on orderly duty is in charge of the patients. Lady nurses are in these circum- stances required to carry out the treatment prescribed. Members of the I.M.D. will not interfere in the actual nursing of patients. N.C.Os. and men of the R.A.M.C. and personnel of the I.H.C. will carry out the orders of the military nursing services in connec- tion with the nursing of patients. Q.A.I.M.N.S. and Q.A.M.N.S.I. 238. General duties.-Lady nurses will perform nursing duties in hospitals for British troops and their families, and such nursing. supervision in hospitals for Indian troops as may be directed. 239. Duty at outstations.-When considered necessary by the- local administrative officer of the medical services, lady nurses may be sent temporarily to any station where their services may be re- quired, provided no extra expense to the State is incurred on account of accommodation. The necessity for such duty at an outstation will be carefully scrutinised in order to avoid the depletion of the nursing services in the stations where they are generally more use- fully concentrated. They will not be detailed for such duty singly. They are not available for nursing members of officers' families in quarters (vide para. 431, Regulations for the Army in India). 240. Chief Principal Matron or Chief Lady Superinterdent.Will be responsible for keeping the service records and confidential reports of members of the M.N.S She will, by frequent inspections, keep herself acquainted with the administration of the nursing services in the various hospitals, British and Indian. She will be responsible that adequate arrangements are made- for the leave of the members of the M.N.S. 49
Paras. 241-46. Duties of the Military Medical Services. She will perform such other duties as may be from time to time allotted to her. 241. Principal matrons or Lady Superintendents.-Principal mat- rons or Lady superintendents are nominated to circles by the D.M.S. in India. They will inspect all the hospitals where military nurses are em- ployed in their respective circles at least twice in the year. They will submit a monthly report to the Chief Principal Matron or Chief Lady Superintendent keeping her informed of all nursing details. Any matter in connection with the Military Nursing Ser- vices or with the state of nursing in military hospitals, regarding which a principal matron considers that official action should be taken, should be brought to notice through the usual official channel. They will keep records of all nurses employed in their circles, and advise the D.D.M.S. and A.D.M.S. on all matters connected with the nursing staff. The principal matron or matron in a station may also visit the I.M.H. in which no lady nurses are employed to advise the O.C. on matters affecting the nursing of patients. Matrons or Senior Nursing Sisters. 242. Responsibilities.-The matron or senior nursing sister will be responsible to the O.C. hospital:- (i) for the general nursing arrangements of the hospital including the family hospital where such exists; (ii) for the performance of their duties and for the maintenance of good conduct, efficiency, and discipline amongst the lady nurses of the nursing establishment; (iii) for the cleanliness and good order of the wards under the charge of lady nurses. She will not be responsible for nursing in wards in which lady nurses are not employed. 243. Training in nursing duties.-She will supervise the train- ing of N.C.Os. and men of the R.A.M.C. and regimental nursing order- lies from units in nursing duties, and will countersign R.A.M.C. Form 22. 244. Reference to officer commanding.-In all cases of doubt or difficulty she will apply to the O.C. hospital who will render her every assistance in the performance of her duties. 245. Report to officer commanding.-When any neglect of duty or impropriety of conduct on the part of lady nurses, other nursing staff, patients, or visitors, come to her notice, she will report to the O.C. hospital. 246. Confidential reports.-The matron will initiate the annual confidential reports on all lady nurses serving under her (Appendix XI), and forward them to the officer commanding the hospital for disposal. 50
Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 247-54. 247. Leave.Paras. 255-62. Duties of the Military Medical Services. The Indian Military Nursing Service. 255. Matrons, sisters and staff nurses.Duties of the Military Medical Services. Paras. 263-65. 263. Ambulance section.Paras. 266-66A. Medical attendance. SECTION III.Medical attendance. Para. 267 military specialist medical officer to attend the patient. When so cal- led in, the specialist will be entitled to fees at the following rates:Para. 267. Medical attendance. Authorised medical attendants for entitled personsMedical attendance. Paras. 268-71. NOTE I.Para. 271. Medical attendance. Medical attendanceMedical attendance. Para 271. geons In military em- ployment; British warrant officers of the R.A.M.C., R.A.O.C., A.D. Corps, I.C.C. (British Wing), I.A.S.C., I.A.O.C., and Barrack Department (excluding those employed as clerks); all British warrant officers, non-commissioned officers and men (of Corps, Departments, Units, etc.) employed as technical clerks at Army Headquarters; British warrant officers serving with corps of sappers and miners; British warrant officers of the R.A.F. on active duty with their units; all non-depart- mental unattached list ranks employed as follows:Para. 271. Medical attendance. Medical attendanceMedical attedance. Para 271. dents at Army and R. A. F. Headquarters, warrant officers, non-commissioned officers and men in other than purely regimental employ including those employed in M. E. Services (warrant and non-commis- sioned officers only), at Army and R A. F. Head- quarters (whether perma- nently, or on probation until assumption of civilian status, but not as technic- al clerks), the R. I. M. (warrant officers only), the Public Works and Tele- graph Departments, but excluding those referred to in class "B (i)"; N.C.Os. and Airmen of the R.A.F. In India in employment other than with their own units. F. Families of the classes specifi- ed in class E above. At their quarters or in a military hospital into which they may be admitted if accom- modation is available and the medical atten- dant recommends this course. Yes. No. Yes. No. No. No. G. (i) Army schoolmasters and schoolmistresses and their familles. Ditto Yes. No. Yes. No. Yes. No. 61
Para 271. Medical attendance. Medical attendanceMedical attendance. Para. 271. J. Europeans unconnected with the Army if residing in a military station and with the approval of the O. C. station. In a military hospital only. Yes. No. Yes. No. No. No. K. Non-commissioned officers and men in purely regi- mental employ and those belonging to R. A. M. C., R. A. O. C., A. D. Corps, I. A. S. C., I. A. O. C., I. C. C.,(B. W.) and Barrack Department but excluding those employed as clerks; non-commissioned officers and airmen of the R. A. F. in active employment with their units. Ditto Yes. No. Yes. No. Yes. No. L. Families of the above classes (K). In a military hospital or at their quarters, the latter only when accom- modation in a mili- tary hospital is not available. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. M. (i) Military officers (includ- ing departmental officers) on the active list in civil employ. Officers of non- Asiatic domicile belonging to Superior Services in the Cantonments De- partment. At their quarters only No. No. No. No. No. No. 63
Para. 271 Medical attendance. Medical attendanceMedical attendance. Para, 271. ing military men who on completion of a probationary perio d, and if approved for permanent retention, assume civilian status) and R. A. F. Head- quarters in India and that of Command, Dis- trict, Brigade or Station Staff Offices and their families when] not stationed in a Pre- sidency town. (iv) Miscellaneous establish- ments attached to the different departments (I. A. S. C., I. A. O. C., M. E. S. Medical, etc.) of the Army including civilian clerks of these departments; and clerks of the I. C. C. (Indian wing). (Civi- lian clerks of these departments, however, are not entitled to gratuitous medical attendance when stationed in a Presi- dency town.) At their quarters only. No. No. No. No. No. No. (v) Families of retired British officers and British other ranks (pensioned direct from the military service of the Government of India) including retired departmental officers and warrant officers if not employed by or in receipt of a pension or gratuity from the civil department. Ditto. No. No. No. No. No. No. 65
Para 271. Medical attendance. Medical attendanceMedical attendance. Para. 271. N. Indian officers and other ranks (including Indian officers holding Honorary King's Commissions as well as sub-assistant surgeons) on the active list in mili- tary and R. A. F. employ; Indian officers and other ranks of the Indian State Forces when attached to the Army; Indian officers and other ranks of the Indian Territorial Forces when embodied or under training; permanent re- cruiters. In a military hospital Yes. No. Yes No. No. No. O. Families of Indian officers and other ranks (including sub- assistant surgeons) on the active list in military and R. A. F. employ borne on the married roll and present with their units. At their quarters No. No. No. No. No. No. P. Regimental and departmental followers, classes I and II, and non-enlisted inferior servants in Military employ. In a military hospital Yes. No. Yes. No. No. No. 87
Paras. 272-74. Medical attendance. 272. The term "military employ" is held to include employment in a bona fide military office, e.g., Army department, army head- quarters, command, district, brigade or station staff offices, etc. 273. When a military officer (including a departmental officer employed otherwise than as Superintendent and clerk at Army and R. A. F. Headquarters at Simla) is admitted into a civil hospital on account of a disabilty considered to have been contracted on duty such officer is entitled to the services of a nurse, or nurses, if the medical attendant considers their employment necessary (class A, para. 271). 274. In order to prevent the spread of infectious disease in stations where there are military hospitals, but where accommodation cannot be arranged for patients suffering from the infectious diseases noted at (a ) below, the brigade or district commander is authorised, when he considers it essential on the recommendation of the authorised medical attendant, to permit the treatment of patients of the classes mentioned at (b ) below in civil hospitals where accommodation for the treatment and segregation of such diseases is available. The cost*of treatment and maintenance will be defrayed by the State subject to the recovery, from the patient, of the usual hospital stoppages noted in P. and A. Regs., Part II. *NOTE.Medical attendance. Para. 275. 275. If serving at a station where there is no military hospital the individuals specified below (class B, para. 271) will, if the medical attendant considers admission to hospital necessary, be transferred to the nearest military hospital for treatment. If, however, the medical attendant considers such a course impracticable, he may cause the patient to be admitted to a civil hospital or to be treated in quarters, engaging such special nurse or nurses as may be considered necessary. The fees for special nurses will be those which usually obtain locally, in addition to the actual travelling expenses incurred. Whether the patient is treated in a military or civil hospital, or has special nursing provided in quarters, the authorised hospital stoppages, vide P. and A. Regs., Part II, will be recovered and credited to Government by whom the balance of the cost of the treatment will be borne. In stations where the services of a government medical officer are not available, a private practitioner's fees will also be borne by Government. British warrant officer in purely regimental employment. Assistant Surgeons in military employment. British warrant officers of the:Paras. 276-78. Medical atttendance. 276. When treated in their quarters or in a civil hospital, the indi- viduals specified below (class E, para. 271) will be allowed special nursing at rates not exceeding those at which nurses are available locally, subject to the recovery of the usual hospital stoppages. (i ) Departmental officers employed as clerks and superintendents at Army and R. A. F. Headquarters while on leave or on duty at stations other than Simla and Delhi (vide para. 278 for Simla and Delhi). (ii ) Warrant officers, non-commissioned officers and men in other than purely regimental employment including those in theMedical attendance. Paras. 279-80. plus the cost of medical comforts, after deducting there- from the following daily amount on account of each patient:Paras. 281-83. Medical atttendance. Rules regarding medical attendance on officers of the British and Indian services and members of the Military Nursing Services, when travelling on board private steamers, are contained in Passage Regula- tions, India. 281. Private treatment.Medical Examination. Paras.284-89 SECTION IV.Paras. 290-96. Medical Examination. When forwarding the report (I.A.F.M-1194) he will definitely state his concurrence or otherwise with the findings of the officer who carried out the preliminary inspection. When the whole strength of a unit or draft on disembarkation is not inspected and reported on at one time, a separate report on I.A.F.M- 1194 should be submitted in respect of each man or group of men subsequently inspected. 290. Disposal of unfits.Medical Examination. Paras.297-98 In framing these reports the following inter alia will be dealt with:Paras. 299Military Hospitals. Paras. 302-07. SECTION V.Paras. 308-10. Military Hospitals. able to the hospital establishment or to individuals will he propor- tionately assessed against the units sending sick to the hospital and published in Station Orders. Barrack damage charges debitable to individuals who are not members of the hospital establishment will be notified to Os. C. units for publication in regimental orders as "personal charges," see R. A. I., para. 404. British and Indian Military Hospitals. 308. British Military Hospitals.Military Hospitals. Paras. 311-19. 311. Classification of military hospitals.Paras. 320Military Hospitals. Para. 324. (d) BarodaParas. 325-31. Hospital Dietary. SECTION VI.Hospital Dietary. Paras. 332-34. 332. Supply of milk.Paras. 335-38. Hospital equipment. SECTION VII.Hospital equipment. Paras. 339-45. 339. Verification of stock.Paras. 346-48. Hospital equipment. Stores", which are authorised for issue to the army and in addition, sera, vaccines and small-pox vaccine lymph. 346. Supply of medical equipment.Hospital equipment. Paras. 349-55. and independent brigades for issue on loan by A. Ds. of M. S. to hospi- tals as required. Medical and surgical equipment not on charge on any particular hospital may be obtained on loan from another hospital in possession of the equipment required. 349. Instruments on loan from medical store depôts.Paras. 356-62. Hospital equipment. check each item of expenditure, satisfying himself of the necessity for the purchase before passing the bills to the audit officer concerned. 356. Unpacking medical equipment.Hospital equipment. Paras. 363-66. (c ) Unserviceable articles will be disposed of to the best advantage locally and the loss will be written-off. No such articles will be re- turned to the medical store depôt. (d ) Obsolete articles, i.e. , articles which are not stocked by medical store depôts and therefore are not included in the Priced Vocabulary of Medical Stores (India) will be disposed of under sub-para. (c ) above locally by the medical units within the limit of financial powers laid down in para. 8, Financial Regulations for the Army in India, Part I. Where necessary, the sanction of the next higher competent financial authority will be obtained. 363. Disposal of deteriorated drugs, except chloroform which will in all cases be destroyed as unfit for use.Paras. 367-73. Hospital equipments above will be furnished by each member of the I. M. D. to the O. C. unit in the field in which serving. In the event of death on field service the pocket case should be returned to the nearest advanced depôt of medical stores. 367. X-ray equipment.Hospital equipment. Paras. 374-75. Articles for which special storage arrangements may be necessary, e.g. , rubber goods, will be removed from the panniers, etc. and stored separately. 374. Removal of articles from equipment.Paras. 376-79. Hospital equipment. SUPPLY OF ARTIFICIAL LIMBS, EYES, AND SURGICAL APPLI- ANCES, EXCLUDING ARTIFICIAL DENTURES. 376. Surgical appliances may be supplied at the public expense as follows:Hospital equipment. Paras. 380-83. Only one pair of spectacles will be issued at public expense, in the first instance, but a soldier whose spectacles are broken or damaged on duty, in circumstances beyond his control may have them replaced at public expense. The following categories do not as a rule require glasses:Paras. 384-85. Hospital equipment. (b ) No simple cylindrical lens will be supplied of a less strength than 0.50 dioptre, or a greater strength than 6.00 diop- tres. (c ) No sphero-cylindrical lens will be supplied having before or after transposition:Correspondence. Paras. 386-93. SECTION VIII.Paras. 394-95. Correspondence. (d ) An additional group, " Morbid conditions due to flying " will be added; this will include the following:Corespondence. Para. 395. the following classes (except when the numbers are small, in which case one or more books will be used and divided as necessary):Para. 396. Correspondence. (d) N. Y. D. venereal .Correspondence. Paras. 397-98. N. B .Paras. 399-400. Correspondence. sheets of patients under treatment will be kept in portfolios provided for this purpose and will not be allowed to fall into the hands of patients. The first and last entries will be signed and transfers from one medical officer to another attested by their signatures. The etiology, present condition, changes in symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, etc., will be clearly and concisely recorded and in fatal cases the result of the post-mortem examination if held. The diagonsis will be in accordance with the Nomenclature of Diseases. Medical case sheets together with other clinical documents, on discharge of the case from hospital will be filed and retained in the hospital. Those of fatal cases and of special professional interest will be signed by the O. C. hospital and forwarded in original, with laboratory and other relevant reports, to the A. D. M. S. for perusal before being filed in the hospital. Medical case sheets of fatal cases of cholera, dysentery, enterica, malaria, syphilis, heatstroke or any uncommon disease will be forwarded to the D. M. S. in India through the usual channels. 399. Surgical operation book.Correspondence. Paras. 401-04. NOTE 2.Paras.405-09. Correspondence. A. F.-A-31-A will be forwarded with A. F. A-31 direct to the D. M. S. by the O.C. of every military hospital. Copies will be sent direct to the A. D. M. S. and D. D. M. S. with A. F. A-31. Nil returns are not required but a slip stating that no sick were treated in barracks will be attached to A. F. A-31. 405. Returns of sick on Boardship.Medical boards. Paras. 410-12. SECTION IX.Paras. 413-15. Medical boards. (b ) Warrant and N. C. Os. and men of British corps, proposed for change of climate, or invaliding, see A. F. B-179 (modified for India), A. F. B-3977, and Regs.for the Army in India. (c) British cases of mental disease including women and children Medical boards. Paras. 416-20. (ii) In the case of an officer who is found temporarily unfit, the president will inform the officer of the board's opinion as to the period of unfitness. (iii) In the case of an officer who is found permanently unfit, the president will inform the officer of the opinion of the board, making it clear to him that the information should not be acted upon until it is confirmed by the War Office, India Office or Army Headquarters. 416. Dates of boards on British officers, British other ranks, and the families of these and on members of Q. A. I. M. N. S. and Q. A. M. N. S. I.Paras. 421-28. Medical boards. the disability was contracted will be fully detailed and a statement of the case by his medical attendant will be attached to the proceed- ings of the board. 421. Proceedings of previous medical boards.Medical boards. Paras. 429-35. 429. Matrons military family hospitals.Paras. 436-43. Medical boards. 436. Cardiac affections.Medical boards. Paras. 444-49. not be accepted, except in the case of Gorakhpur(Karaghat), Laheria Sarai and Nepal where, if it is not possible or feasible to assemble a medical board for such purpose, the opinion of the officer commanding Indian military hospital, Karaghat or Laheria Sarai in the case of the two former and of the Legation Surgeon, Nepal, or in his absence the certificate of the military sub-assistant surgeon of the Legation hospital, Kathmandu, countersigned by the Legation Surgeon in the case of the latter, will be accepted in lieu of the opinion of such a board. 444. Procedure for invaliding.Para. 450. Mental cases. (iii) If any person residing in a Cantonment and entitled to medi- cal attendance under para. 271, shows symptoms of mental disability the authorised medical attendant will report the case at once to the O. C. station and invariably state in his report the amount of control which in his professional opinion should be exercised over the said person and whether the said person is likely to be dangerous to him- self or others. In the event of the medical attendant reporting that the person concerned should be placed under control, the O. C. station will be responsible that steps are forthwith taken to place the said person under proper and suitable control either in a military or civil hospital. If for any reason the O. C. station considers it undesirable that the said person should be placed in a military or civil hospital or if the relatives or friends of the said person object to his or her being so placed, the O. C. station will report the case at once to the civil authorities so that action may be taken under the provisions of the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912. (iv) If any person in a Cantonment not subject to the Army Act or to the Indian Army Act and not entitled to medical attendance under para. 271 shows symptoms of mental disability, the case will be dealt with by the civil authorities. 450. Procedure on admission of a case of mental disease to a mili- tary hospital.Para. 451. Mental cases. The medical board may recommend that the patientParas. 452-53. Mental cases. (f ) When a case of mental disease (soldier) is transferred or dis- charged from hospital, he will invariably be removed in the presence of a medical officer who will be responsible that he is dressed with due regard to health and comfort and will instruct the escort as to the peculiarities of the patient, particularly as. to whether he has displayed suicidal or homicidal tendencies. Whenever possible in the case of British ranks suffering from mental disease a mental nursing orderly will be detailed as one of the conducting party. (g ) Before transferring a case to a mental or other hospital it will be ascertained that accommodation is available. Disposal of cases of mental diseases. 452. General.Mental cases. Paras. 454-56. cases an order may be made for admission to the mental hospital at Lahore, Ranchi, Madras or Rangoon. However, mild cases will be sent to the B. M. H., Deolali. (iv) Officers and other ranks domiciled in U. K. who are in- valided for mental disease will be sent to the United Kingdom as soon as possible. Those admitted to asylums or mental hospitals in India under the provisions of Section 12, Indian Lunacy Act will, as soon as a passage is arranged, be handed over to the military authorities under the provision of Section 32(2), Indian Lunacy Act of 1912, on the application of the D. D. M. S. or A. D. M. S. who originally signed the reception order. Those domiciled in countries other than the U. K. will be sent to their country of domicile as soon as arrange- ments can be made. (v) In the case of officers and other ranks domiciled in India, the officer commanding station will apply to the magistrate for a recep- tion order under Section 5 of the Indian Lunacy Act of 1912. The application will be made on I. A. F. M-1245 (Form 1, Schedule 1, Indian Lunacy Act of 1912) supported by two Lunacy Certificates on I. A. F. M-1244A (Form 3, Schedule 1, Indian Lunacy Act of 1912). If the magistrate makes a reception order, steps will be taken to obtain the retirement or discharge of the lunatic, under the provisions of the Royal Warrant and the King's Regulations. When a reception order has been made by a magistrate for the reception of an individual into a mental hospital, the individual may either be handed over with the reception order to the civil autho- rities for disposal or sent under military arrangements to the asylum or mental hospital to which he is to be admitted. 454. Cases of mental disease to be invalided from the army.Paras. 457-60. Mental cases. Or (iii) in either case they may be handed over to the care of rela - tives or friends who will arrange for their disposal and take full res- ponsibility in accordance with the instructions in para. 459. If admission into a mental hospital is considered desirable in the case of persons in (i) above while awaiting passage to the country of domicile, or in (ii) above, an application for admission will be made to a Magistrate on I. A. F. M-1245 accompanied by two lunacy certi- ficates in accordance with para. 453(v). 457. Relatives to accompany mental case invalided ex -India.Dental Treatment. Paras. 461-63. SECTION X.Para. 464. Dental Treatment. Such treatment will be directed mainly towards the pre- servation of teeth and no teeth will be extracted which can usefully be saved. (ii) Families of British soldiers on the married roll and of warrant and non-commissioned officers of the Indian Unattached List in military employment .Dental Treatment. Para. 464. (i) British officers and members of the M. N. S. and B. O. Rs.Paras. 465-67. Dental Treatment. 465. Renewal of and repair to artificial dentures.Dental Treatment. Paras. 468-76. 468. Scales of charges payable by soldiers, British or Indian, for renewals or repairs to artificial dentures originally supplied under the provisions of one of the foregoing paragraphs.Paras. 476-81. Dental Treatment. condition of, and dental treatment afforded to British soldiers are contained in A. F. B-178, Tables II and VIII and in A. F. I-5033. These forms are sent to India with every British soldier arriving in the country. A. F. B-178, Table II contains a record of the dental condition of the soldier on enlistment or on first inspection by a dental officer. This record once made will not be altered. A. F. B-178, Table VIII contains a brief record of dental treatment afforded to the soldier after enlistment or first inspection. A. F. I-5033 contains a detailed record of the dental treatment afforded. In cases where either of both of these forms have been lost and in cases where the entries have not been made prior to the soldier's arrival in India, the officer in charge dental centre is responsible that, when lost, a new A. F. I-5033 is prepared, that the soldier is examined at the first available opportunity, that A. F. B-178, Table II is completed at this examination and that subsequent records of treat- ment afforded are entered in A. F. B-178, Table VIII and in A. F. I- 5033. In cases where only one form is missing or incomplete the record should be copied from one to the other. 477. Dental treatment cards (A. F. I-5033)Dental Treatment. Paras. 482-88. 482. Dental summary.Paras. 489-93. Hygiene and Pathology. SECTION XI.Hygiene and Pathology. Paras. 494-99. 494.(a ) The Military Food Laboratory, Kasauli.Paras. 500-04. Hygiene and Pathology. 500. Records of vaccination.Hygiene and Pathology. Paras. 505-09. When for exceptional reasons of military expediency it is not possible to give two doses of vaccine, the preliminary dose will provide sufficient protection for a short period. If opportunity arises re-inocu- lation will be carried out as in (a ), (b ) and (c ) above if the necessity still exists. 505. Duration of protection.Paras. 510-14. Hygiene and Pathology. The method of recording inoculations in the documents of all ranks and followers will be in accordance with the following examples:Infectious Diseases. Paras. 515-18 vaccines may be maintained. Endeavour should be made at all times by carefully spacing indents to ensure that sera and vaccines are expended as far as possible before the original date of expiry. A reserve stock of 120 c. c. of anti-meningococcic serum will be maintained for emergency use in all stations in India where troops are located. This reserve stock will be kept at one hospital only in each station and in those stations where both British and Indian military hospitals exist, the responsibility for its maintenance will rest with the Officer Commanding British military hospital. The stocks will be stored in ice chests and fresh supplies will be telegraphed for from the Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli, whenever the stock is drawn upon. Arrangements will be made by A. Ds. M. S. districts that when B. M. Hs. in hill stations are closed at the end of the hot weather any vaccines and sera remaining are sent to selected hospitals in the plains where they may be utilised as occasion arises. Special duties in connection with infectious disease. NOTIFICATION. 515. Notifiable diseases.Paras. 519-24. Infectious Diseases. 519. Outbreaks of infectious disease among troops moving or about to move.Infectious Diseases. Paras. 525-32. latter officer's command. Similarly administrative medical officers will supply G. Os. C. with all necessary information. 525. Other stations to be informed.Paras. 533-37. Infectious Diseases. officer certifies that they can do so without risk of spreading infec- tion. Schools will not, as a rule, be closed in consequence of the occurrence of cases of infectious disease, but, should the outbreak assume an epidemic form or should the medical officer, for any special reason, deem it necessary that the schools should be closed, the dis- trict or brigade commander concerned will order their closure. DISINFECTION. 533. General Instructions.Infectious Diseases. Paras. 538-41. 538. Disinfection of a room.Paras. 542Infectious Diseases. Paras. 545Paras. 548nfectious Diseases. Paras. 551Para. 554. Infectious Diseases. GROUP II. A. Plague (pneumonic) Complete disinfection. Tubercle of the lung B. Cerebro-spinal, fever Local disinfection, and In addition eating and drinking utensils, if accessible, and toys and pencils in the case of children will be dealt with. Diphtheria Encephalitis lethargica Influenza Measles Mumps Pneumonia (lobar and lobular) Polio-myelitis Rubella Scarlet fever 4 Whooping cough GROUP III. A. Small-pox Complete disinfection. B. Anthrax (cutaneous) Local disinfection. *Chicken pox Erysipelas Ophthalmia neonatorum Pink eye GROUP IV. Plague (bubonic) Disinfestation as defined in para- graph 548. Relapsing fever Trench fever Typhus fever GROUP V. Communicable skin diseases Local disinfection, but excluding the adjacent beds and their bed- ding. *During an epidemic of small-pox complete disinfection. 136
Troops Moving. Paras. 555-61. SECTION XII.aras. 562-68. Troops Moving. 562. Medical personnel.Troops Moving. Paras. 569-71. Troops moving by sea other than to and from the U. K. 569. Administration.Paras. 572-76. R. A. F. SECTION XIII.R. A. F. Paras. 577-79. 577. Admission to hospital.Paras. 579-80. R. A. P. For cases admitted during the week and transferred elsewhere for treatment, the name of the unit to which they have been transferred and the date of transfer will be inserted. In case of death, the word DIED and the date of death will be entered. (b ) The " how disposed of,"" date of discharge " and " number of days sick " columns of the stout sheet (office record) will be com- pleted when the patient is discharged. (c ) When there are no admissions during the week, " Nil " returns are to be rendered. Section IV is self-explanatory. Section II Section III Section V will not be completed. (ii) Procedure at the end of each yearR. A. F. Para. 580. history envelope) and the card will be forwarded with Form 38 at the end of the week. The number of Forms 39 forwarded each week will always agree with the number entered in line 4, Section IV of the Form 38 for the week concerned. (ii) In order to complete the statistical data for the year, Form 39 will be completed for all patients, other than 48 hours cases, (equivalent of " Detained patients ") remaining in hospital on 31st December. Therefore all such patients will have two forms 39 rendered for them, one for the period up to 31st December and the other for the remain- ing period of the disability. Form 39 for the period of sickness up to 31st December will be marked on the top and on the " date of discharge to duty " line " Remaining 31st December". On Form 39 for the further period of sickness, the card will be prominently marked at the top " Remaining from 31/12 " and the original serial number prefaced by the letter ' R' will be entered, but " The date of admission " line will read " Re-admitted 1/1 ". The " No. of days under treatment " line will shew only the period from 1st January. (iii) Method of reckoning total number of days under treat- ment:Paras. 581-84. R. A. F. 581. Form 48 (Medical History Envelope).R. A. F. Paras. 584-87. Medical boards will be held on R. A. F. personnel in the following circumstances:146 Para. 587. R. A. F. Findings of board .R. A. F. Paras. 588-89. The forms on completion will be forwarded to the P. M. O., R. A. F., who on approval, will return the hospital record copy direct to the O. C. hospital concerned. Information must be given on the board proceedings as to:Paras. 589-91. R. A. F. Controller of Military Accounts concerned. The rates fixed should be the cost price of the material used, plus freight charges and other incidental expenses, excluding the cost of dentist's time and departmental charges. (b) An airman, whose trade classification is pilot, wireless operator (mechanic), or wireless operator, or who holds the non-substantive qualification of aerial gunner, will be supplied with dentures when the dental or medical officer superintending treatment certifies that these are necessary to make the airman dentally fit, and these will be repaired at the public expense, if and when necessary. (c) An airman not below the rank of sergeant who has been sup- plied with artificial dentures at the public expense may be provided with any necessary renewals or repairs to such dentures at the public expense, but before such renewals or repairs are carried out the airman must, by a court of enquiry, be absolved from all blame or sus- picion of contributory negligence. (d) An airman who as the result of.R. A. F. Paras. 592-95. 592. Provision of dental treatment.-(i) Dental treatment of officers and airmen will be carried out by officers of the A. D. Corps whenever these are available. (ii) Army procedure will be followed. Whenever dentures are required I. A. F. (Medical) 5 will be filled in, the Principal Medical Officer, Royal Air Force in India, being the sanctioning authority. (iii) Particulars of the issue of a denture, giving number of teeth and date, will be recorded on Table VII of Form 48 by the dental officer. (iv) Before submitting any recommendation for dentures for men of low category, the officers concerned will carefully consider whether the man's services are of such value as to warrant an expenditure from public funds on artificial teeth. 593. Procedure for obtaining payment from airmen for renewals repairs not chargeable to the public.Appx. I. Appointments. APPENDIX I. APPOINTMENTS. OFFICERS. NOTE. 1.Appointments. Appx, I. 6 M.O. Lawrence Royal Military School, Sana- war. D. M. S C.-in-C. India Amy I. M. S. appointment for an officer of the rank of Lieut. or Captain who must be married and a member of the Church of England. 2 Yeas. 7 Command B. M. H.Appx. I. Appointments. Item No. Appointment. Nominated by. Sanctioned by. Orders in which published. Conditions. Duration of tenure. 9 Command I. H. C. Com- pany. D. M. S. C.-in-C. Command and District. R. A. M. C. or I. M. S. appointments. A R. A. M. C. officer must have passed the qualifying test in Urdu or must pass within 6 months of appointment. 3 years extendable to 4 years. 10 Staff Surgeon, district and brigade headquarters. A. D. M. S., district or independent brigade. District or indepen- dent brigade commander. District or Brigade. R. A. M. C. or I. M. S. ap- pointment. The charge is in addition to the officer's ordinary duties. 4 years. 11 Staff Surgeon. Bangalore, Poona and Quetta. D. M. S. C.-in-C. Command and District. I. M. S. appointments for officers under the rank of Lieut.-Colonel, when promoted to this rank the officers vacate the appointments. Bangalore.Appointments. Appx. I. 14-A Officers in charge brigade laboratories. Do. Do. Do. Do. 15 Officers in medical charge troops and followers. O. C., B. M. H. or O. C., I. M. H. O. C., station Station A R. A. M. C. officer for British units including Indian troops forming part of these units and public followers attach- ed.An I.M.S. for Indian units and follow- ers. 16 Dental officer in charge Dental Centre. D. M. S. C.-in-C. Command and District. A. D. Corps appointment. Assistant Surgeons. 17 (a ) Sub-medical charge A.H.Q. establish- ments. D. M. S. C.-in-C. India Army. Perform their duties un- der the Surgeon to the C.-in-C. (a ) and (b ) 3 years. (b ) Sub- medical charge Summer Hill. 18 Sub-charge B. M. H. D. D. M. S.,com- mand, or A. D. M. S., indep indent district or bri- gade.. G. O. C.-in-C., com- mand, or indepen- dent district or brigade Com- mander. Command, Die- trict or Brigade. By selection No limit. except in the case of a permanent B. N.H. in the hills When the tenure is 2 years commencing on 1st November. 19 Sub-chargeAppx. I. Appointments. Item No. Appointment. Nominated by. Sanctioned by. Orders in which published. Conditions. Duration of tenure. 21 Sub-charge Dermatolo- gical ward. D. D. M. S., com- mand or A. D. M. S., independent district or bri- gade. G. O. C.-in-C., com- mand or indepen- dent district or brigade com- mander. Command, District or Brigade. .... 22 Sub-charge District Labo- ratory. Do. C.-in-C. Do. Only those should be em- ployed who have acquir- ed technical knowledge by attendance at some special course at a re- cognised school of ins- truction, institute or laboratory. 2 years extendable to 3 years. 23 Sub-charge Enteric Laboratory, Kasauli. D. M. S. Do. District. As in item 22 2 years extendable to 3 years. 24 Sub-medical charge for factories at Cossipore, Kirkee, Aruvankadu, Ishapore, Jubbulpore. D. D. M. S., com- mand. G. O. C.-in-C., com- mand. Command. .... 25 Medical charge Remount Depôts at Hapur, Mona, Sargodha. Do. Do. Do. .... 26 Sub-medical charge, Ca- valry school, Saugor. Do. D. D. M. S., com- mand. Do. .... 27 Attached to H. Q., North- ern and Southern Com- mands. Do. G. O. C.-in-C. command. Do. .... 28 Attahced to P. of W., Royal Indian Military College, Dehra Dun. D. M. S. C.-in-C. District .... 3 years extendable to 5 years. 154
Appointments. Appx, I. 28-A Attached to:Appx. I. Appointments. ItemNo. Appointment. Nominated by. Sanctioned by. Orders in which published. Conditions. Duration of tenure. 34 I. M. N. S. Matron D. M. S. Govt. of India Gazette of India. By selection. 35 Matron, Military Family Hospital. O. C., B. M. H. District or inde- pendent brigade commander with concurrence of D. M. S. District or Brigade Soldiers' wives or widows qualified as sick nurses and midwives (vide Ap- pendix VIII) will have preference. Indian Hospital Corps. 36 Subedar I. H. C. Jemadar O. C., I. H. C. Coy. Government of India. Gazette of India By selection. . 156
Conditions of Service of Q. A. M. N. S. I. Appx. II-A. APPENDIX II. A.Appx. II-A. Conditions of Service of Q. A. M. N. S. I. They are entitled under the above conditions to free conveyance from their station in India to their destination in the U. K. and from their residence in the U. K. to the station they are posted to on return -to India. 3. Penalties for voluntary resignation .Conditions of Service of Q. A. M. N. S. I. Appx. II. A. A lady nurse will be eligible for the full period of leave admissible under this paragraph, whether she is re-engaged for the full period of five years' service or a portion thereof, on completion of her third term of service. 9. Legal agreement.Appx. II-B. Form of Agreement. B.Form of Agreement. Appx. II-B. give that officer one clear calendar month's previous notice in writing of such desire, and in default of such notice she shall, if she quits the service, forfeit to the said Secretary of State the amount deposited by her under condition 1 above. The said deposit shall also be forfeited in the event of the party of the first part being dismissed for misconduct. 5. That if the party of the first part shall at any time hereafter quit the service within six months of receiving a uniform allowance, she shall, (unless the officer commanding the military family hospital at which she may then be serving, certifies that he is satisfied that her resignation is necessary on account of illness or unforeseen circumstances over which she had no control and excuses her from doing so) refund on demand a portion of the yearly outfit allowance issued to her, the amount to be refunded being assessed at the rate of Rs 10/5. for each month or a portion of a month by which her service in that year may fall short of six months, if she is in the first year/second or subsequent year of her service and may be deducted from the amount of the deposit made by her under clause 1 unless forfeited under clause 4 hereof or any other money due to her by the said Secretary of State. 6. That if the said Secretary of State shall at any time hereafter wish to terminate the service of the party of the first part shall be entitled to have one clear calendar month's previous notice thereof or in default of such notice she shall be entitled to one month's salary, provided nevertheless the said Secretary of State shall be entitled to dismiss the party of the first part without notice or payment in lieu thereof for misconduct (as to which the decision of the officer commanding the hospital at which she is then serving shall be final). 7. That the cost of the stamp affixed to this agreement shall be paid by the party of the first part. In witness whereof the party of the first part and the , on behalf of the said Secretary of State have hereto set their hands, the day and year written above. Signed by the party of the first part in the presence of Signed by on behalf of the Secretary of State in the presence of 161
Apps. III. Promotion Examinations I. M. D. APPENDIX III. EXAMINATIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE I.M.D. FOR PROMOTION. GENERAL. The examinations will be conducted in accordance with the rules given in Regulations for the Army in India. 1. EXAMINATION OF ASSISTANT SURGEONS OF THE I. M. D. FOR PROMOTION FROM 3RD TO 2ND CLASS. (a ) The examination will be held annually under arrangements made by the D. G., I. M. S. on the third Monday in April. Should. Easter Monday or Good Friday fall in the third week in April the examination will commence on the 1st Monday in April. (b )Subjects of Examination .Promotion Examinations I. M. D. Appx. III. held should be mentioned in the application for examination papers to ensure the papers being sent direct. Any change that may be made in the Officer Comman ding, hospital, or in the address, between the date of submission of the application and that of the examination should be notified direct to the officer to whom the application for papers was forwarded. (e ) Submission of papers.Appx. III-A. Grant of Honorary King's Commission APPENDIX III-A. RULES GOVERNING THE GRANT OF HONORARY KING'S COMMISSIONS TO MEMBERS OF THE SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEON BRANCH OF THE INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 1. The number of honorary KingGrant of Honorary KingAppx. IV-A. Study Leave I.M.S. APPENDIX IV-A. A.Study Leave I.M.S. Appx. IV-A. and, in the case of leave granted on medical certificate, provided that the Medical Board at the India Office certifies that the officer is fit for study. The total period of absence from duty will be strictly limited to the period prescribed by the Leave Rules to which an officer is subject. 7. Except as provided in Rule 8, all applications for study leave shall be submitted for approval, with the Audit OfficerApps. IV-A. Study Leave I.M.S. respect thereof, provided that study allowance is not drawn for an aggregate period exceeding 12 months during the whole of an officerStudy Leave I.M.S. Apex. IV-A. 12. On completion of a course of study, a certificate on the proper form (which may be obtained from the Office of the High Commis- sioner), together with any certificates of special study, should be forwarded to the Secretary to the High Commissioner, General Depart- ment, who will arrange for the transmission of copies of the docu- ments to the Director-General, Indian Medical Service. Officers may also be called upon to report themselves in person to the Medical Adviser to the Secretary of State, on the conclusion of their course of study. 13. Study leave will count as service for promotion and pension but not for leave. It will not affect any leave which may already be due to an officer, and will not be taken into account in reckoning the aggregate amount of leave taken by an officer towards the maxi- mum period admissible under Rule 81 of the Fundamental Rules. Regulations regarding the grant of study leave to officers of the Indian Medical Service (A )in temporary civil employ whose leave is regu- lated under military rules, (B )in military employ. The Indian Medical Service Study Leave Rules for the time being in force under Fundamental Rule 84 apply to these officers with the following modifications. The numeration of paragraphs is that of the Rules under Fundamental Rule 84. 2. The period of study leave will be calculated at the rate of one- twelfth of pension service subject to the prescribed total. 6. The total period of leave granted in the first instance (study leave combined with any other leave) will not exceed one year. 7. "Under Secretary of State, Military Department, India Office," is substituted for "Secretary to the High Commissioner for India, General Department,"wherever the expression occurs. 8. Ditto. In the case of officers in military employment the consent of the authorities in India will be necessary for the extension of leave, but not for the conversion of ordinary leave into study leave or for the issue of study leave allowance. 9. An officer who is at home on combined leave may be permitted to commence a course of study before the end of his privilege leave and to draw for such period the study allowance admissible under Rule 10 without forfeiting his privilege leave allowances. For all purposes of record and subsequent calculation of leave, the full amount of study leave taken shall in such cases be post-dated as if it had commenced at the end of the privilege leave. 11. The rate of pay admissible during study leave is the rate of leave pay admissible under the Military Leave Rules. 12. "India Office" and "Under Secretary of State, Military Department, India Office," are substituted for " Office of the High Commissioner " and " Secretary to High Commissioner, General Department." 169
Appx. IV-B. Study Leave I.M.D APPENDIX IV-B. B.Study Leave I.M.D. Appx. IV-B. may be In any case in which it is not possible for the Director- General, Indian Medical Service, to give full. details of the proposed course in the programme of study, he will instruct the Assistant .Surgeon concerned to submit full particulars of the course to the Military Department, India Office or to the Secretary to the High Commissioner. for India before he commences his study and before incurring any expense in connection therewith. 5. On the completion of a course of study in the United Kingdom, certificate on the proper form (which may be obtained from the India Office), together with any certificates of special study, should be forwarded to the Under-Secretary of State, India Office, who will arrange for the transmission of copies of the documents to the Director- General, Indian Medical Service. In the case of Assistant, Surgeons who have undergone a course of study in India, the certificates referred to above will be forwarded through the principal of the institution concerned. No certificates of study qualifying for study leave will be accepted unless approval of the course of study has been previously obtained. Study allowance may be given at the discretion of the Government of India or the India Office for any period up to fourteen days at one time during which the Assistant Surgeon is prevented by sickness duly certified by a commissioned medical officer in India or by a medical practitioner in the United Kingdom, from pursuing the sanctioned course of study. 6. Study leave allowance at the rate of 7 shillings 6 pence a day out of India and Rs. 100 a month in India is admissible during the course of study and for the period of any examination held at the end of any course. It is granted on production of the certificate required by rule 4, showing that a definite course of study at a recognised insti- tution has been pursued. The allowance is admissible up to 14 days for any period of vacation. The period for which an Assistant Surgeon interrupts his course for his own convenience is not counted as vacation. The allowance is not admissible to an Assistant Surgeon while studying for an arts examination. It is only admissible while he is undertaking study which is of a purely medical nature. 7. When an assistant surgeon has been granted a definite period of study leave and finds after arrival in the United Kingdom that his course of study will fall short of the sanctioned period to any considerable extent, his absence from India will be reduced by the excess period of study leave unless he produces the assent of the authorities in India to his taking it as ordinary furlough. 8. Study leave can be combined with any other kind of leave, provided the period admissible and occupied in study is not less than two months out of India or one month in India. The study leave should be taken at such a time as to leave at its conclusion a balance of the previously sanctioned leave sufficient to cover the return journey to India. 9. The minimum period of study, which will render an Assist- ant Surgeon eligible for study leave, will be two months out of, or 171
Appx. IV-B. Study Leave I M.D. one month in, India. The minimum period of leave granted solely as study leave will be six months out of, and six weeks in, India. Time spent on the journey to, from, and in India, by an Assistant Surgeon whose study leave is not combined. with any other kind of leave, will reckon as study leave, but the allowance specified in rule 5, will be granted during the period of actual study of medical subjects and of the examination, if any, at its conclusion. 10. Assistant Surgeons on furlough in the United Kingdom who wish to have part of their furlough converted into study leave, should address the Under-Secretary of State, India Office, and should furnish a statement detailing the proposed course of study for previous approval If an extension of furlough is required, the statement of the course of study proposed must be accompanied by documentary evidence of the approval of the authorities in India to the application for extension of furlough. 11. An Assistant Surgeon who is in the United Kingdom on com- bined leave may be permitted to commence a course of study before the end of his privilege leave and to draw for such period the allowance admissible under rule 5 without forfeiting his privilege leave allowances during such period. For all purposes of record and subsequent calculation of leave, the full amount of study leave taken shall, in such cases, be post- dated, as if it commenced at the end of the privilege leave. 12. In the case of an Assistant Surgeon retiring from, or resigning, the service without returning to duty or within one year of his return to duty, after a period of study leave, the allowance authorised in rule 5 will be forfeited. 13. The rates of pay admissible to Assistant Surgeons while on study leave will be as follows:Leave applications, etc. Appx. V. APPENDIX V. SPECIAL RULES GOVERNING FURLOUGH AND LEAVE AND APPLICATIONS FOR SUCH. 1. The rules governing leave of the personnel of the M. M. S. are detailed in column 2 of the table to this Appendix. 2. Applications will be submitted on the following forms:Appx. V. Leave, applications, etc. Table showing the rules under which leave is granted and the sanctioning authorities for leave for various classes. Application from. Leave rules. Authority for sanctioning leave ex- India. Authority for sanctioning leave in India. Authority for sanctioning privilege leave (or full pay leave for Sub-Assistant Surgeons) in or ex -India. R. A. M. C. Officers and A. D. Corps officers. As for British service District or Independent Brigade Commander with concurrence of A. G. in India. District or Independent Brigade Commander with concurrence of A. G. in India. District or Independent Brigade Commander (in the case of privilege leave ex -India Except Ceylon with concurrence of A. G. in India.) Q. A. I. M. N. S Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. I. M. S. Officers. Indian Army. District or Independent Brigade Commander with concurrence of A. G. in India and with concur- rence of D. G., I. M. S. in the case of study leave. Ditto. District or Independent Brigade Commander (in the case of privilege leave ex- India with concurrence of A. G. in India.) I. M. S. Officers of the Medical Store Department. Privilege leave under civil leave rules, other leave under either civil leave rules or Indian army rules. D. G., I. M. S. D. G., I. M. S. D. G., I. M. S. I. M. D. Assistant-Surgeon As for officers and warrant officers of departments (I. U. L.). District or Independent Brigade Commander with the concurrence of A. G. in India and in the case of study leave with the concurrence' of D. G., I. M. S. District, or Independent Brigade Commander. District or Independent Brigade Commander. M. D. Sub-Assistant-Surgeons Special. District or Independent Brigade Commander with the concurrence of the Government of India. Ditto. District or Independent Brigade Commander (in the case of full pay leave ex -India) with the con- currence of Government of India. 174
Leave application, etc. Appx. V. I. M. N. S. Para. 51-A of these Regs. .... District or Independent. Brigade Commander. District or Independent Brigade Commander. Matrons family hospitals Para. 53 of these Regs. .... A. D. M. S. .... I. H. C. except General Section As for I. O. Rs. .... O. C. Company. .... I. H. C. General Section. As for regimental follower .... Ditto. .... Q. A. M. N. S. I. Variety of leave. Para. 6, Appendix II of this volume. Para. 7, Appendix II of this volume. Para. 8, Appendix II of this volume. Privilege leave ex - India. Privilege leave in India. Sanctioning authority A. G. in India District or Ind. Bde. Commander. A. G. in India A. G. in India District or Ind.Bde, Commander. NOTE.Appx. VI. First field dressings and hygiene. APPENDIX VI. SYNOPSIS OF LECTURES ON THE FIRST FIELD DRESS- ING AND ON HYGIENE FOR THE GUIDANCE OF OFFICERS IN MEDICAL CHARGE OF EFFECTIVE TROOPS. LECTURE I. First Aid . 1. First Field Dressing .First field dressings and hygiene. Appx. VI. 3. Environment of the soldier in peace .Appx. VI. First field dressings and hygiene. the first time these "killers" in the Great War. (Contrast with typhoid in South Africa). Routes of spread either (a ) viâ faulty latrines to water sources, or (b ) vià flies from badly proofed latrines to foodstuffs, or (c) carriers handling foodstuffs or beverages. Prevention therefore dependent on attention to (a ) latrinesLectures on nursing for I. H. C. Appx. VII. APPENDIX VII. SYLLABUS. OF LECTURES FOR THE INDIAN HOSPITAL. CORPS (NURSING SECTION). 1. Moral qualifications required in a nursing orderly, obedience, sobriety, truthfulness, patience, etc. Cleanliness and ventilation of wards and annexes, floors, lockers,. beds, cupboards, etc. 2. Bedmaking, how to make a bed to receive a patient on admis- sion, undressing, bathing, and care of helpless patients. 3. Bedmaking continued, changing of sheets, use of drawsheet, macintosh, air pillows, airbeds, etc., making of special beds, fracture, operation, etc. 4. Moving and lifting of helpless patients, care of back, prevention. of bedsores, cleaning mouths, etc. 5. Observation of sick, what to observe and report, such as rashes, spots, pain, vomiting, haemorrhage, etc. Observation of stools and urine. 6. Use of thermometer and of measure glass, taking of pulse and respiration, administration of feeds, care and cleanliness of utensils,. ice box and food receptacles. 7. Baths, hot and cold sponging, cold packs, ice bags, medicated baths, bath temperatures, etc. 8. Enemata. Simple, glycerine, oil, turpentine, starch and opium,. nutrient, etc., use of various syringes, method of administration. 9. Disinfectants and their uses.Appx. VIII. Training wives of B.O.Rs. as nurses, etc. APPENDIX VIII. TRAINING OF SICK NURSES AND MIDWIVES. A limited number of wives and widows of warrant officers and soldiers (departmental, regimental and pensioned) may be sent to the civil hospitals at Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, or Poona for train- ing as sick nurses and midwives. The names of candidates, who fulfil and agree to the conditions noted on the attached form, will be submitted on a manuscript copy of it by the O. C. corps or local head of department to the district or independent brigade commander for his orders and disposal. Applications of approved candidates will be disposed of as follows:Training wives of B. O. Rs. as nurses, etc. Appx. VIII. The candidate (and her husband ) understand and consent to, the following conditions:Appx. IX. Disposal of cases of V. D. amongst time expired British Troops. APPENDIX IX. DISPOSAL OF CASES OF VENEREAL DISEASE AMONGST TIME EXPIRED BRITISH, TROOPS. Soldiers suffering from venereal disease when due for discharge from the service or transfer to the Army Reserve will be evacuated to England; they will not be retained in India. Officers Commanding units are responsible that the names of all such soldiers in their units are communicated to the Officer Commanding British Military Hospital concerned as early as possible and periodically throughout the trooping season. The procedure detailed in this Appendix will also apply to soldiers who, although suffering from venereal disease, are sent to the U.K. for any reason other than discharge from the service or transfer to the Army Reserve. 2. For the purpose of embarkation such cases are sub-divided into two categories, viz ., I. Active, i.e ., patients in hospital. II. Non-active, i.e. (a ) Men attending hospital. (b ) Those men still on the syphilis register. (c ) Those under observation. I. Active .Disposal of cases of V. D. amongst time expired Appx. IX. British troops. cases being non-infective do not come under the provisions of para. 179, Voyage Regulations. 3. Os. C. B. M. Hs. will ensureAppx. X. V.D. reports and returns. APPENDIX X. VANEREAL DISEASE. DIAGNOSIS; LEPORIS AND RETURNS; DISPOSAL OF VENE- REAL CASE CARDS. 1. Diagnosis. In every case of venereal sore the exudate will be examined for spironema pallidum before any local antiseptic treatment is applied, and at the same time a specimen of the blood will be taken for a Wasser- mann test. If the first examination of the exudate is negative, further examinations will be made on the following two days, the sore in the meantime being dressed with saline solution only. Before a negative diagnosis of syphilis is made, all the following conditions must be satisfied:V.D. reports and returns. Appx. X. 3. Surveillance of Venereal Cases. A.F. I-1239 (Modified for India ).Appex. X. V.D. reports and returns. 5. Syphilis Register. Syphilis Register.Roports and returns (Medical). Appx. XI. APPENDIX XI. LIST OF REPORTS AND RETURNS (MEDICAL) TO BE RENDERED BY OFFICERS COMMANDING, BRITISH AND INDIAN MILITARY HOSPITALS AND INDIAN HOSPITAL CORPS, COMPANIES. NOTE 1.Appx. XI. Reports and returns (Medical). Seria No. Description of return. Number of form. Date of submission. SUBMITTED REMARKS. By Through To 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 WEEKLY. 3 Nominal roll of lady nurses on the strength of the British Indian military hospital. I. A. F. (Medl.) 21. Saturday night Matron .... Chief Principal Matron, A. H. Q. MONTHLY. 4 Nominal roll of officers of the British Service on the strength (R. A. M. C. and A. D. Corps.) A. F. B-158. 1st A. D. M. S. .... Secy., War Office, D. M. S., D.D.M. S. 5 Return of lady nurses and matrons military family hospitals. I.A. F. M-1191- C. 1st... Matron, Military Family Hospital. .... D. M. S., D. D. M. S., A. D. M. S., Lady Supdt., or Principal Matron of the Circle. 6 Return of members of Q. A. I. M. N. S. I. A. F. (Medl.) 11. 1st A. D. M. S. .... The Under Secy. Of State for War, The War Office, London, S. W. 1. 7 Return of vaccines and sera in stock, I. A. F. (Medl.) 20 (i) Hospital, (i) 5th (i) O. C., Military Hospital. .... (i) A. D. M. S. After perusal and check one copy of the consolidated district return will be forwarded by D. D.M. S. to D. M.S. (ii) District (ii) 15th (ii) A. D. M. S. .... (ii) D. D. M. S. (2 copies). 8 Strength return of I. H. C. I. A. F. (Medl.) 9 1st O. C. Coy .... D. M. S., D.D.M. S., A. D. M. S. 188
189 Reports and returns (Medical). Appx. XI. 9 Monthly summary of dental treatment. A. F. I-5034 (2 copies). 5th.. Dental Surgeon .... A. D. M. S.. The A. D. M. S. will forward one copy to the D. D. M. S. Com- mand, with any re- marks he may wish to make. (In Burma District only one copy will be sent to the A. D. M. S.) 10 Return of diets and extras received and issued in military hospitals. I. A. F. S-1519- F. 1st... O. C., B. M. H. .... C. M. A. O. i/c Supplies. To be accompanied by one copy of I. A. F. M- 1209. I. A. F. S-1519- G. 1st... O. C., I. M. H.. .... C. M. A. O. i/c Supplies. To be accompanied by one copy of I. A. F. M- 1209-A. 11 Summary of extras supplied daily to military hospitals. I. A. F. M-1210 1st... O. C. Military Hospital. .... C. M. A. 12 Monthly report on anti-malarial mea- sures. D. M. S. 44. 5th... O. i/c. anti-mala- rial measures. S. M. O... D. M. S., D. D. M. S., thro' A. D. M. S. 13 Hospital stoppage rolls of officers and others dieted in military hospitals (irrespective of whe- ther hospital stop- pages have to be effected for them or not). I. A. F. A-55. Last day of the month. O.C. Mily. Hos- pital. The O. C. the Unit or Forma- tion to which the individual concerned be- longs. Unit Accountant (original copy). C. M. A. in whose payment that Unit or Forma- tion is. (Duplicate copy.) The roll should be prepared in triplicate separately for each company or squadron of a regiment and for each battery or com- pany of artillery. The triplicate copy should be retained by the O. C. the Hospital as an office record. 14 Certificate of tin- ning oil and wicks and aerated water bottles broken. I. A. F. M-1212 1st.. O. C. Military Hospital. .... C. M. A. 15 Requisition for petty supplies. I. A. F. Z-2091 1st... Do.. .... O. i/c. Supplies.
190 Appx. XI. Reports and returns. (Medical.) Serial No. 1 Description of return. 2 Number of form. 3 Date of submission. 4 SUBMITTED REMARKS. 8 By 5 Through 6 To 7 MONTHLY 191 Reports and returns (Medical). Appx. XI. 20 Monthly return of R. A. M. C. and A. D. Corps other ranks undergoing specialist training, R. A. M. C. Form 22. As early as pos- sible after 1st of the month following that to which the form refers. O. C. Dett. R. A. M. C. .... D. M. S. BI-MONTHLY. 21 Return of all adminis- trative and execu- tive officers, I. M. S. I. A. F. M-1190- B. 1st January, March, May, July, Septem- ber, November, A. D. M. S.. .... D. M. S., D. D. M. S., C. M. A. 22 Return of Military assistant surgeons, I. M. D. I. A. F. M-1191- A. Do. Do. .... Do.. A copy is rendered by the O. C. unit to the A. D. M. S. 23 Return of Military sub-assistant sur- geons, I. M. D. I. A. F. M-1191- B. Do.. Do.. .... Do. Ditto. QUARTERLY. 24 Requisition for hos- pital supplies, Bri- tish and Indian. I. A. F. Z-2091 1st January, April, July and October. O. C. Military Hospital. .... O. i/c Supplies. 25 Quarterly venereal report. I. A. F. (Medl.) 7 (2 copies.). 15th January, April, July and October. A. D. M. S.. D. D. M. S.. D. M. S.. The A. D. M. S. will obtain the remarks of the district or in- dependent Brigade Commander before submission to the D. D. M. S. After having obtained the remarks of the G. O. C.-in-C. Command, D. D. M. S. will for- ward one copy to the D. M. S. in India. 26 Repot on the physi- cal state of a unit. D. M. S. 40. 3rd January, April, July and October. Officer in medl. charge of unit. .... O. C. Military Hos- pital.
192 Appx. XI. Reports and return (Medical). Serial No. 1 Description of return. 2 Number of form. 3 Date of submission. 4 SUBMITTED REMARKS. 8 By 5 Through 6 To 7 HALF YEARLY. 27 Return of preventive inoculations and vaccinations. (a ) I. A. F. M- 1225 (Station return) British troops, 1 copy, Indian troops, 1 copy, Follo- wers, 1 copy. 10th July. 10th January. O. C. Military Hospital. .... A. D. M. S. (b) I. A. F. M- 1225 (District return) British troops, 3 copies, Indian troops, 2 copies, Follo- wers, 2 copies. 20th July. 20th January. A. D. M. S.. .... D. D. M. S.. After scrutiny and check, one copy of the District return will be forwarded by the D. D. M. S. to D. M. S. in India not later than 31st July, and 31st January, along with a note of any action taken. 28 Return showing the physical state of units. D. M. S. 41. (i) 10th January 10th July. (i) O. C. Military Hospital. Direct.. A. D. M. S.. The District return will be a summary of the returns submitted by hospitals and will give complete information by units. The hos- pital returns will not be submitted to the D. M. S. in India. (ii) By last day of January and July. (ii) A. D. M. S. D. D. M. S.. D. M. S.
193 Reports and return (Medicals). Appx. XI. 29 Half-yearly summary of dental treatment. A. F. I-5034 (2 copies). 7th January 7th July. Dental Surgeon A. D. M. S., D. D. M. S. D. M. S... When forwarding these reports, the D. D. M. S. and the A. Ds. M. S. concerned will attach their remarks. 30 Inspection report on equipment of field medical units. I. A. F. 1-1144 1st April and October. D. A. D. M. S. (Mob.) or A. D. M. S. Usual channel. D. M. S... One of these inspections should be made person- ally by the A. D. M. S. district; the other inspection will be made by the D. A. D. M. S. (Mob.). YEARLY. 31 R. A. M. C. Officers MS... (b) and (d). on 1st July. Applicant. Usual channel. D. M. S. (a) Application to change places on Indian roster of service. (a) accompanied by documents required by King's Regula- tions. (a ) and (c ) as required. (b) Application to extend service in India. (b) with medical certificate on I. A. F. M- 1238. .... .... .... .... (c) Application to alter date of going home during trooping season. .... .... .... .... .... (d) Application for transfer to an- other district command and for command of mily. hospitals at dis- dricts head- quarters and at certain hill sta- tions. .... .... .... ....
194 Appx. XI. Reports and returns (Medical). SUBMITTED Serial No. Description of return. Number of form. Date of submission. By Through To REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 YEARLY195 Reports and returns (Medical). Appx. XI. 41 Confidential report, Sister, and Staff Nurse, Q. A. I. M. N. S. A. F. C-339-A. (2 copies). 1st January Matron.. O. C., B. M. H., A. D. M. S., Principal Ma- tron, D. D. M. S. D. M. S. 42 I. M. D.196 Appx. XI. Reports and returns (Medical). Serial No. Description of return. Number of form. Date of submission. SUBMITTED REMARKS. By Through To 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 YEARLY 197 Reports and returns (Medical). Appx. X. OCCASIONALLY. 55 Return of sick of troops in camp, on man198 Appx. XI. Reports and returns (Medical). Serial No. Description of return. Number of form. Date of submission. SUBMITTED REMARKS. By Through To 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 OCCASIONALLY199 Reports and returns (Medical). Appx. XI. 63 Reports of deaths of Military medical personnel. .... .... .... .. .... See I.A. F. Z-2000. 64 Report of arrest or desertion, result of court of enquiry or court martial, I. M. D. Mss... On occurrence. O.C., Military Hospital. Usual channel. D. M. S. For transmission to D. G., I. M. S. 65 Assistant Surgeons200 Appx. XI. Reports and return (Medical). Serial No. Description of return. Number of form. Date of submission. SUBMITTED REMARKS. By. Through. To. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 OCCASIONALLY 201 Reports and return (Medical). Appx. XI. Dysentery.. Enteric group of diseases. (2 copies). Do.. Do.. .... (i) A.D.M.S. (ii) D.D.M.S. Measles (unless the A.D.M.S. directs otherwise). Scarlet Fever. 70 Report of medical inspection of units or drafts in India. I. A. F. M-1194 (3 copies). See remarks. O. C., Military Hospital: Direct.. (1) D. M. S. (2) D. D. M. S. (3) A. D. M. S. This report will not be submitted by the O. C., B. M. H., until all necessary steps (such as calling for special- ist's reports, etc.) have been taken to ensure that the classifications are correct and final. 71 Report of serious ill- ness of a patient in hospital. A. F. A-21-A (2 copies). When necessary O. C., Military Hospital. Direct.. (1) O. C. Unit. (2) Chaplain. 72 Special report on a case of fever of the Enteric Group. A. F. I-3056. On completion of case. Do.. Usual channel. D. M. S. 73 Nominal roll of R. A. M. C. and I. M. S. officers, Assistant and Sub-Assistant Surgeons recom- mended to attend the X-Ray Course of Instruction, Dehra Dun. MS... 15th July, 15th December. Do.. Do.. Do. 74 Discharge certificate of Assistant and Sub-Assistant Sur- geons of the I. M. D. T. A. F. (Medl.) 19. On discharge from the ser- vice. O. C... Do.. Do... For completion by the D. G., I. M. S. and transmission to the individual concerned. 75 Supplementary and emergent indent on the Medical Store e. ot. I. A. F. (Medl.) 24. When necessary O. C., Military Hospital. A. D. M. S.. O. i/c., Medical Store Depôt.
202 Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. APPENDIX XII. LIST OF ARMY FORMS, ARMY BOOKS AND INDIA ARMY FORMS USED BY THE MILITARY MEDICAL SERVICES IN INDIA. N. B .203 Forms used by military madical services. Appx. XII. A. F. A-32. Annual return of sick and wounded, Indian troops. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 A. F. A-34. Daily state of sick and wounded. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued on the scale laid down in "Table of Books, Forms and Station- ery." A. F. A-35. Notification of infec- tious diseases. As required. A. F. A-36. Hospital nominal roll of admissions and discharges. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ditto. A. F. A-45. Proceedings of a medical board (Officers and Nurses). 6 9 12 24 30 36 42 6 9 12 24 30 36 42 A. F. A-45-A. Proceedings of a medical board on alleases of wounds and injuries, whether received in action or not. As required. A. F. B-117. Reports on wound and injuries. As required. A. F. B-158. Nominal roll of officers of the British Service on the strength (R. A. M. C. and A. D. Corps). As required. Issued also to A. Ds. M. S. A. F. B-179. Medical report on a soldier. As required. A. F. B-181. Clinical chart. 200 300 500 900 1,200 1,500 1,700 200 300 500 900 1,200 1,500 1,700
204 Appx. XII Forms used by military medical services. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds 300 and over. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 A. F. B-182. Return of sick on board ship (for voyages under A. H. Q.). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Supplied to A. Ds. M. S. and S. M. Os. at sea- ports for issue as required. A. F. B-183. Detailed information on a case of men- tal disability (British troops). 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. A. F. B-3977. Notification to the O. C. unit that a British other rank is about to be brought before an Invaliding board. As required. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. A. F. C-339. Annual confidential report, Matron and Sister in charge, Q. A. I. M. N. S. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to A. D. M. S. for sup- ply to Mili- tary hospital as required. A. F. C-339-A. Annual confidential report, Sister and Staff Nurse, Sister and Staff Nurse, Q. A. I. M. N. S. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
205 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. A.F.D-487. Notice to the National Health Insurance Navy and Army Fund of the impending discharge of a soldier. As required. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. A.F. I.1220 Hospital Record Card, British Troops. As required. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. A.F.I.1220(a) Hospital Record Card, Indian Troops. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. As required. A.F.I.1224. Inspection report of ambulance class. 4 4 8 12 16 20 24 4 4 8 12 16 20 24 A.F.I.1225. Report of work done in laboraties. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Supplied to A. Ds. H. & P.Officers in Charge Com- mand Distt. and Bde. Labo- ratories and En- teric. Labora- tory, Kasauli, by the D. M. S. in India. A.F.I.1237. Medical case sheet. 300 600 1,200 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 300 600 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 A.F.I.1239 Return of a solidier under medical sur- veillance for vene- real disease. 100 200 400 600 800 1,200 1,600 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. A.F.I.1242. Instructions for patients suffering from syphilis. 10 20 30 40 45 75 90 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. A.F.I.1243. Instructions for patients suffering from gonorrh206 Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Remarks. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 A. F. I-1247 (Modified for India). Venereal Case C As required. A. F. I-3056. Special report on a case of fever of the Enteric Group. 10 10 10 10 20 20 20 10 10 10 10 20 20 20 A. F. I-5025. Dental treatment form. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,000 copies annually for each Army Dental Surgeon. A. F. I-5033. Dental treatment card. As required. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. A. F. I-5034. Monthly and half yearly summary of Dental treat- ment. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 175 copies annu- ally for each Army Dental Surgeon. A. F. O-1707. Death certificate of pensioner or Army Reserve man. 2 4 4 6 6 8 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. A. F. W-3118 Field medical card. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. Issued on the scale laid down in "Table of Books, Forms and Station- ery." A.F. W-3118- A. Envelope for A. F. W-3118 (Field Medl. card). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
207 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. Army Books. A.B. 27. Hospital admission and discharge book. As required. A. B. 27-A.. Field service hospital admission and dis- charge book. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued on the scale laid down in "Table of Books, Forms and Station- ery." A. B. 28. Vaccination register, men, women and children. 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 1 2 2 3 4 6 6 A. B. 38. Patients' requisition book. 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. A. B. 39. Blank register for use as field service hospital diary, prescription book or ward book. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued on the scale laid down in "Table of Books, Forms and Station- ery." A. B. 46. Medical register of recruits. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 6 8 A. B. 172. Medical transfer cer- tificate book. 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 1 1 2 3 4 6 8 A. B. 468. Dental appliance book. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 annually for each Army Dental Sur- geon. A. B.469. Dental treatment book. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
208 Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Remarks. Under 25 beds. 25-29 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 India Army Forms. I.A. F. (Medl.) No. 1. Index card for officers of the R. A. M. C., I. M. S. and A. D. Corps. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued as re- quired to D. Ds.M.S. and A. Ds. M. S. I.A. F. (Medl.) No. 2. Index card for assistant and sub- assistant surgeons, I. M. D. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 3. Monthly return of British other ranks employed as regi- mental nursing orderlies. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to A. Ds. M. S. 40 copies annually. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 4. Form of application for supply of spec- tacles to B. O. Rs. 4 8 8 12 12 16 16 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 5. Form of application for the supply of artificial dentures to a B. O. R. As required. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I.A.F.(Medl.) No. 6. Nominal roll of in- valids passed by invaliding board. 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
209 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 7. Quarterly venereal report. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to A. Ds. M. S. 20 copies annually. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 8. Medical Certificate (Civilian establish- ments in military employ). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued as re- quired to Head- quarters, Com- mands Districts and Indepen- dent Brigade Areas. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 9. Strength return of I. H. C. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to I. H. C. Coys. 60 copies annually. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 10. Card for record of service of I. H. C. personnel. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Os. C., I. H. C. Coys., as required. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 11. Monthly return of members of Q. A. I. M. N. S. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to A. Ds. M. S. 30 copies annually. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 13. Oto-Rhino-Laryngo- logical Form. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Ear, Nose and Throat Special- ists, Commands, up to 1,000 copies a year for each special- ist. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 14. Statement of parti- culars in support of claims to Nursing/corps as entered in the Pay List of the for the month of 193. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Os. C., I. H. C. Coys., "as required."
210 Appx. XII. Forms used by military Medical Services. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Remarks Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 India Army Forms 211 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 19. Discharge certificate of assistant and sub-assistant sur- geons of the I. M. D. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to A. Ds. M. S., 10 copies annually for distribution to units as requir- ed, 20 copies for D. G., I. M. S., annually. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 20. Monthly return of vaccines and sera. As required. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 21. Weekly nominal roll of lady nurses on the strength of the British/Indian military hospitals.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 130 copies for each hospital where lady nurses are em- ployed. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 22. Record of detained patient. As required. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 23. Confidential report, I. M. N. S. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Os. C. I. M. Hs. where nurses are em- ployed, 20 copies annually. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 24. Supplementary, em- ergent and pay- ment indent on the Medical Store Department. As required. I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 25. Enrolment Form I. H. C. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Os. C., I. H. C. Coys., "as required." I. A. F. (Medl.) No. 26. Form of travelling concession on the North Western Railway for mem- bers of the M.N.S. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Os. C. Hospitals and Embarkation Commandants, as required.
212 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Remarks. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 India Army Forms213 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. I. A. F. I. 1121 Annual confidential report Q. A. M. N. S. I. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to D. Ds. M. S., A. Ds. M.S. for sup- ply to military hospitals as required. I. A. F. I. 1122-A. Annual confidential reports, I. M. D. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. I. 1122-B. Additions to record of service, I. M. D. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. I. 1144 Half-yearly inspec- tion report on equipment of field medical units. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to D. Ds. M. S. or A. Ds. M. S., as re- quired. I. A. F. K. 1168. Enrolment form, non-combata n t s (Military medical pupils). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. M- 1190-B. Monthly return of all administrative and executive officers, I. M. S. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to A. Ds. M. S. 60 copies annually. I. A. F. M- 1191-A. Monthly return of Military Assistant Surgeons, I. M. D. 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued also to A. Ds. M. S., 40 copies annually and to other units in which Assistant Sur- geons or S. A. Ss. are em- ployed 20 copies annu- ally of the form appli- cable. I. A. F. M- 1191-B. Monthly return of Military Sub- Assistant Surgeons, I. M. D. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 I. A. F. M- 1191 C. Return of lady nur- ses and matrons of military family hospitals. 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 This form will be indented for by those hospitals only in which lady nurses are employed. H
214 Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Remarks. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 India Army Forms 215 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. I. A. F. M.- 1198. Security bond, Indian Military Medical Pupils. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Prin- cipals of Medi- cal Colleges and other medical officers as re- quired. I. A. F. M.- 1200. Daily report orderly Assistant Surgeons or Sub-Assitant Surgeon. 400 400 400 400 400 400 400 400 400 400 400 400 400 400 I. A. F. M.- 1201. Hospital rules. 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 I. A. F. M.- 1202. Rules for attendants on insane, British other ranks. 1 1 2 2 4 4 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. M.- 1204. Diet sheet, British and Indian troops and followers. 400 800 1,600 2,000 2,800 5,000 6,000 400 800 1,600 2,000 2,800 5,000 6,000 I. A. F. M.- 1205. Daily ward requisi- tion for diets and extras, British troops. 800 1,600 3,000 5,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. M.- 1205-A. Daily ward requisi- tion for diets and extras, Indian troops. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 800 1,600 3,000 5,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 I. A. F. M.- 1206. Daily hospital requi- sition for diet, (and receipt), Bri- tish troops. 800 800 800 800 800 1,600 1,600 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. M.- 1207. Daily hospital requi- sition for extras (and receipt), Bri- tish troops. 800 800 800 800 800 1,600 1,600 .. . .. .. .. .. .. H 2
216 Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Remarks. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 India Army Forms217 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. I. A. F. M.- 1211. Register of expendi- ture of medical comforts, Indian military hospitals. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 I. A. F. M.- 1212. Monthly certificate of tinning, oil and wicks and aerated water bottles bro- ken. 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 I. A. F. M.- 1215. Dental laboratory book. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. One annually to each Army Den- tal Surgeon. I. A. F. M.- 1216. Annual indent for medicines, medical and surgical stores, etc. 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 I. A. F. M.- 1217. Ward prescription book. 2 4 8 12 16 24 32 5 5 10 15 20 30 40 I. A. F. M.- 1218. Diet chart, British troops. 188 375 562 750 938 1,500 2,250 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. M.- 1223. Patient's receipt for hospital equip- ment (books of 100). 3 6 12 18 24 36 48 3 6 12 18 24 36 48 I. A. F. M.- 1224. Surgical and X-Ray equipment ledger. 3 3 3 3 3 3 6 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 I. A. F. M.- 1225. Half-yearly return of inoculations and vaccinations. 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 I. A. F. M.- 1226. Report of venereal disease contracted. 20 60 80 120 140 200 270 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 I. A. F. M.- 1230-A. Monthly and annual return of sick, regimental and departmental fol- lowers. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 60 60 60 60 60 60 60
218 Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Remarks. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 India Army Forms 219 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. I. A. F. M- 1243. Proceedings of a Medical board on officers, lady nur- ses and warrant officers. 5 10 20 30 40 50 75 5 10 20 30 40 50 75 I. A. F. M.- 1244. Lunacy Certificate. As required. I. A. F. M.- 1244-A. Medical Certificate. As required. I. A. F. M.- 1245. Application for Re- ception Order. As required. I. A. F. M.- 1246. Reception Order. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to D. Ds. M. S. or A. Ds. M. S., as re- quired. I. A. F. M.- 1247. Statement of case of a patient proceed- ing to a Pasteur Institute. 4 4 6 6 8 8 10 4 4 6 6 8 8 10 I. A. F. M.- 1250. Instructions for the restoration of the apparently drown- ed. 2 2 4 4 6 6 8 2 2 3 4 5 6 8 I. A. F. M.- 1251. Religious denomina- tion ticket British troops. 8 16 32 50 50 80 80 .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
220 Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. No. of form. Description of form. British Military Hospitals. Indian Military Hospitals. Remarks. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. Under 25 beds. 25-49 beds. 50-99 beds. 100-149 beds. 150-199 beds. 200-299 beds. 300 and over. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 India Army Forms221 Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. I. A. F. M.- 1259. Form of claim for medical attend- ance on board- ship. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Royal Indian Marine Department and Embarkation authorities as required. I. A. F. M- 1262. Envelope for use when despatching blood sera for examination. As required. I. A. F. M.- 1263. Form to be complet- ed and despatch- ed with specimens of blood sera for Wassermann test. As required. I. A. F. M.- 1265. Medical Board for the reassessment of disabilities. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Issued to Officers Commanding units and Heads of Departments on an "as re- quired "scale. I. A. F. M.- 1265-B. Malaria case sheet. As required. I. A. F. M.- 1265-D. Request for Labo- ratory Examina- tion. As required. I. A. F. S.- 1519-A. General instructions regarding the I. A. F. S. 1519 series of ration returns. 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 I. A. F. S.- 1519-F. Monthly ration re- turn British Mili- tary Hospitals. 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I. A. F. S.- 1519-G. Monthly ration re- turn Indian Mili- tary Hospitals. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28 28 28 28 28 28 28
Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. II.Forms used by military medical services. Appx. XII. INDIA ARMY FORMS. I. A. F. A-311. Appx. XII. Forms used by military medical services. I. A. F. Z.-2041. Books to be in possession of officers and members of the I.M.D. Appx. XII-A. APPENDIX XII-A. LIST OF BOOKS TO BE IN THE POSSESSION OF MEM- BERS OF THE M.M.S. The following books will be in the possession of members of the Military Medical Services:Appx.XII-B. Books on charge of B.M.Hs., etc. APPENDIX XIL-B. LIST OF BOOKS TO BE MAINTAINED BY BRITISH AND INDIAN MILITARY HOSPITALS. 1. King's Regulations for the Army and the Army Reserve. 2. Royal Warrant for Pay, etc.Certificate to be signed by relations of a mental Appx. XIII. case. APPENDIX XIII. FORM OF CERTIFICATE TO BE SIGNED BY THE RELA- TIONS OR FRIENDS ON TAKING CHARGE OF A MENTAL CASE. I certify that I am desirous and willing to receive myrelation* friend No. Rank. Name. Regiment. The nature of his disease and the fact that he may possibly be dangerous has been explained to me, but I am willing to accept full responsibility for him in every way. Signature_____________ Place____________________ Date____________________ *Delete one of these words. If a relation state the relationship. 227
Appx. XIV. Recording dental treatment. APPENDIX XIV. INSTRUCTIONS FOR RECORDING DENTAL TREATMENT. The surname will be written in block letters on the dental treat- ment card, and the particulars of the soldier's unit will be given in full. 2. The following descriptions and signs will be used to denote the existing dental condition. If a soldier is found to require no treatment on first inspection the words "dentally fit" will be en- tered on the first lines of the dental treatment columns of his medical history sheet and dental treatment card:Recording dental treatment. Appx. XIV. (ii ) Particulars of existing artificial dentures. These will be shown as in the following example:Appx. XIV. Recording dental treatment. (d )Pulp and root treatment:Subjects under Hygiene and Pathology. Appx. XV. APPENDIX XV. LIST OF SUBJECTS INCLUDED UNDER HYGIENE AND PATHOLOGY. A.Appx. XV. Subjects under Hygiene and Pathology. B.Vaccines and Sera. Appx. XVI. APPENDIX XVI. VACCINES, SERA, STANDARD AGGLUTINABLE CUL- TURES AND WASSERMANN REAGENTS. VACCINES. 1. Prophylactic vaccines .Appx. XVI. Vaccines and Sera. 1st dose. 2nd dose. 3rd dose. 4th dose. 5. M.melitensisVaccines and Sera. Appx. XVI. Curative vaccines should therefore be indented for as "courses", i.e. , "1 course", "2 courses", and so on (not as "tubes", "capsules" or "c.c." or "doses"). If, however, additional stock doses beyond the four which comprise a course are required, the indent should state the number of extra doses (1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th) required over and above the number of courses asked for, e.g. , "6 courses and 6 fourth doses". Officers indenting for any of the vaccines of which second courses are stocked should state on the indent whether they require first or second courses or both, and specify the number of each. 3. For diagnostic purposes .Appx. XVI. Vaccines and Sera. instructions issued by the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, for the use of this serum, and the label on the phial bears the date of manufacture, from which the date of expiry can be calculated on the basis of the in- structions contained in para. 6 below. (2) normal horse serumSanitary reports. Appx. XVII. APPENDEX XVII. SANITARY REPORTS. The following paragraphs are intended for the guidance of officers preparing special sanitary reports. Initial reports on freshly-occupied areas, new stations, or pro- posed camp sites for long occupation, should be as complete as possible and should be accompanied by maps, plans, sketches or photographs, so that full information may be filed for future reference. Subsequent reports need not repeat details which remain con- stant, but should deal with all matters deemed to bear upon pre- valent diseases or to conduce to increased physiological efficiency. Reports covering matters referred to in B (2) (e ) (Schools ) should be forwarded with the remarks, if any, of the General Staff concerned. Subject-matters are grouped hereunder as follows:Appx. XVII. Sanitary reports. (f ) Public health service (if any ).Sanitary reports Appx. XVII. disinfectants. CooksAppx. XVII. Sanitary reports. Latrines and urinalsSanitary reports. Appx. XVII. Conservancy, Sewage disposalAppx. XVII Sanitary reports FittingsAPPENDIX XVIII. TELEGRAPHIC CODE. Telegraphic code re. infectious diseases. Appx. XVIII 243 To be used in reporting cases of infectious diseases amongst troops families or followers. For form of telegram see Section. XI, paragraph 517. When there is no telegraph station, the message should be sent by post to the nearest telegraph station. No. of cases. CASES. DEATHS. IN BARRACKS OR LINES. IN CAMP. IN FORT. IN BARRACKS, LINES, CAMP OR FORT. British. Indian. British. Indian. British. Indian No. of deaths. British. Indian. 1 Ball.. Lamp.. Calm.. Paddy. Faint.. Rat. 1 Dark.. Salmon. 2 Bane.. Lantern. Cat.. Play.. Farm.. Rare. 2 Dean.. System. 3 Bath.. Lawful. Cist.. Plump. Feat.. Ruth. 3 Dew.. Solid. 4 Bear.. Lead.. Corn.. Plaster. Feel.. Ruddy. 4 Dial.. Safe. 5 Belt.. Lift.. Curt.. Pile.. Final.. Rice. 5 Dive.. Sound. 6 Bilk.. Linger. Cycle.. Pride.. Foil.. Road. 6 Door.. Salute. 7 Block.. Log.. Club.. Pink.. Futile.. Riot. 7 Dull.. Singer. 8 Bole.. Lower.. Chill.. Paste. Fluid.. Review. 8 Dread.. Smile. 9 Breath.. Luton.. Cry.. Peter.. Fright. Ration. 9 Droop.. Scatter. 10 Bud.. Lyric.. Cramp. Pudding. Fry.. Rusty. 10 Dwell.. Sight.
244 Appx. XVIII. Telegraphic code re. infectious deseases. Num- ber. STATUS. OFFICERS. OTHER RANKS. WOMEN. CHILDREN. FOLLOWERS. British. Indian. British. Indian. British. Indian. British. Indian. 1 Oil.. Tar.. Man.. Native. Wail.. Goal.. Yarn. Hall. Amber. 2 Ocean.. Trumps. Mart.. Nave.. Ward.. Gaiety. Yellow. High. Alms. 3 Offer. Taste.. Mend.. Near.. Weak.. Guide.. Yet.. Hollow. Avoid. 4 Olive. Tide.. Metre.. Never.. Wine.. Gist.. Yield. Half. Alloy. 5 Omen.. Tiffin.. Mix.. Nibble. Wood.. Grand.. Yoke. Host. Aaron. 6 Option.. Tub.. Musk.. Nile.. Worn.. Globe.. Yonder. Hamper. Absent. 7 Octave. Twinkle. Mute.. Nod.. White.. Great.. Youth. Haughty. Adore. 8 Otter.. Teeth.. Mean.. Note.. Wrath. Germ.. Yacht. Hump. Acrated. 9 Oblong. Tweed. Mortal. Normal. Wreck. Glitter. Yeast. Haven. Ahead. 10 Oyster. Tool.. Market. Nut.. Wrong. Gorge.. Yardley. Hinges. Account. Disease prevalent in bazar =Bazaar. Moved into camp =Tented. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. APPENDIX XIX. NOTES ON INVESTIGATING, REPORTING ON, AND DEALING WITH OUTBREAKS OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. 1.Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. 2. Interchange of Information .Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. By co-operation with veterinary officers, early information should be obtained of diagnosed and suspected cases of anthrax among animals. Infected animals should be destroyed, and their carcases burnt or deeply buried after being freely coated with quicklime; special care must be taken to prevent the ground being fouled by blood and discharges. Infected ground should not be camped on. (See K. R., paras. 1453, 1454). Abrasions of all personnel engaged in attending animals of infected units must be protected. Shaving brushes before being taken in stock should be soaked for four hours in a 10 per cent. solution of formalin.*The solution should be kept at a temperature of 1100F. and the brush agitated so as to bring the solution into contact with all hair and bristles. Bacteriological examinations should be made of suspected shaving brushes or tooth brushes. If proved to contain anthrax spores, they must be destroyed, and the D. M. S. in India notified by telegram. CEREBRO-SPINAL FEVER. 7. Spread.Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. 10. Preventive measures. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx.xix. 14. Preventive measures.Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. be deemed necessary until adequate time has been allowed for sponta- neous recovery. 17. Serum Treatment. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx.XIX. DYSENTERY. 18. Spread.Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. conservancy arrangements. Anti-fly measures are of special import- ance. Patients suffering from diarrhoea or dysentery should, as far as circumstances permit, be isolated from others. Stools of patients must not be left exposed. If required for inspection or if sent to the laboratory, they should be kept in fly-proof receptacles. Attendants on the sick should pay strict attention to personal cleanliness, and should be inspected frequently to ensure that they are not suffering from irregular diarrhoea. No one who has suffered from dysentery or is proved to be a dysen- tery carrier will be employed in the preparation or handling of food or drink. No member of the I. H. Corps will, however, be dis- charged from the service as a carrier of amoebic dysentery unless the finding of E. histolytica cysts has been confirmed in a district laboratory. Routine examinations of all such individuals will be carried out as laid down in paragraph 51 of Appendix XIX and paragraph 14 of Appendix XXI. A convalescent from bacillary dysentery may be considered " free " if mucus is not found during eight careful consecutive daily naked-eye examinations of the stools. A convalescent from amoebic dysentery may be considered " free " if six negative microscopic examinations of the stools, commencing three days after the emetine course is completed, have been recorded. Stools however should be sent for laboratory examination for cysts once a week for 6 weeks after discharge from hospital. COLLECTION AND DESPATCH OF DYSENTERY SPECIMENS FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATION. The methods to be employed by hospital staffs in connection with the above are of the greatest importance as regards diagnosis. Detailed instructions are given in Appendix XXI, and should be strictly complied with, ENCEPHALITIS LETHARGICA. 20. Spread. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. INFLUENZA. 22. Spread.Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. are available. Every effort should therefore be made that all hill accommodation is used to the utmost and that troops do not return to malarious stations until the infective season has passed. II. Mosquito-proofing of barracks. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. Lectures.Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Children of infected families should be kept from attending school for 22 days. PLAGUE. 32. Spread.Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. Contacts should be strictly isolated and inspected daily for at least 6 days. III. General preventive measures on an outbreak of plague.- When plague exists in the immediate neighbourhood of troops the senior executive medical officer must take prompt steps to obtain informa- tion of all cases occurring. Communication between infected and non-infected places should be restricted. Medical examination of units should be carried out with a view to the discovery of ambulant cases. IV. Measures against rats,etc.- The prevalence of plague either within a military cantonment or in the villages and towns in its vicinity calls for the careful and thorough extermination of rats. In con- junction with the M. E. S. and the cantonment authority every endeavour should be made to destroy rats by trapping, and baiting. Dead or dying rats should not be handled except with a pair of tongs or similar appliance, and the bodies should be dropped at once into a strong solution of cresol. The microscopical examination of dead rats is most important as a guide to the prevalence of the disease among them. V. Evacuation of lines, etc.- The occurrence of plague cases among troops must not be regarded as necessarily involving migration of the whole unit into camp. Where the condition of the lines is bad and such as to offer reasons to believe that the buildings contain infected rodents, immediate evacuation is indicated, coupled with a thorough overhaul and disinfection of all clothing and bedding. VI. Inoculations.- The value of plague inoculation during epide- mics must be remembered and when a number of cases have occurred or a unit or group of units is seriously affected, every endeavour should be made by the O. C. hospital concerned in conjunction with Os. C. units to encourage men and all likely to be exposed to plague infec- tion to submit to the procedure. It is undesirable to press anti plague inoculation on the occurrence of a single case or even a few isolated cases in a unit. It should be invariably carried out for persons actively engaged in anti-plague work, who also need the same protective measures as attendants. RABIES. 34. Spread.- The causal agent is so far unknown. It is a filter- passing virus and remains infective for long periods in glycerin. Spread is by the bite of rabid animals, usually a dog. Infection is by means of the saliva, the virus being implanted on to a nerve ending or nerve tissues by a bite or through an abrasion of the skin or mucous membrane. The saliva of a rabid animal may be infective for as long as 10 days before symptoms declare themselves; observation of the animal for a period of 10 days will always decide whether it was rabid at the time of biting or not, as if at the end of 10 days the dog is alive and well it cannot have been rabid at the time of biting. 257
Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. The incubation period in man varies in accordance with the severity and site of the wound. In lacerated wounds of the face the incubation period may be very short. The incubation period varies in the dog from about 16 to 90 days. The majority of cases in the dog show symptoms between the 25th and 55th day after the bite. The symptoms of rabies in dogs are. often indefinite, but it is wise to assume rabies (1) if the disease is of short duration (2) in cases of " bone in the throat "or paralysis of the jaw or hind legs (3) in cases of unprovoked attack especially where several persons are bitten. 35. Preventive measures. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx.XIX strong collar and chain; full particulars such as name of person bitten, date of bite, etc., signed by an officer should always accompany them to enable veterinary officers to supply necessary information to the Pasteur Institute concerned, vide I. A. F. M-1247. (b)No dogs will be taken to a Veterinary officer's private residence without his permission. (c)No suspected dogs will be kept in veterinary hospitals to the danger of the staff and government animals. These buildings are not adapted, nor intended for isolation purposes,and the danger to valuable horses, etc., is serious in the event of a rabid dog breaking loose. Neither can arrangements be made by veterinary officers for the feed- ing and exercising of suspected dogs. In cases where destruction is deemed necessary the veterinary officer will communicate with the Officer Commanding the unit to which the owner of the dog belongs, who will make necessary arrangements for its destruction. For method of dealing with the brain of-a dog suspected of suffering from rabies see Appendix XXI. 3. General measures .Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. the Pasteur Institute, full particulars as to name, rank, sex of each patient being despatched for treatment and will state the date and time of arrival. On arrival military patients will report themselves to the O. C. station and at the Institute. (iv) Accommodation. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. SANDFLY (PHLEBTOMUS) FEVER. 38. Spread. Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. TETANUS. 44. Spread.Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. 49. Preventive measures.Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious. disease. (b ) The diagnosis of the first eight will be made only on the isolation of the specific organism, while the last will be reserved for cases diag- nosed on a rising Widal reaction, or in which a specific organism has not been isolated, but whose history, onset and clinical course, are suspicious. It is pointed out that, from a scientific point of view, the diagnosis "Enteric group" cannot be considered satisfactory, and its introduction in no way relieves officers in charge of cases of their responsibility for ensuring that every laboratory method is used before the case is so returned. (c ) The diagnosis " Enteric Group (B. fæcalis alkaligenes)" will be made only in those cases in which B. fæcalis alkaligenes is isolated from the blood and in which the patient's serum shows agglutinins for this bacillus. 53. Diagnosis .Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. (b ) Dreyer's method of agglutination is to be employed for all agglutination tests, and the results expressed in standard agglutinin units. It should be noted that the results of Widal tests between the 18th and 24th day from onset of disease are of great importance in the estimation of the rise of the agglutinin contents in the serum of a patient infected with an organism of the enteric group. (c ) Confirmation of laboratory diagnosis. (i) As a check on the accuracy of diagnosis a subculture of any supposed "en- teric" organism recovered in a laboratory will be forwarded for confirmation to the Enteric Laboratory, Kasauli. (ii) Such subcultures will be forwarded to the officer in charge of the Enteric Laboratory, Kasauli, as indicated in sub- paragraph (vi) below, who will keep a register of all subcultures, and will examine and classify them and report the result of the examination without delay to the officer from whom the subculture has been received. (iii) Officers sending subcultures of organisms, recovered from blood or excreta of patients, to the Enteric Laboratory, Kasauli, for confirmation will maintain subcultures of such organisms until a report has been received on the original subculture sent there. (iv) Any change in diagnosis considered necessary as the result of confirmatory bacteriological examination will be noted on all relevant documents. (v) The diagnosis of a case based on the isolation of an organism from the blood should not be changed on account of subse- quent recovery of a different organism from the excreta of the same patient. (vi) Subcultures should be in agar stabs, and the tubes should be sealed and securely packed for transmission through the post. Each should be accompanied by I. A. F. M- 1265 D. 54.Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. direct to the officer in charge of the Enteric Laboratory, Kasauli (officer in charge District Laboratory in the case of Maymyo). (a) A. F. B. 181, Clinical Chart. (b) A. F. B. 178, Medical History Sheet. (c) A. F. I. 1237, Medical Case Sheet. (d) I. A. F. M-1265B, Malaria Case Sheet (if under treatment for malaria). (e) A. F. I. 3056, Special report on a case of fever of the enteric group. (iii) On arrival at the Hill Depôt, Kasauli, or at Maymyo, each man will be placed as soon as possible upon a course of bacteriological examinations of both fæces and urine. Normally this will consist of 30 examinations of each, viz., five per week for a period of 6 weeks. As soon as tests have been completed, A. F. I. 3056 (special report on a case of fever of the enteric group), with the remarks of the officer in charge of the Enteric Laboratory, Kasauli or District Laboratory, Maymyo, regarding the bacteriological and serological findings entered thereon, will be returned to the O. C. military hospital con- cerned, who will forward it without delay to the Director of Medical Services in India through the usual channels. Necessary changes of diagnosis will be made by the D. M. S. in India and notified by him to all concerned. Men relapsing will also be admitted to hospital; on discharge therefrom the series of examinations mentioned above will be com- menced de novo. (iv) At the beginning of each month the officer in charge of the Enteric Laboratory, Kasauli, and the officer in charge of the District Laboratory, Maymyo, will submit nominal rolls of (a ) men comm- encing and completing examination during the previous month and (b ) carriers detected during the previous month, and (c ) of those remaining under examination on the last day of the month, giving the following particulars:Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. Appx. XIX. Form B. 178 will be endorsed in red with capital letters "CHRO- NIC CARRIER, B. TYPHOSUS" (Para. A or Para. B or Para. C as the case may be). In every instance the fact that the invalid is a chronic carrier will be noted on I. A. F. (Medical) 6 in red ink. (xi) When a man is discharged from the depôt as free from infec- tion, his medical history sheet (A. F. B. 178) with notes as to the number of examinations carried out and the result endorsed thereon, will be returned to the officer commanding military hospital, at the station to which he will travel to join his unit. (xii) Instructions when travelling:Appx. XIX. Investigating, etc., of infectious disease. TYPHUS FEVER. 55. Spread. Disinfecting solutions. Appx. XX. APPENDIX XX. DISINFECTANT AND OTHER SOLUTIONS. The following standard strengths are prescribed:Appx. XX. Disinfecting solutions. (6) Formaldehyde gas. The gas may be produced by vaporizing paraform tablets, 26 to each 1,000 cubic feet, or by pouring formalin on to potassium per- manganate, ½ pint to 5 ozs. per 1,000 cubic feet. A temperature of 75°F. and a humidity of 75 is necessary for maxi- mum efficiency. (7)Cresol and soft soap emulsion for fleas. parts Cresol 5 Soft soap 20 Water 75 The cresol and soft soap are added to the hot water with continuous stirring. For use make a 5 per cent. solution with water. (8)Paraffin and soft soap emulsion for fleas. Hard soap 1 lb. (or soft soap 1½ lbs.). Paraffin oil 4 gallons. Hot water 1 gallon. Dissolve the soap in the hot water; add very gradually the paraffin oil, with continuous stirring. For use make a 5 per cent. solution with. water. 270
Specimens for laboratory examination. Appx. XXI. APPENDIX XXI. INSTRUCTIONS FOR SENDING SAMPLES OR SPECIMENS FOR CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMI- NATION. A. WATER. 1. A chemical and bacteriological analysis of water is of great use in ascertaining the quality of new sources of supply and in deter- mining whether a protected supply remains free from contamination. In the case of an unprotected supply, such as an open well or river, the condition as regards contamination may vary from day to day or even from hour to hour; in such cases more reliance should be placed on a thorough and careful inspection of the source and surroundings than on analysis. The scope of bacteriological analysis is rather wider than that of chemical analysis, since it may provide definite information as to the presence or absence of certain specific pathogenic organisms, e.g. , cholera. 2. Receptacles and carriersAppx. XXI. Specimens for laboratory examination. should be allowed to rúm to waste freely, so that impurities in the pipe lumen may be washed out before a sample is taken. (b) Bacteriological samples.Specimens for laboratory examination. Appx. XXI. B.Appx. XXI. Specimens for laboratory examination. 7. The minimum quantities which should be sent for examination are as follows:Specimens for laboratory examination. Appx. XXI. (c ) The exact nature of the examination required, and the reasons rendering it necessary. (d ) In any case of suspected poisoning, a clinical summary. This summary should state particularly the length of time which elapsed between the consumption of the article and the onset of symptoms, the symptoms observed in the order of their occurrence, the present condition of the patient or patients and the condition of other persons who have partaken of the article or of similar articles from the same consignment. These reports will be signed by the officer who actually took the sample, and may be countersigned also by the officer at whose request the sample was taken. 10. Reports on analyses carried out at the Military Food Laboratory will be sent to the officer at whose request the sample was taken, a copy being sent to the A. D. M. S. of the District concerned. C.Appx. XXI. Specimens for laboratory examination. As Dreyer's method of carrying out the agglutination test is in use in all Military laboratories, collection by means of vein puncture is practically always essential for the test to be properly carried out. (a ) Technique of collection in a Wright's blood capsule.Specimens for laboratory examination. Appx. XXI. this is impossible, as in the case of outstations, a small portion of a loose stool should be emulsified, directly after passage, in 30 per cent. " neutral" glycerin in 0.6 per cent. saline solution, and sent by post. It is important that the glycerin should not be acid. Constipated stools are usually worthless for bacteriological examination; therefore when the condition of the patient permits, the stool resulting after saline treatment should be forwarded. Proper glass containers must invariably be used. 5. Urine .Appx. XXI. Specimens for laboratory examination. of the type of cellular exudate. No pressure should be used for spread- ing this film or the cells will be broken down. A useful method is to place some mucus on a piece of litmus paper used for testing the reaction of the stool and draw the mucus along the slide. The reaction of the mucus and the time and date on which the stool was passed should be invariably entered on the laboratory report. Instructions should be given to subordinates that in cases suspected of suffering from dysentery a clean dry bedpan free of antiseptics should be used and also that patients should first pass their urine into a separate receptacle in order that no urine should be mixed with the stool in the bed pan. 8. Amoebic dysenterySpecimens for laboratory examination. Appx. XXI. room directly after the specimen has been passed. Small portions of mucus only, spread thin by the pressure of the coverslip, should be examined. Only motile amoebae containing red blood cells should be diagnosed as E. histolytica. SPECIMENS FROM CASES OF DIARRHAppx. XXI. Specimens for laboratory examination. minations. These specimens should also be macroscopically examined for presence of mucus. Routine examinations will thus be as follows:Specimens for laboratory examination. Appx. XXI. The bottle is now filled up to the brim with one of the following solutions:Appx. XXI. Specimens for laboratory examination. An unbroken pustule should be selected and the surface sterilized by rubbing with cotton wool moistened in absolute alcohol. The pus is obtained by plunging the point of a sterile capillary pipette into the centre of the pustule and gently aspirating a portion of the contents into the capillary stem by means of the teat fitted to the end of the pipette. The end is then sealed off in the flame. BLOOD FILMS FOR MALARIAL PARASITES, LEISHMANIA, BLOOD DISEASES, ETC. 21. The ordinary method.Specimens for laboratory examination. Appx. XXI. As soon as dehaemoglobinization is complete, drain off the fluid by tilting the slide. Next, flood the slide with methyl alcohol. Allow to remain on for five minutes. The film is now fixed. Drain off the methyl alcohol and wash the film very thoroughly in distilled water. Every trace of acid must be removed from the film, or the subsequent staining will be unsatis- factory. Stain the film with Giemsa's stain or Leishman's stain, one drop to one c.c. of distilled water, for 10 minutes. Differ- entiate in distilled water. Do not blot the film, but allow it to dry in air, placing the slide tilted against any vertical surface, with the film side downwards to protect it from dust. Examine with the 1-12th-in. oil immersion lens and a fairly high, eg., No. 6 ocular. The leucocytes are seen to be evenly scattered, field by field, over the half-inch square, which can be rapidly examined for malaria parasites, L. donovani, etc. As contrasted with control thick films for healthy blood, the leucopenia of kala-azar at once becomes most strikingly apparent. PUS FILMS FOR MICROSCOPICAL EXAMINATION. 23. These films should be prepared in the same manner as their blood films(see para. 21). In preparing films for examination for the gonococcus, the sample of pus should be collected on the patient's rising in the morning and before he has urinated. D. RULES FOR PRESERVING PACKING, AND DESPATCHING SPECIMENS TO CHEMICAL EXAMINERS FOR ANALYSIS. 1. The suspected viscus or other materials to be sent for examination should be enclosed in a glass bottle or jar, fitted with a stopper or sound cork. 2. If the material sent is liable to decomposition, it should invari- ably be preserved by one of the following methods:Appx. XXI. Specimens for laboratory examination. (ii) In cases of suspected alcoholic poisoning in man the contents of the stomach and its washings in pure water should be placed in a bottle with a sufficient quantity of clean table salt to saturate the solution and leave a little salt un- dissolved. The stomach itself, after being washed in pure water as above, may be preserved in alcohol as in (i). (iii) In cases of suspected cattle poisoning the viscera or other material may be preserved in spirit or in a solution of common salt. If a solution of salt is used it should be prepared as follows:Specimens for laboratory examination. Appx. XXI. of the post mortem examination) which will throw light on the case or afford him a clue. 9. It is important that substances supposed to contain poison should be analysed with as little delay as possible. When reasonable suspicion exists that poison has been used in the commission of an offence, the substance supposed to contain the poison should be at once sent to the chemical examiner. 10. Registered parcels up to a limit of 25 seers in weight are accepted for transmission by post, and the post should, as far as possible, be used in preference to the railway in medico-legal cases. 285
Appx. XXII. StationsStationsAppx. XXIII. StationsMeasurements of elastic stocking, etc. Appx. XXIV. APPENDIX XXIV. DIRECTIONS FOR MEASUREMENTS OF ELASTIC STOCKINGS AND TRUSSES. I. Directions for the measurement for elastic stockings. Round upper third of thigh. Round centre of thigh. Round lower third of thigh. Round thigh just above condyles of femur. Round knee-cap. Round leg just below head of tibia. Round middle of calf. Round leg just below calf. Round malleoli at ankle. Round foot just above heel. Round instep. Round great toe joint. Length from centre of back of upper third of thigh to lower border of heel. Distance from point just above centre of heel to great toe joint. Those measurements only which are necessary for the manufacture of the particular size and length of the stocking required should be given, and all measurements must be stated in inches. The length of the stocking required should be taken by following the contour of the back of the leg while the patient is standing erect. II. Trusses. State description of hernia. State whether the hernia or weakness is on the right, left or on both sides. Give some idea of the size of the protrusion, e.g., as big as an egg or a walnut. State approximate size of opening through which hernia escapes. The measurement for a truss, whether inguinal or femoral should be taken in the following manner; a measured tape is to be drawn fairly tightly round the pelvis, just below the crests of the ilia, and the two ends made to meet above the symphisis pubis, when the number in inches can be read off. Send number of old truss, if one is in use. 289
Appx. XXV. Submission of payment indents. APPENDIX XXV. RULES REGARDING THE SUBMISSION OF PAYMENT INDENTS TO MEDICAL STORES. Payment indents may be submitted by:Submission of payment indents. Appx. XXV. (8) By Director, Medical Services, Deputy Director, Medical Services, Assistant Director, Medical Services, Director, Veterinary Services, or Deputy or Assistant Director, Veterinary Services, in the case of individuals in Military employment, and Director-General, Indian. Medical Service, or the offices mentioned opposite item (4) above in the case of individuals in Civil employment. (9) By Deputy Director, Medical Services or Assistant Director, Medical Services. (10) By Administrative Medical Officers mentioned opposite item No. (4) above. (12) By Officers mentioned opposite item No. (4) above. (13) (14) By Director-General, Indian Medical Service, in the case of Indian States under the Government of India and Local Surgeon-General or Inspector-General of Civil Hospitals in the case of Indian States under Local Government. (15) By Director-General, Indian Medical Service. (16) By Senior Medical Officer, Port Blair. (17) By Officers mentioned opposite item No. (4) above. Medical Stores may not be supplied to private persons. 291
Appx. XXVI. Period of turnover of drugs, etc. APPENDIX XXVI. PERIOD OF TURNOVER OF DRUGS, ETC. NOTE.Period of turnover of drugs, etc. Appx. XXVI. P. V. M. S. No. Article. Period of turnover in years. 46-A Auri Chloridum in 15 grs. tubes.. 5 52 Bismuthi Salicylas..... 5 54 Bleaching Powder..... 1 55 Borax Purificatus..... 5 59 Caffeinæ Citras..... 2 61 Calcii Chloridum..... 5 if not moist. 68 Camphorodyne..... 5 75 Chloral Hydras..... 2 but requires watching.. 77 Chloroformum in 1 oz. tubes... 5 82 Cocainæ Hythochloridum... 5 84 Collodium Flexile..... 5 if it retains its bulk. 89 Copaiba...... 5 91 Creosotum...... 5 92 Cresol saponified..... 5 93 Creta Praeparata..... 5 96 Cupri Sulphas..... 5 101 Emplastrum Belladonnæ... 1 111 Ethyl Chloride, tubes of 3 c.c... 5 118 Extractum Colocynthidis Co.... 5 114 Extractum Belladonnæ Liquidum.. 5 if bulk retained. 122 ,, Filicis Liquidum... 5 126 ,, Hamamelidis Liquidum.. 5 127 ,, Hyoscyami.... 5 130 ,, Nucis Vomicæ liquidum. 5 if bulk retained.. 136 Ferri et Ammonii Citras.... 5 137 ,, et Quininæ Citras.... 5 149 Glyeerinum...... 5 152 Hexamina (Urotropine)... 5 157 Hydrargyri Cremor (Mercurial Cream). 2 158 ,, Iodidum Rubrum... 5 169 Iodine powder in tubes.... 5 163 Hydrargyri Subchloridum... 5 170 Iodoformum...... 5 194 Liquor Formaldehydi.... 5 293
Appx. XXVI. Period of turnover of drugs, etc. P. V. M. S. No. Article. Period of turnover in years. 195 Liquor Hydrogenii Peroxidi... 1 171 Iodum...... 5 172 Ipecacuanhae Radix Pulvis... 5 177 Linimentum Camphoræ Ammoniatum. 5 180 Linimentum Saponis.... 2 185 Liquor Ammoniæ..... 1 188 ,, Arsenicalis..... 5 190 ,, Arsenii et Hyd. Iodidi... 1 192 Liquor Epispasticus.... 1 193 ,, Ferri Perchlor, Fortis... 5 198 ,, Plumbi Subacetatis Fort.. 2 199 ,, Potassæ..... 5 203 Lysol....... 5 206 Magnesii Sulphas..... 2 227 P. C. oil...... 1 217 Morphinæ Tartras..... 5 218 Mustard compressed in lb. tins.. 5 230 Oleum Arachis..... 5 246 ,, Ricini..... 2 249 ,, Terebinthinæ Rect... 5 253 Opii Pulvis...... 5 257 Paraffinum Molle..... 5 258 ,, Antiseptic... 5 263 Phenacetinum..... 5 269 Pil Calomel compound Rhubarb and Colocynth (2 grains of each). 5 280 Pil Plumbi cum Opio.... 5 286 Pituitrin ampoules of ½ c. c.... 2 289 Plumbi Acetas..... 5 293 Potassii Acetas..... 5 295 ,, Bromidum.... 5 296 ,, Chloras..... 5 299 ,, Iodidum..... 5 301 Potassii Permanganas.... 5 304 Pulvis Cretæ Aromaticus cum Opio.. 5 294
Period of turnover of drugs, etc. Appx. XXVI. P. V. M. S. No. Article. Period of turnover in years. 306 Pulvis Ipecaeuanhæ Co..... 5 307 Pulvis Jalapæ Co..... 5 317 Quinine Sulphas..... 5 324 Santoninum...... 5 331 Sodii Bicarbonas..... 5 336 Sodii Citras...... 5 344 Sodii Salicylas..... 5 348 Spiritus Aetheris Nitrosi.... 1 349 Spiritus Ammoniæ Aromattcus.. 1 350 Spiritus Methylatus.... 5 if bulk retained 356 Sulphur Sublimatum.... 5 361 Easton Syrup..... 1 366 Tabs. Hydrargyri Perchloride 8 8/4 gr. tubes 5 470 Tinctura Belladonnæ.... 5 471 Tinctura Benzoini Co..... 5 473 Tinctura Camphor Co..... 5 483 Tinctura Digitalis..... 1 486 Tinctura Gentianæ Co..... 5 495 Tinctura Nucis Vomicæ..... 5 496 Tinctura Opii..... 5 502 Tinctura Scillæ..... 5 514 Unguentum Hydrargyri.... 5 523 Unguentum Sulphuris.... 5 528 Vinum Ipecacuanhæ.... 5 530 Zinci Chloridum..... 5 531 Zinci Oxidum..... 5 532 Zinci Sulphas..... 2 1861 Alcohol Absolute B. P..... 1 1877 Barium Carbonate puriss... 5 1906 Litmus powder extra pure... 5 1920 Phenalphthallein pure.... 5 1975 Dulcite....... 5 1976 Glucose, pure..... 5 972 Peptone Powder..... 3 295
Appx. XXVI. Period of turnover of drugs, etc. P. V. M. S. No. Article. Period of turnover in years. 1953 Sodium Taurocholate.... 1 1947 Sodium Hyposulphite, pure Recryst. 2 1980 Mannite...... 5 1986 Oil Cedarwood..... 5 1985 Oil Aniline...... 3 1969 Gelatine (Coignet's extra fine).. 5 1987 Xylol., pure..... 5 1968 Agar Agar...... 5 1392 Bags, ice, head..... 2 1393 Bags, ice, spine..... 2 1399 Beds, air, George's..... 5 1427 Cushions, air, circular.... 5 1428 Cushions, air, square.... 5 1683 Tourniquets, Esmarch's I. R.... 2 1728 Gauge, double cyanide, compress, pkts. of 2 ½ yds. 5 1731 Gauze, surgical, loosewove unmedicated. 5 1750 Wool, cotton, absorbent, compressed, 2 oz. pkts. 5 1753 Wool, double cyanide, compressed, 1 oz. pkts. 5 1754 Ligatures, catgut, sterilized... 4 1756 Ligatures, catgut, unsterilized... 5 1704 Tubes, stomach, I. R. with I. R. funnel and gag. 1 1749 Wool, cotton, absorbent, 1 lb. pkts... 5 1752 Wool, double cyanide, 1 lb. pkts... 5 1760-61 Ligatures, linen, sterilized and unsterilized 5 1768-72 Tubing, drainage..... 2 1780 ,, ,, in tubes... 5 2299 Brushes, nail...... 4 2312-15 Corks, various..... 5 2335-35A Flannel, coarse... 4 2412 Paste board, for splints. 5 2432-34 Plaster adhesive.... 1 2438 Plaster of Paris.... 2 296
Period of turnover of drugs, etc. Appx. XXVI. P. V. M. S. No. Article. Period of turnover in years. 2411. Paper, wrapping..... 5 2466 Soap, carbolic..... 1 2503 Waterproof sheeting " Pluviusin ".. 3 .. Rubber components of medical and surgical apparatus. 1 2377 Leathers, white..... 5 2405-06 Paper, litmus..... 5 2407 Paper, paraffin.... 3 2607 Labels, plain, gummed.. 2 297
Appx. XXVII. Scales of field medical equipment. APPENDIX XXVII. Scale of medical equipment for headquarters and regimental units in the field. Unit Apparatus, water testing, Horrocks. Field inedcal companion complete. Feld medical pannier, No. 1. Feld medical pannier, No. 2. Field Surgical haversack. Outfits, first-aid. REMARKS. Headquarters, army, divi- sion or cavalry division. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. British or Indian cavalry regiment. 1 1 1 1 1 .. Headquarters of a field brigade R. A., or an Indian Mountain Brigade R. A., and Ammunition Column. 1 .. .. .. .. .. Battery, R. A. 1 1 1 1 1 .. Divisional Ammunition column. 1 3 1 1 3 .. Headquarters company or field troop, Sappers and Miners. 1 1 .. .. 1 .. Army troops, field or rail- way company, Sappers and Miners. 1 1 1 1 1 .. British or Indian Infantry battalion. 1 1 1 1 1 .. Pioneer battalion 1 1 1 1 1 .. Armoured Car Company, Royal Tank Corps. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Per car. Divisional Train 1 1 1 1 1 .. Divisional Signals 1 1 1 1 1 .. 298
INDEX. Paragraph. ACCOMMODATIONIndex APArIndex BayBoIndex ChCoIndex. De-Di. Paragraph. DEATHSDi-Di. Index. Paragraph. DIETARYIndex. Di-Du. Paragraph. DISINFECTIONDu-En. Index. Paragraph. DUTIESIndex. Ep-Eq. Paragraph. EPIDEMICS. Appx. XIX EPILEPSY 433 EQUIPMENT 335Eq-Fa. Index. Paragraph. EQUIPMENTIndex. Fe-Ho. Paragraph. FEESHyIndex InInIndex. InInIndex. LaMaIndex. MeMiIndex. Of. Paragraph. OFFICER COMMANDINGOf. Index. OFFICERIndex. OfPeIndex. QRIndex. Re. Paragraph. REPORTS AND RETURNSReIndex. SmTeIndex. UnVe