Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. VOL. VI. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM CENTRAL PROVINCES AND MADRAS TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74908722.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894. Price Two Rupees Eight Annas.
I P /DA, /. V 52.d. I.P
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. VOL. VI. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM CENTRAL PROVINCES AND MADRAS TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74908737.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894. Price Two Rupees Eight Elnnas:
QUESTIONS FRAMED BY THE COMMISSION. Evidence before the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-94. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY. 1. What opportunities have you had of obtain- ing information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs in regard to which your answers are framed? 2. In the most recent work on ganja (Dr. Prain's report of 21st June 1893) it is stated that "in India three narcotic articles are obtained naturally from hemp. These are, siddhi or bhang, charas, and ganja." They are thus defined by Dr. Prain: "Siddhi, bhang, subji or patti are different names applied to the dry leaves of the hemp plant, whether male or female and whether cultivated or uncultivated. "Charas is the name applied to the resinous matter which forms the active principle of the plant when collected separately. "Ganja consists of the dried flowering tops of cultivated female hemp plants which have become coated with resin in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely.The formation of seeds is prevented by the destruction of all the male plants. "Three varieties of ganja are sold. Ganja is usually manufactured by being trodden under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops assume a flattened shape. This is 'Flat ganja.' The other sort of ganja is not trodden, but rolled under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops are less closely adherent, and assume a rounded shape. This is 'Round ganja.' The flower-tops of ganja detached from the twigs, whether of flat or of round ganja, and whether the detachment has been accidental or deliberate, form 'chur' or Broken ganja.' " May these definitions be accepted for your pro- vince? By what name is each of these products locally known? CHAPTER II. CULTIVATION OR GROWTH OF HEMP. (Cannabis sativa.) 3. In what districts of which you have know- ledge does the hemp plant grow spontaneously? Mention any in which it is abundant. 4. By what different names is it known? Do these refer to exactly the same plant? 5. What special conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, elevation above sea level, etc., are necessary to the growth of the wild hemp? 6. Is the growth of the wild hemp ordinarily dense, or scattered? 7. Is there any cultivation of the hemp plant in your provinceii it quite lose its effect in time? How long does it keep good with ordinary care ? What are the causes of deterioration ? What special measures can be taken to prevent deterioration ? CHAPTER IV. TRADE. (Statistics to be obtained from Government offices.) CHAPTER V. CONSUMPTION OR USE. NOTE.iii 38. Have the three different preparations of ganja (round and flat ganja and "chur") any different effects in kind or degree on consumers? 39. Is the smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant in any way a less injurious form of consumption than drinking or eating the same or any other preparation? Give reasons for your answer. 40. (a) Is the use of any of these drugs prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by any school of Native Doctors? (b) Are any of them used in the treatment of cattle disease? 41. May the moderate use of charas, ganja, or bhang be beneficial in its effectsiv 60. If ganja is produced in your province, do you think that the cultivation of the ganja-bear- ing plant and the process of its preparation are sufficiently controlled, or that the system requires modification in any respect? If so, in what respects and why? 61. If charas is produced in your province, do you think the cultivation of the hemp plant for its production and the process of preparation are sufficiently controlled, or that the system requires modification in any respect. If so, in what re- spects and why? 62. Do you think that the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should be in any way controlled? Would this be feasible? If so, indicate the method by which such control could be exercised. 63. Have you any objection to the present system of a wholesale/b retail vend of 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang or preparations of them? If you have any objections, state them at length, and indicate the improvements you suggest. 64. Have you any objections to the existing regulations governing the export and import of these drugs or of their preparations from and into your province, or their transport within the pro- vince? Give reasons for your answer. 65. In your opinion is the taxation of 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang reasonable with reference (a) to each other, (b) to alcoholic or other intoxicants? Give reasons for any alterations in the amount of taxation of any of these articles which you may suggest. 66. In your opinion is it necessary that there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja (such as the "flat," "round," and " broken " ganja produced in Bengal), or for ganja grown in different localities? If so, on what principle? 67. Having regard to the ultimate incidence of the tax on the consumer, have you any objections to the present method of taxing 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang? 68. Are there in your province houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs or their prepar- ations where they may be consumed on the premi- ses? What is your view in respect to such houses or shops? 69. Are the wishes of the people consulted or considered in any way before a shop is opened in any locality? What measures are taken for this purpose? Ought local public opinion to be thus considered? 70. Are there any facts regarding the importa- tion or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States into your province to which you wish to draw attention? Is duty really paid in respect to the ganja and other hemp drugs used? Or is there any general use of untaxed drugs, and by whom?
INDEX TO CENTRAL PROVINCES AND MADRAS WITNESSES. No. Name. Designation. Page. CENTRAL PROVINCES. 1 J. W. NeillJudicial Commissioner 1 2 Colonel M. M. Bowie Commissioner 3 3 F. C. Anderson * Offg. ditto 5 4 L. K. Laurie Offg. Secretary to the Chief Commissioner 7 5 H. H. Priest Revenue Secretary 8 6 A. C. Duff Deputy Commissioner ib. 7 B. Robertson Ditto 9 8 Khan Bahadur Aulad Hussein, C.I.E. vi No. Name. Designation. Page. CENTRAL PROVINCESvii No. Name. Designation. Page. CENTRAL PROVINCESviii No. Name. Designation. Page. MADRASix No. Name. Designation. Page. MADRASx No. Name. Designation. Page. MADRASxi No. Name. Designation. Page. MADRASxii No. Name. Designation. Page. MADRASINDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. EVIDENCE OF CENTRAL PROVINCES WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of MR. J. W. NEILL, Judicial Commissioner, Central Provinces. 25. The only one of these drugs that is largely consumed in the Central Provinces is ganja. It is not easy to prove that the consumption of ganja is on the increase, but I certainly believe that to be the fact. I am free to admit that my own per- sonal inquiries on the subject have been limited, and that I have not perhaps been in a position to acquire information at first hand, but many circum- stances appear to me to point to the fact that the use of ganja has acquired a greater vogue. It is known that the use of ganja has always been common among the general labouring popula- tion of many, if not all, our districts, more parti- cularly perhaps those districts of which the popu- lation is largely made up of the descendants of immigrants from Northern India; and it is also known that the same classes or many of them that use ganja also drink country spirit, but it is far from easy to make an estimate of the numbers who take ganja or of those who both smoke ganja and drink spirit. Equally difficult is it to esti- mate the annual consumption of ganja in the pro- vince. In 1878 the Commissioner of Excise, Mr. Nicholls, thought the consumption of the province would not be much over 5,000 maunds. This must have been a ludicrous over-estimate if only taxed ganja is now consumed. It serves to show, however, how little was really known about the matter. In 1882 the Commissioner of Excise, Mr. Anderson, again said: "Still we have much to learn as to the actual quantity of the drug which the people consume." And in 1884 the same Commissioner said: "With our present knowledge it is really impos- sible to estimate with anything like certainty the probable yearly consumption of ganja in this pro- vince." I am not aware that since then the information acquired is such as would enable the Commissioner of Excise to express any confident opinion on the matter. This being so, it is easy to see that any opinion that the use of ganja is on the increase or decrease must be to a very large extent conjectural. I have said, however, that I believe it to be on the increase, and I will men- tion some of the reasons which make me think so. In the first place, such is, I think, the general opinion among natives, not only amongst those who have become Europeanized and who have so readily learnt to damn the sins they have no mind to, and to wish for interference with the ways of their neighbours which are not their ways, but also among those who remain Hindus and Orient- als, and refrain from passing any moral judgment on the indulgences of others. Next, it will be seen from the information which the Provincial Excise Reports afford, that the quan- tity of ganja taxed, and which passes into con- sumption, has on the whole (allowing for apparent fluctuations which can in a great degree be explained away) steadily and largely increased. In 1892-93 it was nearly double what it was ten years before. Of course this may be ascribed wholly or in part to taxed ganja taking the place of untaxed ganja, and 1 readily grant that ganja could be easily smuggled into many districts from outside, and that cultivators of the ganja-bearing plant might keep back part of the produce of their cultivation and surreptitiously sell it. Also that a few ganja plants might be grown in small plots by individuals to provide for their private con- sumption of the drug; and that as these practices were more and more successfully put down, ganja smokers would have to go to licensed vendors for their supply, and the quantity of taxed ganja sold would increase without any corresponding real in- crease of consumption. All this I freely concede. But it appears to me that if it was only that taxed ganja was substituted for untaxed and illicitly obtained ganja, the great increase would have shown itself in the earlier years after cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant was placed under restriction, imports watched, and all illicit cultivation severely punished. But such is not really the case. The steady and regular increase set in some six or seven years later, and it seems to be accepted that smuggling to a considerable extent still continues. I think, therefore, that figures which can be relied upon show that there has been some real increase of consumption, and this increase is greater than the increase in the population. Thirdly, I would draw attention to the fact that this increase of consumption has occurred, al- though the retail price of ganja, is about five times as great as it was before the direct tax- ation of the drug and the restriction of cultivation in 1875-76. Fourthly, it would not be surprising2 country spirit have to take it at the shop like a dram unless they can afford to carry away a full bottle, which will cost them two annas and often more, the ganja smoker can buy his pice worth at any time, carry it about with him, and smoke it when and where he likes. It would not be strange then if many should take to ganja smok- ing, who would, under other circumstances, drink country spirit. Whether this is the case as a matter of fact is disputed. Some officers and a late Commissioner of Excise have asserted that ganja smokers and spirit drink- ers are separate classes, and that there is little cause to fear that a man of the former class will abandon spirit and take to ganja, but in 1877 there was an inquiry made into this matter, and Mr. Nicholls, the then Commissioner of Excise, summed up the reports received, saying it was generally thought, and it was an opinion which he himself shared, that ganja was being more widely consumed owing to the high price of opium and country spirits; and after continuing his en- quiries for another year he said he had obtained incontestable evidence that the past extreme cheapness of ganja had resulted in a very great increase of consumption, and a year later again he reported that, except in Betul, in the upland districts, the Gonds and poorer classes had sub- stituted cheap ganja for dear country spirit. It is true that since then the retail price of ganja has greatly risen; but even allowing for this, the disproportion of the cost is still very great. Lastly, I should not be at all surprised if the efforts Government has made to raise a revenue by taxing the drug to control the cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant and to limit the consump- tion of ganja had in another way led to some increased consumption by making the drug better known and by making some people think that the drug is a luxury, and that a luxury that must be paid for or that is forbidden must be worth having, very much as school-boys will indulge in tobacco-smoking, not because they like it, but because it is forbidden. And to this it may be added that the quality of the ganja supplied has, owing to the interference of Government, been greatly improved, which may very well have led persons to use it who would not have done so before. The above are the reasons which led me to think that the consumption of ganja is on the increase. 35. I do not think it would be feasible to pro- hibit the use of ganja. It might be possible to prevent consumption by prohibiting the cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant all over India, but that could not be done, that is to say the prevention of the use of ganja, without causing serious discontent, which, I am persuaded, would amount to a political danger. Ganja is much used by religious mendi- cants and others of that class, and it would be quite in their power to get up among a discontented people an agitation against the Government. While, however, the discontent would necessarily follow the prohibition of the use of ganja, it is almost certain that those who were deprived of this stimulant would promptly turn to another, and if not to alcohol, turn to other drugs3 experience has not shown me that even excessive indulgence in ganja incites to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise, nor do I remem- ber any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy, or, except one case of dacoity in the Saugor district, where habitual or pro- fessional criminals have fortified themselves to commit a premeditated crime; but I think it ex- tremely likely that a person, not an ordinary criminal, but one who had determined to do a desperate deed, might nerve himself to the act by smoking ganja; and I think I can recollect a case of that kind in the Bhandara district, where four Muhammadans of desperate character, but not ordinary criminals, defied the police for long in a house in which they had made themselves strong, and finally, after murdering their women, who willingly consented thereto, broke out and escaped, only to be captured some days later. These men had, I believe, fortified themselves with ganja, but it was not the ganja that impelled them to commit the crime. In all my experience I cannot at present recall one single case in which a state of ganja intoxication was the real cause of the crime, while I could cite a whole catalogue of murders the result of drunkenness. Since the above was written, another case has come before me, in which a man charged with the murder of his wife asserted that he knew nothing of the matter: he had been smoking ganja, and for days knew nothing of what happened. This was proved to be wholly untrue, and I merely mention the matter as showing how often drugs are said to be the cause of crime when there is absolutely no foundation for the statement. 55. I do not remember any case in which mere ganja was used by criminals to stupefy their vic- tims. Dhatura is of common use for their pur- pose. It is not always possible in such cases to ascertain what was used. 58. I think the present system of Excise Ad- ministration in respect of hemp drugs is working well. It has been gradually elaborated, and is now well understood. Does not give more trouble than any system of strict control that can easily be conceived, and brings in a very considerable revenue. Some of the best officers in the province have at one time or another in the last dozen years held the office of Commissioner of Excise, and they have done their best to establish a good working system. I cannot say that I have been able to give that minute examination to the de- tails of the system that would enable me to point out small blots or weaknesses, but that will not be expected from me, nor am I prepared to suggest that the present rates of duty should be enhanced or reduced. In spite of my belief that the use of ganja is on the increase, I am not prepared to say that it would be better that more alcohol should be con- sumed and less ganja. I do not think that the information collected up to date warrants us in dogmatizing on the matter. The other questions in this chapter have either been answered infer- entially in answers already given, or do not require an answer from me. But I would like to say in conclusion that I think in the case of a drug so generally consumed as ganja the system of tax- ation and of control should be, if not uniform for all provinces, yet on somewhat the same lines, and that the tax should fall, if not at the same rate, still at such rates that there should be no great temptation to smuggle from one part of British India into another. 2. Evidence of COLONEL M. M. BOWIE, Commissioner, Nerbudda Division. 1. I have been in the Central Provinces Com- mission since 1864, and have been Assistant and Deputy Commissioner, Inspector General of Police and Jails, and finally Commissioner. My name will be found also among those who have held the appointment of Commissioner of Excise, but I never took up this appointment, and I have never had any special opportunities of obtaining information regarding hemp drugs, and have not given the subject any particular attention. 2. I have never heard of charas being used by the people of this province, nor have I seen it. I believe that both the bhang and ganja here used are obtained from the cultivated plant, and I am not aware that the different kinds of ganja noted in the question are generally known in this province. 7. In this province the hemp plant is now cultivated in the Nimar district only. The cul- tivation elsewhere has been prohibited. In Nimar it is cultivated for the production of both ganja and bhang. I have never heard of charas being produced there. 16. Bhang is, I am informed, invariably pre- pared by the people in their own houses. 19.As far as I know, ganja is used only for smoking. 20. Ganja-smokers will, I believe, be found among all classes of the people, but it is the labouring classes that chiefly consume it. As to the proportion of the people who consume ganja, I fear I cannot give reliable information. In the village in which I am now encamped, Lokurtalai, in the Hoshungabad district, there are 909 in- habitants, and the contractor tells me he has eight regular customers. 21. The people say they use the ganja supplied by the contractor, and the contractor informs me that this is the flat ganja. 23. I am informed that bhang is never used for smoking in this part of the country. 24. Here bhang is chiefly drunk by the bunnia class and most of all by the Marwaris who take it during the hot weather as a cooling drink (thandai). In Sumbalpur the brahmins, I know, use it in the same way, and I believe its use is common among brahmins in other parts of the province also. A preparation of bhang, called majun is eaten by all classes in small quantities on the occasion of some festivals. 25. I know no reason for supposing that the use of any of these drugs is on the increase, and people say that the consumption of ganja has much decreased since restrictions were placed on the cultivation and sale of this drug. 26. I do not know of any class that habitually consumes bhang, and the occasional consumers I believe to be always moderate consumers. With regard to ganja, I would say that most of the consumers are probably habitual moderate con- sumers, though there are also a large number vol. vi. D 2
4 of occasional moderate consumers. The number of occasional excessive consumers must, however, be very small. 27. The habitual moderate consumers of ganja are, I believe, mostly men who have hard bodily labour, such as palki-bearers, hamals, etc. The ordinary cultivating classes are also often habi- tual consumers, but among all these classes there are often men who only smoke ganja occasionally, i.e., when they have had a hard day's work. The habitual excessive consumers are chiefly religious mendicants, who use it, I believe, because they have nothing else to do. 29. Ordinarily, ganja is, I am informed, smoked with an admixture of tobacco only, but gosains and other religious mendicants, who are almost invariably excessive ganja consumers, are said frequently to add dhatura in order to increase the intoxicating effects. 30. Both bhang and ganja are generally con- sumed by the people in their own houses, and I am not aware that company is sought for in the consumption of either. Bhang as " thandai" is, I believe, used by females also, but I have never heard that females smoke ganja. It is not usual for children to consume either bhang or ganja. 33. Public opinion is certainly not against the drinking of bhang, and no disrepute whatever attaches to it. I can remember some of my Marwari friends in Nagpur recommending it to me as an excellent cooling drink in the hot weather and offering to bring me some. Similar- ly, I think that there is no public opinion against the moderate use of ganja, though there is with regard to the excessive use of it. Except in the case of religious mendicants, an ordinary person who uses ganja to excess is generally lazy and useless, and falls into disrepute in consequence. 34. I believe that to persons accustomed to drink bhang in the hot weather, it would be a serious privation to forego the consumption, and any illness they might subsequently contract would most certainly be ascribed to this cause. Similarly, I think that to men who have to undergo severe bodily labour, it would be a very serious privation indeed if they could not get their accustomed pipe of ganja. 35. I do not think it would be feasible to prohibit the use of either bhang or ganja. The drugs would most certainly be consumed illicitly, and the prohibition would cause most serious discontent among the consumers; such discontent would, I have no doubt, be a political danger. The chief consumers are religious mendicants, and the question would be sure to be made a religious one, and no one can say to what this would lead. The prohibition, if it could be enforced, would be followed by recourse to other drugs in the first instance, and then probably to alcoholic stimu- lants. 36. I do not think that there is any reason to suppose that alcohol is being substituted for bhang or ganja in these provinces. 40. I have been told by the people that former- ly they used to use bhang pretty freely in the treatment of cattle and horses; but that now that the price is so much increased they very seldom do so. 41. Those who use bhang certainly believe that it is beneficial in its effects, being cooling and acting also as a digestive. Similarly, those who use ganja say that it gives staying power under severe exertion and alleviates fatigue. The belief is also very prevalent that it is of use to ward off malaria. The people tell me that they use it when they have to go to jungle tracts where the water is bad. I refer here to the moderate occa- sional use of the drugs. 43. Absolutely as far as I can learn. 44. The immediate effect of bhang is said to be cooling and refreshing, and it also gives appetite. Ganja smoking is also said to create appetite, to remove the feeling of fatigue, and to allay hunger. 45. I have no reason to suppose that the habi- tual use in moderation of either bhang or ganja produces any injurious effects whatever. No in- stances of this have come under my own observa- tion. I have of course frequently heard District Superintendents of Police describe men as being idle and useless because they were addicted to the use of drugs; but I do not remember that District Superintendents have ever told me that this was the result of ganja smoking alone; and I am in- clined to think that they seldom, if ever, take the trouble to distinguish the effects of different forms of drugs. Besides this, the men thus re- ported to me as being idle and useless were all excessive consumers, and it is also open to doubt whether in many cases at least they were not idle and useless before they took to drugs. Since the question has been before me, I have seen and spoken to a good many moderate consumers among the general population; and there was nothing whatever in their appearance or talk to distinguish them from non-consumers. I can call to mind many instances in which Police officers have been dismissed for neglect of duty owing to indulgence in alcohol; but not a single case in which this was owing to ganja smoking. As regards insanity, I would say that the popular belief certainly is that the excessive use of ganja does produce insanity, and in some cases in which the insanity was purely temporary, and which came under my observation in our lunatic asylums, ganja smoking certainly appeared to be the exciting cause of the insanity; but I have always myself been inclined to doubt whether ganja smoking will of itself produce insanity, and whether in most cases at least there may not be some previously existing brain disease which has led to the excessive indulgence in ganja. It is always very difficult, and often absolutely impos- sible, to obtain any really reliable information as to the previous history of the insanes brought to the asylums; and I cannot myself remember a case in which it was clearly shown that it was ganja smoking alone which led to insanity. I am clearly of opinion that the question of the use of the drug by persons suffering from mental anxiety and brain disease has not been sufficiently consi- ered when ganja smoking has been alleged as the cause of insanity. 51. I do not believe that any large proportion of bad characters are habitual consumers of either bhang or ganja, and I do not consider that the moderate use of these drugs has any connection whatever with crime of any kind. 52. I hold the same opinions in regard to the excessive use of these drugs. 53. I cannot call to mind any instance of the excessive indulgence in either bhang or ganja having incited to the commission of crime of any kind having come under my own observation; nor have I been able to learn of any case of the kind from the officials in the Hoshungabad district whom. I have been able to question on the point, except one case which Inspector Mahummud Taki
5 tells me he has already brought to the notice of the Commission. This he tells me was a case in which a head constable and some constables after a debauch in bhang had a fight in which some of them were severely wounded. Without knowing the exact details of this case I would not like to express any opinion regarding it; but from the fact that it is the only case of the kind that I have been able to hear of, I may, I think, safely con- clude that such cases are very rare indeed; and with regard to this particular case, I would say that it is a matter of surprise to me that the excit- ing cause should have been bhang and not ganja. As far as I have been able to learn, bhang is very seldom used as an intoxicant. I have of course frequently read of men running amok under the influence of bhang or ganja, but I do not think that any attempt has been made in these cases to distinguish the particular drug the men had used; nor do I remember a case in which it was clearly established that any drug at all had been used. I can call to mind a great many cases which I have had to deal with as a Magistrate and as a Sessions Judge, in which serious hurt and homicide had been caused by persons under the influence of alcohol, but not a single case of crime of any kind which had been committed under the influence of bhang or ganja. With regard to the cases of hurt, etc., which I disposed of as a Magistrate, it is possible that my memory may be at fault, but this is not probable in regard to the cases of homi- cide which I have disposed of as Sessions Judge. 54. I have heard it said, or perhaps rather seen it written, that people committing violent crime had previously fortified themselves with ganja, but no case of the kind has ever come under my observation, or been reported to me as far as I can recollect. 55. I do not remember a case of the kind com- ing under my own observation, but I have heard of cases in which ganja has been used as the vehicle for the administration of dhatura. I do not believe that complete stupefaction can be in- duced by ganja alone. 58. I have only got a general knowledge of the system of excise in respect to drugs in these prov- inces, and believe that it is working well. 60. I consider that under the system in force in these provinces the cultivation of the ganja- bearing plant and the process of its cultivation are sufficiently controlled; and I believe that if any further restriction were placed on cultivation, it would lead to a great deal of smuggling from the neighbouring Native States. 3. Evidence of MR. F. C. ANDERSON, Officiating Commissioner, Nagpur. 1.As Commissioner of Excise in 1882-85. 2.Charas is hardly known in the Central Prov- inces. What is generally sold are6 26. Ganja smoking.7 any improvement of the system of control over the hemp drugs; but the duties might be raised gradually if the hemp drugs are shown to be deleterious. In saying that liquor is innocuous, I mean that the weak liquor consumed in the Nagpur district is harmless. And, on the as- sumption that hemp drugs are deleterious, I should regard the change of habit from hemp drugs to liquor as beneficial. Question 33.8 observation of persons whom I have had reason to believe to be ganja smokers, I am under the impression that its effect is to produce mental torpor or drowsiness for an hour or a couple of hours after consumption, but the effect quickly passes off and no evil results seem to follow. Moderate smokers are, to the best of my knowledge, inoffensive persons, and in no way quarrelsome. I have never met a case of a man whom an excess of ganja had excited to passion or crime; but I have known superintendents of lunatic asylums describe the abuse of ganja as a cause of insanity; and as their records of causes of insanity are based upon enquiries made of the patients' relatives, it may be that ganja is popularly believed to pro- duce madness, if taken in excess. This is not surprising, for if tobacco is indulged in unduly, it affects the nerves and nerve centres. My belief is that ganja consumed in moderation is not more unwholesome than very strong tobacco. I cannot enter into details as to the action of ganja on the digestion, on the bodily organs, and on the constitu- tion generally, as my duties as Excise Commis- sioner did not directly lead me to a study of the pathology of the drug; and any statements on the subject which are not based on accurate observa- tions, scientifically made and recorded, would be worse than useless. (3) I have never traced any direct connection between ganja and crime. Criminals usually be- long to the poorer classes; and as it is among these that ganja smokers are chiefly found, persons known to the Police as " bad characters " used often to be found at ganja shops before smoking on the premises was put a stop to. One of the objections urged to this measure was that the Police know where to look for bad characters at a certain hour, and so could ascertain if they were safe in the village or wandering abroad with cri- minal purpose. As ganja is, seemingly, stupe- fying to a certain extent, no criminal would consume it as a preparation for crime. He might use it to deaden conscience or fear, after the crime was committed. I have not known a case of ganja being used as a drug to stupefy the victims of crime. Dhatura is well known to be the poison used for that purpose, and can be more readily administered. I do not think that complete stupe- faction could be produced by ganja alone in a sufficiently short space of time for criminal pur- poses. (4) Holding, as I do, that the consumption of ganja is limited and is, on the whole, innocuous; I see no necessity for prohibiting its cultivation or sales. I do not think it would bear much increase in taxation, as if it becomes too costly, the labourers will take to tari, or mohwa-spirit or some other stimulant. What is wanted is greater identity between the systems in force in different provinces and between these provinces and Berar, so as to decrease opportunities for smuggling, and to ensure our raising the highest possible revenue from the taxed drug. It is unnecessary for me to detail and compare the systems in force for taxing the drug in (a) the Central Provinces, (b) the Bombay presidency, (c) Berar, as an account of this is given in the printed memorandum on excise arrangements in respect to hemp drugs in the Central Provinces which is before the Commission; but it is well known that the free cultivation and low price of ganja in the Bombay Presidency is a source of danger to the revenue from taxed ganja in the Central Provinces and in Berar. Again, it is somewhat anomalous that our Khandwa godown should, without any official recognition of the fact beyond what is to be found in inciden- tal correspondence, be the source of supply for the North-Western Provinces Government con- tractors. Till I obtained the Chief Commis- sioner's permission to levy a " Registration fee " on all ganja purchased at our godown, this insti- tution existed (at our sole cost) more in the inter- ests of the North-Western Provinces Government than in our own. Traders must procure the drug much more cheaply at Khandwa than elsewhere, or they would not incur the cost of transport by rail for so many miles. If the subject were gone into, a revised system of export or warehouse dues might be arranged. Part of the money now expended on carriage might come into the hands of Government under a system of provincial cul- tivation and provincial storehouses. 5. Evidence of MR. H. H. PRIEST, Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Central Provinces, Revenue Department. After a lengthened experience of all parts of these provinces in the course of which I had, both as Excise Commissioner and in other executive capa- cities, the amplest opportunities of ascertaining popular opinion, I have never heard a single com- plaint against the Government arrangements for the sale of ganja, nor have I ever heard any reference to the prevalence or growth of the ganja habit as being due in any way to Government action. From my experience in feudatory States, I should indeed be strongly inclined to the opinion that Government action has had a marked effect in checking the use of ganja. 6. Evidence of MR. A. C. DUFF, Deputy Commissioner, Jubbulpore. 1. I have acted twice as Provincial Commis- sioner of Excise for 3 and 4½ months, and I was Deputy Commissioner of Nimar, the only district in which ganja is grown in the Central Provinces, for a year from April 1892 to April 1893. 2. I think not. As far as I know, ganja is only prepared in one way in these provinces. I know no special name for it. But I should judge it to be what is termed here flat ganja. I have never seen the drug being manufactured. 3. I know of none. I have no personal ex- perience of this district, but I am told by the Settlement Officer, whose knowledge of this dis- trict is extensive and peculiar, that the hemp plant does not grow spontaneously here. 7. For ganja, yes. Charas is entirely an imported product, and as far as my experience goes, bhang also. The hemp plant is cultivated far ganja in the Khandwa tahsil of the Nimar district only.
9 8. The area under cultivation fluctuates, accord- ing to the character of the season and the prices ruling in the preceding year. 10. They are of the ordinary agricultural class. 13. Vide answer to question 7. 14. Ganja, yes, in the Khandwa Tahsil of the Nimar district as before stated. The amount of ganja brought to the godown in Khandwa yearly varies from about 6,000 to over 8,000 maunds. (I write from memory.) 18. If the drugs can be kept dry, they will keep good for a long time, say, two years. 19. Charas is, I believe, used only for smoking. Ganja is nearly always smoked, but some excessive consumers are said in rare instances to eat it. 20. The consumption of charas here is insig- nificant. Ganja is smoked by a large percentage of the labouring class and by fakirs and sadhus almost universally. 22. Foreign; imported from the North-Western Provinces. 23. I have never heard of this practice. 24. Bhang is drunk by nearly all Marwaris of the better sort, specially in the hot weather and in the larger towns. 25. The revenue realized from ganja is steadily increasing. But it is possible that this is due to more efficient control and diminished smuggling. Personally, my enquiries have led me to the belief that the use of ganja is not on the increase. 27. I should say that the great bulk of the labouring class are habitual moderate consumers, and the great bulk of the fakir and sadhu classes habitual excessive consumers. 28. ¼ of a tola .. cost 3-6 pies. 1-2 tolas .. cost 1-4 annas. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja, and musk, cardamoms, dhatura, opium and betel-nut are sometimes also so used. Musk and cardamoms, for the fragrance they impart, and the others be- cause they are believed to increase the intoxicating power. 30. Consumption is practised both in company and in solitude, and is not confined to the male sex or to any time of life. Children are some- time given bhang by their elders as a treat. 32. It is the practice to drink bhang amongst Hindus at religious festivals, especially Nagpan- chami and Sheoratri. I know of no social custom requiring the use of the drug. 33. No doubt respectable people do not like to have it said of them that they smoke ganja. There is not the same feeling in respect to bhang. I attribute the feeling about ganja to the fact that it is emphatically the luxury of the very poor, and that, therefore, the criminal classes are gene- rally addicted to it. I never heard of any worship of the hemp plant. 34. I imagine persons who habitually consume the drug would suffer severely from its abrupt discontinuance. 35. Ganja is the only drug which is consumed in these provinces to an extent worth considering. It would be feasible to prohibit its use, but such prohibition would undoubtedly be followed by extensive smuggling. Serious discontent would be caused, but the aggrieved parties would be chiefly of the silent class, and the class with least powers of resistance. So perhaps it would be an exaggeration to call such discontent a political danger. Still everything which harasses and worries the lower classes to any large extent tends to aggravate any political danger which may arise. I should expect an increased con- sumption of opium (vide answer to question 36). 36. I think not. We are raising the price of our liquor in many places, and it is already very expensive in comparison with drugs. 40. I am informed by native doctors that ganja is prescribed for bronchitis and asthma. I am not aware that any of these drugs are used in cattle disease. 41. This is rather a question for a medical man than a layman. But the people believe that the moderate habitual use of the drug (ganja) acts as indicated in (a) and (b). 42. I cannot say. 43. I think they are. 45. No case has come under my personal notice in which the use of ganja, moderate or excessive, has produced any of the noxious effects recited. 51. I think the first part of this question must be answered in the affirmative. I don't believe that people are bad characters because they smoke ganja. But bad characters are generally people who are keen on getting as much pleasure out of life as they can, and ganja being cheap, they go in extensively for that. 53. I have never known personally of such a case. 54. I have never had this fact proved in evid- ence before me. 55. I think this is occasionally done. I can remember two or three instances during the time I have been a Magistrate in which I was satisfied that the victim had been drugged with ganja. But in no case was stupefaction produced to the best of my recollection. 58. I think it works well. 60. Quite sufficiently. 63. No. 64. No. 65. Yes. 67. No. 68. No. 69. Any local representation is, and ought to be, considered, but it is not solicited. 70. There is smuggling of course, and always will be, until the retail price of hemp drugs in Native States is assimilated to the price in British territory. But it is not I believe extensive and it is decreasing. 7. Evidence of MR. B. ROBERTSON, Deputy Commissioner, Nimar. 1. The subject is one to which I had paid very little attention prior to the appointment of the Commission. I have been about six months in Nimar, during which time I have had a good deal of correspondence about ganja administration, especially in connection with the store-house at Khandwa; but before receiving these questions, I knew little about the cultivation of the ganja plant or the uses of the drug. The answers given are the result of recent local enquiry. 2. Charas is practically unknown in the Central Provinces. vol. vi. E
10 Bhang is not prepared locally, but is imported from Northern India. A little used to be formerly imported from Central India, but the import is now said to have ceased, the quality being in- ferior. Ganja. Only flat ganja is produced in Nimar. It has no separate name. 3. I do not know of my own knowledge of hemp growing wild in the Central Provinces. It is not found in this state in Nimar. At least I have met nobody who has ever seen or heard of the wild plant in this district. 7, 8, and 9. See memorandum* on the cultiva- tion of the hemp plant in Nimar. 10. No. They are the same as the ordinary cultivators11 are habitual, they would miss. their daily pipe, and would consider themselves aggrieved in con- sequence. 35. (a) I think not. (b) It would certainly be illicitly consumed in Nimar, as the smuggling of ganja from Hol- kar's territory would be a comparatively easy matter. (c) I do not see how it could be enforced without carefully watching our borders. (d) The prohibition would, moreover, be largely productive of discontent. (e) I do not consider that the discontent would amount to a political danger. (f) The prohibition of the drug would almost certainly be followed by recourse to alcoholic sti- mulants. 36. I am unable to give any information on this subject. 40. The dried leaves of the ganja plant are given to bullocks, but not for medicinal purposes. They are mixed with grain, and given simply as food. 41. I can only rely for my information on en- quiries made from a number of ganja smokers, who distinctly aver that the use of the drug is beneficial as a digestive; it gives staying-power, and is useful as a febrifuge. Some of the rail- way hamals told me that they nearly all smoked ganja to help them to carry heavy burdens and undergo fatigue. The use of ganja as a febrifuge is distinctly believed in in this district. Mendi- cants take to ganja smoking to ward off the ill- effects of exposure and cold, and because of its sedative effects. 42. I can only give an opinion founded on very limited enquiry, but I should say that the moderate use of ganja is in no way harmful. Judging from some specimens of men who had smoked ganja moderately for years, I consider them as fit and healthy as they could be. They have certainly suffered no harm from the consump- tion of the drug. 43. Quite inoffensive. 44. The chief result of a pipe of ganja appears to be refreshment. Its effect is instantaneous, and lasts for two or three hours. No bad after-effects are felt, It does not produce intoxication. It is said to create appetite. 45. I prefer to leave this and the next question alone as being more the province of a medical man. As I have already stated (question 42) the moderate use of ganja.I consider to be entirely harmless and to have no more evil effects than the use of tobacco. This is the unanimous opinion of the moderate smokers whom I have spoken to. 47. No, so far as I have been able to ascertain. 48. No. 49. Ganja, the drug commonly consumed in this part of the country, is not used as an aphro- disiac. Prostitutes nearly all smoke ganja, but not for the above purpose. Ganja smoking does not produce impotence. 51. to 54. I am not qualified to speak on the subject, as I have never sought in ganja smoking an inducive to commit crime. The only case spe- cially brought under my notice during five years' magisterial work is one that occurred recently in Burhanpur. A Muhammadan, who was subject to mental aberrations said to be due to over-in- dulgence in ganja, on two occasions was arrested for breach of the peace. The police considered him a lunatic, but his fit was soon over, and he was sent back to his people. Surgeon-Major Quayle knows the case. I have asked him to note on the matter in the answers to these questions submitted by him. 56. The only admixture of which I am cogni- zant is that of bhang, and very occasionally ganja, with spices and condiments in the form of a re- freshing drink or of majum. The only reason given for the admixture is to make the compound pleasant to the taste. The boiling of copper in an emulsion of bhang is said to increase its intoxicat- ing effects. I have been unable to get informa- tion as to the admixture of dhatura with bhang or ganja. 57. Ganja is almost invariably smoked. If eaten, as it sometimes is, it gives a greater effect than bhang; but it will not produce the same effect as when smoked. 58. I am not in a position to offer any criticism on the ganja administration of the province. My knowledge of it extends to only one year's expe- rience, and during this time I have had to pick up the threads of such a number of subjects in the general administration that I have paid no atten- tion to the special subject of ganja, its taxation, and control. I shall therefore pass only a remark or two on one or two of the points raised. 60. The law of supply and demand alone deter- mines the extent of cultivation of the ganja plant in Nimar. Licenses for cultivation are given to as many cultivators as apply. A temporary es- tablishment is maintained at Government expense when the crop ripens to supervise the cutting of the crop and the preparation of the pressed ganja. From enquiry I find that the control is considered sufficient, and that there have been no complaints against the system. 63. I have no remarks to offer as to the general system. A correspondence is at present going on regard- ing the system of purchase of ganja at Khandwa by the agents of the wholesale vendors. The system is briefly this. The agents buy up the ganja on their own account as a speculation, fre- quently while the crop is standing. The whole outturn thus passes into the hands of about a dozen men, who are then able to run up the price at the Khandwa storehouse to all except the wholesale vendors by whom they have been specially retained. Example: " A is the agent of B, a wholesale vendor. A buys up 400 maunds of ganja on his own account. Out of this he can always supply B at a reasonable rate; but if an outside vendor, say from another province, sends to Khandwa for ganja, he has to pay a corner price as A is in league with the other Khandwa agents, and all have combined to raise the price." The existence of the corner in no way affects the vend of ganja, as far as this province is concerned. The wholesale vendors have to supply the retail vendors at Rs. 3 per seer, so that the latter, and through them the consumers, are not affected. But wholesale vendors from other provinces un- doubtedly find it difficult to make purchases at Khandwa. 65. I have no remarks to offer. 68. The consumption of ganja on shop premises is forbidden in the Central Provinces. 69.The choice of locality for a shop rests usually with the authorities. In the present state vol. vi. E 2
12 of public opinion no measures are necessary in this respect. 70. Ganja smuggling from the Native States which border on Nimar, though it no doubt exists, has never been a prominent matter in Nimar. While opium smuggling cases are of daily occur- rence, ganja smuggling is almost unknown to the courts. It is the general opinion, however, that a good deal of petty smuggling exists, and this is probably correct when it is considered that ganja is sold in Indore territory at about 1/10 th the price in the British districts. 8. Evidence of KHAN BAHADUR AULAD HUSSEIN, C.I.E., Assistant Commissioner and Settlement Officer, Jabalpur. Oral evidence. Question 1. 13 3. Enquiry on these points has recently been made by all Deputy Commissioners, and I believe from their reports that the hemp plant does not grow spontaneously in any part of these pro- vinces. 4. "Ganja" appears to be the only name by which the plant is known, and it is applied indifferently to the plant and to the narcotic produced from it. 5 and 6. Hemp does not grow wild in the Central Provinces, so I need not attempt to answer these questions. 7. Hemp is cultivated for the production of ganja and ganja seed only, and cultivation has been restricted to the Khandwa tahsil of the Nimar district since the close of the year 1889-90. The average area under cultivation during the past three years is 705 acres, and the average amount of outturn of the manufactured article, 6,865 maunds. The raising of ganja for seed is confined to a few villages. 8. Statistics of area cultivated and quantity stored for each of the past five years are as under for the Nimar district:14 16. All the bhang consumed in the Central Pro- vinces is imported from Gwalior and the North- West Provinces, as stated in my answer to Ques- tion 2: this narcotic is not locally prepared at all 17. The classes who cultivate and the ordinary agricultural labourers do all the work required. The chief castes who are employed in cultivation generally are Kunbis and Gujars; next to them come Rajputs. 18. The person best qualified to answer this question is Jaitram Bijraj of Kampti, who has been selected to give evidence. There can be no doubt that both ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping; the latter retains its power longer than the former, but two years seems to be the limit of time for which either can be kept in satisfactory condition. No special measures are taken in these provinces to prevent deterioration. 19. Chains is not consumed at all in the Cen- tral Provinces. Of ganja the only preparation in use for other than smoking purposes is majum, a sweetmeat of which the ingredients are (1) ghi, (2) that part of ganja known as desi bhang, (3) a syrup made of sugar and water. For the current year 34 shops have been licensed to sell this pre- paration, and the total demand on account of license fees is Rs. 854-4-0, The licensed shops are distributed as under:15 (b) those who have. adopted a wandering or isolated mode of life on religious or semi- religious grounds. 28. I believe the allowances to be:- Consumers. Ganja. Bhang. Habitual moderate. ¼ tola, worth about 0-0-06. ½ tola, worth 0-0-6. Habitual excessive 3 tolas, worth 0-4-6 to 0-6-0. No consumption. 29. Ganja is nearly always mixed with tobacco for smoking purposes, two parts of ganja to one of tobacco being the usual proportions. Ganja is always washed in water before smoking, and the tobacco is added after the water has been squeeze- ed out as far as possible, in order to facilitate "drawing." The mixture is said to have a pleas- anter taste and to be less powerfully intoxicant than plain ganja. Dhatura is mixed with ganja only by excessive smokers, and they sometimes smoke the former plain. From replies to inquiries made by this office in 1882 I find that this use was in vogue before ganja came to be taxed at all. This mixture is far more intoxicating than plain ganja or than ganja and tobacco mixed. It is not the practice in these provinces to sell "bhang massala": those who drink bhang mix the necessary ingredients at home themselves. For 5 tolas of bhang the quantities of the ingredients in common use would be:-1 tola black pepper, 20 almonds, 10 cardamoms, ½ tola rose leaves, pounded 50 seeds of cucumber, ½ tola aniseed, ½ seer sugar, 2 seers water, ½ seer milk. 30. Of the main classes of consumers mention- ed in the answer to question 26, mendicants and devotees and well-to-do persons may prefer to smoke in solitude, but there is no necessity for being alone. Labourers nearly always smoke in company, a "chilam" being passed round to each of 3 or 4 persons who take their puff or two in turn; four would find a chilam charged with half a tola of ganja and quarter of a tola of tobacco sufficient for a smoke in this way. With the exception of some prostitutes, women do not smoke ganja at all; nor do children. The habit is contracted by males about the age of 19 years. Bhang may be said to be, among the compara- tively few who consume it, the social drink cor- responding to the Anglo-Indian "peg:" women and children do not drink it. 31. This is a question I am hardly qualified to answer. Labourers whom I have inquired of say that they can manage to do their work well enough, even if they cannot get their usual smoke. In this respect there is a vast difference between consumers of ganja and consumers of opium: the latter are useless, unless they get their accustomed dose, and that at the accustomed time. 32. It is usual to drink bhang on the festival called Shivratri, which occurs early in February. s Some of the concoction is poured over the "ling" in honour of the god. Even those who do not ordinarily drink bhang take a little on this occa- sion, I cannot give any useful information as to the effects of this custom but I have never heard that it is harmful in any way. 33. Most people whose position is superior to that of a labourer profess to look upon ganja smoking as a disreputable practice, and the name "ganjeri" is considered abusive. The use of bhang is for the most part confined to the hot weather, and its moderate consumption at that time is in no way deprecated: even Marwaris drink very little in the rains or cold weather. The hemp plant is cultivated only in Nimar, and it is not worshipped there. 34. I certainly think that the labouring classes would suffer greatly, if they were entirely depriv- ed of ganja; they can do more work when under its influence, and at the end of the day a pipe greatly alleviates their fatigue. Mendicants and devotees are constantly on the move, and would take care to supply themselves somehow, what- ever we might do in the way of prohibiting or restricting consumption: if absolutely shut out from ganja, they would generally find dhatura easily obtainable. Bhang is more or less a luxury, and there are not many who would suffer for long if deprived of it for good. The number of consumers must be well below 100,000, judging from the fact that half tola is the ordinary daily dose, and that retail sales for the past five years average only 11¾ maunds per annum. But it must be remembered that Marwaris travel a great deal between British and Native territory, and no doubt carry about bhang bought in the latter: as possession of any quantity up to 20 tolas, no matter where purchased, is legal, our statistics of sales cannot be regarded as a satisfactory gauge of consumption. 35. If the consumption of ganja is prohibited in the Central Provinces, the prohibition would have to be enforced by a large preventive estab- lishment with special inquisitorial powers. Smug- gling goes on now when possession of 5 tolas is legal and 1,000 retail shops are licensed yearly; so there can be no doubt as to what would hap- pen if the drug was not procurable within the provinces. Smokers are not, however, so influ- ential or numerous that their discontent could give cause for alarm for the permanence of our political supremacy; they would take to dhatura or kuchla, if smuggled ganja was not to be had. The present policy of the Local Administration is to raise the price of country liquor, and even now there is some reason to suspect that prices are so high as to drive consumers to the use of drugs. Opium is not likely to be appreciated as a substi- tute for ganja by consumers of the latter who are labourers, for the reason that opium does not produce an intoxication which brings inclination for physical exertion, but is rather of an opposite nature. 36. There is no tendency to drink liquor in pre- ference to ganja smoking. On the other hand, fears are entertained by the administration that ganja is being substituted for liquor as an intoxi- cant (see answer to question 25.) 37. I can give no information about charas; it is not sold in the Central Provinces. 38. As already stated; only one kind of ganja is consumed here, and that corresponds most nearly with the "flat" ganja of Bengal. 39. Bhang is doubtless the least intoxicating of the preparations used in these provinces. Majum eating and ganja smoking produce pretty similar results in this respect, the intoxication caused by the latter being probably shorter-lived than that induced by the former. I am not prepared to
16 say that moderate indulgence in any one of these three preparations is injurious. 40. "Desi bhang" is said to be given to cattle in the cold weather to get them into good condi- tion. 41 and 42. I am sure that the chief reason why labourers smoke ganja is that it helps them to undergo exertion and exposure, and also alleviates fatigue at the end of the day's work. I have questioned many, and they all described the effect of the drug consumed in this way to be as above. Bhang is commonly said to sharpen the ap- petite, and ganja seems to produce a similar effect in a less marked degree. 43. Moderate consumers are quite inoffensive. 44. Ganja smoking produces at once an intoxi- cation which lasts about two hours. Bhang used merely as a refresher has very little intoxicating power. Neither ganja nor bhang, allays hunger, but both and particularly the former, sharpen the appetite. So far as I have been able to ascertain, the consumer's condition, after intoxication has passed off, is perfectly normal, and there is no craving like that experienced by opium eaters or opium smokers. 45 to 48. These are questions to which I am unable to give satisfactory or useful answers. 49. If an aphrodisiac is, as I take it to be, a medicine which supplies sexual power or increases it when it is feeble, I do not believe that any preparation of hemp is regarded as an aphrodisiac. Kuchla or strychnos mix vomica is so regarded, and used accordingly. 50 to 54. I am not in a position to give any useful answers to these questions. 55 and 56. I understand that to induce stupe- faction admixture of dhatura is necessary. I have met with no cases of such admixture, and my office files do not contain any special inform- ation in regard to it. 57. Ganja proper is never eaten. The prepar- ation of majum has been briefly described above (in answer to question 19), and the intoxication induced by it is said to last longer than that caused by smoking ganja. 58 to 60. The system of control appears to me to be complete, and neither from personal experi- ence nor from my office records can I bring for- ward any sound objections to it. Cultivation is only permitted under license, and that in a very limited area; harvesting is supervised by a special establishment entertained every year; the entire crop is stored in a Government godown, and the manufactured article is thence distributed to district storehouses, access to which is impossi- ble in the absence of a tahsildar or naib-tahsil- dar. Payment of the direct duty of Rs. 2 per seer is ensured by only permitting the wholesale vendor to obtain a fresh supply after he has paid duty on the amount sold by him to retail vendors since the last previous issue. It is true that in 1887 Mr. L. K. Laurie, the then Commissioner of Excise, suggested the substitution of Govern- ment agents for wholesale vendors on the ground that all the wholesale vendor had to do was (1) to buy at the Central stores as much ganja as was from time to time required in the district for which he was appointed, and (2) to employ an agent at each tahsili to sell the drug to retail vendors. All Deputy Commissioners, except four approved of this suggestion, but Mr. Laurie on re-consideration concluded that Government agency was unsuited for purchasing and for sell- ing to retail vendors, and the Chief Commissioner accepted this view. The right to sell by retail is always sold by auction, shops in towns being sold in a lump, and those in rural areas separately. Objection may perhaps be taken to auctioning such monopo- lies on the ground that bids made at auctions are often merely speculative or induced by other than purely business-like considerations. The obvious alternative is to fix the fee payable either separate- ly for each shop or generally for each district or tahsil; and from paragraph 49 of the Excise Manual it will be seen that this may be done with the sanction of the Chief Commissioner. A sys- tem of monthly licenses at fixed rates was tried in 1880-81, but by 1882-83 was almost entirely abandoned: the objections to this form of tax were pointed out in paragraph 43 of the Pro- vincial Excise Report for 1880-81. If yearly licenses were issued at fixed rates, those rates would in practice be settled with reference to the bids at recent auctions, for vendors are as a rule too illiterate to keep accounts, and it is practically impossible in most districts to gauge actual consumption owing to the state of the law which permits possession of 5 tolas of the drug no matter whence obtained. In this connection I would invite perusal of the remarks in para- graph 15 of the Chief Commissioner's Resolution on the Provincial Excise Report for 1880-81. 61 and 62. Neither charas nor bhang is culti- vated or manufactured in the Central Provinces. 63. I have nothing to add to the answer given to questions 58 to 60. 64. If we are to protect ourselves completely by means of penalties against import of ganja, even in the quantity possession of which is legal (5 tolas), the Excise Act of 1881 must be amended. In 1879 the Chief Commissioner submitted to the Government of India a draft Bill on the lines of the Opium Act, 1878, one section of which permitted the import of intoxi- cating drugs prepared from hemp only when effected in accordance with rules to be issued by the Local Administration. But the Government of India appear to have considered that reduction of the quantity of ganja which a private person may have in his possession from 20 to 5 tolas was a sufficient safeguard against unlawful importa- tion, for the Act of 1881 contains no direct pro- hibition of the import of ganja. 65 to 67. The incidences of total demand per head of total population in respect of country liquor, hemp drugs and opium, were respectively as under for the year 1892-93:17 total revenue from country spirits for 1892-93 gives an incidence of 8 annas per consumer. Ganja being emphatically the poor man's intoxi- cant, I think these incidences are relatively proper. I am not in a position to estimate the incidence of opium revenue per consumer. 68. The consumption of opium, madak, ganja, bhang and majum on the premises of licensed vendors of those thugs was entirely prohibited in September 1890, and the prohibition has been in force since the 1st April 1891. 69. Hitherto the public have confined themselves to objecting in a few instances to the location of liquor shops and stills. In this connection refer- ence is invited to paragraph 9 of the Chief Commissioner's Resolution on the Excise Report for 1892-93, where it is recorded that in the Central Provinces no well-defined public opinion exists regarding excise questions. 70. The smuggling of hemp drugs is fully dealt with in the memorandum prepared in accord- ance with the request in paragraph 3 Of the Commission's letter No. 28, dated the 11th August 1893, to the address of the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Central Provinces. 10. Evidence of Mr. F. G. SLY, Settlement Officer, Hoshangabad. I have the honour to state that I and my assist- ants have made detailed enquiries during the present camping season regarding the extent to which cultivators use hemp drugs. All the information collected tends to show that cultivators do not in this district use hemp drugs as a stimulant in seasons of hard work. Of course there is a very small percentage who use these drugs habitually throughout the year, but it is not on this point that the information was required. Some of the information collected by my assistants tends to show that a limited number of Gonds and Karkus do use hemp drugs during seasons of hard work, such as ploughing, sowing, etc. I myself have not yet inspected the hilly portions of Harda tahsil, where aborigines are numerous, and I can- not therefore confirm this statement from personal enquiries. The information collected, however, tends to show that the use of hemp drugs as a stimulant to hard work is very limited indeed even amongst aborigines. These consumers state that its effect is to dispel fatigue, enliven the spirits, and induce appetite. The good cultivat- ing castes say that they never use ganja or bhang as a stimulant to hard work, but that during the seasons of hard work they increase the quantity of their food and more particularly of ghee and milk. Some few Mahratta Brahman malguzars say that bhang is administered in small quantities to bullocks during the seasons of hard work; it is said to dispel fatigue and render bullocks capable of performing extra work. My enquiries tend to show that this practice is very limited. 11. Evidence of PURSHOTAM DASS, R. B., Settlement Officer, Wardha. From enquiries made by my subordinates in this district while in camp, I am in a position to report that as a rule these drugs are not used by cultivators as a stimulant in seasons of hard work as a general rule. In villages situated near jungle, cultivators or labourers who have to stand the whole night in the open watching their fields to protect them against wild animals do sometimes smoke ganja which keeps them warm during the cold nights of winter, but the drug is expensive and not easily procurable. I put the percentage of the cultivating classes using ganja at about 3 per cent., and with such persons the use of ganja becomes a habit. Very few indeed use these drugs as an occasional stimulant. I regret that owing to adverse circumstances, I have not been able to send in this report until now. 12. Evidence of BHARGOW LAXMON GADGIT, Brahmin, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Nagpur. 1. I have been serving in the Revenue Depart- ment for thirty years. I have served in eight districts, and the information I have obtained is from matters coming before me officially, from inquiries made from the consumers of the drug, and from observations made by me from time to time. 2. There is only one kind of ganja (flat) known in this province. Charas is not collected. Bhang is not grown for use in this province, but it is imported from North-Western Provinces. Definitions of these drugs as given in Dr. Prain's report on ganja may be accepted for this province. The dry leaves and refuse of the ganja is also called bhang. 3. As far as I am aware, hemp plant does not grow spontaneously in any of the districts I have seen. 5. Wild hemp is not grown in this province. 7. Hemp plant is grown in the district of Nimar for the purpose of ganja and for seed. The area under cultivation in 1892-93 was 940 acres. 8. The figures for the past five years are given below: 18 9. The land generally selected is near Abadi. Rich black soil is not suited when the rains are heavy; a little hard soil is preferred. The land requires good manuring. Dung manure is pre- ferred. The land before sowing is ploughed up three or four times to prevent any weeds getting root; sowing is made at the end of June. When seed begins to germinate, great care is taken to watch the field, otherwise birds destroy the seed when germinating. Weeding is done like ordinary cotton-fields. When plants are about six inches high, thinning goes on; where the plants are many they are uprooted; one span is left between each plant. When the plants are about two feet high, leaves are removed from plants one foot high from the ground. This is done to encourage the growth of the plants. Separation of male plants is the principal care; this is done to prevent the plants producing seed. The male plants are rooted out three times or even four times; this process goes on at an interval of 8 or 10 days19 Their justification for their conduct, as they say, is that by excessive smoking they do not feel the effect of cold and rain; and bairagis say that it assists them in concentrating their thoughts in one direction, and they can practise "yoga" better under the influence of ganja. The third class of occasional moderate con- sumers is formed of members of all classes. They indulge in smoking ganja. As a rule, such members are addicted to other vices, and ganja smoking is resorted to as an addition. The classes who use bhang as a drink are generally well-to-do people. It is indulged in as a luxury; poorer people drink it as removing fatigue. 28. The average cost of ganja to an habitual moderate consumer of ganja is half an anna, and that to an excessive consumer is two annas daily, or even more. 29. In smoking ganja, tobacco is generally mixed. Dhatura is sometimes mixed. In the preparation of bhang for drinking, the articles ordinarily used are black pepper, sugar, water, and cucumber-seed, but specially the following articles are used: dahi (curd), milk, sopa (ani- seed), kankol (cubebs), rose-flower, black cobweb, copper, and dhatura seed. The admixture of tobacco and dhatura with ganja is to give it a better taste and make it more intoxicating. The articles mentioned above are mixed with bhang when it is prepared for drink. These admixtures are to give good taste and to make it more intoxicating. Bhang massala is generally sold in the bazar; it consists of the articles described above as ordinarily used. 30. Habitual moderate consumers of ganja smoke alone, but habitual excessive consumers (fakirs and mendicants) and other occasional smokers of ganja smoke it in company; bhang drinkers generally drink it in company. Males generally use these drugs, but females and children of the mendicant class who follow them sometimes partake of the drug. 31. The habit of smoking ganja is not easily formed, but the habit of drinking of bhang is easily formed. Ganja-smoking cannot be easily given up. It is these moderate consumers who become in time excessive consumers by force of circumstances. 32. Ganja smokers and drinkers of bhang and the consumers of majum always offer it to the god "Shiva" in the first instance. It is generally believed that ganja and bhang were the favourite articles with Shiva, and before one partakes it is offered to the deity. On Shivaratri bhang is pre- pared for drinking, and it is first poured on the idol (Shiva) and then partaken by the consumer, who generally observes fast that day. In the Holi festival, majum and bhang drinking is in- dulged in by the well-to-do persons; and Marwaris and other well-to-do persons on marriage feasts and in the hot season in garden parties prepare bhang for drinking, and they indulge in the use of majum. It is not considered essential on Shivaratri, Holi, and on such festivals to have bhang and majum, but it has become a fashion, and the most orthodox portion consider it as essential. The use of these drugs on such occasions is moderate, and it is not injurious. There is no fear that such occasional use would lead to the formation of the habit. 33. The occasional moderate use of the drug, either in smoking, drinking, or eating, is not looked upon as vice, and it is not in disrepute. It is the. excessive use that is in disrepute. An excessive smoker and excessive drinker have the contemptuous names of ganjadi and bhangud given to them, and it is this class that is looked down with hatred by all classes. Hemp plant is not worshipped. 34. As I have said before, the labouring and agriculturist class use the drug so as to give relief to them after the hard work they are used to do. To them and to the excessive smokers it would be a great hardship to forego the use. The number of such men is not very large. The total quantity of ganja consumed last year was 1,194 maunds, or in round numbers 1,200 maunds or 48,000 seers. A person who has a pipe of ganja in the morning and again in the evening consumes about ¼ of a tola, and at this rate his average yearly consump- tion would be one seer. If it were supposed that all were moderate daily consumers, the number for the whole province would be 48,000, but due allowance must be made for persons of the mendi- cant class who use this drug in large quantity. The number of persons using this drug cannot be more than 30,000, which to a population of over ten millions would give 3 per thousand. 35. If the use of this drug were prohibited, people would import it illicitly. I know of in- stances in Raipur, Jabalpur, Damoh, and other districts bordering on Native States, where, owing to high prices of this drug, they have recourse to illicit imports in small quantities. Prohibition would no doubt cause some discontent, but if it be general, then in time I am inclined to think the consumers would have recourse to other intoxi- cating drugs. I do not entertain the slightest fear that discontent caused by the prohibition would amount to political danger. 36. There is no reason to think that alcohol is now taking the place of this drug. 37. Charas is not used in this province, but those who have used it say that it is more intoxi- cating than ganja, and that the intoxication lasts longer. 40. I am not aware of ganja or bhang being given in medicine, but ganja is given to cattle along with "gur." This is given to them to take away the effects of fatigue on long journeys. 41. The moderate use of ganja consumers who use it in smoking use is to alleviate fatigue; it is also smoked to prevent disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. Bhang drinkers drink it as they say it digests food and it gives them good appetite. Mendicants and others who are not excessive smokers take it as they say for preventing diseases from climatic influences, and some take it in order to concentrate their minds and enable them to practice "yoga" better. I do not consider moderate use of this drug is in any way injurious. 43. They are inoffensive. 44. I cannot say anything from experience, but from what I have observed I would state that persons drinking bhang feel somewhat in- toxicated; some feel inclined to sleep. The same is the case with ganja smokers; sometimes they are inclined to be very talkative. The effect lasts from two to three hours, according to the quan- tity taken; and after the intoxication is gone they feel quite fresh. Bhang drinking creates appetite. 47. No. 51. Bad characters are not as a rule habitual moderate consumers of these drugs, but their vol vi. F 2
20 associations are such that they soon imbibe all the vices of their associates, and in time they take to the use of these drugs; but a large proportion of these men are not habitual consu- sumers of this drug. 53. No. 54. No; but criminals take these drugs in order that they may not feel the after21 of my conversation with persons dealing in their trade as well as those using them. 2. The descriptions given in this question of round and flat ganja, as well as "chur," may be accepted for this State; people don't understand the term 'bhang,' nor do they observe distinction between patti or ganja. They manufacture liquid drink called "kúsúmba" used like "bhang" in other parts of the country, either from "patti" or "ganja." Charas is not used here, nor is it known what it is. Round ganja is manufactured by the flower tops being tied with string in either plantain leaves or rengál leaves. 7. There was uncontrolled cultivation of the plant in the Sonepur State almost in every village before 1889 for the production of round ganja. It has been stopped since 1889 under Government orders, and ganja supplied by Government is used by the people. It is still cultivated in the ad- joining Boad State. 8. There is considerable increase in the area under the cultivation of the plant in villages of the Boad State bordering the Sonepur State since 1889, because (1) it has not been allowed in the latter State, (2) it can be had cheaper than that supplied from the Government godowns, (3) people say that ganja manufactured from plants cultivated in the Boad State, which are similar to those cultivated before in Sonepur, is liked by them better than the flat ganja, which they think is more injurious to their health. They say that the use of the latter causes headache. This opinion of theirs about the quality of locally cultivated ganja, and the several instances of seizure of ganja smuggled from that State, shew that the demand for the Boad ganja must have increased. Formerly the Sonepur people did not care to get ganja from Boad as they cultivated similar ganja in their own house-yards. All excessive ganja smokers whom I questioned about this matter earnestly asked me to try to obtain permission to cultivate and supply the local ganja. This circumstance strengthens my belief that there is some increase in the area under ganja cultivation in the Boad Sate. 9. Ganja is cultivated in villages known to me, mostly in yards of houses of cultivators or in sugarcane fields. Its seed is thickly sown in richly manured plot like that of chilli or bhata, or tobacco, in the beginning of the rainy season. After the plants are grown about five or six in- ches high they are removed and planted in rows at a distance of a cubit from each other. The ground is made soft and well manured with cow- dung: sweepings of cattle or sheep shed are also mixed. Excessive moisture being injurious to the plants, high ground is selected so that water may not remain accumulated at the roots. They thrive better in house yards than in the sugarcane fields. At the end of the rainy season, when the plants are in flower, the male plants are removed: the distinguishing sign of the latter is the yellowish colour of their flowers, stems and leaves, while the colour of female plants is green. Leaves of the male plants are, however, separate- ly dried and mixed with those of female plants, from which they are not then easily distinguished. The female plants are allowed to stand till they become ripe, when they are cut and dried. Then the dried leaves are removed and the flower tops are kept for a night in dew. The flower tops are then wrapped in leaves such as of Bengal plantain, etc., and tied with string or some fibre. 10. Persons who cultivate hemp do not belong to any special class but are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators, and in no case have I found the cultivation of hemp to be the chief source of a cultivator's living, like his grain fields or sugarcane plantation. 14. Only ganja is prepared in the adjoining State of Boad in the manner explained against question 9. The same drug is used as well as "patti" for making "bhang," called "Kúsúmba." 16. "Bhang" or "kúsúmba" is always pre- pared by people in their houses. This drink is never sold in the market. 17. There is no religious nor social restriction as to the class of people. Anyone can prepare the drugs. 18. Ganja and "patti" deteriorate by being exposed to damp, and lose their effect in any case after a year, up to which they retain their effect if they are not exposed but kept in a dry state. 19. Ganja is used here both for smoking and preparing an intoxicating drink called "kúsúmba" (bhang). This is its general use, but I know one man who ate and chewed ganja just like tobacco, and people here have seen him eating at one sitting about one chhatak or five tolas of ganja. 21. Round ganja is preferred here for smok- ing. 23. Bhang is used for smoking in the absence of ganja, but not in preference to it. 24. All classes of people here, who are not allowed by their religion to take liquor, drink bhang ("kúsúmba") on the occasions of some social gatherings or religious festivals. In the course of my enquiry I found very few persons who said they did not taste this drink in their life. 25. It is on the decrease among the higher classes of people to whom the use of liquor has not been allowed owing to religious prejudices. Such prejudices are gradually dying away with the spread of the western thoughts, and alcoholic liquor is taking its place. The Hindu religion does not prohibit the use of ganja or bhang, and the people believe that their gods like the devotees taking these drugs, so that their use may enable them to concentrate and devote their minds to them. 26. The proportion of habitual excessive ganja smokers and "bhang" takers is small. Simi- larly, the proportion of habitual moderate con- sumers is small. But most of the classes who are not allowed the use of liquor are occasional con- sumers of "bhang." 27. In some religious institutions and social gatherings these drugs, ganja and bhang, are occasionally kept with the object of inducing people to attend them. And whoever attends such meetings is inclined to taste ganja or bhang by seeing others using the drug. In this part of the country I saw in several large villages reli- gious places called "gudis" where occasionally in the year some Hindu mythological books, mostly "the Bhagwat," are read by priests and villagers who go there to hear them read in the evening. The priest is paid for his labour on the completion of the reading, which continues for several days, and the payment made by each person is generally in accordance with his regu- larity in attending the lectures. Those attending regularly pay larger sums than occasional visitors. So the promoters keep ganja, fire, etc., at the place to secure regular attendance of hearers. Such institutions initiate the habit of ganja smoking.
22 Among Brahmans and mahantis and such other higher classes, at the time of caste or religious festivals and feasts, bhang (kúsúmba) is prepared and given to the assembled guests before taking their food. It is usual for the host to ask or even to press every guest, if he were very familar, to take it more and more, just as he does after- wards in the case of any delicious dish. 28. Habitual excessive consumers require about 2 to 3 tolas of ganja, worth about 2 annas, every day; whereas about the same quantity is consumed by habitual moderate consumers in a week. The former smoke ganja for about 20 or 30 times, and the latter twice or so in a day. As for bhang a habitual excessive consumer requires 5 tola patti or one tola ganja in a day. The same quantity is consumed by a habitual moderate consumer in five days or so. Persons taking the latter drug have some fixed time in a day for taking it, either in the morning or in the evening, but always before they take their food; whereas habitual, excessive ganja smokers have not got such times fixed. They smoke it at an interval of two hours the longest. While I was talking with such a consumer on one occasion for about three-quarters of an hour, after which signs of uneasiness became apparent in him, and on being asked he said that unless he smoked ganja he could not answer my questions. On this I asked him how long before he had taken it; he replied shortly before he appeared before me. 29. Ganja pure and simple is never smoked. Tobacco is always mixed with it, whether the consumer is a habitual, the excessive or a moderate smoker. Men of the latter class wash ganja clean first, but those of the former are not so parti- cular about washing it. Three of the persons questioned by me admitted that they smoked the mixture of23 costive (constipated); they feel feverish, yawn, their eyes and nose run. A prisoner was seen by me to have attempted to commit suicide on being refused the drug (ganja) on his admission, because he said he could not bear the sufferings caused by its want. 35. I think it would not be feasible to prohibit entirely the use of ganja or bhang, as habitual excessive consumers will not fail to try all means to obtain it. It will cause discontent among them. The prohibition is likely to be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants among the lower classes, and in the higher classes opium smoking will take its place. This I say, because a ganja smoker told me that whenever he did not get ganja, he satisfied his desire by smoking opium. 38. Round ganja is preferred here for smoking to flat ganja. Consumers are unanimous in their statements that though the former possesses great- er intoxicating quality than the latter, it does not cause headache, burning sensation in the stomach, like the latter. The drink prepared of "patti" (bhang) is less intoxicating in quality and is said to be less injurious to the health than sganja. 39. None say that smoking of ganja in any form is less injurious than eating or drinking it. On the contrary, it is worse in effect than the latter. 40. Several kinds of sweetmeat containing ganja are prepared by native doctors and prescrib- ed as a tonic to weak persons or for sustaining the power for sexual desire. Some of them are named here: (1) Stri darp gaj kesari módak; (2) Brahat kámeshwar módak, or (3) Máhámadan módak, (4) Rati wallabha módak; (5) Apar kam- ágni sandípan módak. Ganja is also given in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Excessive and moderate habitual consumers use bhang as a food digestive or to give staying power. They also take it in grief. The moder- ate, occasional consumers take it as a febrifuge or preventive of disease, when they go to mala- rious and unhealthy tracts, or when cholera epi- demic or such other disease breaks out. In the latter case persons are persuaded to take the drug (ganja or bhang). 42. Ganja smoking or bhang drinking, whether excessively or moderately, is not at all beneficial. Two kinds of drink are prepared of bhang: one is called ghota, which contains a large quantity of it, which is taken by habitual consumers whe ther moderate or excessive; and the other is called thandai, which contains a small quantity of it, and its effect is marred by adding the several articles of bhang massala mentioned above. It is generally taken by occasional consumers in the hot season, or on the occasion of some religious festi- vals. Such moderate use of bhang is harmless, but in no case can ganja, smoking be considered to be so, as it does not fail to produce its injurious effect in however moderate degree it may be taken. 43. Moderate consumers are not offensive to their neighbours. 44. Both ganja smokers and bhang drinkers state that if these drugs be taken moderately on the appointed times, they are refreshing to habi- tual consumers and create appetite. Bhang keeps its effect on habitual excessive consumers for three or four hours, and ganja for an hour or so. After- wards uneasiness and a desire to take it again are produced in them. These persons remain always under their influence. If they do not get the drugs afterwards, they lose their energies and become unable to attend to their work. The effect of ganja smoking is immediate and lasts for an hour or so; whereas that of bhang drink- ing is produced after an hour, bat it lasts much longer than the first, for three or four hours. 45. Ganja smoking impairs the constitution of the consumers, who look pale and thin; whereas this does not appear to be the case with bhang consumers. Its consumer looks stout and healthy. Both these drugs have a tendency more or less to induce debauchery, The object of young men commencing to use them is to increase the sexual desire. Ganja smoking has a tendency to deaden the intellect and produce insanity. Bhang drink- ing does not, I believe, produce these effects. I have known a large number of bhang drinkers. among Brahmans who are well known as reciters of the Vedas. Their intellect does not appear to have become blunt. They all look healthy. From a few instances I have seen it appears that insanity, which was the effect of ganja smoking, was produced in the first stage of the persons using the drug excessively. It was tem- porary. They became quite sane after having been kept under restraint for some months. If such persons be again allowed the use of the drug, they will again become insane. 53. The excessive indulgence in ganja smoking incites unpremeditated, violent crime. Recently I saw a case of a man who went mad owing to excessive ganja smoking, and in that state of his mind he killed his own uncle who had remained to watch him. There was no ill-feeling between them. There was no motive of the murder except perhaps the uncle did not allow him the use of ganja. The story is that after the man having gone mad, the murdered man and his brother sat to watch the murderer. In the meantime the former slept near him telling his brother to keep a watch. Shortly after the murderer told the latter to go to sleep, saying that there was no necessity of a watch as he had become quite sane. On this the man went away. The mur- derer then got up, brought an axe from inside a room, and struck a blow with it to his sleeping uncle, and ran away, and concealed the axe and washed his wearing clothes. He confessed all these facts to the police, and other persons the follow- ing day. He, however, denied subsequently all knowledge before the magistrate. There was no other motive for this murder, which, I believe, was due to homicidal frenzy. 55. Criminals put bhang or ganja in some sweetmeats, generally the preparation is called majum, and give it to their victims, and thus stupefy them completely if a sufficient quantity is mixed. 56. I have not come across a ganja smoker in moderation mixing with it any substance except tobacco. It is only the excessive smokers who mix the several substances mentioned before whenever they desire to use the drug of increased strength. Dhatura is mixed for personal con- sumption in order that the effect may last longer than the mixture of ganja and tobacco. For the same object dhatura is sometimes mixed with bhang for personal use. If the mixture of ganja and dhatura, or bhang and dhatura, be taken by one consuming only ganja or bhang it produces a stupefying effect on him. So this mixture is very often used by road poisoners for the pur- pose of effecting some criminal motive. These men put the mixture of dhatura and bhang or ganja in sweetmeat intended for their victims,
24 in order to make themselves sure of producing the stupefying effect in them without exciting suspicion. If ganja or bhang be alone mixed, a larger quantity is required to produce the same effect produced by the mixture than that used with dhatura, and it will retain its strong smell, which will raise suspicion about the drug. 58. Ganja cultivated in the Nimar district is supplied to wholesale vendors of all districts. The effect of this arrangement is that the inci- dence of taxation is not equal, which I think should be maintained consistently with a principle that in order to control properly the consump- tion of all intoxicating drugs, they should be sold at such maximum procurable price as would ensure minimum chances of their being obtained illicitly, and that consumers in several districts, who prefer drugs grown in certain places, try to obtain them from such places instead of from Government godowns. Under the present ar- rangement hemp is allowed to grow uncheck- ed in the Feudatory States adjoining these pro- vinces, so persons can obtain the drug from them easily if they have got liking for it. In the Khalsa district of the Central Provinces it will appear from the magisterial statistics that several persons were punished for having grown ganja plants in their yards. I think these men grow it more on account of their liking for the drug cultivated at a certain place than with the sole object of eluding the tax. So long as the con- sumers don't get the drug according to their liking and the drug is not equally taxed through- out the country, the above mentioned object, viz., the proper control of consumption of the drug, cannot be entirely fulfilled. 59. Unlicensed cultivation should be stopped throughout the country. The incidence of taxa- tion should be equalised. Some central places for the cultivation of the plant should be selected in consultation with consumers in different dis- tricts. The Government should take control in its own hands of cultivation and supply of these drugs in all Feudatory States, for reasons given against question 58. 64. My objections to the existing regulations governing the export and import of ganja and bhang (drugs) are in regard to the districts bordering on Native States, where the cultivation of the plant has been allowed unchecked. There the consumption is as nearly uncontrolled as it is in the latter, because the consumers can pro- cure as much drug as they want without requir- ing to pay any tax. Under the regulation a man is allowed to possess 5 tola ganja, and 20 tola (¼ seer) bhang without a license, so a person found importing these drugs up to this quantity cannot be prevented. 65. I think it is reasonable. 66. I think all kinds of ganja should be equally taxed. 67. At present the incidence of tax is unequal which I am for equalising. 68. There are no shops licensed for the sale of ganja and bhang here, where they are allowed to be consumed on the premises. I think such shops should not be allowed because they will then become abode or meeting places of consumers who are generally disreputable persons or bad characters. They will afford greater facility for the vice to spread. 69. The wishes of the people are considered before a shop is opened in a locality. The object of the measure is more for the sake of the sale of and the convenience of consumers than a con- sideration of its effect on the society. this is because the people don't object to have a ganja shop near them as much as they object to have a liquor shop. 70. Banjaras and other labouring classes im- port ganja into the Sonepur State as well as into the Khalsa (Sambalpur) from the Boad State. Oral evidence. Question 2.25 14. Evidence of RAGHUNATH RAO, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Damoh. 1. Local enquiries, mostly in the Feudatory States (Raigarh and Sarangarh) of the Chhatis- garh Division, where I have served. I had to deal with the excise as well as all other branches of administration of these States. 2. I cannot answer question No. 2., as I have not seen all these varieties of ganja or charas. 3. So far as my knowledge goes, hemp plant does not grow spontaneously in this province. 4, 5 and 6. I do not know. 7. It is only in the Nimar district that hemp plant is cultivated for production of ganja only. 8. The area under cultivation has enormously decreased owing to the restrictions placed on the cultivation of the hemp plant in these provinces. 9. I do not know. 10. They are of the same class as other agricul- tural cultivators. 11. I do not know. 12. I know nothing about wild ganja, or its cultivation. 13. Yes. It has been restricted only to the Nimar district. I do not exactly know why this district was specially selected: but it seems that ganja used to be grown very largely in this dis- trict and the hemp plant grown there is much better than that grown in the other districts of this province. So far as I know there is no dis- trict in this province where hemp plant cannot be grown. I do not know whether any special con- ditions regarding climate, soil, etc., are necessary for cultivation of the hemp plant. 14. Only ganja is prepared; it is prepared in the Nimar district. I do not know to what ex- tent it is prepared. 15. In these provinces only ganja is prepared from the cultivated plant. Bhang or charas is not prepared. I do not know how they are pre- pared. 16. Bhang is not prepared by the people in their houses. Yes, it can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever it is grown. I do not know whether bhang and charas could be prepared from the wild plant. 17. I do not know. 18. Yes, they deteriorate by keeping. It does not quite lose its effect in time, but its intoxicat- ing effects are lost by lapse of time and the stuff becomes practically useless. if kept with ordi- nary care it can keep good for two years, I think. Exposure causes deterioration. If it is kept air and water tight its deterioration might be pre- vented for a few years, but not permanently. 19. Charas is never used except for smoking. Ganja is sometimes substituted for bhang for drinking where bhang is not available, and also for the preparation of majum and medicinal pur- poses. This practice is most common in the Uriya districts of the Chhatisgarh Division of this pro- vince. 20. I know nothing about charas: ganja smok- ing is not confined to any class or classes of people. It is, however, greatly used by those classes of people more or less who cannot use liquor, but, generally speaking, the bairagis, fakirs, and lower classes of labourers greatly use ganja all over India. I think the proportion of ganja smokers is 10 per cent, of the entire popu- lation. 21. Flat ganja is used in these provinces. I have not seen round or chur ganja, and can say nothing about it. 22. No charas is at all used in these provinces. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking so far as I know. 24. This is not confined to any particular class or classes of the people. In the hot weather and in the Holi festivals bhang is generally used by all classes of people who cannot use liquor. It is eaten as well as drunk. The entire population does not, however, use it. The proportion of the people so using the bhang may be set down at 5 per cent. of the entire population in this province. 25. If we were to compare the present con- sumption of the ganja with its consumption when people could grow it without restriction, its use has certainly decreased, but if we were to see the state of things after the restrictions were made, we find the consumption is on the increase; be- cause the ganja grown in foreign States, which used to find its way in the British districts of these provinces, has been greatly checked by prosecu- tions of persons found importing foreign ganja. Charas is not used. The use of bhang is on the decrease, as no good bhang (grown in Malwa and Benares) could be available. 26. For ganja26 29. It is only exceptionally that dhatura is ever mixed with these drugs. This is done only by those whom the ordinary intoxicating effects of the ganja or bhang do not satisfy. Rich people mix jaiphal (nutmeg), láichi and per- fumes with ganja as a luxury. The " bhang massala," ordinarily consists of sonf, kásni, kali mirach, kakri ké bij (cucumber seeds), khas khas (poppy seeds), and sugar. Well-to-do people also add the following to this massala27 47. No. The effect on the issue is weakness. 48. Persons who are habitual excessive users of the ganja are generally very soon exhausted and get no issue at all, and if they get any, their issues turn out very weak. 49. Yes. Prostitutes seldom use ganja, or bhang. They generally use opium or madak for this purpose. The drugs when used as aphro- disiac are more injurious in their effects. They excite the nervous system and seminal discharges so long as the person is in his rising age, but they slowly exhaust the person and ultimately produce impotence. 50. In the above case the exhaustion is slow, but in cases of excessive use of the drugs the effects are the same, but they follow sooner. 51. No. 52. Excessive use may lead to crime. When a man is a habitual ganja smoker and he has not got money to purchase it, he may likely commit theft. There is, however, no necessary connec- tion with these drugs and the crime in general. 53. I do not think so; I know of no case of homicidal frenzy. 54. Such cases are very exceptional. 55. No. To complete stupefaction it is neces- sary to mix dhatura or other drugs with the drugs. Criminals sometimes administer such preparations to stupefy their victims. 56 and 57. I do not know. 58. I am not fully acquainted with the system and am unable to answer the questions in this chapter, except the last question. 70. I am not in possession of any figures, but I know that the ganja grown in foreign Native States finds its way into the province. The Boadh and Sarguja ganja finds its way into the Sam- balpur district and the Feudatory States and zamindaries of the Sambalpur district and some of those in the Bilaspur district. In the Gurjat States, which border on the Chhatisgarh Feuda- tory States, Raigarh, Sakti, Korba, etc., ganja used to be grown and sold in local markets like any other article of food. The consequence was that a lot of this ganja used to be smuggled into the Raigarh State. I had made enquiries and was assured that it found its way up to Korba, Bilaspur, and Sheorinarain. Attempts were made to arrest its progress, and the authorities of Chhota Nagpur were moved to restrict its growth and sale. The consequence was that in 1892-93 the Raigarh State required more of the Govern- ment ganja from Bilaspur than it ever took before. The untaxed ganja of the Gurjat States was thus superseded to a very large extent. Un- til the surrounding Feudatory States restrict the cultivation and sale of ganja, as it is done in this province and elsewhere, the ganja which is grown there will surely find its way in the khalsa, as it could be had much cheaper than the Khandwa ganja sold by Government contractors. Little or no duty is taken on ganja in the Native States, and the restrictions recently placed on its growth and sale are more nominal than real. Oral evidence. Question 25.28 ras, Kurmis, Lodhis are among the castes that are prohibited the use of liquor and so use ganja. Good bhang I have already said should be made more available. It would reduce the use of ganja as bhang, and also the use of spirituous liquor among the higher classes. Ordinary ganja used as bhang is more injurious than good bhang. The higher classes would also smoke ganja less. They would also take liquor less. All this would. in my opinion. be a change for the better. 15. Evidence of SYED MOHAMED HUSAIN, Extra Assistant Commissioner; Diwan, Khairagarh State. 1. My information about hemp drugs is chiefly based upon my experience of about twenty years as a Revenue and Judicial officer in the Central Provinces, holding the various posts of Naib Tahsildar, Tahsildar and Extra Assistant Com- missioner. Recently my services have been lent to the Khairagarh State by the Government for appointment as the Diwan of the State. In my judicial capacity, I have often had to inspect the excise shops, to arrange for the sale of intoxicating drugs, and to investigate into the crimes against the Excise Act. Besides, during the course of my studies, I had the opportunity to study medicine, as is taught by the hakims. It (my information) is based upon such inform- ation as I could now gather from the bairagis, who are addicted to the use of hemp drugs, and who visit this State during the rainy season. I have especially dealt with questions in the chapters V and VI with which I was much acquainted. 2. The definition of Dr. Prain can be adopted in these provinces. Bhang has got the different names of booti, bhajia, and thandai (cool drink). Flat ganja is called " baluchur." A large collection of round ganja, is called a " joori," while smaller ones "charpa." 18. Ganja does deteriorate by keeping, and when kept long enough loses its effect altogether. It might keep good for three years at most with ordinary care. The chief causes of deterioration are damp, exposure to rains, to be moth eaten. It also deteriorates by being broken into minute particles. The effect is also lessened by constant exposure to weather. The special measure taken to prevent deterioration of ganja is to keep it in a closed room on a wooden platform, high enough from the ground between the strata of grass. The same is the case with bhang, but to prevent deterioration it is kept in dholee (a kind of bamboo basket). Charas is kept in leather bags and wooden "dabbas." 19. Ganja is for the most part used for smok- ing. But as "bhang" is rare in the Central Provinces, people use "ganja" instead in the following forms: 29 The use of charas in these provinces is so in- significant that it cannot be taken into considera- tion. 26 and 27. GANJA. BHANG. Answer to 26. Answer to 27. Answer to 26. Answer to 27. Higher. Middle. Lower. Higher. Middle. Lower. % % % % % % % % 60 1 9 50 40 10 25 5 15 ... 3 12 15 3 10 2 20 ... 5 15 40 10 20 10 5 ... ... 5 5 ... 3 2 Total. 100 1 17 82 100 23 58 19 The above figures show the result of the answers to both the 26th and 27th questions. 28. The quantity of ganja as smoked by the different classes of smokers is as follows:30 40. The following are the virtues of hemp drugs according to the Arabic Materia Me- dica: 31 59. The only modification in excise adminis- tration: 32 Question. 55.33 Bhang34 Oral evidence. Question 1.35 26. The proportion of habitual moderate con- sumers to habitual excessive consumers is as 10 is to 2. The latter (c) (d) is 8 to 2. This is for ganja only. The proportion of bhang is 8 to 1 to (a) (b) and 2 to 4 to (c) (d). At the time of " Mesh San- krant," in the month of Baisak of each year, bhang is drunk by all higher class people. 27. These are mainly from the labouring classes, Nalia Paiks, who were a sort of militia in the time of the late Raja, and the Katki people. The labourers, after the day's work, find some relief in smoking ganja. The Nalia Paiks are of lazy habits, which lead them to smoke ganja. The Katki people, who carry on trade and go from place to place, smoke ganja to avoid the effects of the climate. 28. (a) 3 pies (b) 1 anna Ganja. (a) 1 pie (b) 3 pies Bhang. But ganja is generally smoked in company. It is not the case with bhang generally. It is taken alone. 29. (a) In ganja smoking ordinarily tobacco is mixed. (b) Exceptionally the consumers mixed opium, the juice from the root of dúb grass and dhatura is also mixed to it. All this is done to enhance intoxication. In bhang also dhatura seeds are mixed to increase intoxication. Usually with bhang black pepper and souf (anise) are mixed. But in hot season and on occa- sions, cardamom, cucumber, and kakri and melon seeds, kasini, rose leaves, almonds, saffron, and javitri are also mixed with pepper and souf. Rose water and keuara flower water are also mixed. I have observed bhang drunk as follows: 36 also alleviates fatigue. The working classes use ganja and bhang to alleviate fatigue after their days' labour, and the rich classes use these as accessory to the digestion of their food and for good appetite. My reference is to moderate habi- tual use. 42. The moderate use of bhang is generally considered harmless, if not beneficial, as apparently no complaints have been heard, and it is also a general belief. 43. Yes, they are inoffensive to their neigh- bours. 44. The moderate use of bhang is refreshing, produces intoxication, creates appetite, gives sound sleep, but it does not allay hunger. Those who take in the evening the effect lasts up to mid- night. The after-effect is, I believe, dullness, and the want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 45. (a)and (b)The habitual moderate use of bhang does not produce any noxious effect, nor does it impair the constitution. (c) and (d) No, it does not. (e) The consumers become a little lazy. (f) No. (g) Not come under my observation. 46. I have come to know by observation that the habitual excessive use of ganja is very inju- rious. I think of all the intoxicants ganja is said to be the worst. I have known cases that by excessive use of ganja the consumers who were very healthy in their youth have become totally blind. Many cases have come to my knowledge of insanity, both temporary and permanent, pro- duced by excessive use of ganja. In old age the excessive smoker of ganja generally gets cough and asthma, and many have come to their grave at a premature and early age. I have seen ex- cessive smokers of ganja to become cranky and not affectionate to their wives and children, and quite indifferent to their affairs. In short, the excessive habitual smoker of ganja becomes quite useless to himself and to society. 47. No; I am acquainted with persons who are habitual moderate consumers of bhang and ganja, but their children never use these drugs. 48. It has been often observed that the sons of habitual excessive drinkers of bhang and smokers of ganja have been found using these drugs, but there are some exceptions to this; also generally in some family where excessive use of these drugs appears to be hereditary. 53. Very seldom. I know of one case of an excessive ganja smoker where there was homicidal frenzy. 54. No; on the other hand, I have known cases where the use of these drugs (bhang and ganja) will stupefy them and make them unfit for any action. 55. Yes, the criminals do this to their victims. Yes, without admixture, by bhang drinking alone complete stupefaction can take place. 56. The dhatura for personal consumption with bhang is used in a moderate quantity to increase intoxication. But it is used in large quantity with bhang on others with criminal intentions and to commit crimes. 57. I have known in Central Provinces and also in this State of Kalahandi that ganja is drunk as bhang with bhang massalas. The effect is more injurious than the bhang leaves; but as no bhang leaves are obtained, they drink ganja. Ganja is sometimes roasted in ghee and eaten in this State. 58. The present excise arrangement is working well. 60. No ganja is produced in this State, and it should not be allowed. 61. No, charas is not produced. 62. Not produced in this State. 63. No objection to offer. 64. None. 65. The tax on ganja is less in these provinces than in the North-Western Provinces. In my opinion, it is much less here and should be raised. No bhang or charas is sold here, so it cannot be compared; as compared with the tax on opium, the tax on ganja is far less. 66. I would propose different rates on different kinds of ganja, as they being of different qualities, some inferior and some superior, should be taxed according to these qualities. 67. No, I have none. 68. There are no such houses or shops in this State where these drugs or their preparations are consumed on the premises. I think where the consumption is allowed on the premises it should be stopped, because it is tempting and leads many people to it. 69. The wishes of the people are not generally consulted, as there is no public opinion on the subject. I think it will be better to consider the local public opinion, if any is offered. 70. I know in my official capacity that ganja was imported from the adjacent Native States of Punna, Rewa, Nagode and Bhopal, etc., to Central Provinces, there being no proper control in these States and the taxation being very light or not at all. In this State of Kalahandi ganja is imported from the neighbouring State of Jeypore. No tax is levied in that State on ganja, and it is sold in the bazaar there like tobacco, without any check, very cheap. The people grow ganja there without any control, and I am told that no tax is levied there. There was no proper control at the time of the late Raja regarding the cultivation of hemp plant (ganja) in this State. It was grown by the people wherever they liked, especially in the hilly tracts, I am told. No bhang or charas was manu- factured. Since the State came under direct management of the British Government on account of the minority of the Raja the cultivation of the ganja is totally stopped, and it is now penal to cultivate the same. The system followed in the Khalsa is strictly observed here. The ganja for sale is obtained from the Government godown at Raipur, and it is kept under lock and key in the treasury room under charge of the tahsildar, who issues the same to the contractor, and a proper account is kept of it. No bhang and charas is sold here. The clean ganja is given to the contractor, and the sticks and bhang are burnt.
37 18. Evidence of ALAM CHAND, Superintendent, Bastar State. 1. When I was tahsildar at Khandwa, in the Central Provinces, I have bad opportunities to inspect the cultivation of hemp in the Khandwa district, and its adjoining districts and States, such as Indore, etc. Other opportunities I have had when I was Diwan of Kanker and Chhuikha- dan, and Manager of Kawardha and Superintend- ent of Bastar. The experiences I have obtained from the people and their associates, who smoke ganja, are embodied in my answers. At Kawar- dha there is a religious society of Kabir Panthis, and ascetics from many parts of India, such as North-Western Provinces, the Punjab, Bengal, and China, do frequent these religious associations, and the effects that I could perceive upon these persons are given in my answers. 2. No charas or bhang is prepared from hemp here or used. I simply confine myself to ganja. Formerly hemp used to be cultivated for produc- tion of ganja. The definitions given by Dr. Prain can hold good in respect of ganja. Cultivation of hemp and production and pre- paration of ganja have been stopped by the Gov- ernment, but the process which the people had resort to when they bad cultivation to a little extent in the compounds of their houses is as follows: It was not being trodden under foot in order to give a flat shape, but the people used to stack it, putting the flowering tops one above the other, grass or straw intervening to save it from damp, and then pressing it with some heavy timber or other heavy thing. This process used to give it a flattened shape. No steps had hither. to been taken here to procure "round" or "chur" ganja. 3. Here I have never seen hemp growing spon- taneously. 4. It is generally known by the name of "ganja" only. 5. Wild hemp does not grow here, so I cannot relate the conditions necessary for its growth. 7. None of these products is now being manu- factured, nor hemp is cultivated in Bastar. 8. Formerly, i.e., two years ago, people used to cultivate hemp, but as its cultivation has now been stopped by the Government, there is now no area under hemp cultivation. 9. Formerly the people did not prepare fields, but scattered a few seeds in their compounds or raised a little crop by transplanting the seedlings. They consider the plant fit for preparing ganja, when its leaves become yellowish and its heads resinous. When the plants had grown one foot or one-and-a-half feet, they cut the top of the plant and clear up the big leaves in order to enable it to give out more branches and getting kalis. 10. The cultivators did not form a special class, but they belong to the class of agricultural culti- vators (i.e., Murias, Gonds, etc.). 11. Here we have no wild hemp. Ganja has hitherto been produced from cultivated hemp. 12. I have never seen ganja having been manu- factured from wild hemp. 13. Its cultivation has now been entirely stop- ped in this State. Bastar is well suited to the growth of ganja on account of being tableland and excessive rain. In the hilly parts or soil saturat- ed by water, I think its cultivation would not be possible. 14. Ganja used to be prepared from hemp plant. I would estimate its product at about 400 seers. 15. Here ganja is not eaten, nor drunk. It is used for smoking only after cleansing, taking out its seeds and rubbing it on palms of hands, mix- ing some water. 16. Bhang is not used; nor was it formerly used. Wild hemp does not grow here. 17. Here agricultural cultivators or Murias (aborigines). They used to cultivate it. 19. Charas is not used here for smoking; ganja is only used for smoking. It is not applied here to any other use except for medicines, as will be stated hereafter. 20. The ganja smokers are very few; because the aborigines of this State satisfy the desire of intoxication by having recourse to the use of tari, sulphi, sindhi and landha (fermented mixture of kosrá seeds). Day-labourers and sadhus use ganja by filling it in leaf-pipes or chilam. More is used in the head-quarters of tahsil. Rural population use it very seldom. The proportion of the consumers is. 06. 21. Flat ganja imported from Raipur is pre- ferred. No other kinds of ganja are used here. 25. No bhang or charas has ever been used here. Only ganja is used, but its use is on the decrease owing to the imported ganja being dear. The statistics of ganja are given below, as could be ascertained from this office:38 27. Table showing the classes from which each of (a), (b), (c), (d), are taken and their habits of life and the circumstances which mainly lead to the practice. Description of class. Name of class. Habit of life. Circumstances that led to the formation of habit. (a) Habitual moderate consumers. Professional day-labourers, such as breakers of stones, etc. They live on their daily labour. Excessive work and hard labour. (b) Habitual excessive consumers. Ascetics and the persons with- out any occupation. The former live on alms, and the latter on bounty of their relatives. The latter belong to different classes of inferior order. The former to concentrate their minds on fixed object. The latter on account of company. (c) Occasional moderate consumers. Few belong to respectable class who cannot use liquor and who associate with sadhus. Among these must be consider- ed spoiled children of well-to- do persons on account of bad company. Company. (d) Occasional excessive consumers. Low castes, such as Mehra, Ghasias, Chamars, e'.c. Menial service or occupation, such as cutting grass, or syce, etc. For alleviating fatigue and a desire to work more which I think they can hardly accom- plish by taking resort to such remedy. 28. The average allowance and cost of ganja per diem is as follows:39 46. Excessive habitual use of ganja is certain to produce insanity. Men using ganja moderately often take recourse to excessive use, simply some- times to relieve them of their mental anxieties. It deadens their intellects, and for want of self- control, induces them to indulge too much in its smoking. 47 and 48. It is not a hereditary habit, but affects the health of the children. 51. I do not think that its moderate use in any way affects the crime in general or in particular. Some of the bad characters, who use ganja, com- mit petty thefts, but not in a larger proportion. 52. As stated in No. 51. 53. I have not seen such a case, nor do I know of any case that the consumer's brain was so turn- ed out as to attempt murder. 54. I have not seen such cases. 55. I have seen two or three instances when criminals robbed their victims by administering ganja mixed with other intoxicating drugs, such as dhatura. Ganja alone I don't think can stupefy completely. 58. I think the present system of excise ad- ministration in respect of ganja is working well, and no modifications are necessary. 60. Hemp is not cultivated here. It is imported from Raipur. 61. Charas is not imported here. 62. Bhang is not used here. 63. I have no objection to offer. 64. Ganja is imported from Raipur, and the rules now in force governing its import are not objectionable. It is sent in sealed boxes. 65. As compared with the tax on liquor, the taxation of ganja is not reasonable. It is small. I think the tax should be increased, for a ganja smoker can satisfy himself on payment of a pice or two pice. 66. No different rates of taxation are necessary. 67. The tax on ganja is not felt at all. It is comparatively very small. I would advocate its increase. 68. There are shops licensed for sale of ganja, but ganja is not consumed on the premises. I think it should be sold by licensed shop-keepers, if its entire sale is not prohibited. 69. The people are not consulted, but shops are opened at such places where they can conve- niently have a resort to. It is 1 think not neces- sary to consult them. 70. Here ganja is imported from Raipur. Duty is paid on the ganja used here. Generally untaxed ganja cannot be used here, though there may be some cases of importation from foreign States. 19. Evidence of T. GOONDIAH, Tahsildar, Janjgir, Bilaspur District. 1. I have been Tahsildar in Chhattisgarh Divi- sion for nine years; and so I have had opportu- nities of obtaining information regarding ganja, which is supplied to this division from Khandwa and issued under our supervision. 2. Yes. In Chhattisgarh division these pro- ducts are known by the names of (1) ganja (ganjai in Uria country); (2) bhang; (3) charas. 14. (a) Ganja is cultivated in Nimar district under orders of the Government. (c) Bhang is prepared at home by the persons drinking it. 15. Ganja is generally used for smoking and bhang for eating and drinking. Very few people eat bhang; generally it is drunk. 16. Yes. Bhang is generally prepared by people in their houses. Yes. 18. Yes. They deteriorate by keeping more than a year. They do not quite lose their effect. They keep good with ordinary care for twelve months. 19. Ganja is generally used for smoking, but it is also used as medicine in cattle diseases in this division, and also given to cart bullocks when they are fatigued. As medicine, it is given with dahi or curd milk, and for fatigue it is given with turmeric and gur. 20. Generally, labouring classes smoke ganja. It is also smoked by artisans and bairagis and gosains (religious mendicants). It is smoked throughout the province. It is not limited to any special locality. Two per cent. of the popu- lation may be smoking ganja. 21. Flat ganja is always supplied to this divi- sion from Khandwa, and it is liked by people in this country. I have not seen round ganja or "chur." 22. I know nothing about charas. 23. No. It is never used for smoking. 24. Bhang is generally drunk by Marwari and Hindustani Brahmins in this country in summer season. People seldom drink in other seasons. There are people who are addicted to bhang, and such men drink it as beverage throughout the year. The number of bhang-drinking men is so small that no percentage can be noted. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase. The principal reasons are 40 bhang and do not smoke ganja. Females never smoke ganja, except among bairagis. 31. Yes, it is easily formed in company. Yes, it is somewhat difficult to break it off soon. The easiness or the difficulty depends upon the form- ation of habit. If a man smokes occasionally, his habit can be broken off easier than that of a person who is a regular smoker. There is a tendency in these drugs for moderate habit to develop into ex- cessive. 32.As far as my experience goes there is no custom, social or religious. Almost all the bairagis (religious mendicants) are addicted to ganja smoking, and the real object is to concentrate their mind in devotion to God. 33. Respectable and educated people regard ganja smoking as bad. The public opinion is against it, as viewed from social standpoint. I think that the use of ganja is in disrepute, and the sentiment is attributable to the fact that it spoils health and renders him indifferent and care- ess towards his worldly duties. Moreover, a ganja smoker loses trust. It does not cause so much harm to bairagis. I do not know of any custom of worshipping. 34. I think it would go very hard with bairagis and gosains to forego the consumption of ganja. The reason is that they are habitual smokers and they have very little worldly cares and anxieties. They can't drink liquor or eat opium, and so they require ganja as a matter of necessity for con- centration of mind. 35. Yes, for some time the drug would be con- sumed illicitly. Prohibition can be enforced by abolition of shops and stoppage of ganja supply, as well as abolition of its cultivation. The prohi- bition would certainly occasion serious discontent among the consumers. But it would not amount to a political danger. Yes, there is probability of the prohibition being followed by recourse to liquor and opium. 39. Ganja smoking is much more injurious to health than the drinking of bhang. The latter form, if well prepared, cools the body and keeps up a man's spirit. The former causes great heat and makes a man weak. Bhang is prescribed by the school of native physicians on account of medicinal qualities. It is chiefly used in medicines given to remove nervous debility. In the treatment of cattle dis- ease also it is used. 41. Yes, use of ganja and bhang. (a)Bhang drinking. (b)Ganja smoking. (c)Ganja smoking. All labouring classes and artisans. Moderate habitual use. 43. Yes. They are inoffensive (ganja smokers). 44. The immediate effect of moderate use of ganja on habitual consumers is intoxication, allays hunger, creates appetite after 20 minutes. The effect lasts one hour. The after-effect is lazi- ness. The immediate effect of bhang is refreshing, slight intoxication, good appetite. The intoxica- tion lasts three hours. The after effect is exhaus- tion. 45. It impairs the constitution in the long run to some extent. It does not cause loss of appe- tite. It causes bronchitis and asthma if good quantity of ghee is not taken. 74 and 48. No. 49. Excessive use of ganja for a long time, without nourishing food, would produce impo- tence. 51. No. Few ganja smokers will be found among bad characters. Moderate use does not tend to commit crime. 52. As above. 55. Very rarely done. Yes. 63. The present system is working well, and I have no objection to it. 65. The taxation of ganja is reasonable. One tola of ganja satisfies ten persons at one time, and its cost is 1 anna; whereas 10 annas liquor would satisfy ten persons at one time. 67. I have no objection to the present method of taxing ganja. 68. In this division there are no licensed houses for the sale of these drugs. 69. No, the wishes of the people are not con- sulted before a shop is opened. The neighbour- ing contractors are consulted;and if they have no objection to the opening of the new shop or their objection proved useless, it is opened. Public opinion is unnecessary. The present method is good. 20.Evidence* of MUNSHI THAKHT SINGH, pensioned Tahsildar, Hatta, District Damoh. 1. Entered Government service in 1836 as Assistant Record-keeper. Rose to be Naib Tahsildar and Tahsildar. Was also Superintend- ent of Settlement. Retired in 1880. An Hon- orary Magistrate. 2. Bhang is imported in small quantities from Upper India (known as duba bhang);charas is unknown. Ganja (the flat kind) is obtained from Nimar. Broken ganja is not sold separately. 19. Ganja is only used for smoking, i e.,the flower part, rejecting the stalk and leaf. Majum, which is prepared from ganja boiled in ghee, is eaten. The leaves of ganja are used in place of bhang when the latter cannot be obtained. 20 Charas is unknown. Ganja is chiefly used by the lower classes and castes. It is used by all who have to do hard manual labour. Very few such could be found who don't use it. 21. Only the fiat kind. 23. No. 24. Knows of no such practice as bhang eating. It is drunk by all castes and by respectable persons in all places. Its use is confined to the hot weather as a cooling and refreshing beverage and as an inducer of sleep. 25. The use of ganja is not decreasing, rather increasing. I do not think the stoppage of its cultivation under license in every district has decreased its consumption. 27. See answer to 20. It gives a man an interest in his work, and enables him to work harder and longer. The effect of a chilam lasts for four or six hours. Hard manual labour chiefly leads to the practice. * Translation.
41 28. (a) One chilam or two chilams a day cost a piec or less. (b) Can't say. 29. Ganja, is smoked with tobacco. Bhang is drunk in water with saunf, kasni, pepper, rose leaves, saffron, kakri seed; dhatura never used. For majum, ganja or by preference bhang, is boiled in ghi, and cardamoms, pepper, saffron mixed. The ghi, after the ganja (or bhang) is taken out, is allowed to harden, and is cut into cakes for eating. Used especially at the Holi festival. 30. Chiefly in company. Women and children do not use it. 31. The habit (ganja) is difficult to break off. No one does break it off except in jail. Why should they try and do so ? I do not think a moderate smoker would necessarily develop into an excessive one. 33. Bhang is by no means held in disrepute. Ganja is among respectable classes. Beason is that former is not used to induce intoxication, but the latter is so used. Never heard of plant being worshipped. 34. It would be a serious privation for a. man to lose his ganja. He would be unable to do his ordinary work. 35. The use of ganja could not be stopped, People would get it as they do now from native territory. People will have some kind of stimu- lant. Thinks that liquor drinkers and opium or madak consumers are separate classes from each other and from ganja smokers. A man deprived of ganja would not derive satisfaction from liquor or opium. But if one be abolished, the consump- tion of the others would increase. 36. No. 39. Smoking ganja is more injurious than drinking of bhang or ganja, leaf decoctions. Never heard of any bad result of the latter. 40 Bhang is sometimes used as a medicine for men and horses, not for cattle. 41. (b) A moderate use of ganja (and also bhang) is good. 43. Yes. 45 and 46. Habitual excessive smoking is bad; induces asthma in old age and dimness of sight. It weakens the intellect, but never heard of its in- ducing madness. Habitual moderate use will have the same effect but in a less degree; perhaps in some cases no result at all. 53 and 54. No; excessive ganja would make a man foolish and not foolhardy. 55. No, it would not induce stupefaction like dhatura. 58 and 59. Has seen two excise systems before the present42 21. Evidence of CHINTAMANI NAND VIDYÂ BHUSHANA, Uria Brahmin, late Tahsildar, Sonepur, Sambalpur. 10. The persons who cultivate hemp for its narcotic properties do not form a special class in this side. They are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 16. The bhang is generally prepared in their houses. It is called kúsúmba in this part of the country. 23. Yes; it is also used for smoking. It is so used by the bairagis in all parts of India gen- erally. 29. The consumers of bhang mix pepper gen- erally and other articles for the sake of physical benefits. Sometimes dhatura is mixed with a view to make it stronger. 30. The consumption of ganja either in smok- ing or drinking, is chiefly practised by the male sex and at any time of life, excepting childhood. Children generally do not consume any of these drugs. 31. As to the habit of drinking bhang, it is not easily formed. Of other kinds I have no know- ledge. There is no difficulty in breaking off the habit of a moderate consumer of bhang. 32. According to the aphorism of Tantra (Shas- tra), the use of ganja as a drink is regarded as a religious custom by the Shaktas, a sect of people devoted to the Hindu goddesses; while worship- ping they necessarily drink it. On ganja there are some treatises. The known work on it is "Sanat Kumar Sanhita," which treats purely of ganja drug and its use, and of the effect produced by its use on the consumers. In that work ganja is called " vijaya" or invigorating drug and " sambit " or educator. It may also be found in some Tantras that no worship can be performed without using ganja. It is used because its use makes one's mind composed. It is regarded as essential in Tantras, but not in society. The use of it in Tantras is generally temperate. If used excessively, it becomes injurious to health and changes one's temper. It is used as essential in the worship of Hanumân and Bhairov. 32. All the devotees may accept that the prac- tice of taking ganja is in the rules of Tantra Shastra. The excessive use of the narcotic drug is generally in disrepute, and people call him " ganjâ" who consumes it with unusual excess. 34. Those consumers of bhang, either smokers or drinkers, will seriously feel privation of ganja if they will have to forego its consumption. 35. It would be in no way feasible to prohibit all of these drugs. As to the prohibition of any of these, the sunmers will take recourse to one or the other part of it if one part be prohibited. The prohibition of all parts cannot in any way be given effect to. The prohibition will surely and certainly occasion serious discontent among the consumers, which may amount to political danger. 36. The prohibition of ganja would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants by those in whose society there is practice of taking liquor. But by the others recourse will be had to other drugs, such as roots, stems, or leaves of narcotic jungly plants. I observed that in Patna some persons satisfied their desire by the use of some jungly substance which was known to them when ganja could not be had. 40. As to the use of ganja, the following has been prescribed in the treatise on medicine on ac- count of its medicinal qualities. The names " bhanga, ganja matulâni, madini bijayâ, jaya, and shakrâsana " are given to this drug. Bhanga is destructive of asthma; costive, digestive; productive of "pitta," stupefaction or intoxication. It is light, sharp, warm, produces activity in speech, increases appetite, destroys leprosy, creates strength, furthers sense, and in its constant practice it allays the effects of old age and diseases; makes the body long lasting. One more name " trilokya vijayâ" is given to it, and it is mixed with many sorts of medicines, such as modaka (pills), chûrna (powders), and is also mixed with "bhasmâs," such as banga, etc., in order to reduce it to ashes. If regularly used, according to the Shâstras, it keeps the state of youth firm. 41. The moderate use of ganja is beneficial in its effects as (a) digestive. (b) The drinking and smoking of ganja, as the peasants say, are beneficial to alleviate fatigue arising from the excessive work and exposure to rain and cold. (c) It cures dysentery, and is to some extent pre- ventive of cholera if used with some medicine. It has been observed that when cholera prevails in any place, many of the people residing therein generally take ganja with a view to puss off fear. The agricultural class mainly use ganja for the purposes mentioned above under (a) and (b) of this question, and the common people for the purpose mentioned under (c). I refer to moderate habitual as well as moderate occasional use. 42. The moderate use of ganja is beneficial, and, if not beneficial, it is harmless. 43. The moderate consumers are not offensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate use of ganja, if moderate, is refreshing and productive of bravery in the brave and cowardice in the timid. Instead of allaying hunger, it creates appetite. It has been noticed that Brahmins use ganja before dinner with a view to have good appetite when they are invited to a feast by somebody, or they are supplied with cups of kúsúmba by the host. If moderately used, its effect lasts for an hour or an hour-and- a-half. If used excessively, after creating a great amount of hunger, it allays it, and the effect lasts for a day or a day-and-a-half, when by con- stant bathing its effects are removed. In case the quantity used by the habitual consumer, whether moderate or excessive, be less than usual, they feel uneasy. 45. The moderate use does not produce any noxious effects, except that it produces the effect (physical) of reddening the eyes and mental effects of making the consumer a little lazy43 53. The excessive indulgence in ganja incites sometimes to unpremeditated actions, but not to crimes of a violent nature. 54. I don't think they are so used. 55. No complete stupefaction is caused by this drug if unmixed with other drugs. 56. According to treatises on medicine, ganja, if mixed with different kinds of medicines, differ- ent sorts of effects are modified. 57. Many drink ganja and a few eat it. I am saying all about ganja drinking. It is taken both in the morning as well as evening before dinner. When ganja excessively excites the con- sumer, he is made to take sour eatables and drinks, and to bath constantly when he becomes extreme- ly excited. He is caused to take "harra" in order to cause the drug to be vomited. 58. Looking to the condition of our province, I think that the excise administration is working well. 65. I think the taxation of ganja, etc., is reasonable. 22. Evidence of VINAYAK BALKRISHNA. KHARE, Brahmin, Excise Daroga, Nagpur. 1. My occupation as Excise Daroga for the last 8 years, especially in the Nimar district in which ganja is grown, constant inspections of shops, in- terviews with ganja contractors and ganja smokers in the course of my tours, and the special enquiries made last year under orders of Government, have afforded me abundant opportunities to study this subject. 2. There is only one kind of ganja manufactur- ed in these provinces, and that is "flat ganja." This article is locally called "pathar ganja." The process of manufacture defined in Dr. Prain's pamphlet for "fiat ganja," is exactly the one adopted in these provinces. Bhang is not grown here, but is imported either from Malwa or North- Western Provinces. Charas accumulates on the palms of hand (being resinous substance) when harvesting ganja. It is collected, but is at once destroyed, as its sale is not permitted in the Cen- tral Provinces. 3. So far as I know, in no districts of the Cen- tral Provinces wild hemp is grown. 4, 5 and 6. Since it is as above, these questions require no answers. 7. Yes. For only (a) and (d) (seeds), and in the Nimar district confined only to about 100 villages more or less, in the Khandwa tahsil, covering an area nearly 1,000 acres. A statement of the past five years is given be- low: Year. Number of licenses. Area under cultivation. 1888-89 574 833 1839-90 699 1,466 1890-91 408 833 1891-92 474 653 1892-93 697 940 8. There was a great increase in the year 1885- 86 in area, number of licenses, and number of villages, owing to the high rate per maund obtain- ed by the cultivators in the preceding year from foreign traders; but the influx of the commodity in the market in that year and the limited demand for the article disappointed the cultivators when they found that their labours were scarcely paid by the return their field produce brought. The fol- lowing year showed a great falling off and conti- nued stationary up to the current year, when there is a little increase on account of the preceding year's high prices obtained by them. Its increase or de- crease depends upon the demand. 9. Please see separate memorandum sent by the Commissioner of Excise, Central Provinces. 10. There is no special class of cultivators for the cultivation of ganja. The ordinary agricultur- ists do it. 11. No. Not from wild hemp seed. 12. No answer, as wild hemp is out of question for these provinces. 13. Yes, to Nimar district, Khandwa tahsil. There is no particular reason why it is permitted in Khandwa, except that the cultivators there have been sowing it for years past, and when asked to name the period, they say their grandfathers used to say that they learnt it from their grandfathers. It is certain that ganja crop requires moderate rain and good water soaking soil. Ganja was also grown in the Katol tahsil of the Nagpur district, of which the land is said to be suitable, but since 3 years cultivation is prohibited there as the drug produced in Nimar is much more in excess of the provincial demand, the surplus being annually ex- ported to some districts in the North-Western Provinces and Native States in Central India. I don't think the cultivation would be impossible ex- cept for the careful examination of the ganja growing plant. 14. Yes, (a) ganja, (b) charas, but this is not collected nor sold. In Nimar about 100 villages, 1,000 acres more or less. Produce between six and seven thousand maunds. 15. Please see separate note sent by the Com- missioner of Excise for the province: one kind only is prepared for all purposes. 16. (a) No answer, as bhang is not produced in the Central Provinces. (b) No. (c) No knowledge. 17. By the ordinary cultivators. 18. Bhang is imported and consists of dry leaves without any resinous substance. I have seen bhang stored in the ordinary way for four years without deterioration or losing its quality. Charas is never kept, and I am unable to say any- thing about it, but ganja deteriorates and loses its quality after two years, the resinous substance having dried or disappeared from it. I do not think it will hold good after that period with any amount of care. 19. Ganja and charas are used in smoking. Majum. (one of the names for a form of intoxi- cant made from hemp) is prepared from ganja, and it is eaten as a luxury generally by all classes of people. There are also habitual majum eaters. I saw in Nagpur during the last Moharam festi- vities that it was indulged in even by young children who came with their parents to see the tamasha from outside. It is also indulged in dur- ing the Holi festival of the Hindus. It is sold throughout the year at the head-quarters of the districts generally. 20. The following classes of people generally make use of ganja in smoking, viz: (1) Hindu mendicants of all grades; (2) the Muhammadan fakirs; (3) labouring classes on the railways and agriculture and others; (4) a few agriculturists; VOL. VI. I 2
44 (5) a respectable number in the middle class, edu- cated and uneducated. There are many others who are too numerous to enumerate. But the above form the principal communities of smokers. They can smoke charas if they get it. 21. On this side of the country, Central Pro- vinces, Central India, and the southern presiden- cies, flat ganja is smoked, as I think the people only know that kind. 22. I have no knowledge of charas being im- ported, at least in the Central Provinces. 23. Bhang is never smoked. 24. The consumption of bhang is by no means restricted to the poor. On the other hand, it is drunk by Marwaris and banias on this side, and during the hot season by respectable high caste and educated Brahmins of the orthodox class who are restricted from taking liquors. Such a pre- paration is generally called " panga," meaning light drink. There are such drinkers of this pre- paration in Malwa and in the North-Western Provinces, notably Benares, that they can drink off at one sitting 1 or 2 seers so thick that it is called " sikia dub," i.e., if a straw is thrown into the pot filled with this kind of preparation, it stands straight. This preparation cannot be drunk by an ordinary drinker without subjecting himself to serious consequences. Moreover, some people are so fond among that Brahminical class that they take pride in preparing and consuming the strongest dose in other ways, namely, that the bhang patti is boiled in water in a copper pot and a couple of copper pice put into it while under- going that process. It is then roasted in ghee and. then powdered along with almond, aniseed, pepper, dry rose flowers, seed of cucumber, and all these mixed in water, or, to make it still stronger, to prepare it in milk which they call "dudhiya," and then to drink it. I drank such a preparation myself once through not knowing the way in which it was prepared. I cannot describe in what state of mind I was thrown for about 36 hours, when the intoxication subsided. On the Ghats of the Nerbudda at Onkar, Mandlesar and Mahesar, and on the Ganges at Benares, and on the Kship- pra at Ujjain, this bhang preparation is so common and so often resorted to that the stones there bear deep marks. The learned Brahmins at Benares and Ujjain are noted for indulging in this drink, and through the instrumentality of the intoxica- tion produced by it, they can repeat the Vedas without a mistake and without being fatigued. Eating bhang is rare among those habituated to daily drink, but they do so sometimes for convenience sake when going on journeys. I have seen a man eating 1lb of bhang dry and unprepared, when lie found himself in trouble for possessing more than the authorised quantity, and thus escaped punishment. Preparation for drink- ing involves great deal of trouble and labour and cannot be secretly done, and in such cases those who do not like to undergo that trouble, and others who have some fear from their elders at home, keep a preparation for eating. 25. If the official statistics are seen, the use of ganja seems to be on the increase, but I attribute this increased consumption to be due to severe check on the smuggling from Native States and other places in British India. In the former case, there is no effective check as in these provinces on the cultivation of hemp drug, sale of monopolies and every other thing connected therewith is all uncontrolled. Similarly, in tie British districts out of the Central Provinces, as in the Berars and Bombay, the drug is sold much cheaper than in the Central Provinces, and the facilities afforded by the railways are great for smuggling. I expect still more increase in sales if the system of taxing the drug becomes uniform and the same system is adopted by the adjoining Native States. It is impossible to detect every smuggler without subjecting him to search, and thereby cause vexation, molestation and risk (vide section 45 of the Excise Act). I can speak from my own experience that there are people in good position, whose names I do not like to disclose, and whose avocations take them in the daily course of their business to such Native States and other districts, wherefrom they import the drugs for their friends in respectable positions. Their actions pass un- detected. If all these sources are stopped by making the tax uniform throughout, there will no doubt be still more increase in sales to the disgust of the advocates of the abolition of the hemp drugs. The number of smokers is not, however, increasing. 26. The majority of ganja smokers will go under class (a), as each and every person has to earn his living, which he cannot do if he becomes a habitual excessive smoker. Besides, the classes I have enumerated in answer to question No. 20 are those who cannot afford to pay two annas a tola to make them excessive smokers. Their earnings are shared by several calls on them. The mendicant and fakir classes are such as can be classed under (c), as their hand is always ready to welcome a chilam (pipe) of ganja if one is given every hour. They have no care for their living, as they beg from door to door, and a couple of hours' rambling satisfies their want. The well- to-do and charitable people have respect and sympathy for them, who spontaneously supply them this drug without cost, and very often at such places where these men stay, idle men addict- ed to ganja smoking congregate there who enjoy smoking in company with them. Under (c) may be classed those mentioned in No. 5 of the list against question 20 and those beginners who enjoy their company on such occasions, though not properly speaking habitual or occasional consumers, yet through the pressure of their friends partake it, and thus gradually become habitual moderate consumers. I cannot class any body under (d), as occasional moderate consumers cannot go to excess. A habitual moderate consumer can smoke two chilams a day. Idle fellows who can afford to pay for the drug, and who have no anxiety or care to earn their living, can smoke six or seven chilams a day, and such people have always a company to serve. An ordinary chilam can serve four or five persons, and unless there is a company there is no pleasure. Habitual moderate consumers will not ordinarily collect a company daily, but will do so in a way which the next-door neighbour will not know of. I do not call those people excessive consumers who have become habituated to it, although I have classed mendicants as such. 27. (a) From labouring class. (b) From religious mendicant class. (c) From superior middle class. (d) Nil. For (a), after taking a small quantity of drug, a labourer can work indefatigably or carry load without requiring much food. So the drug like alcohol becomes a highly concentrated food. Their small earnings necessitate them to resort to this practice, which enables them to observe eco- nomy and to possess sufficient energy to work.
45 For (b) indifference to the worldly affairs and conduct of life, without caring for the morrow. For (c) luxury. 28. For (a) 1 anna, half a tola, with ease, and even with that can treat one or two friends; and for (b) it is uncertain. It depends upon the company, but if he smokes alone, 4 to 6 annas will amply satisfy him. 29. Tobacco is invariably mixed with ganja. Dhatura stupefies a smoker, and it is therefore not mixed unless there is some object in view. The necessity for mixing tobacco is occasioned by the fact that before ganja is brought into use, it is required to be thoroughly washed, in order to remove its bilious quality, and all water dropped by pressing the drug with all force on the palm of the left hand by the right hand thumb. This done, the ganja still remains in wet condition and difficult to be burnt, and therefore the admixture of tobacco helps it, if any seed, kadi or patti, are allowed to remain, they produce phlegm. Bhang is never pre- pared without massala, and the proportion of ingredients, as given in the margin, are re- quired for 5 tolas of bhang preparation. 10 to 12 grains of pepper. 4 or 5 almonds. 2 cardamoms. ¼ of a tola rose flower dry. About 10 seeds of cucumber. ½ a tola aniseed. 1 lb sugar. 30. (a) in question 27 generally consume it in solitude: (b) and (c) in company. It is confined to males. Public girls who do not keep the profession of singing occasionally smoke ganja. Children never smoke, nor are they permitted to associate with ganja smokers, but occasionally they are given a little bhang even by their elders if any happens to be present at the preparation. Bhang is generally drunk in com- pany of other friends unless there be no one to join him. 31. Beginners generally tremble at its name and do not easily take to it. It gradually becomes a habit, when he constantly associates in the company of smokers and is pressed to smoke. Ganja smoking is not a permanent habit as that of opium. It can be given up at pleasure if one determines to do so. Of course for a few days he will miss the habit. It is possible for a moderate consumer to gradually grow into excess. 32. I am told by pundits that mention of this drug is made in the Vedas and Shastras. I can- not, however, speak with authority in connection with its use religiously, but I can speak with confidence that it is no doubt a long-standing custom to offer the preparations of this drug (ganja and bhang) to our great god the " Shiva," and no smoker or drinker will use it unless he offers it first to that deity. On the Shivratri day on Mahabaddi 13th it is a custom to prepare bhang, and with that bathe the god " Shiva," which is regarded as an essential. It is the day from which occasional habitual drinkers generally begin to use this drug for the hot season. It is no doubt temperate, and is not likely to lead to a habit or produce injurious effects, as the class who resort to it are business men of the middle class. 33. Those who do not ever touch it regard the practice as a vice, and it is therefore condemned by them. In this respect " charas " stands first. Ganja smoking takes the second place, and bhang, though it produces a more lasting intoxi- cation, still it is not considered disreputable by the drinking or non-drinking class. The total abstainers call ganja smokers as " ganjakas," bhang drinkers as " bhangad." The consumers themselves cannot be expected to regard it as a vice. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. Certainly those who are habituated to it will deeply feel if this drug is denied to them. I think they will rather go mad without it than with it. Habit is second nature, and it must be attended to. The classes which will mostly feel are mendicants and labouring classes chiefly. 35. It will not be advisable to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. If they are denied licitly, the consumers will certainly have recourse to obtain it by illicit means. Unless the growth of hemp drug is entirely abolished, the use of the drug will not cease. If, on the other hand, it is abolished in one part of the country under the British rule and not interfered with in the Native States, it will be extremely difficult to enforce prohibition; and if such a prohibition is announced there will be a great discontent among the people whose interest is at stake, and they will cry inside their homes and quietly bear it, and will sit to think over the matter to contrive means to satisfy their appetite; and if they fail to succeed in their attempts, in my humble opinion, it must eventually result in political danger, which at the present moment cannot be antici- pated. My idea about these intoxicants is that a habitual consumer can forego his meals once, but not his usual allowance of drug. Of course those who have restrictions for liquor will not like to take to it, which must necessarily be in violation of his caste rules. Opium is a dull intoxication and a costly one, and which cannot be given up as others. I do not know then what other article would take the place of this drug. 36. I have never found that a ganja smoker has given up ganja and taken to liquor. On the contrary, the authorities had reason to suspect that the case was quite the reverse, since increase in consumption of ganja was noticeable year after year. Since the introduction of the new system of taxing liquor in these provinces, liquor is sold much dearer than before. Its price is nearly doubled and if the system is extended to the remaining districts, and outstill system altogether abolished, as is done in two districts, there is no chance of people going for that article in pre- ference to their habituated drug. Besides the one great bar for the majority of them is their caste prejudice. 37. Yes. I have no personal knowledge of the effects from smoking charas, but I had experiment- ed once upon my two friends. I had got this drug (charas) from Babu Bisumbar Nath, a well known contractor in the North-Western Provin- ces, and my friends smoked it. I do not know if they had mixed tobacco with it. They smoked the chilam twice when I left, and when I saw them the next morning they told me that the drug was very much active and kept them in an intoxicated state for upwards of ten hours, making them giddy, while the effects from ganja smoking are much milder. The intoxication does not last for more than two hours, and keeps the smoker in good humour. One of them is intelligent, English- knowing, and is a pensioner. He smokes, drinks and eats all these drags, and an evidence of such a man may furnish valuable information. 38. No knowledge, as only one kind of ganja is prepared here and sold.
46 39. I would give preference to smoking ganja. Charas, majum and drinking bhang produce in- toxicating effects stronger than the first, and which last longer. Excepting charas the effects from the other two preparations are in no way injurious to the health, so far as I have ascertained in my own case. 40. I have never enquired on this point from Dative doctors, but the consumers say that their use protects them from malaria, bad effects from water, effects from different climes and places, and effects from closed bowels, respectively. I do not know if any of them is used in the treat- ment of cattle disease. It is, however, at times administered to a patient to relieve him from in- cessant pain for a time. 41. The consumers say that these preparations possess all the qualities enumerated in (a), (b) and (c). For this reason only the labouring class use them moderately. The mendicant and fakir classes being constant wanderers use them also for qualities mentioned in (b) and (c). I refer to the moderate habitual use. 42. It is beneficial, as stated in answer to question 41. 43. Ordinarily, they are inoffensive to their neighbours. But if they are unnecessarily spoken to or reproached they will fall out. 44. Five or six minutes after a chilam is smoked signs of intoxication begin to appear. After about ten minutes it produces forgetfulness, a thought coming momentarily and followed by a host of other incoherent thoughts, the original thought being quite banished, and forgetting all worldly cares. After about fifteen minutes one thinks to be moving up and down. Mouth gets dry and the tongue is felt to be dragged inside, which is followed by a dislike for light, and in- clination to lie down. After a couple of hours the intoxication subsides. Similar effects are produced from drink of bhang, but its effects are much longer. Bhang is refreshing, produces intoxica- tion. I have no information to answer the remaining questions. 45. (a) No. (b) No. (c) I don't know. (d) No. (e) Not to my knowledge. 47 and 48. No, it is not hereditary. 49. No. Prostitutes occasionally use it. I think it must be injurious. It does not produce im- potence. 50. Excess of anything is bad. 51. I cannot say; there is no connection of moderate use of the drug with crime of any type. 52. I am unable to say anything on the point. 53. No. Never have I heard of any such occurrence. 54. No. 55. (a) Yes, but not without the admixture of " dhatura." (b) No. 56. The admixture of dhatura with ganja or bhang will completely stupefy a moderate con- sumer and may cause danger to life when it is done in excess. Cases have occurred in which ganja mixed with dhatura was administered to persons with an object to rob them of personal ornaments. 57. I have not seen ganja being eaten except in majum, and the effects of majum are already stated. 58. I am thoroughly acquainted with the administration of hemp drugs in the Central Provinces and it is satisfactorily working. No improvements are necessary. 59. No answer, as no improvements are neces- sary. 60. Of late years certain improvements have been effected for watch and ward of cultivation and manufacture. The establishment allowed is, however, inadequate to watch so many fields sown with ganja, and in my opinion the fields so sown ought to be fenced, so as to prevent ingress of other persons unconnected with cultivation. The manufacture ought to be carried on in an enclosed place and watched more closely and vigilantly. 61. Charas is not produced in the Central Provinces. 62. Bhang is not produced in the Central Provinces. 63. The present system in respect of ganja is good in all respects, but I do not understand why the sale of bhang is confined to be sold in retail by the wholesale vendor only, and at head- quarters of the districts and tahsils where a whole- sale vendor is bound to keep an agent. It is sold at Rs. 3 a seer to the public by retail while ganja is issued at the same rate to the retail vendors only, who, in their turn, sell it to the public at a rate varying between 5 and 10. 64. The present arrangement is very good. Import of ganja is not permitted. 65. With due consideration of the intoxicating quality of each of these three drugs and also of the other drugs and alcoholic intoxicants, the present rate of taxation is reasonable (I take the present tax on liquor for comparison). But I do not see why on bhang the tax should be so low as compared with ganja. There is a large gulf bet- ween the retail rates of bhang and ganja. 66. I cannot say anything on the point. 67. Having regard to the station in life of the majority of the consumers, the present tax seems to me to be already high, but as the consumers have become accustomed to it for the past eight or ten years, I do not think any reduction or increase in the present tax advisable. 68. The standing rules are that no drug is to be consumed on the shop premises. Such houses ought not to exist, and the prohibition is sound. 69. The present rules do not require any consul- tation, but great care is taken in fixing the locali- ties of the shops with due consideration of public conveniences. Hitherto no objection has been taken to the location of any shop in any place fixed by the Collector, and besides the drug is not permitted to be consumed on the premises of the shop. I think the rule regarding liquor shops should be extended for sale of drugs too. 70. Smuggled ganja is imported in small quan- tities from the Native State of His Highness the Holkar, as stated in answer to question 25, but this allegation cannot be substantiated by proofs. Consumers themselves use smuggled ganja in the north-western part of the Nimar district, which is intermixed with that territory, and where our shops are not purchased. Ganja issued from Government stores for consumption in the province is duty paid.
47 23. Evidence of ANANDI PERSHAD, Excise Daroga, Hoshangabad. 1. I am serving as Excise Daroga in the Cen- tral Provinces since the year 1864. I, therefore, while on tour, had several opportunities to come into contact with and receive information from the licensed contractors and vendors regarding the hemp drugs. I have also gained much experience during my long service of 29 years in the Excise Department. I therefore pass my opinion with regard to the intoxication and the system of management of the drug as my experience teaches me. 2. Charas is not produced in these provinces, therefore its information in detail will be known from Punjab people. Flat ganja is produced in these provinces, which is defined in the question. Round ganja is not made in these provinces. The flower-tops of flat ganja when detached from the twigs form the broken ganja, and it is correctly defined. In these provinces these products are known as" flat ganja " and "broken ganja." 3. In the capacity of Excise Daroga I had been in Jabalpur, Saugor, Damoh, Narsinghpur, and Hoshangabad districts, In none of the aforesaid five districts hemp plant grows spontaneously. It no doubt grows so in Punjab, therefore its full information can be had from the inhabitants of Punjab. 4. The ganja, that is made from the hemp plant is, in these provinces, known as " flat ganja " and " broken ganja " which are defined in ques- tion 2. 5. Wild hemp does not grow in these provin- ces, therefore I am unable to say anything about it. 6. As wild hemp does not grow in these pro- vinces, so I cannot say about it. 7. (a) Hemp, in these provinces, is cultivated in tahsil Khandwa, of the Nimar district. (b) Charas is not produced in these provin- ces. (c) Bhang is imported from Rajputana. Its amount of production will be known from Khandwa. 8. Statement of hemp cultivation will reach your office from Khandwa. It shall clear every- thing. 9. The correct answer for this will be had from Khandwa. 10. Hemp cultivation is not restricted to a particular class. Cultivators of all classes do it. 11. As the wild hemp is not cultivated in these provinces so its seed is not used. 12. As the wild hemp does not grow in these provinces so I know nothing about it. 13. Hemp cultivation in these provinces is restricted to tahsil Khandwa of the Nimar dis- trict only. Hemp of superior quality is produced there. It so abundantly grows there that it is not only sufficient to meet the requirements of these provinces, but it is exported to North-West- ern Provinces, Oudh and Bundelkhand Feudatory States also. Therefore special arrangements are made for godown there and its cultivation is pro- hibited in the other districts, Other information regarding the soil, rainfall, etc., will be known from Khandwa. 14. In these provinces hemp is cultivated in tehsil Khandwa of the Nimar district. Charas is not produced. Bhang is not produced in these provinces. It is imported from Rajputana and Ajmere. The amount of hemp cultivation will be known from its statement from the Nimar district. 15. Wild hemp does not grow in these prov- inces. Hemp is produced from the cultivated seed at Khandwa. It is smoked like tobacco. They also eat it with sugar and ghee. 16. They, as a rule, do not make bhang in their own houses, because its cultivation is prohibited. Bhang is not produced from the hemp plant. It is imported from Rajputana, Gonda, Bahraich in Oudh. Wild hemp is not cultivated in these prov- inces. 17. In Khandwa, every class of tenant culti- vates hemp, and generally the grocers and confec- tioners make majum. 18. I cannot say anything about charas, as it is not produced in these provinces. Ganja and bhang deteriorate if they are kept for one year. If ordinary care is taken, it can remain safe for two years, but becomes less effective. Damp soon deteriorates it. There are no special measures to prevent its deterioration, but it remains safe in wooden boxes and baskets of bamboos; otherwise after one year it becomes less intoxicating and its colour is changed. 19. Like tobacco, ganja and charas are smoked; otherwise hemp is at first powdered and washed with water; water is then extracted out. After- wards they mix dried tobacco with it and smoke it. In the other way they make majum of ganja and eat it. It is prepared with ghee and sugar. It is used in these provinces very freely, especially in the Holi festivals. 20. They do not smoke charas in these pro- vinces. Ganja is generally much consumed by the fakirs, gosains, sailors, water-carriers, shoe- makers, palanquin bearers and other menial classes. Persons of high caste very seldom smoke it. The number of hemp consumers is about 5 per cent. 21. Neither the round hemp is produced in these provinces nor it is sold here. All persons like flat ganja which they call " kalidar." They use broken ganja when they cannot get the flat. 22. Charas is neither sold nor smoked by the people of these provinces. 23. The people of these provinces do not smoke bhang. 24. They use bhang to a very limited extent in large towns, such as Hoshangabad, Harda, Seoni and Sohagpur. They use it especially in the summer season. Mostly bhang is used by the Rajputana grocers, Brahmins, Marwaris, and the inhabitants of North-Western Provinces. The persons who have settled in these provinces long ago neither drink nor eat it. During the Holi festivals they generally eat majum made from bhang by mixing ghee and sugar with it. They also drink it, when powdered, with water. In villages they neither eat nor drink bhang. Five per cent. of the population eat and drink bhang. 25. Charas is not at all used in these provinces. Ganja is much used, and bhang to a very small extent. 26. They do not smoke charas in these prov- inces. The average number addicted to ganja smoking is 5 per cent. of the whole population of the district, and that of bhang, 2 per cent. The average of the persons who have become slaves to
48 it and consume it to a great quantity is 2 per cent. The average of the persons who seldom take it is 8 per cent. The average of the persons who use it seldom but in great quantities is 5 per cent. of the whole population of the district. 27. The persons of the Hindu community who belong to Shivai sect, such as gosains, etc., have introduced the consumption of the drug. On the festival day of Shivaratri ganja, bhaug and the fruits of dhatura are offered to Shiva in worship, and generally the people in token of the remnant of offer drink bhang. The persons who smoke ganja, smoke it. 28. The average expense of the addicted moder- ate consumer is 3 pies a day, because in 1½ pice ganja 4 annas in weight is available which is sufficient for two times and that of bhang 1 pice per day: one anna's worth ganja is sufficient for an addicted person who can consume much, and half an anna's worth of bhang. As they do not smoke charas here, therefore I cannot say anything about it. 29. They do not smoke charas here. Generally they mix tobacco with it and then smoke it. They mix black pepper, sonph and coriander seed with bhang. They do not mix the seed of dhatura with it; but if they intend to trouble or injure anybody, they mix the seeds of dhatura with it in order to heighten the intoxication, whereby the smoker is put to great troubles. Bhang is also used as medicine, which is then called thandai. Grocers sell it, but it is not used in these provinces. It is sold in the cities of North-Western Provinces, where they much con- sume bhang. Sonph, coriander seed, black pepper, rose flowers, seeds of kakri, kashini, cardamoms are mixed with the powdered drug. They also drink it with sugar and milk. 30. All the abovementioned drugs, charas, bhang and ganja are smoked in company. They do not appear good in solitude. It is confined to males only. The average of the female consumers is nil. Charas is not smoked in the provinces. But in Oudh, and specially in Lucknow, women also smoke it. There they are known by the name of Sakin, that is, the providers of tobacco and charas. Ganja produces a very strong intoxication. The women cannot bear the puffs of its smoking, therefore they do not smoke it. But no doubt they, to a small extent., drink Chang as thandai in Holi festival. But they do not drink it always. Their boys consume these drugs49 it is called broken ganja. The flat ganja is first powdered and washed with water and then smoked, therefore it makes no difference. 39. Smoking hemp is more injurious than eat- ing it, because by smoking, the heat is increased through the fire which burns it. It is not very injurious if it be eaten as majum or drunk with water, because water, sugar, and ghee reduce the heat to a certain extent. 40. Ganja and charas have not been considered as medicine by the native physicians. Bhang is used as a medicine. It is given to the animals, and it also removes the fatigue of the journey. It is given to oxen to make them fleet of foot. 41. Charas is not at all smoked in these provin- ces. The advantages of ganja and bhang are described as follows:50 60. The cultivation of ganja is restricted to tehsil Khandwa, of the Nimar district, where it grows abundantly. The method of its adminis- tration will be known from the Khandwa report, as I am not well acquainted with it. 61. Charas is not produced in these provinces. I am therefore incapable to write anything on it. 62. Bhang in these provinces is not made from the hemp plant. It is imported from Rajputana. I therefore cannot say how it is supervised there. 63. There is no objection to the present system of the wholesale vend, but there is objection to the retail vend: 51 (a) Some take to it for the sensation and some because it calms the mind, makes appetite and removes belly-ache. (b) From habitual moderates people become habi- tual excessives, because the taste grows on them. These cases are not, however, common. (c) The same reasons as (a). (d) Mostly the pleasure of getting intoxica ted These remarks apply to both bhang and ganja. 28. Ganja.52 59. People would prefer home grown ganja to Khandwa. I think too many ganja shops are allowed. Two shops are enough for Sambalpur town. For the district I don't know how many are required, If there were fewer shops, I think it would lessen the number of consumers. Coun- try ganja is more intoxicating than Khandwa; therefore, people would use less and would be better. I think countryganja is less injurious than Khandwa ganja. I am told that the latter produces headache and belly-ache, which the for- mer does not. 62. I do not know. 63. As regards the retail vend of ganja it should be fixed that the retail amount to be sold should be 4 tolas. I think Government should manage the sale of ganja themselves. If they farm it out to several people it is a motive to the farmers to push the sale. It should only be sold to those who are known to be consumers. The excessive consumers would have to be licensed Other moderate consumers might purchase with- out a license. Shops should only he opened with the approval of the local punchayets53 ligious man. I associate with jogis. I am myself a jogi if you like. My eye-sight has fallen off during the last two years. My mind is active. I have had no recent illness. I smoked ganja early this morning at my prayers. I was in hos- pital for one day on the occasion described above. A fellow musician gave me drugged wine. As soon as I drank it, I became insensible and swoon- ed. I do not remember how I was treated by the doctor. I waked in the morning at prayer time, and found I had upon me wounds like burns. These were cured in nineteen days. 26. Evidence of COLONEL J. C. DOVETON, Conservator of Forests, Southern Circle, Central Provinces. 1. As a Divisional Forest Officer, the Gonds and Kurkus of the wilder parts of Hoshangabad, Betul, Nimar, and Chhindwara were constantly coming under my observation. In later years, my experience has extended to the Bygas of Mandla, Balaghat, and Bilaspur, the Marias of Chanda, and the Gonds residing in the vicinity of the forests in other districts; but I have not had the same opportunity of observing their habits. 20. In the districts of Betul, Hoshangabad, Chhindwara, and Nimar, between 1864-1869, only one case of the use of hemp drugs by jungle tribes (Gonds and Kurkus) came under my ob- servation. The individual was the head man of a village, and did not use any of the preparations in excess. Recently, referring to a body of about 30 of the men working for Government, the officer in charge observed that " there were 5 who smoked ganja." 21. Though still restricted and in moderation, the use of hemp drugs by the jungle tribes is more common than formerly. Letter fromCOLONEL DOVETON, published as an Appendix to his evidence. I regret that I myself know very little regard- ing the use of hemp drugs beyond that they are used to support both men and beasts under fatigue. In all my wanderings, I have rarely come across a case of evil results that could be attributed to the use of preparations of hemp, and this has led me to infer that, though commonly used, the exces- sive use of such drugs is chiefly confined to towns where the inferior classes generally congregate. With special reference to the jungle tribes referred to in the Secretary's letter, it may be said that they, and specially the Bygas of Mandla, Balaghat and Bilaspur, are fond of spirits; but it can hardly be said that these people are much addicted to the use of hemp drugs. Up to about 1870, the use of these drugs was almost unknown, to those at least in the districts of Hoshangabad, Betul, Nimar, and Chhindwara. From 1864 to 1869, in the districts abovemen- tioned, I was constantly out with large gangs of the people either for work or sport, and I can well remember that if by any chance a chillum was produced that was drugged with any of these preparations54 5. A moist climate, rich, well-drained light soil, and rainfall of over 60 inches, and an elevation of from 2,500 to 7,000 feet above sea level are necess- sary for the growth of wild hemp. 6. As far as I have seen it, it is dense. 7. Only in one place in the north of the Nimar district have I seen it cultivated, where it was grown for the 'production of ganja, and also for the use of its fibre. It was grown in one small patch a little over an acre in extent. 10. Where seen cultivated by me, it was culti- vated by the ordinary agricultural cultivator. 13. It could be largely cultivated in this district. 14. In this district, as far as I am able to ascertain, ganja, charas and bhang are obtained ready-made. 15. The preparations for smoking (A) are55 36. No, there is no reason for thinking that alcohol is being substituted for any of these drugs. 38. Round and chur are more intoxicating than flat, chur being the most intoxicating. 39. The smoking of ganja is more injurious than the eating or drinking of any preparation. The smoking affects the health, and if not support- ed by something nourishing in the way of food, such as cream or milk, it brings on emaciation. 40. In this district native doctors prescribe it largely for diarrh56 Question 35.57 21. In quality there seems no distinction between flat and round ganja; one is considered just as good as the other, and the people smoking ganja give it a preference to chur or bhurka. 22. As far as I know, charas is not manufac- tured in these provinces. If it is used at all, it is imported from other countries. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking by any class of men. 24. The people of this district eat bhang in exceptional cases, but drink it generally, as ex- plained under 17. 25. In my opinion the use of the ganja and bhang is on the increase, because they are less expensive than any other stimulating articles, such as opium, madak, or liquor. 27. Bhang and ganja are the only drugs to be had in these provinces. The former is used mainly by people well-to-do, while the latter is generally taken by poor classes. In both cases the begin- ning is made under impression of the uses of drugs being conducive to health, and it is this that mainly leads to habitual or occasional practice. 29. The ganja is used ordinarily with tobacco, and exceptionally with tobacco and some addi tional ingredients, such as dhatura, arsenic, or the root of a poisonous plant known as bachnaug. These preparations are only used for smoking, and the last three admixtures are intended for produc- tion of stronger effect than that of ganja itself. The charas for smoking is mixed ordinarily with gudakhu and rarely with plain tobacco. Bhang is prepared in two ways. The ordinary preparation is called siddhi, while especially one is commonly known as sabzi. Siddhi is prepared only with aniseed and pepper, while sabzi requires the fol- lowing massala sold for the purpose: 58 the fields, they generally carried a small quantity of ganja to freshen them after a hard day's work; that it was cheaper than liquor, and easy to carry about, as a small packet in a man's waist cloth would last a long time. 26. See above. 27. See 25. 28. The cost depends on the source of supply. 29. I am told dhatura is occasionally used to add to the exciting qualities of the drug, but have no positive knowledge. In the days of palki- travelling, dooly-bearers used to mix ganja in small quantities with tobacco to chew as they went along to lessen the sensation of fatigue. 30. Moderate consumers make no secret of its use that I am aware of. I have seen small paper packets of broken ganja carried in the folds of a puggri. 31. Yes, easily formed; and, once formed, very difficult to break from; but the tendency to deve- lop into the excessive depends on the individual. 33. The use of the drug is generally accepted as a sign of dissolute habits. 34. I am not prepared to use the word serious; not such a serious privation as in the case of opium. An opium-eater on admission to jail has to be care- fully watched as to his health, and it is often necessary for a short time to treat him with stimu- lants. After this he recovers the privation and rapidly increases in weight. No notice is taken of a man who is a ganja eater or smoker when known to be such. 35. Not feasible to prohibit; would be consum- ed illicitly. The prohibition could not be enforced, and would cause discontent. 36. On the contrary59 Question 53.60 Asylum by the Magistrate. I cannot be certain whether there was any family history in this case. He had gone off his head several times before, but had done no act of violence. He was regarded as dangerous in this state. His friends ascribed this to ganja, and (I think) said that he took no liquor; but he may have taken liquor. My Assistant; Rai Bahadur Dinanath, tells me that the case he mentions in his answer No. 52 (which is similar to my Bilaspur case) was a Chanda case, which occurred about four years ago when he was there. Question 53.61 We have many cases of insubordination from ganja. I think ganja is a more frequent cause of dismissal and punishment than liquor. The effects of excessive use of ganja are longer in duration than those of liquor. A man who is off his head from drink is generally all right next day. With ganja it sometimes takes a fortnight. This refers to excessive indulgence. Saugor is a particularly bad district for ganja, being on the borders of Native States. Many of the police are up-country men, Purbeas, etc.; but I do not think that more of them use hemp drugs than local men. In fact, I think low caste local men are more given to these drugs. I should think that the consumers of liquor in the Saugor police are about equal in number to the hemp drug con- sumers. Question 12.62 unless it is mixed with dhatura seeds or charas. As for instance, in Khurai, zilla Saugor, a large weekly cattle market is held. One Ganpat Goojer of Piperia-chore, pargana Rahatgarh, contracted friendship with three men who had come with cattle for sale to the market. After that, the accused mixed dhatura seeds with ganja and in- duced the three men to partake of it. When they were found intoxicated, Ganpat Goojer bolted away with cattle and valuables of these three men. He was arrested in February 1879, and in the cases tried by Colonel Ward, then the Deputy Commissioner of Saugor, the accused was found guilty, and was sentenced to 16 years' imprison- ment. 33. Evidence* of SAYAD MOHOMED TAKI, Inspector of Police, Hoshangabad. 51. Amongst the habitual moderate consumers of these drugs, bad characters are in excess. Most criminals belong to the menial castes, and amongst them the consuming of these drugs is a custom, there being no caste prejudices against the taking thereof. Criminals are severally addicted to liquor, ganja, opium and bhang. Amongst the following criminal tribes, viz.:63 34.Evidence of MR. PASLEY,* Inspector of Police and Superintendent of City Police, Jabalpur. 51. I do not think that more than 20 per cent. of the bad characters are moderate smokers of these drugs in this city. These ganja smokers commit petty thefts only. 52.About 10 per cent, of the bad characters of this city are excessive ganja smokers; they are not addicted to any special class of crime, but commit petty thefts like the others when driven to it for want of funds to obtain the drug. 53. The excessive use of this drug incites bad characters to quarrel with people and ultimately to fight. Bairagis and sadhns are much addict- ed to the use of the drug, and I have known an instance in which one sadhu, when excited under the excessive indulgence of ganja, killed a fellow sadhu. 54. I do not think these drugs are used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a pre- meditated act of violence or other crime, but in almost 90 cases out of 100 criminals indulge in liquor for the above purpose. 55. I have not heard of instances in which cri- minals resort to these drugs to stupefy their victims. The common article used is dhatura seed; complete stupefaction can be induced by this drug. 1 have known cases in which persons have put ganja into a " chillam " and induced a friend to smoke it (in joke), making him believe it was tobacco, and the result was serious. 35. Evidence of BRIGADE-SURGEON64 cases set down to ganja. I cannot give any opi- nion as to the percentage from my own experience. I only know what has been stated to me by others. From my own experience, however, I am strongly of opinion that the excessive use of ganja is sometimes the cause of insanity. Question 44.65 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed, and very ex- ceptionally dhatura, and this by excessive habi- tual consumers to increase the strength of the drug. Bhang massala is made of bhang, cucumber seeds, sugar, rose leaves, ajwain, aniseed, sweet almonds, black pepper, poppy-heads. These are mixed in a mortar with a neem stick, and often a copper coin is included. The bhang in Nagpur is the leaf of the ganja (chur). 30. Ganja smoking is often a solitary practice, for people are often ashamed of the habit, but either cannot or do not care to leave it off. It is chiefly confined to the male sex. It is never consumed by children. 31. It does, I think, depend on the moral strength of the individual, and is like smoking in this respect. 32. Bhang drinking is a part of the religious ceremonies at the Holi, Dussera, and also at mar- riages, specially amongst the Marwaris. I do not think it is essential. Those who do not care to drink can rub some on their foreheads. In the case of a very strict religious man, I should think the habit would be confirmed. At the ceremonies the amount drunk is usually moderate. 36. No. 37. I have no experience of charas smoking. 39. I should think smoking has a more dele- terious effect than drinking. It does, I think, give rise to a form of temporary insanity; but I see no reason to suppose it is more the cause of insanity than alcohol or excessive venery. 40. Bhang is used in dysentery, dyspepsia, piles, bronchitis, and also as a tonic. Ganja is used for tetanus, and so is charas. 41. Ganja is used to create an appetite and to give staying-power. Bhang is used as a febrifuge pretty generally. 42. With regard to the moderate use of the drug I cannot say it is beneficial, nor would I like to say that it is harmful. I should think it goes like smoking in this respect. 44. Its effect on the habitual consumer is exhi- larating and refreshing, creates an appetite, and its effects last from one to three hours. 47. I should say no. 49. It is an aphrodisiac. Is not used by pros- titutes. I do not think it tends to produce impotence. If it is a fact that it is an aphrodi- siac and used as such, the excessive venery would produce impotence. Majum in Nagpur is prepared as follows:66 Remarks. I do not think the asylum is the proper place in which to study the effects of ganja smoking. Out of 155 inmates there are only 19 where there is a doubtful history of ganja smoking, and I have the names of 22 more who say they have smoked the drug, that gives 41 out of the total, or 26 per cent. The people who could give the best information would be the malgluzars of the different villages, for there is no doubt that there are a very great number of cases of temporary insanity lasting a week due to the smoking of ganja, of which we hear nothing. The drug is doubtless an exciting cause of in- sanity along with drink, but I am inclined to believe that in India it is more the cause of crime than drink is, owing to the sudden and excessive excitement which is one of the first symptoms. In very few of the cases admitted as from the effects of ganja smoking have we a positive proof that the man ever smoked the drug. Take the case of Bairoo; he was admitted on the18th July 1870; was found wandering about and was sup- posed to be dangerous. He had just been deserted by his wife. He was discharged three months after and was re-admitted in 1874; supposed cause ganja, but in this case the desertion of his wife was the immediate cause which unhinged his brain. He has never been violent, and I should say that this insanity was not due to the drug. Case No. 2.67 and the supposed cause majum. She certainly had not had majum when in the asylum, and the only opportunity she had was during the 27 days. This is a very doubtful case. 5.Mussamat, Shaishama.68 mainly on my knowledge of the police, of whom many are up-country men. I have never recog- nized any connection between bhang and rheu- matism, and see no reason why there should be any. There is very little true bhang used in this province. It is more the ganja leaf. Question 45.69 There is, therefore, no evidence of value to be obtained regarding its consumption. Ganja is almost wholly used for smoking. Very occasion- ally, however, in those addicted to the excessive use of the drug, it is prepared in the same way as bhang and drunk. 23. I can obtain no evidence of the use of bhang for smoking. It is said never to be used for this purpose. Probably the small amount of the active principle contained in the leaves precludes its being consumed in this manner. 28.Charas.70 the muscles occurs. Bronchitis is not uncommon among those who indulge excessively; but this may be owing to neglect and exposure. Insanity must be a rare consequence, else one would expect to find most of the sadhus insane, which in my experience is not the case. Cases of insanity associated with the excessive use of Indian hemp. Case I.71 Question.72 38. Evidence of HONY. SURGEON-MAJOR J. E. HARRISON, Retired List, and Civil Surgeon, Kalahundi. 1. My long service in the medical profession in India of over 40 years. 2. Charas is not used or obtained in these parts. The ganja sold here by contractors under excise rules consists of the loose leaves and tops of the plant obtained from Government Stores, Raipur, and known locally only by its name "ganja." 3. During the Maharaja's time ganja used to be cultivated in this State; but since it has come under Government management, the cultivation has been stopped. I have not observed it grow- ing spontaneously. 5. I should consider the climate of these parts favourable for its cultivation, with an average rainfall of 54". 7. None. 13. Yes, restricted in this State now. 14. None. 18. When very old, the leaf deteriorates; but ganja and its resinous portions keep the active principle good for years. The leaves deteriorate by damp and moisture. To prevent this, it should be kept in well covered vessels. I have been informed that it keeps well in leather bags strung up in the roof of houses. 19. Charas is only used in the Upper Provinces for smoking; it is unknown in these parts. 20. I cannot give the proportion of people who smoke ganja, but mostly all classes smoke the ganja, Brahmins, especially those coming from Puri and Cuttack, Rajputs, Paiks, Mahuntis, Gonds, "Konds Katchina," but not the Kutia Konds inhabiting the hills, and most of the lower castes, the Doms and Ghassies (sweepers). 21. The old hands prefer the round ganja, being stronger in its effects. 22. None used in these parts. 23. The word "bhang" is not used in these parts, but ganja only. 24. Many of the Hindus and lower classes chew ganja with tobacco, and a large number of Brahmins and Mahuntis use it in drink, ground up with black pepper and sugar or jaggery, and some mix spices and milk, when it is called "kúsúmba," and is offered in the temples. 25. The ganja is used only for smoking, chewing, and drinking, and is on the increase, as already shown below, and to my own knowledge of over nine years' residence here, many non-users of the ganja have commenced its usage. The sale of ganja since the introduction under Government excise rules commenced here from the 6th August 1884, and the yearly increase is shown below:73 (d) As a tonic and cooling drink it is largely used by Hindus, mendicants, jogis, sanyasis, and bairagis. A moderate dose is considered to be from half to a rupee weight. The appetising effects are most to the occasional moderate users of the bhang. Charas has not this effect, but their desire is for dainty food. 42. It is not harmless but baneful. First, the moderate users have desire to its increase; secondly, the daily cost, which would help to maintain the family and other comforts; thirdly, it makes the consumers lazy and averse to labour; fourthly, a quiet disposed person becomes fretful and irritable in most cases. 43. Not so; they are quarrelsome and labour under imaginary harm of their neighbours. 44. The immediate effects are a peculiar intoxi- cation and pleasurable feeling, a sort of halluci- nation of grand waking dream, loquacious, very desirous of amusements, songs, and music, and an appetite for food. This state lasts for about three hours, then follows depression, a desire to rest or sleep; if not, fretful and irritable, and a longing for the repetition of the stimulus. 45. Yes, the noxious effects are physical, mental, and moral. It impairs the muscular powers and nervous system. In time both appe- tite and digestion are impaired. The consumers are most subject to these diseases, dysentery, bronchitis and asthma. It certainly induces laziness. In the beginning it excites venery to a certain extent. It over-excites the intellect and produces insanity; but deadens pain, and induces insanity of the type "mania," temporary or per- manent. It can be reinduced by its use. The typical symptoms come on generally suddenly74 52. The same as above, and more callous. They lose self-respect, and become careless and in- different to their families and thus hundreds have to work for their living or beg, and many of their females become unvirtuous. 53. Most certainly. I have known many, of which I can give a few instances that came under my observation. 54. I have no knowledge of any. 55. In past years crimes were committed of theft and murder on the high road by inducing travellers to smoke and drink bhang. Often the seeds of dhatura were added, when complete stupe- faction was produced. Complete stupefaction can be produced with ganja in drink or smoke. I have attended persons in this state brought to me for treatment. 56. It is generally administered in strong doses and often mixed with dhatura. A strong decoc- tion is made of ganja with the seeds of dhatura strained and kept for the purpose and, when re- quired, given either in food or in drink. 57. I have not seen charas used in eating, but ganja mixed with tobacco, or made into the drink subji; also a sweetmeat called majum. 58. The system now adopted works well under the excise rules. I am of opinion that more re- striction should be put on, and taxation, and only sold by contractors under license. 59. I agree with the proposition made by our late Political Agent, Mr. H. H. Priest, that the users of these drugs should have a licensed ticket for the purchase of the hemp drugs. By this the sale would be restricted. The ticket would be an index of shame to the bearers, and would prevent others from enlisting in the roll. The drug could be sold for medicinal purposes or cattle use, and the name written in the sale book of the vendor. 60. I have been informed that the drug is smuggled into this State from Jeypur and Singa- pur, and illicitly sold. 62. It should be cultivated only in selected places under proper rule and control. 63. The present system of vend is good, the ganja only being sold here and used, and the growth of the plant and illicit sale prohibited. 64. There is no other feasible way to its res- triction but importing the hemp drugs under control of Government75 same pipe. I think madak and ganja together a most deleterious mixture, worse than either alone. Ganja alone is, I think, worse than madak alone. Case No. 3.76 proportion of whom are Hindus. The beverage compounded is regarded much as Europeans look on light wines, claret or table beer77 50. Not used as an aphrodisiac. Not used by prostitutes. Said not to cause impotence. 51. No. The only connection would seem to be that the poorer classes use ganja largely, and these furnish the larger proportion of offenders in all countries. 52. Uncertain. 53. No. 54. No exact information, but it is possible. Criminals under sentence of death, who had run " amuck," have told me that they were addicted to ganja, nux vomica and other drugs; that the same had been secretly administered to them; but I could place no reliance on their statements as they were evidently seeking commutation of sen- tence. 55. Complete stupefaction cannot be produced by hemp alone. The admixture of dhatura is some- times practised for this purpose. 56 and 57. No information. Oral evidence. Question 1.78 Question 5479 46. The habitual, excessive use of ganja gene- rally produces lasting physical injury, mental confusion and moral deterioration. Loss of flesh and even emaciation frequently occur from dis- inclination for food and dyspepsia. A chronic bronchiectasis is always present, simulating asthma. Inertia, due to mental depression and general physical languor, exists; but there is usually a complete absence of sexual desire. The intellect is permanently impaired, and in- sanity sometimes produced. Two cases recently came under observation where acute dementia resulted from ganja excess, and, in both, the drug was the predisposing cause. Young and strong, with no history of family trouble or sickness, these police constables deve- loped insanity after prolonged excess in ganja smoking. The prominent symptoms were despondency, incoherence, moroseness with occasional maniacal paroxysms, and a profound aversion to move- ment or activity of any kind. Both recovered under treatment, but a temporary relapse followed renewed indulgence in one case. This man's second attack resembled a subacute melancholia without any very violent fits of mania. 47. Heredity cannot be traced in any single case. 48. Facility in obtaining the drug is quoted by a few habituals. A habitually drunken father leaves the drug lying about and the son thus contracts the habit at a tender age. Heredity cannot however be made out. 49. Occasional moderate use of ganja and bhang is practised for aphrodisiac purposes and does not result in any injury. Moderate habitual use of both is said to produce impotency, but no facts bearing on the point have been elicited. 50. Excessive use of ganja and bhang produce impotence and often complete inability for sexual intercourse. This is stated by many fakirs and a few laymen, but all of an advanced age, well past the prime of life. Oral evidence. Question 1.80 41. Evidence of DOORGA DAS SEN, Baidya, Assistant Surgeon, Warora. 1. The following informations have been ob- tained from actual observations and enquiries among the workers employed at this colliery, as well as from my general experience as a medical man. 19. Ganja, I believe, is exclusively used for smoking. 20. As a rule, the low caste people smoke ganja; about 15 per cent., I understand, of the workers of this colliery are used to it. Charas is not used at this place. 21. The 'flat' and the 'chur' or broken ganja are generally used by the people; the former being comparatively dearer, is used by those who can afford to get it, and the latter by the more poor classes. The other variety, viz., the 'round ganja,' is seldom or never used by the people of these provinces. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking here. 24. Bhang is largely used chiefly by the upper classes of the Hindu people and generally they drink it in the hot weather, mixed with some mas- salas or with milk and sugar, with an impression that it has a cooling and refreshing effect on the body and the mind. Some, however, especially of the poorer classes, would either habitually or occasionally eat this drug. They mix up the broken leaves of bhang with treacle into a pulpy mass and divide it into balls which they call "gur bhang," and eat them daily as often as they would. 26. Ganja81 45. Yes, it produces injurious effects, physically, mentally and morally. It impairs general health, and predisposes its victims to subsequent bodily and mental diseases. It causes diarrh82 8. I cannot speak with personal knowledge on this subject. 9. While I was at Khandwa I had occasion to see cultivation of ganja; the cultivators at first prepare soil which is of a friable nature and well manured, and exposed to sun. In May or June the ganja seed is sown; after the plant attains sufficient height, i.e., after three or four months, it is trimmed of its scattered lower twigs so that it may flourish. About this stage the parakdar recognizes the female and male plants and destroys the latter, reserving a sufficient stock for seed for the next crop; the flowering tops of the female plant are now trimmed and being pressed with hands are brought into round shape. It matures about January, and by the month of February it is capable of being gathered. The cultivators then reap it and dry it in shade and sell or consume. The seed of bhang varies from that of ganja, but the resemblance of each other is so alike that they are hardly distinguished from each other, but their plants are distinguished when they attain a height of one foot or more. Two kinds of ganja are cultivated and used in these provinces: (1) pattar, (2) billuchur. 10. No. They are the ordinary agricultural cultivator class. 11. I cannot say, but it is probable that the seed of wild hemp can be cultivated for production of ganja. 12. I can't say. 13. Yes; except in Nimar ganja cultivation is strictly prohibited. Nimar was probably selected because there ganja grows well and its cultivation is well under- stood by the people, who learnt it from their neighbours in Indore, and for reason that the land of that district is well suited for its cultiva- tion on account of its being of light character. 14. In Nimar only83 not in any way socially looked down on. Among Muhammadans, of course, if a man is in the habit, or ever uses intoxicating drugs, and it becomes known, he is socially and religiously outcasted; but this is generally the case among Muham- madans of lower sects, such as Pinjaras, Kunjras, and the like. 34. Sudden deprivation of the drug would be a serious privation to habitual consumers, but any one could gradually break himself off the habit. 35. Feasible by prohibiting cultivation of the hemp plant, which would to a small extent be illicitly consumed. Of course, discontent would be occasioned among consumers, but not to the extent of a political danger. The prohibition can possibly be effected by (a) raising the price, (b) reducing the number of retail vends, (c) the quan- tity now legally allowed to each consumer may be reduced, as may appear, feasibly to half. It is possible that the drug may be substituted for alco- holic stimulants or some other drugs. 36. One addicted to this drug can substitute alcohol for it, provided (a) not prohibited by reli- gion or caste; (b) the consumer cannot at once put a stop to this habit, hence he must have some sort of stimulants. This chiefly occurs among low castes, as both the stimulants possess the same sort of intoxication. 37. Ganja and charas smoking are alike in their effects, but the latter is to a certain degree stronger than the former. 38. The different preparations referred to have not different effects on consumers, but "chur" or broken ganja is considered to be more powerful than the other two in its effect, because it contains more resinous part. 39. The smoking of any of these preparations is, of course, more injurious form of consumption than eating and drinking, for the drug is com- posed of cannabine, which is not diluted in smok- ing, and hence it vigorously injures the system. 40. Ganja is generally used by native quacks as an electuary or confection for aphrodisiac effects in impotency, spermatorrh84 the moderate use has with general crime is that the consumers commit crimes with impunity, and encouragement caused by influence of smoking ganja especially. 52. The proportion of excessive consumers among bad characters is from 5 to 8 per cent. as appears from general observation. The exeessive con- sumer is likely to commit crimes of more serious nature. 53. Of course excessive indulgence very rarely incites unpremeditated crimes of violence, such as homicide and offences against chastity. I remem- ber to have read in some medical works that a con- sumer murdered a man by strangulation while in the state of intoxication from the effect of ganja. 54. Yes; the criminals intending to commit acts of violence have been known to use ganja to fortify themselves. 55. Criminals in order to carry out their designs often induce victims to partake any of these drugs, so that they may be stupefied, to afford every possibility of being deprived of their property. These cases generally are to be met with during journeys. A man can be completely stupefied by being administered ganja and charas, but cri- minals generally mix dhatura for the purpose. 56. The admixture of other substances, such as dhatura and tobacco, changes its effects. However small quantity of dhatura be adulterated, it greatly enhances the effect of intoxication, as it is one of the principal ingredients of Cannabis sativa; but the consumers for their personal use mix it in a very small quantity, but while administering to others mix a greater quantity of it. 57. So far as I know I have never heard or seen persons eating or drinking ganja and charas, except in case when no bhang is available they substitute ganja for bhang in drinking. Oral evidence. Question 1.85 43. Evidence of MIR ZAMIN ALI, Pensioned Hospital Assistant, Jabalpur. 1. I had the following opportunities of obtain- ing information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs:86 33 The consumption of ganja and charas, and also excessive consumption of bhang, have no favourable opinion among the people. The habits of consuming them are regarded as very low and mean. The social opinion in regard to the prac- tice is very unfavourable and scornfully against. According to the Muhammadan religion they are strictly forbidden. The use of all forms of the narcotic is generally in disrepute, because its use has always produced bad results, such as insanity, immorality, weakness of constitution, and many others. In this province there is no such custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion and by any sect of the people. 34. It would not be a serious privation to any class of consumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use, for I have seen many cases of excessive consumers of these drugs, who, when they were put either in the gaol or in the lunatic asylum, could live easily without the consumption of the drug they used to consume habitually. 35. Yes, it can be practicable to prohibit the use of all of these drugs, but by wise and gradual measures. Yes, if stopped all at once, those who are strongly and deeply addicted to the use of these drugs, would consume them illicitly. The prohibition could be enforced by wise and gradual measures which, according to my humble opinion, I have given on a separate paper annexed here- with. If stopped all at once it will occasion dis- content among the habitual consumers. But such discontent will not amount to any political danger. The prohibition will not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants, because both the Hindus and the Muhammadans are strictly for- bidden by their religions to use any sort of alco- holic stimulants. But there is probability of their taking to madak, opium or dhatura. 36. As regards this province, I have no reason to think that alcohol is now being substituted for any of these drugs. 37. Charas affects on the system sooner than ganja and more strongly. By smoking charas seldom sudden deaths occur as in apoplexy. 38. The round ganja, viz., baloo chur, has stronger effect on the consumers than other kinds of ganja (the flat and chur). 40. Bhang is prescribed by Hindu native doc- tors (i.e., baids) in stricture, chronic gonorrh87 great distances. And the cultivation also of these drugs should be lessened and finally stopped. 62. Yes; the cultivation of the hemp for the production of bhang should be controlled, and it would be feasible by the orders of the Govern- ment. 69. The wishes of the people are never con- sulted or considered before a shop is opened in any locality. No measures are taken for this purpose. The contractors with the consent of the Daroga open a shop in any village or place, where they think it will command good sale. Special opinion on the subject as a whole. The use of the hemp drug, whether excessively or moderately, and habitually or occasionally, is very bad. It contributes to the poverty of India. It degenerates the moral character of the people and undermines their constitution. It is owing to this hemp and other intoxicating substances that so many horrible crimes are committed here. It is owing to this hemp drug, and hemp drug alone, that the bulk of the people have grown indolent. It is owing to this drug alone that so many idle persons live on the alms of others, because they cannot work and thus are very burden- some to the people. It is under the influence of these intoxicating drugs and liquors that there are always quarrels, contentions, riots, and feuds. It is owing to these narcotics and alcoholic stimu- lants that this tract of land teems with murders, thefts, debaucheries, and frauds. It is owing to these narcotics and alcoholic stimulants that not- withstanding the benign rule of peace and justice of the British Government, there appears to be anarchy and confusion. It is owing to these, and these alone, that lunatic asylums are fraught with idiots and insanes, and gaols with prisoners. This evil, therefore, requires to be eradicated as soon as practicable. It is the duty of every Government to enact such laws and re- gulations which may check the commital of different crimes. Therefore it is incumbent on the British Government, just as it is, to take measures to uproot this great evil, which lies at the bottom of all crimes, as soon as pos- sible. Though the Government will be put to a pecuniary loss by stopping the use of these drugs, yet it can make up the loss by imposing heavier taxes on foreign alcoholic liquors and other such things which are imported to this country. We can gladly suffer to pay heavier taxes on alcoholic stimulants whether foreign or native. Besides this, if the Government is put to a little pecu- niary loss in effecting the well-being of its sub- ject, it should bear. Because, when the subject is in prospering condition, that loss can be more than compensated. According to my humble judgment a few steps that can be taken for the removal of this evil are the following: 88 44. Evidence of FAKIRCHAND, Brahmin, Baid and Pandit, Jabalpur. 20. Ganja is the drug of the very poor and of fakirs. 45. I have known hundreds of ganja smokers and I smoke it myself. I have never known a case in which it did any harm. I give it as a medicine for diarrh89 is most common in Bhopal, Indore, etc., and among those who have come from there. 25. The use of the drug has become less fre- quent among the better members of the commu- nity. The others use it about as much as before, especially in the jagirs. The reason of the de- crease among the former is the opinion that it is not a proper thing to do. 26. (a) Gond, Ahir labourers generally. (b) Fakirs, gosains and bairagis. (c) and (d) Can't say. 27. See above. 28. Can't say. 29. Dhatura is so used to increase the intoxi- cating effect. I know of no other ingredient. I know of no such substance being sold. 30. The drugs are sometimes consumed in soli- tude, but the consumers prefer to congregate together. It is confined to men. Boys do not smoke till after 15 or 16, when they continue all their lives. If a man begins he never leaves off. Children are never given the drug. 31. It is easily formed and hard to break off. There is a craving for the drug, but no illness results from suddenly breaking off the habit as in the case of opium. A man goes on always taking only a little of the drug, but if he once increases his dose, he is nearly sure to go to excess. 32. There is no religious custom requiring the use of the drug except perhaps that of the baira- gis, who do so as they say Mahadeo did. At Holi people generally use it, but only to make them lively. 33. (a) Among low castes with tolerance; among high castes it is thought somewhat of a disgrace from its intoxicating effects. (c) No worship of this sort occurs here. 34. It would be a similar privation to most consumers as would occur from the prohibition of any other luxury. It would not be such a priva- tion as the prohibition of opium. No one could say that it was an interference with his religion. 35. There would not, I think, be any serious discontent or disturbance, as none followed the prohibition of the growing of the plant. The consumers are too weak and devoid of influence to cause any political danger. They would pro- bably take to other drugs. 36. No. 37. The effect of charas is intoxication, much as opium, while that of ganja is more detrimental, ending sometimes in madness. The temporary effect is much the same and does not make the con- sumers disorderly at the time, as they sleep under the influence of the drug. 38. Have not seen these three kinds. 39. Smoking is the most injurious, as it affects the intellect, dries up the body, and causes bad coughs. Eating and drinking bhang is not so bad; it makes a man light-headed and makes him chatter, but his body is "mazbut," "taiyar." 40. See answer 19. It is often given for cattle disease. It is given to horses when tired to remove fatigue. It is not often given as a medi- cine to human beings. 41. (a) No, it increases appetite but not diges- tion. (b) Perhaps to those accustomed to it. (c) No. (d) No. 42. I am of opinion that in moderation the drug is harmless, except as leading to greater excess. 43. No. 44. Perhaps it is refreshing. Ganja smoking produces immediate intoxication, which only lasts about half hour. Bhang drinking does not cause intoxication for some time and lasts longer. Bhang creates appetite, ganja does not. The habitual consumer will feel no after-effects, but a casual consumer gets "hot coppers." There is a craving for the drug if not obtainable. 45. (b) No. (c) No. (d) Not dysentery but bronchitis, and asthma almost certainly. (e) It causes laziness and reduces the power for sexual intercourse, and so of sensual feelings. This is one reason why bairagis take it. (f) The excessive use of the drug, but not the moderate use, impairs the intellect and produces insanity. I have seen many lunatics who have become so thus. 46. The constitution is impaired. Digestion is not injured. Bronchitis and asthma are caused. 47, 48 and 49. No. 50. It produces impotence, partial at any rate. 51. There is no connection between ganja, smoking and bad character except in so far as the bad characters belong to the castes and classes who habitually use the drug. 53. It is possible. I know of no case of homicide or attempt caused under the influence of the drug. 54 and 55. I have not heard so. 59. I am of opinion that it is capable of im- provement in the direction of checking the use of the drug and ultimately prohibiting it. 67. I should like the taxation to be enhanced to increase the price. 68. Persons do not here smoke at the shops. 69. No. No, because local public opinion, be- ing uneducated, would be in favour of greater extension. 70. No 46. Evidence of GANGADHARRAO MADHO CHITNAVIS, Honorary Magistrate, Nagpur. 1. I have been able to collect information from bairagis and others who stop in the temple of Jageswar in Budhwari. The temple is under my management as a member of the Bherisla Temple Fund Committee. The names of persons who have given me this information are Ganputgeer, Wushruthgeer, Mahadeogeer, Ganga Prasad, and others. I got some information from Ghullu Patel, a well-known Malguzar in the Katol tahsil, and Kulmaj Sakharam, and other tenants whom he specially brought to me as being persons who grew ganja on their fields in the Katol tahsil before its cultivation was forbidden by Govern- ment. I have been able to get some information Vol. vi. P
90 from the pensioned Excise Daroga of Nagpur, Ramchandra Kasherao, and also from a sub- contractor, Chammunya, and a cart-driver of mine given to the habit of smoking ganja. 2. These definitions may be accepted for our province. It is the flat ganja which is generally used here. 3. I know of no particular district where it grows spontaneously. It grows by cultivation. It was cultivated some time ago by people in the Katol Tahsil, but its cultivation there is now for- bidden by Government. It is now cultivated only in the Khandwa district. 4. It is known by the names of ganja, bhang, and a preparation of it by the name of majum. Charas is seldom used in these provinces. The flowers of the hemp plant are made into ganja. The green colouring matter repeatedly washed from the dried leaves of the plant is named bhang; the extraction of its resin by its being boiled with ghee, and the jelly so obtained, when cooked with dried milk and sugar, is made into majum. 5. It requires high land for its cultivation. It generally grows well on white land quite near the village. 6. The ganja is said to grow dense, but it has to be weeded and thinned before it can be expected to bear fruit. I cannot say if the growth of the wild plant is ordinarily dense or scattered. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated in the district of Khandwa for the production of ganja and for its use as bhang. The bhang made from Khandwa ganja is not so generally used as the Marwar bhang. The plant was cultivated very largely in the Katol tahsil, but it is now for- bidden. 8. I have reasons to believe that there is a decrease, and the decrease is due, they say, to the very strict scrutiny and restriction under which it has been placed by Government. The culti- vators are required to sell the ganja to one whole- sale vendor, and the prices are not regulated by the usual laws of supply and demand. This is one principal reason why there has been, they say, such decrease in its cultivation. 9. The seeds are put down about the end of May or beginning of June, and as soon as the seedlings have fairly sprung up, the ground is carefully cleared of weeds and the plants thinned so as to leave an open space of three or four inches between. The process of bakharing is by means of a bourdened bakhar, so as to allow a man to walk between the rows of seedlings planted. The plants are cut in October91 Gosains, fakirs and bairagis belong to class (b). Middle class people belong to class (c). Gosains and other wandering tribes belong to class (d). 28. Habitual consumers spend about half an anna for the use of this drug. Habitual exces- sive consumers spend an anna per day. 29. Ganja is generally smoked with tobacco. Habitual excessive consumers who consider smoking ganja by itself a light intoxicant, mix it with dhatura, bachnag, arsenic, and kuchla. 30. Gosains, bairagis and labourers generally use it in company. Only middle-class men, who get addicted to it through want of self-control or through their association with classes of persons above-mentioned, generally use it in solitude. Females never use it excepting those abandoned characters who generally follow some of these bairagis and other wandering tribes as their con- cubines. Children seldom use it but only those of the above class of population who find it within their easy reach and who take it from the example of their fathers. 31. The habit is easily formed with asso- ciation of persons who use these drugs; but it necessarily shows weak character and want of self-control. It is generally difficult to break off when once addicted to it, by reason of its pro- ducing deleterious effects on the mind if not taken and indulged in for any length of time. It has necessarily a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. It is not used here in these provinces for religious purposes. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is looked down upon by the people. It is consider- ed immoral in the social scale. Generally all sorts of vices are looked down upon by the better classes of society, and as this is a narcotic that is generally used by the lower classes of people, and as its consumption is necessarily very generally associated with bad characters, and also as the smoking of this drug has a tendency to make its victims demoralised and lose much of their mental vigour, the habit is looked down upon by the people. No classes of persons here worship the hemp plant. 34. It would be considered a hardship for some days, as it would tend to make them uneasy and unnerved, and they say it would altogether dis- incline them to work. This will be the case with habitual smokers. But the occasional smokers can throw off the habit without considering it a serious privation. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit bhang and ganja. Charas, which is a greater intoxicant, may be prohibited. In the case of labourers and wage-earners, Gonds and others, there are reasons to believe that the prohibition of this drug would necessarily bring about illicit consumption. The smoking of it is, they say, necessary in the case of labourers to give them staying-power. It is not like madak, which makes its victims disinclined to work. Its prohibition would of course produce discontent among the labouring class. Even now, as far as I can make out, the severe restrictions imposed upon it afford cause for discontent among them. But the discontent cannot under any cir- cumstances amount to a political danger, but it would, I suppose, create a social danger, inasmuch as people would then take to opium, which, being along with wine the sole intoxicant, might rise in value, and would thus deprive their families and children of the necessaries of life by spending an increased amount on such luxuries. 36. We have reasons to believe that alcohol is not being substituted for any of these drugs. The consumers of alcohol and ganja form different classes by themselves. 37. The smoking of charas is more intoxicating and dangerous than the smoking of ganja. It is a more wild intoxicant. 38. The effects of flat ganja are more intoxicat- ing than either chur or round ganja. The effect varies with the classes of consumers: the effect produced in the case of occasional smokers will be greater than in the case of habitual smokers. 39. The smoking of ganja is more injurious than either drinking or eating it. They say the smoking of it has a very irritating effect, while the drinking of it has a soothing effect; and so it is that bhang has come to be used as a beverage on fast days to alleviate the heat caused in the system by abstention from food. 40. Native doctors sometimes use bhang as an antidote against dysentery, of course with an admixture of some ingredients. Some of them use it as a health restorer or tonic. They say it gives strength and matter. It is called vijaya in Sanskrit, meaning the conqueror of health. It is generally used in the case of cattle to remove the effects of fatigue, and also as a medicine in some diseases peculiar to cattle. 41. The moderate use of bhang is beneficial in its effects, but not so in the case of ganja and charas. People who use it extol it as a great digestive. No doubt in the case of labourers it gives them staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, and it does alleviate fatigue. It also acts as a febrifuge or preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. Pilgrims and wanderers generally use it for these purposes. It is the occasional moderate use which may bring on all these results, but eventually the habit has a tendency to drift into the excessive, and then it spoils health. 42. The occasional moderate use of the drug does not injure health. I have seen many persons given to this vice good and strong. 43. Moderate consumers give no trouble. 44. Only a moderate use of the drug in the case of habitual consumers brings on a feeling of re- freshment. It produces, they say, very little intoxication. It creates appetite. The effect, they say, lasts for three hours. Want of subse- quent gratification does produce longing and uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of these drugs does produce noxious effects, but not to the extent produced by consumption of opium and. madak. A moderate use, as far as I have been able to make out, does not deteriorate the physical strength of a man to any very large extent; but it necessarily destroys his mental equilibrium. For some time it helps digestion, but when the habit becomes settled, it begins to produce noxious effects, and in some few instances causes loss of appetite. It does not cause dysentery, but in a few cases helps to produce symptoms of asthma after a course of years of regular habit. This has been the case in my own cart-driver. I don't know if the consumption of ganja has a necessary effect of demoralizing a man, but my experience goes to show that generally persons given to ganja smoking are persons who lead an immoral life. In many cases it gives an Vol. vi. p 2
92 incentive to work hard. In the case of weak persons it results in making them insane. Moderate ganja smoking does not produce in- sanity. Excessive smoking produces insanity, but, as a rule, it necessarily produces this effect after some time in the case of persons who smoke it with bachnag, arsenic, kuchla, and dhatura. It produces temporary insanity upon persons who are moderate smokers, but who have a weak constitution and a weak intellect. Weak persons making an excessive use of such admixtures be- come permanently insane. The insanity caused by pure ganja, even if it takes place, is not of a serious nature; it only deranges the mind for short intervals. 47. It does not appear to be a hereditary habit, and does not in any way affect the children of the moderate consumer. 49. It is never used as a provocative to venery, not even by prostitutes. It does not produce impotence. 50. Not even so when taken in excessive quantities. 51. I have not been able to trace the connec- tion of crime solely to the consumption of this drug. But as bad characters generally belong to the lower classes, and as these classes of persons are very generally addicted to this vice, it generally appears that most of the bad characters are given to smoking ganja. As an Honorary Magistrate I find that the criminals who come before me are generally given to this sort of vice. 52. Of course the persons using this drug in excessive quantities are persons who are given to thefts and other offences. 53. I know of no case where the excessive in- dulgence of this drug has led any person to commit murder. 54. I have reasons to believe that criminals use these drugs to fortify themselves to commit pre- meditated acts of violence. Ganja smokers will never say this is the case, but I have reasons to believe that this is done. 55. In some instances criminals do so, but then they mix it with some such wild intoxicant as bachnag, arsenic, and dhatura; without such admixture this drug by itself is quite unable to induce complete stupefaction. 56. Ganja mixed with dhatura, bachnag, arsenic, and kuchla produces a very bad effect. It produces very bad intoxication, and criminals generally use it to fortify themselves to commit deeds of violence. To those who are used to it, it gives effect of fortification, but it quite stupefies those who are its first victims. 57. Ganja is eaten by some few persons along with an admixture of turmeric and molasses. It is drunk as bhang. The intoxication is not as bad as in the case of smoking. 59. It is said the wholesale vendor purchase ganja at a capricious price from the cultivator and as the cultivator is necessarily under orders of Government bound to sell it to one man, there is no choice left to him to demand the price he chooses. It will be better if the Government settles the price at which the cultivator ought to sell it to the wholesale vendor, taking into con- sideration the cost and trouble the cultivator take to grow it. 60. The cultivation of ganja, in my opinion, is sufficiently controlled. I think as bhang is not so injurious in its effects, some restrictions on bhang, properly so called, might safely be done away with. 62. The cultivation of ganja for the production of bhang does not need so much restriction, as far as the effects are concerned, but it is impossible to restrict it for some special purposes and to allow it free scope for others. 68. No. 69. The opinions of the people are not consulted. I think public opinion ought to be consulted before opening such shops. Oral evidence. Question 25.93 noticed among persons both intoxicated and insane from ganja. The same symptom exists in both. The intoxication of liquor is much greater than that of ganja. Question 51.94 49 and 50. The excessive use of ganja if long continued leads to impotence. It is not used as an aphrodisiac in the same way that opium or madak is. 53 and 54. No, a man intoxicated by ganja is foolish and not violent. 55 and 56. Ganja is not so used unless mixed with dhatura. Knows of a case in which a bairagi gave ganja and dhatura mixed to some boys to smoke in order to obtain their ornaments. The boys died. 58 and 59. Thinks it would be advisable to raise the price of ganja by increasing the taxation This could not be done unless arrangements are made to stop its production in Native States. Thinks this might be done and a Government monopoly declared, as has been done in the case of salt. Suggests also that the limit of 5 tolas might be reduced. 68. Thinks it better to allow smoking on the premises than to compel people, as now, to smoke it in their own houses. Thinks the latter rule causes ganja smoking to increase. 70. Knows there is much smuggling from ad- joining Native States. Has no special knowledge. 48. Evidence of CHAUDHRY UMRAO SINGH, Honorary Magistrate, Jubbulpore. Question 33.95 washed. This removes all the yellow colouring matter. The cleaned bhang is then pounded up with pepper-corns, and almonds. It is then mixed with water and strained. The cleaned liquid is then drunk. This is made every day. In the hot weather sugar, kuskus, rose petals and other flavourings are added. These are added to the bhang before it is pounded. This makes it a cooling liquid. Bhang, after it has been pounded is also occasionally rolled into small balls by add- ing a little water and then eaten. 17. There are no special classes of people who prepare these drugs. 18. All these drugs will only keep about a year. They lose their intoxicating power. I know of no means of preventing this. 19. They are only used for smoking. 20. Charas is very little consumed here, as it is not procurable, and I speak therefore only of ganja. Among the higher castes I should think that only 1 or 2 per cent. smoke ganja. Among the lower castes, such as Kunbis, Bhamptis, Mahars, gosains, etc., and among Muhammadans I should think that 25 per cent. smoke it. 21. Flat ganja is used in this district. 22. Charas is not used. 23. Bhang is not smoked. 24. Majum is only eaten to a very small extent in Wardha. Bhang is eaten by all castes; but among the higher castes very few eat it. I should think about 1 per cent., and among the lower castes 25 per cent. Marwaris eat gulkand more; but it is not obtainable here, and is rarely imported. Of the local people of Wardha only about 5 per cent. drink bhang. They are mostly high caste men. The Marwaris of Bika- nir drink it to a very large extent, and of the other Marwaris only about 10 per cent. drink it. All the five castes of Marwaris drink it to the same extent. 25. I consider that the consumption of ganja is decreasing, because its price is now much higher. I held the ganja contract for Wardha 15 years ago, and the price of ganja was then much lower. The use of bhang is increasing. Formerly its use was not very common; but its use among the higher classes has much increased, especially in Marwar and Benares. In small quantities its effect is to increase the appetite, and it is used for this purpose. In large quanti- ties it relieves the minds of all cares, and is there- fore used. 26. I should say that in 1,000 persons there would be 100 habitual consumers of ganja and 50 occasional consumers. Of the 100 habitual con- sumers, 25 would be excessive and 75 moderate. Of the 50 occasional consumers, 10 would be ex- cessive and 40 moderate. Among Marwaris, in 1,000 persons here 100 are habitual drinkers of bhang. Of this 100, about half are excessive consumers. About 150 in 1,000 would be occa- sional drinkers, of whom about half would drink to excess. Of the local people of Wardha, only 25 in 1,000 would drink bhang. They are all occasional consumers to a small extent. 27. The habitual consumers of ganja are most sadhus, fakirs, and gosains, and low caste people. Gosains, sadhus and fakirs chiefly use to suppress all sensual passions. The lower castes use it because they are obliged to labour, and it prevents them tiring. Some young men use it to increase sensual passions. Bhang is chiefly drunk by Benares people and Marwaris, and chiefly in the hot weather. It is used as a cooling drink, and to increase the appetite. Some people who use it to excess have no appetite without it. 28. The average daily allowance of ganja for habitual moderate consumers is half tola, costing anna 1. Habitual excessive consumers use from 1 tola to 2 tolas a day. The price of ganja is 2 annas a tola. The average daily allowance of bhang of habitual moderate consumers is 1 tola costing about 9 pice per day. The habitual ex- cessive consumers use 1 ½ tolas a day. The best bhang from Ujjain costs Rs. 4 per seer. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja. White arsenic and dhatura are occasionally mixed with ganja. This is especially done by religious mendicants to increase its intoxicating effect. For bhang massala, see answer to question 15. It is prepared in the house and not sold. To in- crease the intoxicating effect of bhang it is cooked in a copper vessel and heated pice are dropped into it. Milk is occasionally also mixed with bhang. 30. Ganja is generally consumed in private. It is confined to men and to prostitutes among females. It is not give to children. About 75 per cent. of consumers smoke it in private. Bhang is generally drunk in company. Females occa- sionally drink it and also children; but it is principally drunk by men. It is not confined to any period of life. 31. In regard to ganja, all these questions must be answered in the affirmative. Bhang is not the same. The practice of drinking it can be easily discontinued at any time. 32. I know of no customs, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of these drugs. 33. There is no mention of either ganja or bhang in religion; but the public opinion is against the consumption of ganja, either to moderation or excess, and it is regarded as dis- graceful, because it is held to render the consumer insensible, and, if taken in excess, to destroy his reason. The use of bhang in small quantities occasionally is not considered objectionable, but the use of ganja is, as it reduces a man's intellect in time. 34. I don't think that it would be a serious privation to any class of consumers to forego ganja. Those who consume it to a moderate ex- tent could give up the habit; while those who used it to excess would substitute liquor or some other drug, such as dhatura, the root of jowari, or arsenic. These would only be used by those who used ganja in the largest quantities. The others would take to opium. There would be no objection to the prohibition of the use of bhang as the habit of using it is easily given up. 35. It would be perfectly possible to prohibit the consumption of all these drugs. Such pro- vision would occasion no serious discontent. It should be declared an offence to possess, sell or consume ganja or its products, and cases in which the prohibition was exceeded should be punished. Such prohibition would not lead to an increased consumption of alcoholic stimulants. They would not take to opium, as it is too expensive. Some perhaps, might have recourse to dhatura or the roots of jowari or arsenic and tobacco; but I do not think that many would. 36. Alcohol is not being used in place of any of these drugs at present. 37. The effects of charas smoking are different
96 from those of ganja. It is more intoxicating and far more weakening. It renders the blood black and deficient in quantity. It is principally used by fakirs and sadhus, and has no good effects at all. The intoxication produced by smoking charas lasts longer than that from ganja. The smoking of ganja strengthens the smoker while the intoxi- cation lasts, and also increases the appetite. Charas does neither of these things. Charas also destroys all capacity for sexual intercourse. 38. The round ganja is a little more intoxicat- ing than the other forms; but the effects are the same for all three. 39. There is no ganja preparation smoked which is less injurious than drinking bhang. The drinking of bhang causes no injury in most cases while the smoking of ganja is injurious if it is used frequently. 40. Ganja and charas are not used in medicine. Bhang is, however, used sometimes both externally and internally. Ganja is used in the treatment of cattle disease with advantage, especially in foot and mouth disease and in "fasi." 41. Bhang is useful as a food accessory and digestive, and to alleviate fatigue. It is not used as a febrifuge. It is used to alleviate mental pain. All classes, but especially Marwaris and Pardeshis, use bhang for these purposes. Ganja is used to excite the appetite, and to give staying- power under exertion, and also as a prevention of disease in forest tracts, and is useful for these purposes if used in moderation and occasionally. Ganja is largely used by labourers and forest people for these purposes. Charas in moderate use is in no way beneficial. Bhang used for the above purposes in moderate quantities and habi- tually is beneficial. Of dwellers in the forest about 40 per cent. smoke ganja, and of dwellers in town about 10 per cent. of the labourers smoke it. Ganja, costing one pice, will give as much effects as liquor costing four pice. 42. Charas is in no way beneficial. The moderate use is harmful, as it reduces the appetite and weakens the body. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. Ganja is refreshing and a little intoxicating. It does not allay hunger, but creates an appetite. Its effects last about three hours, and it leaves the smoker disinclined for any effort. The want of subsequent gratification produces both longing uneasiness. Bhang is refreshing. It pro- duces intoxication, which lasts little longer than that of ganja. It increases the appetite and leaves no after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification does not produce any great longing or uneasiness. Charas is intoxicating and allays hunger. The intoxicating effect lasts longer than that of ganja, but less than that of bhang. The want of subsequent gratification would produce longing and uneasiness. 45. (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) No, as regards bhang and ganja. (f) No, as regard all three drugs. 46. All these drugs used in excess cause loss of appetite and weaken the constitution and induce laziness. They engender a desire for milk and sweet things. All these drugs in excess cause insanity of a permanent nature. The persons who become insane from their use are noisy and wander about, but are not violent unless interfered with. I know of no typical symptoms. 47. The habitual moderate use of these drugs is not hereditary, though children of moderate consumers would learn the habit from their parents. The children of moderate consumers are, as a rule, weaker than those of others. 48. Same as to 47; but the habitual excessive consumers have fewer children. 49. Ganja and bhang in moderate quantities are used as aphrodisiacs occasionally. It is so used by prostitutes. The use for this purpose is not more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. All three drugs in excess produce im- potence, and charas in small quantities also does. 51. I should say that about 95 per cent. of bad characters are ganja smokers either in moderate quantities or in excess. There is no special con- nection between ganja and crime. Ganja smoking does not cause a man to become a bad character; but the bad characters are drawn from the lowest classes, who indulge most in ganja. 53. No. 54. No. 55. Both ganja, and bhang are used by criminals to stupefy their victims. Complete stupefaction can be produced by either drug without any ad- mixture if the victim is not in the habit of using the drug. 56. Tobacco mixed with ganja, produces less intoxication. It is used by moderate consumers. Arsenic produces more intoxication. Its effects are more powerful than ganja, and it produces complete stupefaction. It shortens life and pro- duces madness. Dhatura is also mixed with ganja; but its effects are less than the admixture of white arsenic and ganja. These two are only used by excessive ha- bitual consumers. Dhatura and ganja mixed are used occasionally by bad characters to stupefy their victims if for any reason they wish to pro- duce greater insensibility. 57. I know of no such customs. Oral evidence. Question 29.97 50. Evidence of MODAN MOHAN SETH, Honorary Magistrate, Jubbulpore. 1. I had been ganja and bhang retail sale and wholesale contractor of several districts for several years. As great quantities of ganja and bhang used to be given in charity since sixty or seventy years, consequently I had an opportunity of ob- taining information from person of different classes and of different provinces, who used the drugs, and with whom I had a talk about its consumption, etc. They were also supplied food and clothing as required, and therefore full information was obtained from them. We also use bhang on Hindu festivals, such as Shivratri, etc. In olden times people used to cultivate the drugs and con- sume them. 2. Ganja is obtained from ganja trees and probably charas too, but as it is not obtainable in these districts, it is heard that charas is obtain- ed from ganja trees. The dry leaves of ganja are not called bhang. If bhang is not obtain- able, ganja leaves are used instead, but they create much heat, and therefore they are burnt or thrown away. The consumers of ganja pick out the flowers only and throw away the leaves and seeds. Bhang is of two kinds: (1) Bahraich, (2) Duba. The former is of yellow colour and pro- duces moderate intoxication, and the latter is of green colour and produces much intoxication. Ganja has three names, namely, round, flat and chur. They are thus defined: round is called kali; flat, baluchar; and chur, pitar. Ganja is manufactured as above stated. Some persons in some places take out the flowery tops of the green trees and dry them on fire and use them. 3. In these days ganja chur, pitar, is grown at Khandwa, Nagpur and Raipur. Bhang, cha- ras, and baluchar ganja is grown in east and west provinces. 4. There is only one tree that produces ganja, but it bears different names, viz., ganja shankar bodh, turatanand, and shighra bodh, etc. 5. The growth is ordinarily a scattered one. 6. No ganja is cultivated in my district. 7. Ganja is cultivated in smaller quantities in these provinces than in former days. The reason is that in these days no place was specially fixed for the purpose, and every cultivator used to cul- tivate it wherever he liked. It is specially culti- vated in the districts mentioned in answer 3. 9. Ganja plant grows everywhere except hilly places. There is a nursery of ganja plants, and when ready they are transplanted. 10. No particular class of cultivators cultivate ganja, but every one can do this without exception. 13. Ganja can grow on every kind of soil, and the climate which is beneficial for rabi crops is suitable for it. Ganja can grow on each and every part of the district, except rocky and hilly tracts. 14. No ganja, bhang, produced in the district since restricted by the Government. 15. Ganja is prepared for smoking in the follow- ing manner: the ganja leaves, seeds, and sticks are thrown away; dry tobacco with a little water is mixed up, and then smoked in chillums. Bhang is washed and powdered with pepper and sugar, etc., and then drunk. Some persons bruise it and roast it with ghee, and then mix it with almonds, cardamoms, etc., and eat it; and some drink it with milk, sugar, kesar, almonds, poppy seeds, rose flower, kakri seeds, sonf, and kasni, etc., after straining. Some boil it with ghee and pre- pare majun from it. Some drink it with anar juice, orange juice, curd, and sugarcane juice. 16. Bhang is prepared and drunk generally by the people in their houses. Bhang cannot be ob- tained from ganja trees. 18. Ganja and bhang are damaged by rains. Charas can remain good for nearly two years. Nothing can prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja, charas, and bhang are used for medicinal purposes for persons and cattle. The oil of ganja seeds is useful for rheumatic pains. The use of ashes of ganja seeds is effectual for cough, etc. 20. Ganja and charas are smoked by fakirs and other persons. Amongst the former nearly 75 per cent. and the latter nearly 40 per cent. consume the drugs. Nearly 10 out of 100 are Brahmans and Chatris, and 30 out of 100 are persons of other classes. 21. Preference is given to baluchar (flat kind of ganja) and next to it is round. Here both kinds are liked. 23. Bhang is not use for smoking. 24. Nearly every class of people drink bhang to an extent of 90 per cent., out of which 10 per cent. are habitual drinkers. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the decrease in these provinces for two reasons: 98 34. Of course, it would be a serious privation to labourers, fakirs, and those who think it to be religious custom, to forego the consumption of the drug they use. The number of these consumers is 50 per cent. To break off the habit of consum- ing any of these drugs will prove injurious to health. 35. These drugs cannot be used for purposes other than medicinal. The practice of consuming these drugs should not be prohibited, but the old and rotten drugs, or the stuff containing large quantity of seeds and leaves, ought to be prohi- bited or be destroyed, as the use of such drugs is injurious to health. 36. It would be rather difficult to prohibit the use of the drugs and would be a sort of discontent specially to the fakirs and labourers, as it is consi- dered by them to be their chief food. The pro- hibition would not be followed by recourse to other drugs or alcoholic stimulants, as the prac- tice of consuming madak, chandu, kuchla, dha- tura, and liquor, in the opinion of the public, is considered disreputable. The benefit derivable from these drugs is not derived from opium. Be- sides this, the other drugs and stimulants are costly and injurious to the consumers, and the prevailing of which would lead poor people to commit theft, etc. 37. Charas creates too much heat. 38. The three drugs have different effects, as stated above. 39. Ganja and bhang-smoking and drinking are not injurious. The effect of each drug is the same. 40. The native physicians have prescribed the use of these drugs on account of their medicinal qualities in ancient books. 41. It is used in other works too, the details of which have been given above. It is not confin- ed to any class of people. Sometimes it is gene- rally used by every class of people. 42. It does not cause any kind of injury. 44. Ganja and charas have their immediate effect, and bhang produces its effect after half an hour. 45. Excessive consumers of these drugs, with the exception of fakirs, have noxious effect. There are fakirs who smoke half a seer of ganja per day. It induces laziness, and in old age causes asthma and cough, etc. It does not impair the habit of debauchery, nor produces insanity, but to the impairing of senses weakens the intellects. 46. Sometimes habitual excessive consumers get a kind of senselessness. 47. The habitual use of these drugs does not appear to be hereditary, but depends only upon the company which the consumer joins. 49. The use of hemp does not tend to produce impotence. 50. Several persons use ½ a seer of bhang, ¼ seer of ganja and charas, yet they do not lose their senses. 51. Though he indulges in it, yet he commits no crime. 52. These drugs do not lead persons to commit suicide. 54. These drugs are not used for criminal pur- poses. 55. The criminals, in order to further their de- signs to commit murder, do not induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs, as no complete stupefaction can be induced without an admixture of some other roots. 56. The hemp used in moderation does not cause any injury, but the admixture of dhatura, kuchla, jawr root, etc., stupefy or even cause death. 57. Ganja and charas are not eaten or drunk, but their excessive use causes senselessness, vomit- ing and heat in the brain. 58. No one regards the bhang a bad drug, as every one has occasion to use it. Ganja-smokers are considered somewhat low for two reasons: (1) only the persons of inferior class and fakirs smoke it; (2) the persons who do not use it regard it as disreputable; for example, persons who do not drink liquor condemn liquor. 62. Bhang is cultivated and also grows itself, which is called wild bhang. Many persons reap the bhang trees, dry them, and then pick up the leaves; and many allow the standing trees to dry up and pick up the fallen leaves. 64. The system prevalent in the province is not objectionable, and should not be put a stop to. If so stopped, the poor labourers and the fakirs will suffer much. 65. The retail sale contract. 67. In my opinion the retail sale contract is objectionable, as the contractors increase the contract money very much without any regard to their profit or loss. During their contract, when they find themselves under loss, they sell admix- tune of other things, such as water into liquor, bhang leaves, rotten ganja into ganja, and earth and sticks into bhang. Such admixture of ganja is sold at Rs. 12 per seer. Short measurements are also made by which the poor consumers suffer much. It will be better if some tax is imposed on every shop, rather than putting it to public auction, and the quantity for sale be also fixed, so that they may not sell more than allowed. 68. The license for wholesale ganja should be put a stop to, as the wholesale contractors pur- chase the cheapest and admixture of rotten ganja, which also contains seeds and leaves in great quantities, the use of which produces several diseases. The best system would be the purchase of ganja by the Government and sale to wholesale contrac- tors at the rate prevalent now. By this arrange- ment it will not entail any trouble at all. The former arrangement about the retail shops was good. In my opinion the city is capable of holding 20 or 25 shops. This will be liked by all and the present complaints will be removed. People will be able to obtain good stuff and would not suffer in any way. People will agree to pay Rs. 8 or 10 for each shop. These intoxications should not be stopped or encouraged. The old arrangement should be continued. Fakirs should be exempted from pay- ment of tax, as in case of exemption they will pray for the prosperity of Government.
99 51. Evidence of KAPUR CHAND, Honorary Magistrate and Gumasta, Raipur. 1. I have lived in Raipur for twenty-three years, and have taken ganja contracts in the feuda- tories of Bastar and Kanker. 2. Yes, these definitions are correct. But I have never seen "charas" here, though I have in Marwar. 3. It grows in Bastar. I have been told by my agents that they have seen as much as 50 or 100 plants growing in jungle, where no sowings can have been done. 4. I know none but ganja. 5. It wants matasi (light clay) soil and a good rainfall. 6. Sometimes one and sometimes the other. 7. Yes, in the Bastar State. The tenants sow what they want for their own use, and sell a little occasionally, but there is no regular trade in it. It is inferior ganja, the seeds being taken from the wild plant. 8. It is on the decrease, because of its inferiority compared with Government ganja, which is now easily procured. 10. There is no special caste. 11. Yes. 12. No. 16. No. Bhang cannot properly be prepared from the wild ganja. Ganja can be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown, but, as I have said, it is inferior. 17. No particular class. 18. Yes. They may with care be kept for four or five years, but they generally deteriorate after two or three. Damp is bad for them. They should be protected from damp. 19. I know nothing about charas. Ganja is, generally speaking, used only for smoking; but bhang drinkers, if they cannot get bhang, will occasionally make bhang of ganja. 20. Generally low castes and sadhus, fakirs, gosains, etc. No special locality. 21. Flat ganja is the best. 23. No. 24. No difference between (a) and (b). Hindus- tanis (from north of the Ganges, and especially from Muttra) and Marwaris are the principal consumers. Among Marwaris all castes drink it. 25. Neither. 26. For bhang 40 per cent. are habitual moderate consumers (a), 30 per cent. are habitual excessive consumers (b), 25 per cent. are occa- sional moderate consumers (c), and the remainder occasional excessive consumers (d). 27. (a) Are chiefly Marwaris, (b) are Purbeahs and other Hindustanis, (c) and (d) are of all castes. 28. For ganja.100 except general lassitude. Consumers of both drugs are apt to be quick-tempered, but this is more marked in the case of ganja. They do not produce immorality. Insanity may be produced by the excessive use of either drug. This again is more marked in the case of ganja. 46. See above. 47. No. 48. No. 49. Yes, in the case of bhang, not ganja. Prostitutes do not use it for this. There is no difference in the subsequent effects when used for this purpose. They do not produce impotence by themselves, but bhang may be the cause of excessive sexual intercourse, which will lead to impotence. 51. No. I do not think there is any connection. 52. As above. 53. No. 54. Yes, occasionally. 55. Yes. They generally mix dhatura, some- times kuchila. Complete stupefaction can be induced without admixture only in the case of people unaccustomed to ganja. 56. The admixture of other substances strength- ens the effect of ganja. The admixture of dhatura makes the drug cheaper and stronger. 57. Eating ganja is harmless. 65. I think the price is high, but I do not re- commend any reduction. 66. There should not be separate rates. 69. No. I think public opinion ought to be consulted. But I do not remember any new shop being opened here. 70. A good deal comes in from Bastar into the interior of the district. The Bunjaras bring it in. I think cultivation in Bastar should be stopped. Oral evidence. Question 11.101 17. There is no special caste. 19. Ganja is nearly always used for smoking; rarely for eating (see answer 15). It is also used medicinally both for men and cattle. For men it is a tonic. For cattle it is used as a preventive of diarrh102 69. No new shops having been opened for years in my neighbourhood, I cannot say what is usually done. Local opinion ought certainly to be consulted. 70. A good deal of ganja smuggled from Jaipur in Madras. I have had several cases to try myself. There is no supervision there. I do not, however, think that a great deal now escapes taxation. Most of the consignments are seized. 53. Evidence of HARI HAR SINGH, Zamindar and Honorary Magistrate, Sambalpur District. 3. It grows in Orissa and Ranchi districts, and chiefly in Ranchi district. 4. It is known by three names, viz., ganja, charas, and pati. 5. No one grows wild hemp. It grows sponta- neously here and there. No conditions of soil and climate are necessary. It grows anywhere. 6. It is scattered at some places, and also dense at some places. 7. (a) No. (b) No. (c) No. (d) No. 9. There is no cultivation of this in our district and I am therefore unable to give any particulars. 10. No, all classes of persons can cultivate hemp. 11. These plants have a different kind of seed. They are not raised from the seed of the wild hemp. 12. So far as I know, no one cultivates wild hemp. I cannot say anything about the male or female plants of such hemp. 13. It is restricted in our district. Formerly every one used to grow ganja here and there. The leasing out of monopoly was then not in force. Formerly the ganja monopoly was not leased out in our district. The people of all classes then used to grow it anywhere they pleased, without reference to the conditions of climate and soil, and consume it; but since the introduction of the system of leasing out of monopoly by Government no one cultivates it. Only water is to some extent necessary; but of this no limit is fixed in our district. Formerly the public used to grow ganja in many places in our district, for which only water was necessary without reference to the soil and air. The mono- poly of ganja having been leased out, all the plants were cleared off by Government. The ganja cultivation has since then ceased in this district; nor does any one grow it. It can be grown everywhere. I do not think that there is any part where its cultivation would be impos- sible. 14. Formerly ganja and pati only were pre- pared and used in our part of the country. At present they are not prepared here. (a) Ganja is prepared from hemp plants for smoking and drinking. (b) It is not prepared or used in this part. (c) Bhang (or pati) is prepared from hemp plants. It is pounded and mixed with water and used for drinking. 15. Formerly as ganja was cultivated in our part of the country, the people prepare only ganja, and from its leaves, pati or bhang; but wild hemp plants are not produced anywhere in our part of the country, nor are they even in use. The cultivated ganja, too, is being supplied by Government, and used since the leasing out of monopoly has been brought into force. 16. The people pluck the leaves of the hemp plant and use them in their respective houses for drinking. The leaves and ganja of the hemp plant, wherever grown, are used. Ganja and charas are produced from the wild hemp. 17. All classes of people prepare ganja and pati, but no one prepares charas in this country. There is not even any particular class of people who prepare it. 18. If these three drugs (ganja, charas, and pati) are kept for a long time, first of all the bhang or pati loses its effect, and if it is kept with care for a long time, it can be of good effect for one year. If ganja is similarly kept, it can- not lose its effect for two years. As charas is not in use in this country, I cannot say after what length of time it loses its effect. 19. Ganja and charas both are used for smoking, and, in cases of certain diseases, ganja is mixed with other country medicines, and used as madak (or medicine). Ganja is pounded and mixed with water and used for drinking like pati. It is used for drinking, more especially in the Orissa country and for its medicinal quality, throughout India. 20. Ganja is used by almost all classes of people for smoking. It is used mostly by jogis and Vaishnavas. As charas is not obtainable in this country, it appears to be used very seldom. The ganja is used by the people of every class in almost all districts in India. 21. As only flat ganja is supplied to this district it is in use, but as round and chur ganja, are not supplied, they are not in use. In what localities these kinds of ganja (round and chur) are in use I do not know. 22. As charas, native or foregin, is not in use in this country, I do not know whence it is imported. 23. Bhang or pati is not used for smoking. 24. All classes of people in India sometimes (a) eat, and sometimes (b) drink it. 25. Of ganja, charas, and bhang, the use of ganja and bhang is increasing day by day. The increase is owing to bad company, and to the fact that they are obtained at a small value and in large quantities, and produce intoxication in a short time. 29. (a) Higher classes of people in India. (b) Jogis, Vaishnavas, and lower order people. (c) People of higher and lower classes. (d) When there is a party making an attack or reading " Bhagwat" (a sacred book), or where there assemble 10 or 15 ganja smokers, there will be found the excessive use of this drug, and when jogis and Vaishnavas assemble together at any, shrine they use it in large quantities.
103 27. From jogis, Vaishnavas, and lower classes. Some say that the intoxication from ganja has the effect of concentrating the mind, i.e., the mind takes the same direction as the persons using it wishes. I therefore think that, as the jogis and Vaishnavas always wish to devote themselves towards God, with a fixed mind, they use it with that object: that some idlers among the lower class people use it with the object of diverting their mind from the household business; and that the men of business use it with the object of performing a large amount of their ordinary duties. 28. In this country six pice worth ganja is sufficient for a moderate consumer, and two annas for an excessive consumer. 29. (a) Ordinarily tobacco is mixed with the ganja for smoking. (b) Some men, in order to get themselves more intoxicated, smoke ganja, having mixed dhatura seed and keskar (or pistil) of champa flower with it. The only article sold for being mixed with the ganja is tobacco. 30. It is used in large quantities in company and at conspicuous places. It is confined both to the male sex and to the grown up persons. It is not used by the children. 31. Yes; when by bad company it is used for some days. When the habit is formed, it is difficult to break it of, and it is natural for the moderate habit to gradually develop into the excessive. 32. It being the social custom among the jogis and Vaishnavas, they are in the habit of using it; but religion has no connection with it. In my opinion its use is not very essential. It is used throughout by some in moderation and by some in excess. When the habit of using it is formed, it pro- duces in some cases various kinds of diseases (such as lung and head diseases) in time. 33. These drugs are generally regarded as injurious. There is no opinion (social or reli- gious) regarding it. As it injures the body and, owing to its narcotic quality, induces the consum- ers to commit other bad acts, it is hated. We hear that the people of Bikanir, Malacca, Siam, etc., and particularly Marwaris, worship this plant. 34. If they should suddenly give up its use, they may be attacked by various diseases, i. e., they would not have sleep at night; joints, etc., of their bodies would ache; and sighing, swelling of belly, unsoundness of mind, indigestion, and continuous anger would follow. All these are generally produced by ganja, bhang, and charas. 35. If the use be prohibited at once, the con- sumers would be put to considerable difficulty. It would be improper to consume illicitly. If it is proposed to prohibit its use, first of all, the event of leasing out the monopoly shall have to be gradually lessened. If its use be prohibited at once, the consumers would, no doubt, be dis- contented, and consequently a political danger is likely to arise. Yes, the prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants and other drugs; but as the jogis, Vaishnavas, and Brahmins in India hate liquor, and do not use other drugs, I think it would be difficult to have recourse to them at once. 36. I have heard that the lower class people, who use ganja, use alcoholic stimulants when ganja is not procurable, but what quantity they use I cannot say. 37. As charas is not in use in this part of the country, I am not in a position to explain the difference. 38. Only flat ganja is used in this part of the country; but as the round and chug ganja are not in use, I am unable to explain what different effects they have. 39. The smoking of ganja is less expensive than any other preparation. 40. The baids [or native physicians] of this part of the country use ganja on account of its medicinal quality. They also prescribe it, mixed with other medicines, in cases of bowel com- plaints of cows, etc. 41. It is observed in the baid Shaster that ganja is mixed with the medicines. So it appears to have some effect, because, had it not been the case, the baids would not have used it. (a) The people say that ganja has some diges- tive effect, and those who use it say that they feel more appetite. (b) In case of severe exertion or exposure relief can be obtained from ganja owing to its narcotic quality. (c) We hear that in unhealthy tracts ganja is used in sufficient quantities. The people of almost all classes generally use it for the above purposes. 42. Out of these drugs the moderate use of ganja is not likely to do any harm. As the Indian baids use ganja, having mixed it with medicines, it appears that its moderate use does not do any harm. 43. As the people of all classes are in the habit of using it (ganja) in our country, none of them are offensive to their neighbours or any one else. 44. The moderate use may affect the health of the habitual consumer, owing to its small degree of intoxication. It is refreshing. It produces intoxication. It does not allay hunger. It creates appetite. The effect lasts for three or four hours. The consumer feels unwell after the intoxication is over. Yes, the want of subse- quent gratification produces longing and uneasi- ness, and so the body becomes unhealthy. 45. The habitual moderate use of this only deranges the mind, and does not produce any physical or moral injury. When the mind is deranged it injures the digestive power and causes loss of appetite. It does not cause dysentery or bronchitis. It causes asthma in some cases in old age. It impairs the moral sense, and induces laziness, habits of immorality and debauchery. It deadens the intellect and produces insanity. When it produces insanity, he who is affected by it is always inclined to do what he is generally addicted to, but it is temporary, No symptoms of insanity appear as before if the drug is used after liberation from restraint. No one recom- ends that persons of unsound mind, who never use ganja, should use it. I would not recommend the use of ganja by persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease to obtain relief. The intellectual power of a man of weak in- tellect cannot be increased by the use of these drugs. 46. The habitual excessive use results in brain diseases and commission of thefts, dacoities, de- baucheries, etc., and produces insanity.
104 47. It is not the custom to use ganja here- ditarily; nor do I know that the use of it affects in any way the children of the moderate con- sumer. 49. Ganja and pati are used as medicine with the object of exciting the desire for sexual in- tercourse. They are also used by prostitutes with the same object. The use of an additional quan- tity by a person whilst being ordinarily intoxicated causes the person using it to be out of his senses. The excessive use of ganja may weaken the body. 50. The excessive use of all these drugs injures the body. 51. The ganja appears to be used mostly by badmashes. Its excessive use is likely to result in the commission of grave offences through stupidity. 52. The excessive use of any of these drugs may produce insanity, which is likely to result in the commission of grievous hurt, murder, etc. 53. Excessive indulgence in these drugs incites to various kinds of violent and unpremeditated crimes. I have personally seen certain cases of assault, grievous hurt, etc. 54. Yes. 55. Those who do not consider their own in- terest may, in order to further their designs, stupefy themselves. Stupefaction can be induced by excessive use, even without any admixture. 56. What the baids use in moderation, though modified by the admixture of other substances, produces good effect, and, similarly, what they use in excess produces bad effect. Those desiring for more intoxication mix dhatura seed with ganja, etc., and some men, I hear, in order to commit theft of another's cloth, fulfil other bad desires, and stupefy others, administer ganja mixed with dhatura seed, etc. 57. The ganja is sometimes used mixed with country medicines as preventive of asthma and dysentery. Charas is not in use in our country. 58. The abkari administration is working pro- perly. Any improvement of it would result in disadvantage, while to relax it might probably be advantageous. 60. In some of our adjoining Feudatory States no control has been maintained from the begin- ning. The system requires modification in this respect. If no modification is to be effected, the people may use as they please, and may commit bad acts. 61. Charas is not produced in our country. The control should be exercised where it is pro- duced; otherwise, if the public be permitted to use it as they please, it may probably be dangerous in future. 62. Control should be maintained. This would be feasible for the Government. Gradual increase in price and proper arrangement may prevent the excessive use. 63. As it is sold at many places and at a small price the public easily use it. In my opinion the price should be gradually increased, and the sales at too many places stopped. 64. I have no objection about this. 65. If the duty on ganja, charas, and bhang be increased, as in the case of liquor, it is very possible that the people may reduce their con- sumption. 66. The duty on all kinds of ganja should be the same. The rate at which the ganja is now sold should be at first increased double, and then gradually. 67. The present rate of duty on ganja, charas, and bhang, if increased, would gradually reduce the consumption. 68. There are houses licensed for the sale of ganja, etc., in our province. I have no objection regarding them. 69. The people are not consulted in this matter. The ganja shops, etc., are opened at the places selected by Government of its own accord, and sales are effected under its orders. 70. If any one illicitly brings ganja, exceeding five tolas in quantity he is punished by Govern- ment. The duty is paid. There is no such drug as is used without being taxed. 54. Evidence of BEHARI LAL, Banker and Honorary Magistrate, Jubbulpore. 24. I came from Dehli and found that every- body, high or low, drinks bhang at the Shivaratri and Dewali festivals without the slightest cen- sure or disapprobation. Bhang is also much drunk in the hot weather to neutralize the heat. Here105 55. Evidence of RAJA SETH GOKAL DAS, Banker and Landowner, Jubbulpore. 20. I estimate roughly that 75 per cent. of the people take ganja in some form or another. 35. I do not anticipate that ganja smokers deprived of the drug would have recourse either to opium or to liquor. 45. I am of opinion that ganja smoking is an injurious habit. It is a widely spread one, and is not confined to any special classes or sects, although gosains are specially addicted to it. I have never known a case in which ganja smoking has ended in madness or violent crime, but I have known many cases in which health has been injured or destroyed. 65. I should recommend an increased duty on the drug, so as to bring it beyond the means of a larger number of the people. 56. Evidence of RAI BAHADUR SETH TIKA RAM, Brahmin, Money-lender and Malguzar, Narsinghpur. 1. By personal observation of the condition of the consumers of the drugs in this (Narsinghpur) district and by hearing about them. 2. Ganja is not cultivated since the last fifteen or sixteen years in this district. Ganja and Indori bhang are imported. The former is brought from Khandwa. 10. It is not cultivated in this district. 13. The cultivation of ganja has been prohi- bited by Government since the year 1878 in this district. 14 and 16. They are not prepared in this dis- trict. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking in this district, and occasionally, when it is necessary to do so, it is administered as medicine after being mixed with other things. Charas is neither imported nor used in this district. 20. Twenty per cent. of the lower classes of people, and 5 per cent. of the middling classes of people may be said to smoke ganja in this district. Charas is neither imported nor used in this district. 21. Only the Khandwa ganja is imported and used in this district. No other ganja is import- ed. 22. No kind of charas is imported or used in this district. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking in this district. 24. Bhang is very rarely used in this district. The number of habitual eaters and drinkers among the middling classes of people may ordi- narily be 2 per cent., and of the latter in the hot weather 5 per cent. 25. The smoking of ganja appears to be some- what on the increase in this district. Some of the non-consumers even begin to smoke by the company of consumers, when they are in com- munication with the latter. 26. The number among the lower and mid- dling classes of people106 consumers of ganja and bhang is 15 and 2 per cent, respectively. 35. It is not an easy matter to prohibit the habitual consumers specially of ganja and bhang from using these drugs. Such prohibition will vead to the illicit use of the drugs, and will be nery much disliked by the consumers. There is to wonder that it may cause a disturbance. If rhe prohibition is ordered, it will not be within the ieach of every consumer to use liquor or any other intoxicant as a substitute for ganja. 36. The use of alcohol in substitution of these drugs is not a matter that is heard of in this dis- trict. Perhaps it may have been done by any one in any other place. 37. Charas is not smoked in this district. 38. No ganja from any place other than Khand- wa is imported into this district. 40. Sometimes ganja and bhang are used for medicinal purposes. They are also used in me- dicines for animals. But their use as medicine has not given rise to the custom of their being used as intoxicants. 41. (a) The moderate use of ganja and bhang encourages appetite and helps digestion in the beginning; but the effect does not continue. (b) The moderate use of ganja and bhang at intervals gives staying-power so long as there is intoxication and alleviates fatigue. But it is not the case when the intoxication is over. (c) They do not serve as a preventative of fever or any other disease. (d) In no way they are beneficial. There is no particular caste of persons who are addicted to the use of these drugs. In every caste the persons who are ignorant or those who asso- ciate with such persons take to them, looking to the immediate advantages as noted above. After a few days' use, however, they become accustomed to them and begin to use them in larger quantities. Afterwards they find it difficult to give them up. 42. The use of any intoxicating drug, even in a moderate quantity, is not beneficial but injuri- ous. 43. Some of the moderate consumers even cause trouble to their neighbours by picking quarrels with them. 44. Ganja and bhang have their immediate effects. They are refreshing so long as there is intoxication. They relieve one from hunger in the beginning, but it is felt afterwards. The in- toxication lasts for nearly three or four hours. There is uneasiness if a consumer does not use them. 45. Ganja-smoking causes cough. It has a deleterious effect on the brain, and so bhang has. 46. Vide reply against question No. 45. 47. It does not appear to be hereditary or to affect the children of the consumer. 48. Vide reply against question No. 47. 51. The number of consumers among the bad- mashes does not seem to be a large one. 52. As above. 55. It has been now and then heard that offend- ers, in order to gain their object, make the per- son whom they wish to offend smoke ganja or bhang with them. One who never uses these drugs naturally becomes somewhat senseless by smoking or eating them in large quantities. 56. When the persons who are habitual exces- sive consumers of ganja do not get the drug in sufficient quantities, they use some dhatura with it, so that they may be intoxicated. But as they are accustomed to it, they do not become senseless. A person who is not habituated to it becomes senseless if he smokes dhatura with ganja. 57. Sometimes the use of ganja does not seem to cause injury to any great extent. 57. Evidence of DIWAN PREM SINGH, Zamindar, Bilaspur District. 1. I have lived from my birth in the Bilaspur district. 2. I know all the terms described in this ques- tion, except siddhi. They are all well known in these provinces. 3. In the district of Ranchi, in Sarguja, it grows wild very abundantly. It grows freely in Khandwa and Rajshahi, in Bengal, also Patiala and Bahraich, in Oudh. 4. I know no other terms except bhang, charas, and ganja. A kind of flat ganja is known as "traloncha." These are all products of one and the same plant. 5. It grows everywhere except on retli, panhar, and patreh soil. It requires an average rainfall. 6. It grows densely. 7. In Nagpur and Khandwa. It is not grown in the feudatories, as it is forbidden by law. Its fibre or seeds are not used for any purpose. 8. The area under cultivation has greatly de- creased owing to the restrictions placed upon it by the Government. 10. No special caste. Those who smoked ganja used to cultivate it for themselves. 11. Yes, but the plant improves by cultivation. 13. In Nagpur and Khandwa. 14. Only bhang and ganja are prepared in Nagpur and Khandwa, not charas. 15. For the production of ganja the tops of the plant are broken or twisted to prevent flowering. Bhang is the product of the full flower. Ganja is rubbed in the palm of the hand with tobacco and a little water, and then smoked. Bhang is drunk and eaten, but never smoked. 16. Bhang is prepared by people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown, and so can ganja and charas. 17. Every one makes their own. 18. With ordinary care it lasts for two years. It is tied up in grass and straw in a dry place. It is spoiled by cold and damp. 19. Ganja and charas are only smoked. 20. No one smokes charas in Bilaspur. It is only used in cold places. Sadhus and the common people are the ordinary users of ganja, both Muhammadans and Hindus. 21. Flat ganja is the best, then round, then chur. 22. Charas is imported from the North-West- ern Provinces. 23. Bhang is never smoked.
107 24. The wealthier classes use bhang. Bhang is not much affected in this district. Sadhus use both bhang and ganja. Wrestlers use bhang. They consider it useful to enable them to stand the excessive exertion. It, is much used by the people of Muttra and Brindabun. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the increase, partly owing to the increase in popu- lation, and partly to the increased prosperity of the people. Ganja and bhang are dearer than they used to be. 26. Habitual moderate consumers are far the greatest in number. I am unable to give exact proportions. 27. Sadhus, for purposes of devotion, and labourers who have to undergo severe labour; but the use of ganja in moderation is very common among all classes. 28. Ganja. (a) From half tola to a tola; cost from one anna to two annas. (b) Double this. (a) Bhang. Two tolas, cost one anna. (b) Double this. Bhang is really more expensive on account of the ingredients necessary for its use. 29, With ganja is mixed tobacco and water. Sadhus and excessive smokers of ganja on excep- tional occasions mix dhatura with the ganja. Dhatura being cheap, intoxication can be pro- duced more cheaply if it is admixed. With bhang are mixed kasni, saunp, black pepper, dhaniya, cardamoms, cucumber seed, sugar, khus- khus, kabab-chini. In the rains almonds and ajwain and milk are especially mixed with bhang. At other times it is taken with water. 30. Habitual consumers take the drugs in solitude. The ordinary smoker prefers to take it in society. Children never take these drugs. They are never consumed before maturity. 31.The habit of smoking ganja is more easily acquired than that of smoking bhang. The ordi- nary consumer would find no difficulty in break- ing the habit: the excessive consumer would. 32. At the Shivaratri festival it is offered to Shiva. At other times it is offered in perform- ance of a vow. On no other occasions is it obli- gatory. It is handed round at assemblies and meetings. At the Holi, bhang and ganja are much used, but are not obligatory. The use at these festivals does no harm. There are many persons who only use these drugs at these festivals, but they do not last long enough to develop a habit. 33.The term "ganjeri" is certainly one which carries contempt with it. There is no general public opinion against moderate smoking, but a man is considered generally a better man who does not use the drugs at all. Parents do their best to prevent their sons using them at all. Ganja is considered far more harmful than bhang. I have never seen bhang or ganja worshipped. 34. The sadhus would feel the privation very much, and would feel it an interference with their religion. It would be a far greater hard- ship to the people to forego opium than to forego ganja or bhang, but in my opinion more harm is caused by opium than by these drugs. 35. I think it would be inadvisable to put a stop to ganja or bhang. It would be illicitly con- sumed, and there would be general discontent. The lower castes would take to drinking liquor instead. But the higher castes, Brahmans, sadhus, and Chattris would have no alternative. 36. I do not think alcohol has yet been sub- stituted for drugs. 37. I know nothing about charas except by hearsay. Its effects are stronger than those of ganja. 38.Chur is less powerful than the fiat or round ganja. 39. The same drug is never smoked and drunk or eaten. 40. The ganja is given as a drug for men and animals in affections of the stomach. Bhang is also given as medicine for diarrah108 55. Yes, but I have no personal experience of such a case. 57. They are never eaten or drunk. 58. Efforts should be directed towards reducing the number of consumers. 59. I can suggest no improvements. 60. It is sufficiently controlled. 62. The use of bhang should be encouraged. 63. I approve of the system of wholesale, as it is a valuable check in consumption. 65. There is disproportion between the tax on drugs and liquor. The production of liquor entails far greater labour, and on the whole, however, I think it is a good thing that drugs are heavily taxed. 66. Flat and round ganja should be more heavily taxed than chur. 69. This should be done more than it is. 70. Smuggling is carried on, but not gene- rally. 58. Evidence of LALL UMED SINGH, Zamindar, Bilaspur District. 1. Ganja and bhang are the produce of one and the same plant. Ganja is prepared from the leaves, bhang from the buds. Local bhang, that is bhang prepared in Khandwa, is considered inferior to bhang imported from the North-Western Provin- ces, especially from the Mattra district. Such bhang is called "dudhia bhang." This is only obtainable in these provinces through friends living in other parts of India. 2. I know the term chur as applied to ganja. It means broken ganja. I know flat ganja, but never heard of round ganja. Charas is the juice which exudes from the buds of the living plant. What remains of the buds is ganja. 3. I know it grows spontaneously in the Sar- gooja estate, which borders on my zamindari. There is no prohibition against ganja growing there. It grows freely in all foreign States. In Sargooja every house has a plantation of ten or twenty trees in the compound, and besides this there are fields of it, but it is mostly grown in small patches round the houses. 4. I know two kinds of ganja, one buriya another baloucha. Special care is taken in the preparation of these forms of ganja, which are stronger than the ordinary. Slits are made in the living plant, and preparations, such as dhatura, put into it. The plant is the same. 5. I have never seen any wild ganja nor heard of it, though I have large tracts of forests in my zamindari. 7. Ganja, charas and bhang are regularly grown and prepared in foreign States of the Central Pro- vinces. They are grown and prepared in Nagpur and Khandwa. I never heard of rope being made from its fibre. Its seeds are useless. 9. At the end of June the seeds are thickly sown over a small space. When the plants are about nine inches high, they are transplanted on to ploughed and manured land at a distance of two or three feet from each other. They are weeded twice or thrice and manured. When the plants are grown, the tops are cut and the branches are twisted to prevent flowering. When the buds are formed, the trees are cut down and well pressed. The buds are then collected. The ordinary leaves are used for bhang. Charas is collected before the plants reach the stage at which they are ready to produce ganja. It is collected by men who walk through the fields clothed in leathern coats. The charas exudes from the plants, and is collected in the clothes. 10. They are ordinary cultivators, but belong especially to the caste of Kachis. 13. It is restricted to Nagpur and Khandwa. I know of no special conditions for its growth. It is a hardy plant, and grows everywhere. 15. Ganja is only smoked in chillums or leave chungis. Two-thirds ganja are put with one- third tobacco. It is never smoked alone. A few drops of water are put with it. It is never drunk. Bhang is never smoked109 27. Occasional excess is much more frequent in the case of bhang than of ganja. Bhang is frequently used at festivals by persons who otherwise never touch it. Out of 1,000 typical persons in this district, 700 would never touch any kind of drug. Bhang is very seldom habi- tually consumed in this district. I should not think there are more than 50 or 60 habitual con- sumers, and they are foreigners. Ganja is never consumed occasionally. The craving must be satisfied every day. The use of bhang is generally stopped in the cold weather and rains. In my opinion, there is very little excess in these drugs in this district. There is not the same violent intoxication that results from liquor. I have not seen a man insensible from bhang or ganja more than six or eight times in my life. Sadhus and bairagis are habitual smokers of ganja. They frequently mix intoxicating ingredients. Labour- ing classes use ganja moderately habitually. Only one or two per cent. of Gaontias and Malguzars would use ganja habitually. There is practically no harm done by bhang. 28. Bhang Ganja. (a) 2 tolas ¼ tola. (b) 1 chittack to 2 chittacks ½ tola. 29. Tobacco is always mixed with ganja; charas is also mixed with it and also dhatura and kuchla, especially by the sadhus. With bhang is mixed kasni, saump, black pepper, dhaniya, rose petals, cucumber seed, khas- khas, cardamoms, almonds, sugar, kesar. When drunk, it is mixed with milk or water. 30. Bhang is used at festivals. Sadhus smoke in solitude. Ganja smokers invariably smoke in company, if possible. The practice is never commenced before sixteen. His father and mother smack a boy who tries to smoke before this. Female sadhus smoke. Female coolies do not smoke ganja. No respectable women smoke ganja, but now and then they drink bhang. This would be in solitude. Opium, but not these drugs, is given to children. 31. The habit of bhang eating is not easily ac- quired. Ganja smoking is very easily acquired, and its use does not, in my opinion, easily develop into the excessive. 32. At the Holi festival, a special form of bhang is used called majum. It is sugar and water with bhang and massala in it. It is eaten as a sweet- meat. Bhang is also used at the Shivratri festival. Its use is not essential to any festival. There is no special custom among the Gonds, who prefer liquor. There are no social customs connected with ganja or bhang. 33. The term ganjeri (a ganja smoker) is equi- valent to a loafer. I do not believe the theory that ganja or bhang can habitually supply the place of food for a poor man. It gives him strength for a short time, but a reaction sets in. It renders him liable to cold and bronchitis. Its use is in bad repute, because the craving to go and smoke with his fellows make a man idle and dis- honest. Its use clouds the brain. I believe opium to be of use if used in moderation. I believe all use of ganja and bhang to be harmful. 34. Ganja, consumers could not stop its use without great privation. To forego bhang would be privation for only the very insignificant per- centage of habitual drinkers. 35. It would be a good thing for bhang and ganja smokers to be driven to liquor, as these are not harmful to the same degree. 36. Drinking is more or less a matter of castes. Certain castes drink. Those that do not are not likely to take to it. Liquor drinkers never con- sume bhang; they do ganja, but only to a very small extent. 39. Bhang is by far the least injurious of all preparations of the hemp plant. 40. Ganja is burnt and rubbed into the body with oil. I never heard of it being prescribed as an internal medicine. Never saw it used for cattle diseases. 41. I never heard that the use of these drugs or of opium was a prophylactic against fever; though they might be of use, if used for the first time when fever came on. Bhang is useful as a digestive. It is used for this purpose in medicine. Neither ganja nor bhang are any real use for severe exertion, expo- sure or fatigue. Opium may be some use in the case of exposure or fatigue. 42. Ganja is absolutely pernicious. A moderate use of bhang is not so harmful. The habit can be more easily broken off. 43. Yes. 44. The first effects are rest and warmth. The will loses its strength. The subject gets hungry and thirsty. Then the body gets cold, and the man becomes lifeless as earth, listless and careless of life. A man deprived of ganja or bhang does not suffer anything like so much or so long as when deprived of opium. 45. It causes cold, bronchitis, and cough. I have never known a man become insane from the use of the drugs. They become silly for a short time, but the effect wears off with the drug. The brain is un- doubtedly affected. There is no one in my zamindari commonly pointed out as a victim of bhang or ganja smoking. 46. Men frequently take to ganja and bhang drinking to stimulate the passions. The im- mediate effect is to stimulate the passion. This leads to immorality; but the effects soon wear off and leaves the man impotent. 47. The habit is not hereditary. 49. Prostitutes do use ganja. 51. It undoubtedly blunts the moral sense. I have never seen a case of violence or rape when under influence of ganja or bhang. It leads to gambling. 53. No. 54. Criminals do fortify themselves with bhang or ganja. 58. I have nothing to suggest. These drugs undoubtedly have a bad effect on the character, health, and the purse of the people, and therefore any arrangement for checking it within reasonable limits will be good. 60. The strength of ganja would be much in- creased if the charas were not extracted from the plant before it comes into the market. For this reason the Sargooja ganja is much better than ours. 61. I think it is sufficiently controlled. 63. No, except that too much profit goes to the wholesale vendors, thus putting a heavy burden on the consumers. It would be better if Govern- ment would deal straight with the retail vendor. 64. No.
110 65. The drugs are more heavily taxed than liquor, which is a good thing. I do not propose any alterations. The difference in price between drugs and liquor is hard on the castes that do not drink. The effects of ganja go off much more rapidly than those of liquor or opium. 66. The various kinds should be separately taxed. Chur should be taxed half as heavily as the other kinds, as it is much weaker. Old ganja should also be lightly taxed. 67. The contracts should be let out directly to the retail vendor. The wholesale vendor should be eliminated. 68. No, and I am glad there are not. 69. The authorities should consult the public more than they do at present. 70. There is a great deal of smuggling from the neighbouring foreign States. Oral evidence. Question 7.111 vending and to place the consumers under police surveillance and sanction. The consumers will be seriously discontented. Political danger might follow the prohibition. Probably the consumers of ganja will take to other narcotics; which they may be I cannot specify. 40. Ganja has medical uses in the country medi- cal books and is prescribed by native physicians. Ganja is used in the treatment of cattle. 47 and 48. The use of ganja does not appear to be hereditary nor to affect the children of the moderate consumers. 58. The administration of excise in my State is the best I could devise. 59. No improvement suggests itself to me. 60. No ganja is produced in my State at present. 61. No charas used here. 62. No bhang used. 63. No objection. 64. No objection. 65. (a) Reasonable. (b) Reasonable. 66. Different sorts of ganja should be different- ly taxed, according to their intoxicating properties, the more intoxicating ones being taxed more heavily. 67. No objections. 68. No licensed shops where ganja could be consumed on the premises. Such houses would not be possible in view of the habit of the con- sumers of smoking wherever they like as tobacco is smoked. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted before opening a shop, and a shop is opened in a place the people of which are known to smoke ganja. This is in fact considering the wishes of some of the people. Local public opinion should no doubt be invited and considered. 70. I do not import ganja from any Native State: all the ganja used here is imported from the Sambalpur Government Stores. Duty is paid ultimately by the consumers as vending is licensed at the first. Untaxed drugs are not in general use in my State. 60. Evidence * of PANDIT NARAYAN RAO GOBIND, Brahmin, Zamindar, Hurda. 1. I have had occasion to talk with some ganja- smokers and persons addicted to bhang-drinking and I have generally met with majum-eaters during the Holi days and persons who take bhang in the hot season. The sadhus, bairagis and gosains who generally use bhang and ganja have also added to the number of my informants regarding the matters connected with the hemp drugs. 2. The ganja sold in the market by the con- tractor is of three varieties. The flat ganja is called kali, the round one is termed only ganja, and the chur is named bhang, but this is not the real bhang, which is of two kinds, sadi and dudhia. Bhang is also called buti, bhrangakha and bijya respectively. 3, 4, 5 and 6. I do not know this. 7. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant in the Hoshangabad district, but it is carried on in the Nimar district112 28. I do not know this. 29. While smoking ganja they mix tobacco with it to improve its taste. Dhatura is not mixed. Bhang massala is neither prepared nor sold in this district. 30. They smoke ganja in the presence of persons who are addicted to its use and avoid the presence of those who do not smoke it. Those who drink bhang do not take any such precaution; rather they take delight in drinking it in com- pany. Generally its consumption is confined to the male sex and children are not allowed to use it. 31. The habit is easily formed on account of the effects of society, and to break it off is attended by temporay discomfort, which if one cares to undergo, the habit breaks off. It depends upon the habit of a moderate user to develop into the excessive. 32. None of these drugs bears any connection with religion, caste or custom. They are only taken for intoxication. After a short use it be- comes a habit to smoke ganja which results in producing foam and reducing the blood. The use of bhang produces flatulence. 33. The respectable class of people regard the intoxication of ganja as very bad. Its use has no connection with religion. It is liked only by bairagis, gosains and sadhus, who profess to have left all worldly cares, and the labouring classes, who are under the impression that by smoking ganja they will be relieved of their worry. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant in this district. It is not advisable to drink bhang, but people take delight in doing so. 34. It would not be a serious privation to any class of consumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use. I cannot guess the probable number of each class of consumers. 35. It is possible to prohibit the use of all these drugs. If it is gradually reduced, the consumers can after some time forego the con- sumption of their favourite drug. If it is pro- hibited all at once, the ganja-smokers would find it very inconvenient, and they will adopt any measure, however bad it may be, whereby they could expect to get the drug. It is not advisable to replace the ganja by any other intoxicating stimulant, for all intoxicating things are bad. The prohibition would certainly create discontent among the consumers, but not to such an extent as to amount to a political danger. The entire prohibition of ganja would be beneficial to all classes of people excepting the sadhus, bairagis, gosains, etc., who consider this drug even more indispensable than food itself, and as they are always travelling, the use of ganja prevents the effects of the changing climates on their con- stitution. 36. I do not know this. 37. They do not smoke charas in this district, hence I cannot state the difference. 38. The flat ganja (kali or baluchur) produces more intoxication than the other two preparations. The round ganja possesses a greater degree of intoxication than chur. 39. They don't use bhang for smoking. Ganja is so used, and the chur is both used for smoking and drinking, The use of ganja for smoking is very injurious as is evidenced by the effects produced on the smokers, many of whom become insane, and others are reduced in health owing to loss of blood. 40. In "Granth Raj Nighant" and "Gadni- waran" the authors have described the medicinal qualities of bhang, which is mixed with several native medicines, and the chur and bhang form also an ingredient of the cattle or horse massala. 41. I do not know about charas, but the mode- rate use of ganja or bhang is beneficial in its effects, as detailed below:113 61. Evidence of CHANDI PERSHAD, Brahmin, Malguzar, and President, Municipal Committee, Chanda. 1. Have constantly mixed socially with con- sumers of the drug. 2. I accept these definitions save with regard to bhang. The term 'bhang' is, I believe, used in a different sense in the North-Western Provinces, but in these parts it is applied to the refuse of ganja. 3. It grows spontaneously in the neighbourhood of Dehra Dun, not in these provinces. 4. It is known as 'jungli ganja.' 6. Sometimes dense and sometimes scattered. 7. In the Nimar district only. 9. It is sown in July and requires somewhat sandy soil, such as would be suitable for kharif crops. 11. No. 12. This may happen occasionally, but not to any large extent. Ganja was formerly cultivated in this district, though not very largely, but its cultivation has been forbidden for the last twenty to twenty-five years. 14. Ganja is prepared, and also bhang in the sense in which the term is used here (see question 2 above). 16. (a) No. (b) and (c) Ganja for administration to animals, but not for human use, is obtained from the wild plant. 18. Ganja keeps good about two years. After that it loses its strength. It should be kept from damp, and if allowed to get damp may be spoilt in two months. 19. Ganja is also used as a medicine, and is occasionally eaten in lieu of bhang. 20. Charas is not used in these parts. 21. Only one kind, the flat, is used in these parts. 23. Not in this district. 24. The bhang of this district is eaten to some extent by Brahmins, Chattris, Marwaris, and Jats (from the North-Western Provinces). Low-caste people do not much use it. 25. The sale of ganja in this district is increas- ing. The reason is, I think, that the retail vend- ors outside Chanda itself get their licenses cheap, and so are able to sell the drug cheap. 26. Occasional consumers are rare. I should say 10 per cent. only. If men take it at all, they generally take it habitually; and if they take it habitually, they generally from time to time take it in excess. But constantly excessive consumers are rare. 27. Musalmans, fakirs, gosains, bairagis, Nais, Barhais, and Gohars, a few Dakhani Brahmins and Chattris, and Banias, all these are habitual consumers. Excessive consumers are generally bairagis and gosains. The company of smokers is a great cause of the habit being adopted though there are also other causes, which will be noted below. 28. (a) Two or three annas' worth a day, or even four annas' worth. (b) Six annas' worth a day. 29. Nothing is mixed with ganja, but dhatura is commonly mixed with bhang. Yes I know 'bhang massala,' but it is not sold in this district. People make it for themselves. Its ingredients are rose-flowers, poppy seeds, black pepper, carraway seeds, kasni, cucumber seeds, milk and sugar, and almonds, 'Majum' is made of ghee, sugar, and bhang. 30. Bhang is generally eaten in solitude, but ganja is smoked in company. Their consumption is generally confined to the male sex. It is gene- rally begun in youth, but once begun is continued to old age. Children do not consume either ganja or bhang. 31. The habit is easily formed, and with diffi- culty broken off. The habit of eating bhang is not so difficult to break with, but that of smoking ganja is much more so, not more than 5 per cent. of smokers give up the habit. There is a ten- dency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There is no social or religious obligations to take these drugs even amongst bairagis and go- sains. Bhang is sometimes spoken of as 'Maha- deo's leaves,' but there is nothing in the Shastras to that effect. 33. (a) and (b) It is considered disreputable, because it produces intoxication, and impairs the intellect, but there is no religious prohibition of its use. (c) No. 34. Ganja smoking is a thing which is done daily, and fore-going it would be a serious priva- tion to those accustomed to it. This is not so much the case with eating bhang, which is a more occasional thing. Some 5 per cent. of the total population of this district are, I should say, ganja smokers, and some 3 per cent. bhang eaters. 35. (a) Bhang eating might be forbidden, but not ganja smoking. (b) Yes, where British territory adjoins Native States. (c) The best means of prohibition would be by gradually raising the price. (d) The prohibition would occasion discontent amongst habitual consumers. (e) There would be some danger from this dis- content, but not much. (f) Consumers of ganja and bhang, if cut off from them, would not take to liquor or opium. 36. No. 39. Ganja smoking is more injurious than bhang eating. 40. (a) Yes, both ganja and bhang are used by native doctors. (b) Yes, bhang, but not ganja. 41. (a) Eating bhang is good for the digestion, but not ganja smoking. (b) Eating bhang is also good in the way of giving staying-power and alleviating fatigue, but not ganja smoking. (c) Neither eating bhang nor smoking ganja is of any use as a febrifuge. Under (a) and (b) moderate eating is under- stood No other beneficial effect is obtained from the practice. 42. Habitual eating of bhang is harmless, if not beneficial, but ganja smoking is always more or less harmful. 43. Yes. vol. vi S
114 44. Ganja smoking produces intoxication im- mediately, but bhang eating after the lapse of an hour or two. Ganja smoking is refreshing to beginners, but not to habituals. Eating bhang is never refreshing, but produces sluggishness. They are always taken with the view of producing intoxication, and a man, whom I should call a moderate consumer, will yet take enough to in- toxicate him. An excessive consumer will al- together lose his senses. Ganja smoking takes away the desire for food, but bhang eating in- creases it. The effects take on an average about six hours to wear off, but the time varies greatly with different people. As soon as the effects have worn off, there is a desire for more. 45. (a) Yes, ganja smoking does, even though moderate, but the bhang eater when he has re- covered from his intoxication is none the worse. (c) Ganja smoking injures the digestion, but not bhang eating. (d) Ganja smoking generally causes asthma in habitual smokers. (e) Yes, ganja smoking does so, but bhang eating only whilst the intoxication lasts. (f) Ganja smoking tends to deaden the in- tellect, and very frequently causes insanity. It may even do so, though practised in moderation. Bhang eating does not produce insanity. 46. The effects of habitual excessive ganja smoking are the same as mentioned above, but intensified. 47. No. 48. No. 49. Ganja is often smoked by young men as an aphrodisiac, and they feel benefit from it for about a week, but after that they are worse off than if they had not taken it, and ultimately be- come impotent. Prostitutes sometimes take it for a similar reason. 50. Bhang is not taken for the above-mention- ed reason. 51. (a) Yes. (b) No special class of crime is peculiarly com- mon with ganja smokers. Eaters of bhang are on the average of better character than ganja smokers. 53. No. No. 54. No. 55. (a) Yes, very often. (b) 'Be-hoshi' may be produced by smoking ganja, but not such complete stupefaction as by excessive eating of bhang. Dhatura is commonly mixed in bhang, not in ganja. 56. Dhatura is often mixed with bhang by poor people for their own consumption, and not with any criminal purpose. It increases the bad effects of the drug. 57. People accustomed to eat bhang eat ganja if they cannot get bhang. The effects of ganja when eaten are similar to those of bhang, but stronger. 58. Action should be taken to raise the price of retail vend licenses, and thus cause the vendors to demand a higher price from the consumers. 59. (See above.) 63. (See above answer to 58.) No objection to wholesale vend system. The price of ganja could however, if preferred, be raised by making it more expensive to the wholesale vendor. 64. No. 65. Ganja is more expensive than an equal weight of country spirit, but a man can intoxi- cate himself on less money's worth of ganja than of spirit. In a way therefore ganja is the cheaper of the two. I do not believe, however, that any re-adjustment of their comparative prices would cause ganja consumers to take to liquor, or liquor consumers to ganja. The classes which take the two things are quite distinct, and would always remain so. 68. My impression is that consumption on the premises is not allowed in the Central Provinces. At any rate it does not occur in the Chanda shop. Consumption of these drugs on the premises of licensed vendors is objectionable, as the consumers are likely by this means to get into bad company and habits. 69. None, so far as I know. I do not think it necessary. Respectable people, however, would not like a ganja shop near their houses. 70. No. A certain amount of contraband ganja is used, but not much. Where there is a want of police supervision, it is introduced into this district from the Nizam's dominions. The price of ganja there is much lower than here, as cultivation there is not restricted. Oral evidence. Question 16.115 62. Evidence of THAKUR MAHARAJ SINGH, RAI BAHADUR,* Malguzar, Saugor. 1. I have seen much ganja smoking, and have observed the result of its effects and abuses. I have frequently made many enquiries on this sub- ject, so that I can speak with some authority on the subject. 2. Yes; names under which the products are known: Dhuba bhang, Bahraich Ganja ki-patti. 3. Do not know any cases of spontaneous growth in the Central Provinces. 4. Not known. 5. Wild hemp is unknown. 6. Wild hemp is unknown. 7. Yes; ganja and bhang in the Khandwa dis- trict of the Central Provinces. Fibre is not used, nor is charas produced. 8. The area under cultivation has decreased be- cause special licenses are now granted for cultiva- tion of the hemp plant in one district only in the province. 9. Generally the seeds are sown broadcast. 10. They are of the same classes as other culti- vators, i.e., the agricultural classes only cultivate the hemp. 11. No. 12. I have no knowledge of this. 13. Yes, to Nimar only. 14. Yes; ganja and bhang. Charas is not made in the Central Provinces. 15. (A) Ganja.116 (c) By prohibiting cultivation and prescribing severe penalties for introduction of the drugs into British territory. (d) Not serious discontent, though there will be a little discontent at the beginning. (e) No. (f) The lower classes will take to liquor in- stead if they can afford it. 36. No. 37. They are different, Ganja brings on intoxi- cation much sooner than charas smoking. 38. I do not know. 39. Smoking is more injurious than drinking or eating. 40. Native physicians prescribe them sometimes. Bhang is used in treating cattle for certain speci- fic diseases, such as colic and loss of appetite. 41. (a) No. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) No. (e) Labouring classes. (f) Moderate occasional. 42. No; habit is generally formed by persons who begin moderately at first. 43. No. 44. (a) Effect.117 63. Evidence of RAO VENKAT RAO, Brahmin, Malguzar, and Political Pensioner, Saugor. 1. My answers are based on information which I have received from other persons; and from personal knowledge of people who are addicted to the use of the drugs, and who are known to me. I was formerly a Tahsildar exercising 2nd class magisterial powers, and tried many ganja cases for a period extending over twenty years. Thus I had ample opportunity for obtaining information regarding matters connected with hemp drugs. The definitions mentioned may be accepted for this province; but in this province bhang is divid- ed into two classes, according to quality, viz., duba or dudhia and ganjeri. The former is of superior quality. 3. The hemp plant does not grow spontaneously anywhere in this province and hence I am unable to answer questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 7. The hemp plant is not now cultivated in these provinces. I cannot therefore give any reply to questions Nos. 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12. 13. As far as I know the cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is prohibited in all the dis- tricts of this province. 14. Ganja, charas and bhang are not prepared in this province. I am therefore unable to answer questions Nos. 15, 16 and 17. 18. Ganja, bhang and charas do deteriorate by keeping. Their intoxicating effects are lessened by the keeping, and in two years they are thrown away as useless. Damp during the rains is the cause of the deterioration. As a rule no measures are taken to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja is used medicinally. For rheumatism it is applied as an ointment on the affected part. In cases of dysentery it is taken internally in small doses. 20. Ganja is universally smoked by the bairagis throughout India, and by all classes of labourers of the lower castes. About 95 per cent. of the bairagis and about 50 per cent. of the labouring classes smoke ganja. 21. Flat ganja is preferred in this province for smoking. 22. Charas is not used in this province, 23. Bhang is never used for smoking in this province. 24. Some people of all classes in this province eat bhang during the cold weather, and drink it during the hot season. I cannot say what is the proportion of the people who do so. 25. In my opinion the use of ganja in this pro- vince is on the increase, but I am unable to ac- count for this increase. 26. I cannot answer this question. 27. Labourers and persons of low position in life are addicted to ganja, smoking. Bairagis take ganja to prevent evil effects of drinking water of different places. Labourers smoke it as a relief from the fatigue of labour. 28. I cannot say. 29. Dhatura seed is sometimes mixed with ganja and bhang to increase the intoxicating effects. I do not know of any bhang massala being sold. 30. Ganja and bhang are sometimes used in company. The use of ganja and bhang is confined to the male sex. I have never heard of children being addicted to the use of these drugs. 31. (a) and (b) The habit of consuming ganja and bhang is not easily formed, but when once formed is hard to break off. (c) There is a tendency in the case of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. In this province there is no custom, either religious or social, regarding the consumption of ganja or bhang. 33. (a)It is generally regarded as being injurious. (b) The public opinion is against the use of these drugs. The use of these drugs is held in disrepute because it is injurious to health. 34. At first it would be felt seriously by the consumers if they were to forego the use of ganja or bhang. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs at the same time.. If prohibit- ed, they would be consumed illicitly, The prohi- bition could be enforced by law. The prohibition would create discontent among consumers, but such discontent would not amount to a political danger. The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. There is some reason for thinking that alcohol is now being substituted to some extent for these drugs. I can give no reason for this. 64. Evidence of RAO SAHIB BALWANTRAO GOVINDRAO BHUSKUTE, Brahmin, Jagirdar of Timborni, Barhanpar, Nimar District. 1. I have a number of dependents and a large number of menial servants, a few of whom are more or less addicted to the use of the hemp drugs; I have come across several persons who are more or less addicted to the drugs in question. 2. Bhang is obtained from the dry leaves of a species of hemp plant, different from that from which ganja, is obtained. The definition of charas, as given by Dr. Prain, may be accepted, so also the definition of ganja. There are two varieties of ganja known in these parts, viz., flat ganja and chur. It is manufactured in the manner indicated in Dr. Prain's report. Round ganja is unknown in these parts. The products are known here by names (1) bhang, (2) charas, and (3) ganja. 7. There is cultivation of hemp plant in a village called Bhigava of my estate. It is situated in the Khandwa tahsil, Nimar district. 10. The cultivators do not form any particular class. They are ordinary agriculturists. 18. Every one of these drugs deteriorates by keeping. It loses all its effect in time. It keeps good with ordinary care for about two yeas. The action of atmosphere causes deterioration.
118 19. Ganja and charas are usually used for smoking. Ganja also forms an important ingre- dient in the preparation of majum and gulkand, which are eaten. Ganja is also substituted for bhang for drinking purposes. A preparation con- sisting of ganja, salt, haldi, and wheat flour is made and given to bullocks for stimulating their appetite. This is prevalent in the Nimar district. 20. Ganja and charas smoking is not confined to any particular class or community. It is more freely used by the lower order of society, agricul- tural classes excepted. The class of bairagis (re- ligious mendicants) are notorious as ganja smokers. Artists, whose trade is of a sedentary nature and requires application, are more or less addicted to ganja smoking, so are also persons whose duties subject them to the inclemencies of weather and require them to move about in bad and unhealthy places. It should, however, be borne in mind that members of higher orders of society are not usually addicted to ganja smoking although they are placed in circumstances indicated above. 21. Flat ganja is preferred for smoking. 23. I do not know of people ever using bhang for smoking. 24. I know of no persons eating bhang. Per- sons used to drink bhang sometimes eat it, when they do not care to take the trouble of preparing it in liquid form. 25. The use of ganja appears to be on the de- crease owing to taxation to which it is subjected and the growing poverty of the people. Ganja. Per cent. Bhang. Per cent. Habitual moderate consumers 75 80 Habitual excessive consumers 15 10 Occasional moderate consumers 5 5 Occasional excessive consumers 5 5 27. These are taken from all classes of people. The habits of life or circumstances, which lead to the practice cannot be particularised. I know of persons of active as well sedentary habits given to the use of ganja. So also ganja smokers can be found among people under any set of circum- stances. 28. Cost per diem per head119 38. Round ganja is not available in these prov- inces. The effect of flat ganja is stronger than that of chur in degree though similar in kind. 39. The smoking of any preparation of hemp plant is in my opinion not less injurious form of consumption than drinking or eating the same, but on the contrary it is decidedly more injurious, because smoking acts more directly upon brain than eating or drinking. 40. The use of ganja is prescribed on account of its medicinal qualitities in Yunani and Mishrani Schools of Native physicians in the treatment of certain diseases, such as dysentery, etc. It should, however, be borne in mind that ganja in itself is never prescribed as medicine. It only forms an ingredient in very small quantities; ganja is also used in the treatment of a cattle disease called Fansi120 65. Evidence * of DAMODHAR DASS, Brahmin, Mafidar, Bargarh, Sambalpur District. 1. I live in Bargarh and see many people there in course of my occupations. There are some 10 or 20 ganja smokers in Bargarh. 2. I have met with only two kinds of ganja121 47. I do not think it is hereditary. 48. The children of excessive smokers are not affected in any way. I have seen many such. 49. A preparation of ganja called "modak" is used for this purpose. I do not know if prosti- tutes so use it. "Modak" is not so injurious as ordinary ganja. It is a mixture of some 50 or 60 medicines. It tends to produce impotence. "Modak" is the only form of hemp I know of used for this purpose. 50. It is not used to excess much. The exces- sive use of it produces impotence. I have heard this. 51 and 52. I do not know. 53. I do not know personally. I have heard that people commit sometimes murder or suicide, or try to do so, when under the influence of hemp, but I do not know of any particular case. 54 and 55. I do not know. 56. See my answer to 29. I do not know details. Too much dhatura will cause death. 57. People always smoke ganja. 58. I do not know much about the Excise Ad- ministration. 59. No suggestions to offer. 63. I have no objections. 69. I have no objections to the present system of licensing shops. 70. Ganja is smuggled because it is cheap in Native States. I know of no particular facts to which I wish to draw attention. Oral evidence. Question 25.122 (a) The hemp plant is cultivated for the pro- duction of ganja in the Khandwa Tahsil of the Nimar District of the Central Provinces, and also very widely in the Feudatory State of Bastar. 8. There has been considerable fluctuation in the area for the cultivation of ganja in the Nimar District of the Central Provinces, where only it is permitted to be cultivated. The area under culti- vation for the last four years is as under123 preparations of these drugs. I am of opinion that the latter class are more specially swelling the ranks of ganja-smokers. I mean by those to whom liquor is a religious prohibition. 26. The answers are a mere guess. Under124 37. Charas is not imported into the Central Provinces, and so I am unable to give any opi- nion as to the relative effect each drug produces on the consumer. 38. Cannot say, for only one kind of ganja is utilised in these provinces licitly. 39. Ganja-smoking is considered very injurious. Bhang drinking is considered most beneficial to health. Majum-eating, prepared with ganja, is considered less harmful, as also "yakuti" and "panjari." 40. Yes, very rarely. Bhang is administered to bullocks to allay fatigue and weariness some- times. But generally the water of fermented "mohawa" called "goda" is given. 41. It is said that bhang is most beneficial in its effects as125 70. The Nizam's territory and the Hyderabad Assigned Districts are contiguous to the Chanda District, as also Bastar close to Sironcha, which latter is a tahsil of the Chanda District. In these places the restrictions on the cultivation, sale, and price of ganja are not so stringent as in the British territory, and there is great possibility of its being smuggled into these provinces. 67. Evidence of the REV. A. G. DANIELSSON, Missionary, Chhindwara. 29. Many mix ganja with tobacco for smoking. A sweetmeat or drug is made of the extract of hemp mixed with sugar and is called majum. I am told it is often served to guests at social gather- ings after the meal, and that it causes a pleasant intoxication. 32. Many Hindus smoke ganja, because their god Mahadeo was in the habit of smoking it. 35. (a) Yes. (b) Of course those addicted to it would try to get it. (c) By forbidding the sale of them except for medicinal uses. 45. Yes, it produces bronchitis, asthma and cough owing to that smoking of ganja consolidates the lungs. It seems to weaken the intellect and make the consumers very dull. 49. Yes. 68. Evidence of the REV. O. LOHR,* Medical Missionary, Bisrampur, Raipur District. 1. I have resided in the country as a missionary from 1849 to 1857 in Chota Nagpur, and from 1868 up to date in Chattisgarh. I have practised medicine all these years, and have occasionally made enquiries among the people about the use of drugs. 2. As far as my experience goes, the only form of this narcotic used is ganja in these parts. Bhang is occasionally used as an exception by foreigners from the North-West Provinces. I have never come across any person using charas. I shall speak only of my acquaintance with this narcotic in Chattisgarh, as my knowledge of the use of it in Chota Nagpur is too remote to be of any certainty. 3. I have never come across any instance in the Raipur and Bilaspur districts (which are the only ones I have knowledge of), where I have seen the plant growing spontaneously. 4. The plant is only known under the name of ganja. 5. Not having seen the wild plant growing anywhere, I cannot tell. 6. See question 5. 7. Not at present. About 20 years ago, I used to see it growing in the gardens of Gonds. There is scarcely any grown now. Formerly it was cultivated for ganja alone being produced. I have seen it in both the Raipur and Bilaspur dis- tricts to a very small extent; but I believe that now it is hardly grown at all on account of its cultivation having been since prohibited. 8. See question 7. 9. As far as I know, no particular care was taken for its cultivation, and there were about 10 or 15 plants in the gardens where I saw it grown, seemingly only for the use of the owner. 10. See question 7. 11 and 12. I do no know. 13. It is prohibited entirely. I cannot tell (last question). 14. Not to my knowledge. 15. I have no knowledge regarding these matters. 16. In the few cases I knew of, the ganja was prepared by the consumer for his own use. This was years ago. 17. By Gonds formerly, None is made now. 18. I do not know. 19. I have no acquaintance with charas or bhang. I can only speak of ganja. Ganja is in these parts only used for smoking. Bhang is used by the high caste people, I believe. I can only give evidence regarding ganja. 20. Foremost are the Gonds and bairagis, Rawats or Gwalas, and Pankas; in a smaller degree, Telis and Kurmis; and in a still less degree, all other classes, even Muhammadans. The only exception are the Chamars, amongst whom only one per cent. (about) indulge in the drug. All over the districts. 21. The flat kind, locally called "kalli," is in- variably used, and with it the chur or broken ganja. 22. Charas is not used to any extent. 23. No. 24. Bhang is, I believe, used by the up-country Brahmins and Banias chiefly as an aid to diges- tion; but only to a small extent. 25. The use of ganja is, I think, on the increase. I can give no reason for the increase, unless it be the increased prosperity of the people and greater facilities for obtaining it. 26. The cases I have come across were and are chiefly habitual moderate consumers; there were a few habitual excessive consumers, and very few of the other two classes. 27. The persons indulging in the drug (ganja) are mostly such as lead an idle life, like bairagis, Gonds, beggars, and Rawats, who follow cattle and dance a great deal. 28. A moderate habitual consumer will use from 1 pice to 1 anna's worth a day, and habitual excessive consumers will use up to 4 annas worth a day. 29. Tobacco is sometimes mixed and smoked with ganja. I have come across no cases of dhatura being so used. I do not know of any preparation such as bhang massala. 30. Ganja is smoked about here in the same way as tobacco is, and only by male adults. It is not usual for children to use it. It is used more by middle-aged men than by others. * Invited to attend at a sitting of the Commission for oral examination, but failed to appear.
126 31. According. to my experience, the habit is easily acquired but difficult to break off. Yes, there is such a tendency. 32. It is decidedly part of the religious orgies of the Hindu classes mentioned, and less so with Gonds. It is not regarded as essential; but is always excessive in such cases, and is likely to lead to a formation of the habit. It is injurious in such cases. 33. As far as I know, with indifference. There is no public opinion on the matter. I don't think it is in disrepute; nor are people who use it shunned more than users of tobacco are, except by the extreme temperate people, i.e., people who object to the use of tobacco, spirits and narcotics in any form. 34. Not to my knowledge. I have come across instances of people giving it up because of my advice, and no evil effects have resulted. 35. Since the people have been accustomed to use the drug (ganja) from time immemorial, prohibition would be very difficult, and it would be consumed illicitly. I think prohibition would lead to political trouble, and would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants and other drugs. 36. In my opinion the two habits keep pace together. I do not think alcohol is being sub- stituted for the drug, nor the drug for alcohol when both are obtainable; but when one cannot be obtained, the other must and will be indulged in. 37. Not knowing anything of the effects of bhang or charas, I can only confine myself to giving an opinion about ganja. 38. I cannot say. 39. As far as I know, smoking is more injurious than any other form of indulgence in this drug, for in all the cases of attempted suicide and delirium I have come across from indulging in the drug, smoking has been the cause. 40. I don't remember. I never heard of such use. 41. I do not think it is beneficial, except in moderation, as an aid to digestion. In cases of fatigue, and so on, the effect can only be tem- porary. It may be soothing and act as an inducement to sleep. I do not think it is useful in any other way, as smokers are attacked by fevers, etc. 42. If a person indulges in this drug, the moderate use may be beneficial to the health; but as the system becomes accustomed to it, the dose must be increased, and therefore the habit is liable to become a baneful one. 43. Yes. 44. It is first exciting, then soothing, followed by slight intoxication when used moderately; in a less moderate degree of indulgence it causes merely temporary excitement. It is said to create appetite. It lasts only about an hour, and there are no after-effects, except an inclination to sleep. A longing for more is produced. 45. (a) Yes, to some degree in all three senses. (b) Yes, if continued. (c) Not in moderate, quantities. (d) Not to my knowledge. (e) Yes, it induces laziness and immorality. (f) It deadens the intellect, but does not induce insanity if used moderately. If used immoderate- ly, it induces temporary insanity. Yes; the pupils are dilated, sensibility is diminished, there is delirium of a boisterous nature, followed by sleep. I never met with such a case. (g) I do not think so. Never having kept histories of such cases, I am unable to answer this question satisfactorily. 46. I have answered this question in the above. 47. I have not ascertained this fact; but I think in a great many cases it is hereditary. I do not think the children are in any bad way affected. I have seen very intelligent children of habitual ganja-smokers. 48. I should answer this question as above. 49 and 50. I know it is an aphrodisiac; but I do not know if it is used for that purpose, having had no experience in this matter. 51 and 52. I have no experience in these matters. 53. In my experience, the immoderate use of ganja leads to suicide, but not to any other crime. 54. I do not know. 55. I have had no such experience. 56. I never came across any such admixture. As far as my experience goes, the pure ganja is always used. 57. I have never come across any such cases. Ganja is always smoked about here. 58 and 59.. I am not acquainted with these matters. 60. Ganja is not produced here now. 61. I do not know anything about charas. 62. See above. 63. See question 58. I do not know anything about its wholesale vend; but think the retail sale should be restricted rather more than it is, as now it is accessible to all classes of persons, even children. 64 to 66. See question 58. I know nothing about this. 67. See question 58. I know nothing about this matter. 68. Not as far as I know. I do not think such houses or shops should be allowed. 69. I do not know anything about this, as no such wishes have been expressed to me, nor have I been asked. I don't know. I think in most cases this would be desirable. 70. I know nothing about these matters. I regret I can give no further information on these matters as, owing to failing health within the last few years, I have not paid much attention to them. I think, however, the sale should be still further restricted, as the vice is increasing.
127 69. Evidence of ADHAR SINGH GOUR, Kshattri, Barrister-at-law, Hoshangabad. 1. Mixing with the people and observing their habits during the last 30 years. 2. Yes. The older leaves and fruit-vessels. It is also called Verbesina prostrata. In some parts the very tender parts of the plant without the stems make bhang. The female flowers are unfertilised. Their agglutinated tops and the resinous exudation on the same forms ganja. Flat ganja is used in these Provinces. Round ganja is hardly known. Yes. Ganja is also called sulpha. Bhang128 makes it altogether unwholesome for human con- sumption, though it is said to be good for medi- cinal purposes in the treatment of cattle and horse. The leafy part assumes a greyish tint and the resin, containing definite carbon compounds, is weakened. If the room in which it is kept be kept dry and warm by artificial means, it could be made to last for another 12 months. The room should be well ventilated, and should not have any stone pavement. People now keep it hermetically closed in a common earthen pot, in the mouth of which is kept a small quantity of cotton. The mouth of this pot is then covered over with saj or teak leaves and well plastered over with mud, which is made to dry in the sun before the pot is consigned to its final destina- tion. 19. I know nothing of charas. Ganja is used only for smoking. 20. Labouring classes that work out in sun and rain, particularly in jungly and swampy places. Bairagis, sanyasis and other ascetics use it freely wherever they may be. 21. Only flat ganja is used in these parts. There is also another kind of ganja, called pattar, that comes from Holkar's territories or rather is smuggled. 22. I do not know if charas is at all used in these Provinces. 23. No, for the simple reason that it contains the least resinous matter which is the active in- gredient in producing intoxication. 24. Bhang is consumed generally by well-to-do people. Chaubes of Mathura and Marwaris seem to patronize it particularly. It is more largely consumed during the hot months, as it is believed to be cooling and digestive. Poor men and men of business do not, for one thing, patronize this bhang, as it requires quite one hour's time before it can be made; whereas ganja ball can be prepared for the chillum (pipe) in about one-fourth the time; indeed it can be made while the maker is attend- ing to his usual work. 25. I am not able to cite statistics on this point; but the lower class of people who consumed liquor before have taken to ganja, because liquor has become expensive to them. This is the general reason given by persons who are questioned on the subject; and there seems to be some truth in it. 26. I would not answer this question, as I have not been able to collect correct statistics. 27. Mendicants, domestic servants, black magi- cians and all orders of ascetics. These classes of people are as a rule ill clad. They think that the use of the drug fortifies them against the extremes of weather. Bairagis and sanyasis use it because it enables them to meditate properly. Debauchees use the drug as they it is an increaser of pleasure. Poor people, because it is an assuager of cares. 28. (a) One pice worth. (b) Two annas worth. 29. Ordinarily tobacco is mixed with ganja in the proportion of 1/3 to 2/3 ganja. Exceptionally cardamoms and otto of roses or other otto. Yes. Dhatura seed is sometimes smoked with ganja, when the latter fails to give requisite intoxication. Bhang is seldom or never drunk alone. Bhang massala consists of the following:129 34. Supposing that the population of the pro- vinces is 13 millions or 6½ millions males, and the classes who generally consume this drug are in the following proportion in the Central Provinces:130 mitted that when ganja works such a change on a perfectly healthy brain, its work on the brains of persons who are troubled with mental anxie- ties or worries must not only be precipitate but certain. 47. I cannot say that it is a hereditary habit131 intoxicants. A moderate ganja smoker betrays his habit by his conversation. His lips bear evi- dence of his habit. They are blackish. Question 43.132 the rainy season, and keeping them in an air-tight place is perhaps the best way to save them from deterioration. 19.Yes for men. Ganja. 20. Ganja smoking is confined to the lower classes as a rule. When a man belonging to the better sort does indulge in it, he tries to keep it unknown to his neighbours, as it is considered disgraceful for a respectable man to do so. In Bengal the classes who indulge in it are generally boatmen, fishermen, mat-makers (domes), profes- sional lathials (clubmen), factory hands, postal runners, petty shopkeepers, professional musicians, syces and mahauts, Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs, and in a less extent masons and carpenters. I believe the custom varies directly with the swampiness of the locality. The drier the cli- mate the less the amount of the indulgence. It is not so easy to estimate the proportion of people of each class who smoke ganja. Of the fakirs and musicians it may be said that at least 50 per cent. of them indulge in it; of the other classes taken as a body 10 to 15 per cent. may be a fair estimate. In Bengal almost every man amongst the lower classes would not let the chillum go untouched if he can get it ready and free of cost, especially when he is about to do anything fa- tiguing or has caught a cold. Such men smoke more for the company than for pleasure, and a good many gradually get into the habit. As for charas, in the Central Provinces I have never seen it used. In Bengal also its use is not very extensive, except perhaps in the swampy and malarial districts of Murshidabad, Purnea and Malda. 21. In Nadia the smokers prefer the varieties known as "Jessore" and "Balughar." I do not know where the latter place is. The smokers in Raipur prefer the fiat, "kali" variety. 22. The Bengal people gave preference to the "Nepal" variety. I have never seen native charas. 23. Yes; Jatrawalas and worthless young men in the villages smoke bhang, but not to any con- siderable extent. A ganja-smoker run short of his stock, sometimes smokes bhang. 24. Almost every Marwari in Raipur and else- where drinks bhang in his "thandai" every even- ing during the hot weather. Habitual bhang- eris prefer to take it in pills which they some- times dry up for use during travel or where they do not wish to take the trouble of preparing it every day. A good many people belonging to the other classes drink bhang during summer evenings "to cool themselves"133 Dhatura is mixed only by excessive smokers of their own free will. It is, however, administered with ganja for criminal purposes. The object of the mixture in either case is to procure in- ebriation. I have given above the ingredients of bhang "massala." It is sold in large towns in Pansari shops in bundles; elsewhere people procure the ingredients separately and mix them themselves. 30. People of the better sort invariably smoke ganja in solitude; bhang is drunk as "thandai" more openly, but not in company in the sense that wine is drunk by Europeans in company except it be on festive occasions where young men drink it together in garden houses or "baithak khanas." The lower classes do smoke ganja in company, I believe, more for economy than for talk. Women, except the most degraded, seldom smoke ganja; a little of "thandai," I am inclin- ed to think, does not come amiss to young married women amongst the Marwaris, provided it does not become known. Such cases are not many, and the practice is never habitual. Children I have never known to smoke ganja or charas. A little "thandai" is given to boys sometimes during the hot weather months, espe- cially in families of which the headman is a devout believer in its efficacy, but here also the cases are very few and seldom habitual. 31. The habit of ganja smoking is usually formed in youth, when the man falls into the company of smokers, who recommend it to the uninitiated for almost every kind of disease134 feet of ganja smokers. They are said to be liable to dysentery and lung diseases. I have never noticed any such thing in the bhang drinker. 40. Native physicians use bhang largely in the preparation of "módaks"135 and judgments that he used to copy. His people found it necessary to put restraint on his move- ments. He received a small pension and lived till some time in 1891. With increasing age he ceas- ed to be violent, but he never recovered his reason completely. I do not know if he continued to smoke ganja after he became mad. He however had a hankering for it and never missed an oppor- tunity to indulge in it. I could give a few more cases; but I think the above are sufficient. I believe that in the acute stage of the disease there is hope of cure by com- plete abstinence and freedom from excitement of any sort. I have seen both amentia and dementia resulting from the use of ganja; the former more frequently than the latter. In the cases that came under my observation there was no mental anxiety or brain disease, as far as I know, to account for the habit. I do believe, however, that men of weak understanding, and especially those whose will power is weak when they once get into the habit soon become excessive smokers and gradually drift towards insanity after a time136 69. I have never known the wishes of the people to be consulted by Government officers before establishing a ganja shop in any locality. To my mind there can be no doubt that the wishes of the community ought to be consulted and res- pected on such occasions. Oral evidence. Question 1.137 that the ganja smoker acts on impulse and is defi- cient in self-control. Question 56.138 especially in Holi and Dewali in Northern India, and in Dasera in Bengal on the Dashami day. I cannot give the proportion, but now it is decreas- ing with the increase of education and civilisation. 25. So far as these provinces are concerned, I do not think that the use of any of these drugs is on the increase, in spite of the Government record that the consumption of ganja is on the increase. The following causes work against the increase139 no after effects. Want of subsequent gratifica- tion produces uneasiness (and illness in some cases) in the case of ganja, and nothing in the case of bhang. 45. The effect of the habitual moderate use of ganja is that it weakens the body and the mind, and not necessarily the moral sense. After a long use it weakens the digesting power. It can cause bronchitis and asthma, but bhang is not so inju- rious. Both these drugs bring a laziness after a length of time. Ganja may cause insanity of a temporary kind. 46. I can only guess that the effects will be proportionately aggravated. The excessive use of ganja (habitually) brings on insanity of a perma- nent kind. 47. No. 48. I have no information on this point. 49. Yes, and so used by prostitutes also. The use for this purpose is more injurious, as it pro- duces impotence. I am referring to ganja only. 50. The same answer as above. The effects are aggravated. 51 and 52. I do not know. There is no con- nection, so far as I know, or have been informed. 53 and 54, No. 55. Yes, by admixture with dhatura140 more or less of the condiments above described. Brahmins and Marwaris occasionally use it. 20. (1) Gossains, Bairagis, and fakirs, gene- rally (with very few exceptions), 95 per cent. (2) Gonds and Gowaries, 50 per cent. (3) Powars and Lodhis, 75 per cent. (4) Brahmins, Musalmans, Marwaris, Koshtees and Mahars, 25 per cent. The largest consumption is in Tarora tahsil adjoining the Balaghat district. Flat ganja is preferred for smoking to that of chur or broken ganja. Round ganja is never imported in this district. 22. Charas is not imported nor used in this district. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking, as it is not sold. The leaves imported with the ganja are generally destroyed. Broken ganja or chur is used as a substitute for "bhang" for eating and drinking. 24. See my answer to No. 19. 25. I am of opinion that ganja smoking is on the increase. Looking at the gradual increase of income from ganja, both under the fanning and the sale system, no one can shut his eyes to the fact that, the consumption of ganja has greatly ncreased. Ganja income under farming system. Ganja income under sale system. Year Rs. Year Rs. 1871-72 .. 1,575 1879-80 .. 5,006 1872-73 .. 1,731 1880-81 .. 5,171 1873-74 .. 1,792 1881-82 .. 4,875 1874-75 .. 2,500 1882-83 .. 5,880 1875-76 .. 2,025 1883-84 .. 7,312 1876-77 .. 2,005 1884-85 .. 9,381 1877-78 .. 2,415 1885-86 .. 12,371 1878-79 .. 4,453 1886-87 .. 11,110 ...... 1887-88 .. 11,299 ...... 1888-89 .. 8,744 ...... 1889-90 .. 11,430 ...... 1890-91 .. 11,600 ...... 1891-92 .. 11,399 ...... 1892-93 .. 14,199 It appears that the stimulus to ganja smoking was given from 187-79, when the Bengal- Nagpur Bailway was under construction, on ac- count of the influx of labourers and contractors from the North-Western Provinces who brought this pernicious habit with them and taught the people both by precept and example. The reasons of its consumption being now on the increase are141 (c) as a febrifuge or preventive of disease in malarious or unhealthy tracts; (d) I know of no other way. The Gonds, Gowaries, Powars, Halbas and other labouring classes. I refer to both moderate occasional use and moderate habitual use. In Bhandara and Balaghat districts, the labouring classes in the malarious and unhealthy parts use ganja smoking for the above use. 42. I consider the moderate use of the drug as beneficial as well as harmless, as far as ganja is concerned. 43. Moderate consumers are generally inoffen- sive to their neighbours, as far as ganja is concerned. 44. The immediate effect of ganja smoking, moderately, on habitual smokers is to create a kind of forgetfulness and an aptitude for work. It is refreshing after severe fatigue. It produces in- toxication when inhaled. It does not allay hunger but creates appetite. The effects last about two hours. The after-effects are naturally languor and weakness. In habitual smokers the want of subse- quent gratification produces longing or uneasiness. Habitual moderate smokers generally use it after meals, and the want of it generally causes indiges- tion or bloating of the stomach. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja smok- ing does not produce any noxious effect, except the affecting of the lungs, which causes either bronchitis or asthma, which generally comes on in old age, It does impair moral sense or induce laziness, or immorality or debauchery, when used for the purpose. It has the effect of deadening the intellect, but I have not seen a case of moderate smokers becoming insane. In excessive smokers it certainly leads to insanity of a temporary character, and the symptoms do come on by the use of the drug, I know of only one case, Em- press ns. Amdoo, No. 12142 68. None. 69. No, I think the wishes of the people should be consulted. 70. None. Oral evidence. 20. Powars and Lodhis smoke a great deal. The Kunbis, who are also cultivators, hardly smoke at all. So do several other classes. 27. (c) It is among Powars and Lodhis that ganja is not considered so disgraceful as opium or liquor. This is not the general opinion. 29. The people generally do not use dhatura. Only few of the Gossains use it: those who re- quire great intoxication. I have heard of nux vomica being similarly used, but not arsenic. 32. This answer also applies to bhang. Bhang is used in the Holi; but it is not enjoined. The obligation referred to in my Answer 27 (a) rests only on Gossains, who, as devotees, are privileged to use ganja to produce concentration. In my answers generally, I include bhang, in ganja,143 (b) One witness says one tola144 contracted the habit once, and given it up after- wards. 30. The women and children are not known to smoke ganja. The habitual consumers say that they have taken to the habit of ganja smoking, because prescribed by hakims for some ailments, or because they had been pressed in the beginning by their companions to join them. Two of the men have been smoking ganja for the last 20 years. They generally smoke once at night after meals at bed time. Some smoke the residue early the next morning. Some prefer to smoke before meals 28. The ganja each man smokes is a pice worth, weighing about 145 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. 36. Alcohol cannot be substituted for these drugs, as many people will object on caste and religious restrictions. 40. Bhang and ganja leaves are sometimes used for medical purposes, and for treating cattle disease. 41. Bhang is a food accessory; but is defective in digestive power, and also used as a preventive for cholera. Moderate occasional use. 42. In my opinion, moderate use of bhang and ganja is harmless, as the consumers do not do any harm simply by moderate use. 43. Yes. 44. It is refreshing and produces intoxication and creates appetite. The effect lasts from three to four hours. Yes; the want of subsequent gratification does produce longing and uneasiness. 45. (a), (c), (d) and (e) No. 47. No. 49. Neither one nor the other, in my opinion. 54. I don't think so. 55. Yes, the admixture of dhatura or arsenic will bring complete stupefaction as well as a strong dose of bhang to non-habitual drinkers. 63 and 64. No. 67. Moderate reduction is needed. 76. Evidence of LALA NUNDKESHORE, *Agarwal, Merchant, Banker, Contractor, Malgoozar, Honorary Magistrate, Secretary, Municipal Committee, and Member, District Council, Saugor. 1. I had ample opportunities of coming in con- tact with persons addicted to ganja, charas and bhang in these and other provinces. 2. Definitions herein given may be accepted. Ganja is locally known here as baluchur(round), harial (flat), and chur (broken ganja). Bhang is also locally known as buti; sometimes bhang is sub-divided into minor groups according to quality, such as duba or dudia, ganjery and Behraich. 3. It grows in Gwalior, Indore and Ratlam territories, and in. the Khandwa district of this province. It is also known to grow in Marwar and North-Western Provinces, as well as in the Feudatory States of the Chhattisgarh Division. 4. All these are the products of the same plant, differing only in effect on account of different kinds of soil and climate. 5. It grows abundantly in hot climates and where the soil is "moond," and in yards which are sufficiently manured. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily dense. 7. Yes. In Khandwa District for production of ganja and bhang only. 8. Cannot say. 9. The soil is well ploughed and manured, and then seeds are sown. 10. It is cultivated particularly by Lodhis, Kurmis, and Kuubis, and ordinarily by all agri- culturists. 11. The seed of the wild hemp is very seldom used for the production of ganja. 12. The wild hemp is especially cultivated for the production of ganja in districts mentioned in answer to Question 3. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is restricted in all the districts of this province except Khandwa, where its growth is both spontaneous and cultivated. Special con- ditions are stated in answer to Question 5. In my opinion its cultivation is nowhere impossible in this province, more or less according to the nature of soil. 14. The ganja and ganjar bhang are prepared in Khandwa district to a great extent. Khandwa is therefore the emporium of trade supplying to all the districts of this province. (The quality of bhang supplied to these provinces from Govern- ment emporium is very interior.) 15. Ganja is prepared when the shoots at the top get ripe. They are cut and pressed under- neath heavy loads or some weights. Before the ganja is completely dry, it is exposed to the air and then used. Bhang is prepared from the leaves of the plant when the shoots are not fully ripe. There is little or no distinction between the cultivated and the wild plant. For smoking purposes it is first cleared of seeds and veins, then placed on the palm of the left hand with a few drops of water, and well rubbed with the thumb of the right hand till it becomes soft, when a little tobacco is mixed and smoked in a chillum. Bhang is eaten in the form of tali and pills, etc., mixed with sugar or treacle. Bhang is also used for drinking purposes. It is first washed, then powdered and mixed with massala, water, milk and sugar, and then drunk. 16. Yes; bhang is prepared by the people in their houses. Yes; it can be prepared from the hemp plant, but not of all sorts. Yes; ganja and charas can be prepared from the plant wherever grown. Charas can be prepared only where the growth of the hemp plant is dense and in abundance. 17. By people of the agricultural classes, but especially by those mentioned in answer to Ques- tion 10. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping, while charas improves in quality. It does not lose its effect if kept carefully for two or three years at the most. The damp and moist atmos- phere in the rains are the causes of deterioration. If the seeds are separated, and due precaution is taken to keep it from damp and moist, deterior- ation is prevented. 19. No. They are used for smoking in general and for medicinal purposes in particular. In cases of diarrh146 22. Native charas is chiefly used. 23. No. 24. Marwaris and Mathra Chaubes in general, and Pandits in particular, eat and drink bhang according to their convenience. 25. The use of ganja, charas and bhang is on the decrease on account of their being dear, and also for the tendency of the people towards local and foreign liquor. 26. Cannot answer this question. 27. I have answered this question to some extent in my reply to Question No. 24, but I cannot say about the extent of habit of each. 28. Cannot state this question definitely, as the price varies in different districts and provinces as well as in Native territories. 29. In ganja, the ordinary ingredient is the dry tobacco leaf, the exceptional ingredient is atar, musk, cardamoms, cloves, mace, and nutmegs. No; the dhatura is not so used. The object of these admixtures is to make it palatable and more intoxicating. Yes, bhang massala contains the following ingredients:147 51. No. 52. Yes. 53. Yes. I have seen a case in which it has led a consumer to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Yes. 55. Yes; in some cases. Yes; in both instances. 56. In my opinion they are always used in excess of admixture. The admixture of dhatura is generally used for administration to others to stupefy and to overcome the victim. 57. They are eaten or drunk as medicine. 58. The system of giving rewards to the infor- mers for arresting persons selling or using these drugs unlawfully is in more instances harmful, inasmuch as persons with a view to obtain rewards by foul means put these drugs into the possession of their enemies; otherwise the administration. seems to work satisfactorily. 59. The system of giving rewards should be put a stop to for reasons given above. 60. No. 61. Charas is nowhere produced in this prov- ince. 62 to 69. No. 70. Yes. The poor classes who are habitual excessive consumers use untaxed drugs from Native territories. 77.Evidence* of GIRDHARI LAL, Oswal Bania, Merchant and Banker, Seoni-Chapara. 1. Only general observation as regards ganja. Bhang I indulge in myself, but only in the season of Holi, say the month of Phagun (March-April). 2. Definition of ganja is correct. But the bhang, of which people drink a decoction, is not the dried leaves of the ordinary hemp (ganja) plant, but of a fine quality of the plant grown in Malwa and Marwar. I have to get my bhang from Nagpur. It is not sold in the Seoni district. 3. I know of no district in which ganja grows spontaneously. Occasional plants grow in this district from seed that is found in purchased ganja and thrown away. 15. For a party of eight I would first soak 1 ½ 2 tolas weight of bhang in water for half an hour or more, and then throw away that water and wash the leaves out besides in four or five other waters, so as to get rid of all colouring matter. Then I would have the soft leaves ground up with badam (almonds), rose flowers, cucumber (kakri) seed, khasskhass (opium seed), black pepper, jaifran (kesar), sont (ginger, dry), kasni; and then the resulting paste would be divided be- tween 4 lotas, containing about 4 seers of cold water, and after soaking and mixing these for about an hour, the decoction would be strained and drunk like tea, with milk and sugar to taste. 19. Ganja, is used only for smoking. An oint- ment is also made from ganja with admixture of salt and ghee, which the barbers rub on fever patients. After being well rubbed with this oint- ment, the patient is covered with blankets, and a copious perspiration results. 20. I consider that about half the male adult population smoke ganja. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. People do not eat bhang. 24. About 10 per cent. of the adult males and 5 per cent. of the adult females drink bhang. They cannot get good bhang under present excise arrangements; so, in default of better, prepare their decoction of bhang from the leaves included among the stuff issued as ganja from the Khand- wa Government store. 25. The smoking of ganja is on the increase, especially among the labouring classes. I speak from general observation of four or five years past. I cannot say anything regarding former custom. I took no notice previously. 26. I estimate that only 20 per cent, of the ganja smokers are occasional consumers; the re- maining 80 per cent, are habitual consumers. I consider the whole 100 per cent, to be only mode- rate consumers. I know of' no excessive consu- mers. Excessive consumers are the rare excep- tions. 27. The labouring and artisan classes are habi- tual smokers of ganja, especially Goads, Pardhans, Nais (barbers), and masons. The hard work and the exposure lead them to refresh themselves with three or four whiffs of ganja a day. Under its influence they do not feel either the sun or fa- tigue. After a smoke of ganja, the smoker ceases to be thirsty or tired. 28. Ganja smokers, as a rule, only smoke ganja two, three, or four times a day. I have not come across any who smoke ganja more frequently. One pice worth of ganja, mixed with tobacco, is the usual fill of a pipe. As a rule, one person does nut smoke off such a pipeful himself; he smokes it with two or three others, passing the pipe round from one to another for a draw. In absence of any one to finish the smoke any habi- tual consumer could smoke off such a pipeful without its affecting his ability to proceed with his work or journey. 29. Tobacco is the only ingredient ordinarily mixed with the ganja. The proportion is about three parts ganja and one part tobacco. Just sufficient water is added to moisten these ingredi- ents, and enable the consumer to rub them well together with his thumb in the palm of his hand. No one smokes unmixed ganja; all mix tobacco with it. A few add a little opium to obtain a more staying exhilaration or intoxication148 Ganja smoking is confined chiefly to the male sex. Not more than 5 per cent of ganja smokers are women. Ganja smoking is not peculiar to any special age. Boys begin from 12 to 15, fol- lowing the example of their fathers and elders. 31. It is not easy to learn ganja smoking. People have to learn by degrees. A fellow takes 15 days or a month to learn to smoke ganja with appreciation and enjoyment. Once learnt, the habit of smoking ganja is difficult to give up. There is a tendency, but it is not a strong one, for moderate consumers to begin to smoke ganja to excess. I cannot recall any instances of consu- mers who have taken to smoking ganja to a ruinous excess, The great majority continue to be moderate consumers for life. 32. I know of no custom, social, or religious, involving consumption of ganja. 33. Among classes and families, who do not smoke ganja, it would be considered a disgrace if one of their sons was to take to ganja smoking, and he would be given the reproachful title of "ganjeri." But among classes accustomed to ganja, no such reproach attaches to the habit. It is only prejudice on their part, for half the male population indulge in ganja without injurious effect. I never heard of any custom of worshipping the ganja plant. I have, however, heard that some people consider ganja the (buti) flower of Mahadeo, and offer the flower (kali) of ganja in their worship of Mahadeo. But nothing of this kind has come across my personal observation. 34. It would be a serious privation to deprive habitual consumers of the ganja smoke to which they are accustomed. It would affect all their energies and their digestion, and lay them up more or less for a month. I say so from what I imagine. I have never known a case of the kind. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja. Is anything too difficult for the Sarkar? But let the Government first make certain that it is really for the good of the people to stop the use of ganja. If Government is satisfied on this point, two years' notice should be given by pro- clamation, that people may gradually accustom themselves to do with less and less ganja, till they can dispense with it altogether. I do not think the prohibition could be enforced by fine or im- prisonment. If ganja smoking were made punish- able, even after two years' proclamation, with fine of even Rs. 5, I apprehend that the jails would not be large enough to hold all the persons who would become liable to imprisonment. There would be a very general plotting to obtain the drug illicitly. Serious discontent would be roused, and there would certainly be riots. Probably about 50 per cent. of the present consumers of ganja would bow to the proclamation and give up smoking ganja, 30 per cent. would submit after making all the commotion and resis- tance they could, and 20 per cent would take to alcohol or opium instead. I do not, however, advise any such attempt to suppress the consumption of ganja. 36. Alcohol has certainly not begun to super- sede ganja in this district. One pice worth of ganja suffices for a chillum (pipe), which will re- fresh and invigorate three or four men. It would require a bottle of liquor to refresh them equally, and that would cost 2 annas or 2½ annas,149 58. I am satisfied with present excise arrange- ments as regards both ganja and bhang. I get what little bhang I use from friends returning from Marwar. There is no occasion to make foreign bhang more easy to buy. 65. I consider it unreasonable that the whole- sale vendor of ganja should be bound to sell to retail vendors at Rs. 3 per seer, while no restric- tion is placed on the amount which retail vendors may charge. The result is that the poor have to pay at the rate of Rs. 10 per seer. I think retail vendors should be restricted to a maximum charge not exceeding Rs. 5 per seer. This would be a great help to the poor, and not reduce Government revenue. It would not result in any injurious excess of ganja smoking. The labouring poor need their ganja, and it does them good and not harm. 69. There is no harm from a ganja shop that its location in a public place should be objected to, and no one entertains any such objection. It is a public convenience to have a ganja shop in the bazar. Oral evidence. Question 20.150 27. Class (a) includes chiefly hard-worked la- bourers, who take an occasional whiff of ganja, three or four times a day, to relieve their weariness, or just as they lie down at nights to set them asleep and assist digestion. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja for smoking purposes. Occasionally dhatura seed is mixed with ganja; this is by people who suffer from asthma; an exceptional few mix dhatura with ganja to enhance the intoxicating effect. Travel- ler-thieves are credited with administering dhatura with ganja to their victims; it makes them tem- porarily insane for about three days. No special bhang massala is sold for admixture with bhang. 30. About 20 per cent. of the ganja smokers smoke in private, and 80 per cent. in company. Out of every 100 consumers, about 10 per cent. are women, 20 per cent. are boys, 70 per cent. are men. Boys of the labouring and ganja smoking classes begin to smoke ganja from 12 years old and upwards: result of example, because they think it manly. 31. Smoking of ganja has to be learnt by de- grees. Beginners get the last whiff, or have to avoid taking a full whiff: they acquire the habit in two or three months, and become confirmed habituals after about a year. The habit once ac- quired is difficult to break off. If a smoker is deprived of his ganja, it affects his digestion, and his energies. As in the case of all intoxicants, the tendency is for moderate indulgence to in- crease, but not necessarily to excess. For instance, the 20 per cent. of consumers, whom I estimated to be habitual moderate consumers, are not likely to become habitual excessive consumers. They will probably require an extra whiff or more as they grow older, but having learnt to be habitual mo- derate consumers, they are not likely to become habitual excessive consumers. 32. There is no religious sanction for indul- gence in ganja or bhang. Consumers of their own wrong-headedness and wickedness do take their pipe of ganja, or lota of bhang, to the temples and pour some of the bhang as an oblation to the gods, but this is quite against religion. They also offer a piece of ganja flower (kali) as an offering. 33. The consumption of either ganja or bhang is considered disreputable. The terms "ganjhar," a regular ganja smoker, or "bhangar," a habitual drinker of bhang, are terms of reproach. A parent, not himself a consumer, would grieve if he caught his son taking to ganja. Even if the parents being addicted to ganja thought little of their son taking to it, employers of labour and others would disapprove it. The same reproach does not attach to the men occasionally partaking of a draught of bhang de- coction in the hot weather as a cooling drink. I never heard of any worship of the ganja plant. 34. I consider it would be a serious privation to the labouring classes to stop their smoking of ganja. Not only would they suffer from indiges- tion, sleeplessness and loss of energies for two or three months, but in the end, even they would not be able to undergo hard work or exposure as before, without fortifying themselves with some other stimulant. The labouring classes require their smoke of ganja. 35. The general consumption of ganja could be stopped by proclamation, allowing consumers a year's time to get over the habit by gradually lessening their consumption. After that, absti- nence could be enforced by fine, not exceeding Rs. 50, with imprisonment in default of payment. The habitual ganja smokers would be driven to take opium or liquor instead. Their dissatisfaction would be exceeded. by the satisfaction of the majority of ganja consumers thus forced to give up the habit. There would be no fear of a mutiny or the like from stoppage of ganja smoking; there would be much abuse of the Government and its officers by the ganja smokers, but no real danger to the State is to be apprehended from them. 36. Alcohol is certainly not superseding ganja as a stimulant. Who accustomed to intoxication or stimulant at 1 pie, which is about the price of sufficient ganja, would give that up to take to liquor at 4 annas an intoxication? Certainly not the poor labouring classes. No one, rich or poor, would give up ganja willingly to indulge in al- cohol. 39. The smoking of ganja is more injurious than the drinking of a decoction of bhang. More people fall into excess over ganja than over bhang. If either ganja or bhang be indulged in to excess, the evil effects are alike. People go off their head from both. 40. The only medicinal use of ganja or bhang that I know of is in the form of ointment prepared from bhang for poor patients. Native hakims also prescribe a mild decoction of bhang to counter- act or smother the violence of a fever. Ganja, as distinct from bhang, is not prescribed medicinally that I know of. For the method of preparing bhang ointment, see my answer to Question 19. 41. Ganja smokers certainly claim for ganja that it is good for digestion. It is also certain that, if habitual ganja smokers are deprived of their ganja, their digestive organs go all wrong. Ganja also does certainly give staying-power under severe exertion or exposure. A ganja smoker, for instance, could walk straight on and for a longer distance than a non-smoker. This is why the labouring classes so generally smoke ganja. Also ganja certainly enables the Gond to live under conditions of bad water, and malarial exhalations, which would soon kill a non-smoker of ganja. The habitual moderate consumers of ganja among the labouring classes and jungle tribes certainly benefit from ganja smoking. It is for the sedentary classes, and for those who are not subjected to bodily fatigue and exposure, that ganja smoking is not beneficial. 42. I do consider that the smoking of ganja is positively beneficial to the poor, who have to work hard in the open under exposure. With the help of a smoke of ganja, the labourer suffers neither from cold nor wet, despite insufficient clothing. 43. The moderate ganja smokers give no trouble to their neighbours. It is only occasional exces- sive smokers, and persons unaccustomed to ganja, who make themselves offensive under its influence. 44. I have no personal experience, but I have noticed the effect of a smoke of ganja upon the habitual moderate consumer. He returns refreshed to his work, and applies himself to it with zest; the effect does not make him spoil his work, or carry it out less intelligently. It allays hunger151 according to the man's habit. If he is in the habit of smoking ganja twice a day, the effect will last till his time comes round for another smoke. When it ceases to last so long, he will take to smoking three or four times a day to re- new the effect. It is not usual to smoke ganja more than four times a day; the effect of more frequent indulgence is injurious. The moderate habitual consumer will become disinclined and unfit for work if he misses his smoke of ganja, and he will have a longing for another smoke. As for bhang, I have noticed that in the hot weather many people drink a decoction of bhang as a cooling and refreshing beverage. It does not incapacitate the moderate consumer in any way; it creates appetite instead of allaying it. Such drinkers do not indulge more than once a day, generally about 4 P.M. It induces a motion, moves the bowels moderately, and after this the occasional consumer returns with appetite for his food, and goes refreshed to business. The intox- icating effect passes off after half an hour. I have no experience of habitual consumers of bhang, or of persons who indulge to excess. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja does not impair the constitution. On the contrary, it sus- tains the body under hard work and fatigue. The poor merely smoke ganja to sustain them at their work, and fortify them against the exposure, which would otherwise injure them. So long as they continue to get their accustomed smoke of ganja, it does not injure their digestion or lessen their appetite for food. It does not cause either dysentery, bronchitis or asthma; it is only exces- sive indulgence in ganja that causes asthma; mode- ate indulgence has no such effect on the working man. For the labouring man the habitual moderate consumption of ganja neither induces laziness, immorality or debauchery. It only has such effect on the man of sedentary or idle habits. For the man who works hard out of doors, ganja, in mode- ration, is good; for the man who lives an in-door life, it is bad. I believe it is only persons of se- dentary in-door habits, and indulgers in ganja to excess who become insane from the effects of ganja. I have no personal knowledge of such cases. 46. The excessive consumer goes off his head, and speaks nonsense, and becomes violent and ag- gressive, and his constitution becomes enfeebled, and he coughs day and night. 47. Habitual moderate use of ganja is general in this district among the labouring classes, but it does not affect their children in any way. They are just as healthy and strong as children should be. I never heard of their inheriting a craving for ganja; but they do take to ganja, generally in moderation, as they see their fathers and seniors do. 48. Excessive indulgence in ganja enfeebles the man and his seed. I cannot call to mind any child- ren whose feebleness of constitution I can attribute to their fathers having been excessive consumers of ganja. Neither in any assembly of children could a person pick out any as the children of in- dulgers in ganja to excess. 49. Ganja does not excite to sexual indulgence. On the contrary, it stops sexual desire, and it is, for this very reason, that Bairagis, Gossains and fakirs are great ganja smokers. The moderate indulgence in ganja has no such effect on the out-door workers. On the contrary, it is notorious that our Gonds and hard working labourers have large families. 50. Excessive indulgence in ganja does make a man impotent, and that is why fakirs and others, who have given up thoughts of this world, take to ganja, so as to liberate their desires and enable them to concentrate their thought on duty and the next world. 51. The habitual moderate consumption of ganja does not operate in any degree to develop or en- courage a disposition to crime. The mass of the labouring classes in this district are moderate and habitual ganja smokers, and the effect on men is the very reverse; it enables and disposes them to work hard, and that is what they smoke ganja for. Of course, habitual criminals, like others, indulge in ganja, but their criminal habits are not due to ganja. 52. Excessive indulgence in ganja would dis- qualify the habitual criminal just as it does any one else. Excessive indulgence in ganja has no connection with crime. 53. I never heard of any man killing people under influence of homicidal frenzy, the result of ganja. The murders in these parts are on account of women or for gain, and I have heard of mur- ders under influence of alcohol, but not from effects of ganja. Our ganja smokers are not particularly addicted to violent crime; on the con- trary, the patient industry of the Gond is proverb- ial. I have heard of bhang being used to incite to crime, and of bhang drinkers breaking out in homicidal frenzy, but there is no bhang drinking to speak of in this district. 54. I have never heard of persons smoking ganja to fortify their courage before commencing a premeditated crime. Ganja would incapacitate the would-be criminal, who is not an habitual. Criminals, like other people, smoke ganja, if from custom they feel the need of it. 55. It is a practice of criminals to induce intend- ed victims to join in a smoke. They pretend the pipe is of tobacco only, but it contains ganja. The effect of even one whiff of ganja upon a person unaccustomed to it, is to cause instant stupefaction, when he can be robbed with impu- nity. Dhatura seed is mixed with the drug to disable the victim more completely, and prevent his recovering for two or three days. Even, with- out dhatura, a person misled into inhaling ganja would remain insensible for a whole day. 56. There are four or five persons in Sewan who mix ganja with opium and chew it. They are hardened consumers, but poor, so adopt this mixture to effect intoxication at small expense. They are enfeebled people, with ruined constitu- tions. 58. I have no improvement on present excise system to suggest as regards ganja. It is just as well that bhang is not readily pro- curable. 63. It seems to me a defect that the wholesale vendor has to supply retail vendors at Rs.3 a seer, whereas the retail vendors are allowed to charge what they like, and do, as a matter of fact, realize at Rs.10 a seer. If the retail price were greatly reduced, there would be objection that consump- tion is encouraged. But, if the consumers have to pay Rs.10 per seer, it does not seem to me good administration that Government should get no more than the Rs. 2-8 a seer or thereabouts, which the wholesale vendor pays to Government. When the money is going, Government should arrange to get the lion's share. If ganja were issued from the Government stores in ¼-seer bags, corresponding with the opium cakes, and issued
152 from the treasury direct to retail vendors, as opium is now sold, it would be easy for Govern- ment to realise Rs. 2 per ¼-seer bag, or Rs. 8 per seer. It would be requisite, however, to ensure careful and honest selection of only the first class ganja for these ¼-seer bags at the Government stores. At present, Tahsildars are subjected to great waste of time in cleaning the ganja issued by sackfuls from the Khandwa store. It would pay Government well to cause effective and honest selection there. It would be easy to provide damp and rat-proof store places at every treasury. The ¼-seer bags should be sealed at the central store when filled. 68. Ganja is not a drug for which people col- lect in shops or houses to smoke together. The habitual ganja smokers must have their whiff three or four times a day, and they carry it about with them. It never has been the custom for consumers of ganja to collect in the shops to smoke it together on the premises. The prohibi- tion of smoking ganja in shop premises has, there- fore, had no particular effect. 69. There are no complaints against the loca- tion of ganja shops. People have no objection to location of a ganja shop in a bazar. On the con- trary, it is a convenience. The shop is no nui- sance, for objectionable people do not assemble at or hang about the ganja shop. Ganja smoking is so common, that there is no prejudice against the shop. 79. Evidence* of HUSEN KHAN, 153 bhang in the hot weather, especially at the season of Holi. The ganja smokers will not take this bhang; I keep what the ganja smokers refuse all the year round, and sell it to those who want bhang in the Holi season. 25. Since the cultivation of ganja was stopped 16 or 17 years ago, there has been a great de- crease in the consumption of ganja. Latterly the sale of Government ganja has been increasing, but I consider this is attributable to increased sup- pression of illicit ganja. Sixteen or seventeen years ago, a pice weight of ganja could be bought for one pice; now it costs one anna; of course this enhancement of price has checked consump- tion. 26. Of the 500 consumers of ganja in Seoni town, I estimate 300 or 60 per cent. to be habi- tual smokers, and 200 or 40 per cent. occasional smokers. The excessive consumers are a small minority; say 25 or 5 per cent. of the total are habitual excessive consumers, and 10 or 12, say 2 to 2½ per cent. are occasional excessive consumers. The consumption of ganja is much more pre- valent in the district than in the town. I have shops in the interior of the district, so know. The Gonds, Pardhans, and labouring classes form the bulk of the rural population. I estimate that ¾ of the rural males are most of them habitual consumers of ganja. Out of the 75 per cent. of rural males, I estimate that 70 per cent. are habi- tual consumers, and only 5 per cent. are occasional consumers. The rural consumers seldom indulge to excess; they are habituated to the drug and have hard outdoor work, and, as a rule, only in- dulge in moderation. A Gond cultivator will buy 4 annas worth at a time, and use it frugally, so as to last 8 days, each day taking no more than the usual quantum. They renew their supplies at the weekly bazars. 27. The labouring classes and the artizans and the working agriculturists are the chief consumers of ganja. Those who have to work hard in the open air are the people who require and take ganja; it removes their fatigue and fortifies them to resist wet and cold, and even heat. 28. The average consumption of ganja by a labourer, who is a habitual moderate consumer, is one pice worth, or the weight of a 2-anna piece in ganja. This allowance merely sustains and invigorates him; it does not incapacitate him in any way for work, but, on the contrary, makes him work all the better. Sixty per cent. of the consumers only use a pice worth a day, or less. Twenty per cent. consume an average of 1½ pice worth a day. Twenty per cent. consume an average of 2 pice worth a day. This last include well-to-do men, who do not consume all they buy themselves, but treat their neighbours. It is the exception for ganja smokers to con- sume more. Some Gossains and even Musalmans and Kayeths consume a tola weight of ganja per diem. This is excessive. About 5 per cent. of the consumers are habitual excessive consumers of this class. 29. Tobacco is the ingredient generally mixed with ganja for a smoke. No one smokes ganja by itself. The general proportion is about 3 parts ganja to 1 part tobacco. A few add 2½ seeds of black dhatura seed with the ganja. Those who wish to increase the intoxicating effect do so; also persons suffering from cough and asthma add dhatura in their ganja to relieve the cough. About 5 per cent. of ganja consumers use dhatura with their ganja, and 2½ seeds is the recognized addition per pipe. Still fewer add a little opium to the ganja for their smoke; they do so to relieve looseness of bowels and ease a cough. About 1 per per cent. of consumers use a little opium with their ganja. Two or four persons in Seoni town add madak to ganja to get a very intoxicating smoke; they call this mixture "bharra." The only motive for this is to enhance the intoxicating effect, and none but seasoned habituals can stand this mixture. Nothing is sold as "bhang massala" in Seoni. 30. Ganja smoking is a sociable custom. As a general rule, the man who fills a pipe of ganja (with tobacco) for a smoke, passes the pipe round to three or four companions. This is the general custom. Only about 5 per cent. of the con- sumers will smoke out a pipe by himself. Ganja smoking is confined mainly to the male sex. Only about 5 per cent. of the consumers are women, and those are only women of loose charac- ter. The women-folk of ganja smoking Gonds do not smoke ganja. It is considered very dis- reputable in a woman. Ganja is not smoked with any idea of increasing sexual vigour; the ganja smoker smokes to put himself to sleep, or to refresh himself when fatigued and enable him to work on. Boys, the sons of smokers, begin to smoke ganja when they go out to work with their fathers or caste-fellows. Ganja smoking is not special to any age. 31. Ganja smoking has to be acquired gradually. A boy takes about 15 days to learn. The elders begin by giving him only the last draw at the pipe, and he does not take a full whiff at first. The habit of smoking ganja, once it is acquired, is a difficult one to break off. Only about 5 per cent. of the ganja smokers develop into excessive consumers. The bulk remain habitual moderate consumers. The proportion of people who get ruined from excessive indulgence is much smaller in the case of ganja than of other stimulants. I know be- cause for some 18 years I have been a vendor of opium and madak as well as ganja. The pro- portions to develop consumption to excess are in my opinion about 5 per. cent. for ganja, 10 per. cent. for opium, and 50 per cent. for madak. From general observation, I estimate that 10 per cent. of the consumers of liquor (alcohol) take to drinking to excess. 32. I know of no custom, social or religious, involving the consumption of ganja. At the Shivaratri time, Hindus of the ganja-smoking classes offer a little ganja in the Mahadeo temples, but smoking is no part of this custom. Also it is their custom similarly to offer a little ganja at the Chitarai Debis or collections of stones with rags tied to some tree above. They offer either a cock, or a cocoanut, or some ganja. It is a custom among travellers. These Chitarai Debis are in the open, and the travellers have a smoke at the same time. They do not smoke in the Mahadeo temples. 33. Those classes, who do not themselves in- dulge in ganja, consider the smoking of it to be disreputable. For instance, the Musalman community think it wrong of me even to sell ganja. There are Musalmans who smoke ganja, and these are considered disreputable. Similarly, many Brahmins smoke ganja, but those who do not do so blame those who do. No one is ever turned out of caste for merely begin- ning to smoke ganja, but Brahmins and Banias vol. vi. z
154 excommunicate any of their caste fellows who take to alcohol, and so do Musalmans. But similar measure is not dealt out to ganja smokers. I never heard of any worship of the ganja plant. 34. It would be a serious privation to a ganja smoker to forego his smoke. If a man has not money to buy ganja, he will go to a friend or some free-handed smoker and ask for a whiff. Deprivation of such smoking in the case of an habitual smoker throws his digestion quite out of order, causes a swelling of the stomach, and deprives him of appetite. The man gets pains in his arms and legs, and cannot work as before; he soon gets tired. I have seen such cases often when consumers have been out of money; they come begging to me for ganja to get them up to go to work again, saying they have been off work for want of ganja. This is the case with all habitual consumers. 35. The Government could stop the consump- tion of ganja155 51. It is the case that budmashes and habitual criminals do smoke ganja to give them increased courage and indurance for commission of crime, and escape afterwards. They smoke ganja for the same reasons in fact that the hard working labour- ers do156 3. In the principal town of Gonda, Bahraich in North-Western Provinces, bhang and ganja plants grow spontaneously. 4. The plants are respectively known as bhang and ganja plants. 5. The wild plants of bhang and ganja and common "pathar " (hemp plant) of this province can be grown in any land. It is a common say- ing that the plant is most shameless, as it will grow in any land without any care, but the suitable land for the best ganja plant called " baluchar" is in Lower Bengal. 6. Scattered, like weeds, such as "chakutra," etc. 7. Yes, (a) for production of ganja in Nimar district only, where the area of 940 acres 1 rood were under cultivation during the year 1892-93; (b) foreign importation; (c) also foreign import- ation. In this province the leaves, which are collected from the male, or fallen off leaves of the female plants, and sold by the vendors as bhang, is not genuine bhang, and is not used as such by the well-to-do or even middle class, excepting the very poor people who occasionally use it as a spurious article. 8. Statement of ganja cultivation in Central Provinces, from 1882-83 to 1892.93. YEARS. CULTIVATION IN NAGPUR. CULTIVATION IN NIMAR. Total area under cultivation in Central Provinces. Total quantity received in central stores, Central Provinces. Area under culti- vation. Quantity received in central stores. Area under culti- vation. Quantity received in central stores. A. R. P. M. S. C. A. R. P. M. S. C. A. R. P. M. S. C. 1882-83 93 0 8 632 8 0 832 0 0 3,388 34 4 925 0 8 4,021 2 4 1883-84 91 1 28 457 34 10 1,053 0 0 5,898 24 0 1,144 1 28 6,356 18 10 1884-85 328 0 0 9,36 34 0 2,553 0 0 8,483 27 0 2,881 0 0 9,450 21 0 1885-86 543 1 8 2,292 26 0 3,627 0 21 16,679 5 0 4,170 1 29 18,971 31 0 1886-87 98 2 0 834 14 0 833 0 0 8,455 33 0 931 2 0 9,290 7 0 1887-88 38 3 28 625 31 0 485 3 32 4,124 28 0 524 3 20 4,750 19 0 1888-89 79 10 33 377 0 0 858 2 32 9,449 30 0 940 1 25 9,826 30 0 1889-90 38 3 18 311 36 0 954 0 0 10,854 15 0 992 3 18 11,166 11 0 1890-91 520 3 0 7,224 6 0 520 3 0 7,224 6 0 1891-92 653 3 0 6,684 33 0 653 3 0 6,684 33 0 1892-93 940 1 0 6,685 33 0 940 1 0 6,685 33 0 9. I have no personal knowledge of cultivation of these plants, but very interesting account is given in the Dictionary of the Economic Products of India, pages 103 to 126, Volume II. 10. No, they are the same as the other agricul- tural cultivators. 11. Yes. 13. The cultivation of hemp plant for ganja is now restricted in Nimar district only. Formerly it was cultivated in other districts, the last culti- vation was prohibited by the authority in Nagpur district during the year 1889-90, Regarding its growth, please see Answer No. 5. 14. (a) from ganja plant prepared no articles. From (c) bhang, majum is prepared. In Nagpur Nimar, Hoshangabad, Narsinghpur, Jabalpur, Damoh and Saugor districts of this province majum is prepared, and following numbers of licenses for retail sale of this preparation were granted and license fees received during the years 1882-83 to 1892-93. YEARS. Number of licenses for retail sale of majum in Central Provinces. License fees received on majum in Central Provinces. R a. p. 1882-83 17 632 1 4 1883-84 20 632 8 0 1884-85 19 804 8 0 1885-86 21 1,152 8 0 1886-87 21 1,500 0 0 1887-88 21 1,695 14 0 1888-89 22 951 0 0 1889-90 23 976 0 0 1890-91 24 836 8 0 1891-92 25 782 12 0 1892-93 36 1,075 4 0 16. Bhang (subji) is generally prepared by the people in their own houses, but it is also sold prepared ready by Brahmin vendors in Bombay, Allahabad, Cawnpur, Mathura, Benares and many other large towns in India, Yes, bhang can be prepared from any bhang plant, whether of wild or country. Products from the wild hemp plants, either of ganja or bhang, will not be so effective and flavoury as properly cultivated one. 17. Bhang (subji) and majum when sold in bazars is prepared by Brahmins only. There is no restriction to ganja; the chillum of ganja can be prepared by any smoking class of people. 18. Ganja and bhang will keep good for ten years if properly protected from moisture and packed in wooden boxes and earthen chatties. New ganja and old bhang are always appreciated by the consuming class. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking by almost all the habitual and occasional moderate consu- mers, and the smoke inhaled deeply and retained by the habitual excessive consumers. 20. More than 50 per cent. of male members of almost all (excepting Christians, Parsis and high caste Muhammadans and Brahmins) in the villages resort to ganja, but not so extensively used in the towns. Generally they commence at the age of 12 to 15; and, as a rule, females do not use it. 21. Flat ganja (kali) is preferable to chur. Round ganja is not obtainable here. But balu- chur of Lower Bengal is the best quality, and is consequently much dearer than the pathar of this province. 22. Charas is a foreign product, and generally brought by Kabulis and Punjabi dealers. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24 (a) Bhang leaves are also eaten along with jaggery by habitual drinkers while travelling and when it is inconvenient to make subji on the road. (b) Most of the wealthy and middle class of the Hindu community (Brahmins included) drink bhang. 25. The use of bhang as well as ganja is in increase in this province.
157 Statement of ganja sold through holesale vendors to retail vendors and amount realised in Seoni District, and total sale of bhang and ganja in Central Provinces from year 1882-83 to 1892-93. YEARS. GANJA SOLD IN SEONI. BIIANG SOLD IN CENTRAL PROVINCES. Ganja sold in whole Central Provinees. Total amount received for the sale of ganja, bhang, majum, etc., in the whole Central Provinees. Ganja sold in Seoni district only. Amount received in Seoni district. Bhang sold in whole Central Provinces. Amount received for bhang in whole Central Provinces. M. S. C. R. a. p. M. S. C. R. a. p. Maunds. R 1882-83 50 22 6 9,176 15 0 10 31 7 851 7 9 610 1,11,095 1883-84 63 6 15 9,978 7 8 9 29 0 769 10 0 757 1,29,207 1884-85 74 32 12 12,872 12 6 11 20 14 924 14 6 845 1,62,340 1885-86 65 34 9 14,752 1 4 9 13 8 747 1 0 1,005 1,92,679 1886-87 57 5 12 14,079 14 6 10 30 0 860 1 0 863 2,12,691 1887-88 64 33 8 14,485 10 6 10 19 2 838 10 0 831 1,90,528 1888-89 67 12 4 16,412 10 6 12 6 7 973 0 3 941 2,00,168 1889-90 68 12 8 16,344 11 0 10 18 5 837 10 6 971 2,02,429 1890-91 68 6 0 17,078 10 0 10 14 15 829 14 0 1,019 2,12,580 1891-92 82 39 11 19,027 3 6 12 9 1 976 14 0 1,156 2,29,251 1892-93 79 17 14 19,790 11 0 13 22 12 1,085 13 9 1,194 2,54,931 26 Ganja158 ganja is burnt in the house of the dead person, the smoke of which is supposed to reach the spirit of the dead. In the first instance the followers of the god Shiva are bound to give the offering, and is there- fore an essential ceremony. As for the Gonds, the funeral ceremony described above is followed invariably. In Shivaratri holiday, bhang is used to a great extent compared to ganja, and the consumption is temperate only except in rare cases; and these occa- sional indulgences could not be supposed to form into any habit or prove injurious. 33. Upon a social point of view, amongst the Hindus of middle and higher classes, a ganja con- sumer would be looked down somewhat, but a bhang consumer will not in the least lose his pres- tige, whereas, amongst the Muhammadans, the consumer of anything intoxicating, being a high sin, the consumer of any of these drugs amongst them would be looked down very badly. Amongst the high caste, or orthodox Hindus, a ganja or bhang consumer would not be looked upon on a reli- gious point of view, but if the consumer takes liquor then he is at once outcasted. Hemp plant is not actually worshipped by the Hindus, but in the Veda it is reckoned with soma plant as one of the five plants " which were liber- ators of sin," viz., pimpal, bar tree, odumbar tree, pains tree, and soma. The witness thinks that, properly speaking, the real soma plant is our bhang plant, but to keep this secret from the public, fabulous description of the soma plant of Vedas and homa plant of Zend is given, though the effects of these three (soma, homa, and bhang plant) are the same when prepared in a peculiar manner. 34. Yes, it will be serious privation to the labour- ing class of habitual moderate and excessive consu- mers of ganja and bhang, as they will not be able to work and support their families and could not get some cheaper drugs to satisfy their longings. 35. It is not advisable to prohibit the use of ganja or bhang. It is the only narcotic stimu- lants for middle and poor classes. It will occasion serious discontent among the consumers, and in the Native States, where the cultivation is grown. The prohibition will be followed by recourse to dhatura seed, somal, wachhnag, and kuchla only. The result will be something like the Govenment introducing more idiotcy all over, as the mass of people will not be able to pay for dearer alcoholic stimulants, and in what repute the liquor is held, I have already expressed the native opinion in No. 33. 36. It is quite the reverse. According to my experience as an Abkari Contractor, people are leaving off the habit of drinking liquors day by day, and are resorting to ganja instead, as this drug is much cheaper than the country spirit. The following statement will prove the same: 159 constitution, nor injure digestion or cause loss of appetite, nor produce dysentery or bronchitis or asthma, nor impair moral sense or induce laziness or immoral habits, much less debauchery, neither it deadens the intellect or produces insanity. 46. Habitual excessive use of ganja will bring all the miseries enumerated in the Question No. 45, the unfortunate being a curse to his own exist- ence, and there is strong presumption to believe the fact that medicine loses its efficacy during any serious illness of the consumer. 49. Yes, moderate use of ganja or bhang will tend to produce aphrodisiacal effects. In rare cases ganja is smoked by prostitutes. The excessive use of bhang and ganja will tend to produce impo- tence. 50. The excessive use of ganja and bhang will destroy all the aphrodisiacal desires. Yes, exces- sive use of ganja and bhang will bring on impo- tency. 51. Among bad characters, 40 to 50 per cent might be taken as habitual moderate consumers, and as the moderate use of ganja and bhang has the power to concentrate the thought, according to our own mood; and the explanation given in Answer No. 41, will tend to prove the connection between crime and the moderate use of ganja and bhang. 52. The excessive use of ganja destroys all activity, and the consumers have no opportunity to do anything, good or bad. 53. No, the excessive use of ganja and bhang incapacitates the consumers, and does not cause homicidal frenzy. 54. Bhang and ganja will seldom be used by criminals as a means to fortify their courage. 55. There are certain classes of criminals who induce their victims to smoke ganja in order to rob them. If the victim is a non-consumer, the effect of an ordinary ganja chillum will completely stupefy him, and he will be at the mercy of his oppressor, but if the victim is a moderate or excessive consumer of ganja, then 2½ seeds of dhatura mixed in the chillum toil completely stupefy him. Bhang is not generally resorted to for this purpose, neither it stupefies completely without admixture of dhatura seeds. Please see Answer No. 39, regarding the effects of bhang. 56. The use of ganja and bhang, in addition to other admixture, is described in my Answers to Nos. 29 and 55. The admixture of dhatura for personal consumption is to obtain more intoxica- tion; while administered to others, it is chiefly done for the purpose of stupefaction. 58. As far my opinion goes, I think the Govern- ment system of farming the ganja sale of whole- sale and retail, though it increases the revenue annually, has now come to its zenith, and the time is not distant when the revenue will go down. Each year, at the time of selling the monopoly, a new contractor comes to the front and retires after his contract is completed, drawing a new person after him. If the old contractor had any profits, he would not have allowed the new man to take up his business for the sake of few extra rupees. Properly speaking the Government actually receive Rs. 6-0-7 on every seer of ganja sold to the poor retail vendor in Seoni district, or Rs. 5-5-5 on every seer of ganja and its products sold all over the Central Provinces during the year 1892-93 before it went in the hands of retail vendors of the province. 68. There are no shops where the preparation of bhang is consumed on the premises, and it is my opinion that such houses should not be en- couraged. 69. Properly speaking people, even in large towns, have no interest in the matter, and are quite careless where you open a shop. 81. Evidence of BIJRAJ, Marwari, Wholesale ganja vendor, Kamptee, Nagpur District. 1. I have been wholesale ganja vendor for many districts in the Central Provinces for the last 15 years. 2. These definitions may be accepted for the Central Provinces. The names given are locally applicable. Bhang is also known as "thandai." 3. I don't know of any such districts. 5. I don't know about this. 6. No knowledge. 7. Cultivation of the hemp plant is permitted in the Khandwa Tahsil of the Nimar district for purposes (a), and (d) seeds. 8. None to my knowledge; only ordinary fluc- tuations. 9. No knowledge. 10. No; they are of same class as other agri- culturists. 11 and 12, No. 13. Yes. Nimar district. Because ganja has been always grown there, and because the average rainfall is very small, which is favourable for such cultivation. Such cultivation would be im- possible in the rice districts, e.g., Chhatisgarh and wherever there is much rainfall. 14. Only (a) ganja. In the Nimar district. Upwards of 5,000 maunds yearly. 15. The cultivated plant is pressed under foot, useless leaves fall off, and the remaining ganja is then used for smoking. Local preparations are not used for eating or drinking. 16. (a) to (c) No. 17. The only preparation in these provinces is ganja, as before stated. It is prepared by ordinary agriculturists. 18. I don't know about charas. Ganja and bhang quite lose their effect after 2 years. The resinous properties dry up. No special measures are possible to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja is generally used for smoking, but a preparation called majum is also made there- from, and eaten chiefly in the larger towns. 20. Labouring classes generally; Hindu men- dicants of all sorts; Muhammadan fakirs; a small proportion of the agricultural class; also a few of the middle and upper classes. Charas is not used. No particular locality. 21. Flat, such as is produced in Nimar. 22. None is used. 23. No.
160 24. It is seldom eaten except in travelling. Marwaris, Brahmins, Khatris, Pardesis of all classes, drink bhang. Of these castes about 75 per cent. drink it. 25. The use of bhang is much the same as formerly; but the use of ganja appears to be on the increase, because less smuggled ganja from Feudatory States, etc., is obtained. Thus the increased consumption of ganja too is more ap- parent than real. 26. Almost all the labouring classes and agri- culturists are habitual moderate consumers of ganja. Almost all mendicants and fakirs are habitual excessive consumers. Most of the middle and upper classes came under (c). Consumers of bhang are confined chiefly to the upper middle class, under (a) only. 27. The classes are explained above in 26. The practice is induced by the fact of its being a stimulant to exertion, and counteracting fatigue like alcohol. 28. (a) From 6 pies to 1 anna. (b) About 4 annas. 29. Ordinarily tobacco. Exceptionally dha- tura, to make it very strong. Yes; black pepper, almonds, cardamoms, rose leaves dried, cucumber seeds, aniseed, sugar, milk. 30. The labouring and upper middle classes generally smoke in solitude. The mendicant classes in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex: not to any particular time of life. Children occasionally drink bhang. Prostitutes frequently smoke ganja: those who don't sing. 31. (a) It is easily formed. (b) Difficult to break off. (c) No. 32. The names of several deities are invoked before consuming ganja or bhang. At the Shiva- ratri festival, the god Shiva is bathed with bhang; this is considered essential. It is generally tem- perate, adopted only by those who have already formed the habit. Not particularly injurious. 33. The total abstainers regard it as a vice, others don't. The opinion of the former is based on the fact of its being an intoxicant to some extent. Charas is looked down upon, but its use is not prevalent in these provinces. No custom exists of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. Most certainly, to all habitual consumers. They would rather forego food. [I can't answer the other part of the question.] 35. (a No. (b) Yes. (c) Not at all. (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes, by those who can afford it, and are not prejudiced by caste. 36. No. 37. The effects of the former are more active and last longer. 38. Only the flat kind is consumed in these provinces. 39. Smoking is less injurious, the effect passing off more rapidly. 40. No knowledge. 41. (a) Yes. (b) and (c) Yes. All classes of consumers. I refer to the moder- ate habitual use. 42. Beneficial as described in Answer 41. 43. Yes. 44. (a) to (e) All these effects are produced. ( f) The effect lasts for an hour or two. (g) No after-effects. (h) Yes. 45. (a) to (e) No. (f) No. I don't know whether insanes confess to the use of the drug. ( g) No knowledge. 46. The habitual excessive consumer sometimes becomes emaciated, with a tendency to chest complaints; but I do not think that any mental or moral injury results. 47. No. 48. Not hereditary in this case either. 49. (a) No. (b) Yes. (c) No knowledge. (d) No. 50. Excessive use of charas might produce im- potence. 51. (a) No. (b) None. 52. Unless dhatura is mixed with the drug, I don't think it would act as an incentive to crime. 53. Only as above. No. 54. I am not aware of such use. 55. (a) Not to my knowledge. (b) No. 56. The admixture of dhatura in any way is liable to produce excitement akin to madness. 57. I have not sufficient knowledge to reply to this. 58. It works well. I cannot suggest any im- provement. 60. No modification required. 63. No objection. 64. No. 65. Taxation reasonable. 66. No, only one kind here. 67. No. 68. No special prohibition exists against this. The prohibition is sound. 69. The wishes and requirements are considered by the District Officer, as they ought to be. 70. No; there is very little smuggling. As a rule duty is paid on ganja and other hemp drugs used.
161 82. Evidence of LALA RAMSAHI AND LALA SITARAM, Abkari Contractors, Nagpur. 19. Charas is used only in smoking, and ganja is used in smoking as well as in eating and drinking, but turning it into different form, such as bhang and majum, in almost all places. 20. Charas is used much in Northern India, while ganja only is used in Central Provinces and nearly ¼th of the population is addicted to it. Sages, people of low caste, and labourers generally use it (ganja) in the Central Provinces. 21. Chur ganja is more intoxicating, and there- fore it is liked much for smoking, but it not being available in Central Provinces, flat ganja, which is produced here, is used in its place, Chur ganja is used in Northern India. Round ganja is consi- dered to be inferior, and therefore not used. 22. Native charas is used generally. In the Central Provinces it is not used at all. 23. Bhang is not used in smoking. 24. Bhang is generally used in the whole of India, but it is used much in Marwar and Northern India. Nearly half of the population must have been using it in drinking only. In eating it is rarely used. All classes of people drink it, but Marwaris and Hindustani Brahmins use it much in drinking. 25. Day by day all these drugs are used much, because a man is intoxicated in a very little ex- pense. 26. Ganja is used by162 he nominally sells at an average of Rs. 10 a seer, but he cheats his customers as far as he can in the weights and gets Rs. 12 a seer. 45. Fifteen days ago I saw a man, Naga Baba, smoke himself alone in two hours a pound of ganja. At the end of it he was quite in his senses and could sit upright and speak, and he ate food that evening. 33. Strong disapprobation is felt in respectable circles against the habit of ganja smoking, because ganja is generally smoked by low and disreputable persons. 35. I think it will be impossible to stop ganja altogether. It would always be smuggled in from somewhere. In my contract, I remember, when the price of ganja went up, the Madras Re- giment stationed here smuggled ganja from Bellary in boxes of dried fish. Again, if we raised our duty, we should have ganja smuggled in from such States as Panna and Maihar. The price of ganja there now is from 8 annas to Re. 1, but I believe the smuggling from there is very small. 45. I think that the ganja habit is more inju- rious than the opium or the country liquor habit. Ganja intoxication is instantaneous in most cases, not gradual like that induced by other drugs. 84. Evidence of SHEW NARAIN, Bajpai Brahmin, Public Works Contractor, Jabalpur. 41. I think the habit of ganja smoking to be beneficial to the poor labouring classes, but injuri- ous to the well-to-do. The former cannot afford to buy much, and they work off the effects, so that they derive no harm from it. The latter suffer in health; they get a persistent cough, and their blood dries up (sic). 33. A respectable man will incur social odium if he takes ganja in public with regular ganja smokers, but not if he takes a little in the pri- vacy of his own house. 53. I have never had any experience of any person having lost his reason or committed any crime of violence in consequence of over-indul- gence in ganja. 25. I cannot give any opinion whether the con- sumption of ganja here is on the increase or no. 65. I am opposed to any increase in the duty, because I believe that people who have formed the habit will obtain the drug somehow, by smuggling if they cannot get it otherwise. 35. I should deprecate the total abolition of ganja. Many working people would be wholly unable to work without it: neither opium nor country liquor would satisfy their cravings. 32. Bhang is drunk by all Hindus at several religious festivals, such as the Ram Lila. Ganja is not smoked in connection with any religious festival or family ceremony, as far as I have ever heard.
163 EVIDENCE OF MADRAS WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of THE HONOURABLE MR. C. S. CROLE, Member, Board of Revenue. Oral evidence. I am a Member of the Board of Revenue, and have been over thirty years in the Civil Service. I have been in connection from September 1889 up to December last with the excise as Commis- sioner of Excise, having at the same time a num- ber of other subjects under my charge. I can give no information regarding the extent of the use of the drugs apart from the returns of auction sales. But these are not reliable. They under- state the extent of use notwithstanding the large increase that took place two years ago, inasmuch as any one may, under existing law, have plants in his back-yard in certain districts where the custom of the inhabitants or climate has led to this. I do not think that hemp would grow to profit in the low-lying hot districts of the east coast. The extreme south, the Wynaad, the Javari Hills in North Arcot, practically the whole of the Kistna district, and the agency tracts in the hill tracts, from five hundred to three thousand feet above the sea, are the places where it seems to be generally grown. Of course I am only speak- ing from general knowledge, as it was determined not to introduce any crucial restrictions. I have no reason to suppose that consumption is on the increase; but I should think that the probabilities are that it is on the decrease, because under the regulations a healthy liquor is available in toddy; and distilled liquor and probably drugs also have suffered. Toddy has been driving out distilled liquor, I find, and as I have no ground to suspect increase in drugs, I fancy the same opera- tion is going on there. The toddy traffic has been placed under strict regulation. A better liquor is provided; and there is no possibility now of forcing the sale of distilled liquor against fer- mented liquor. This seems to me a great benefit, like the substitution of a light gravity beer for Hennessy's brandy. I can tell nothing of the effects of the drugs on the health of the people. The subject in this Presidency is quite immaterial. My impression is that there is a widely diffused consumption of hemp on a very small scale. I have seen no effects. I have no reason to believe that it has had any effects on the health of the people. It has never been mentioned to me in this connection. I have heard that insanity is attributed to hemp. I have read this in the papers for many years, But I have never come across a case. This is due, no doubt, to the peculiarly limited consumption in this presidency, and I know that the reports as to the cause of insanity have to be taken with a considerable grain of salt. In regard to alcohol as contained in distilled liquor, I can say I have seen very bad effects on health among the de- graded portion of the community. In "degraded" I include not only the lowest of the people, but others also. I have seen cases of very bad effects. No such case has ever been brought to my notice in connection with hemp. The connection of hemp drugs with crime has never been brought to my notice, though up to 1889 I had had charge of six or seven districts and served in others. Since then I have had oppor- tunities of travelling over all districts of the presidency. I have also been Salt Commissioner in Orissa (Bengal). I see no need for prohibition, possibility apart. Nor have I seen any necessity for further restric tion at all. For the auction system will always tend to keep prices up and check excessive con sumption. Financial considerations apart, I see no necessity for further restriction. What I know of the extent of the use of the drug and of its effects leads me to say that there is no such necessity. My own opinion is, and my advice has always been, that so long as there was no abuse there should be as little interference as possible. I can- not speak for Government. That is my personal view. The best plan of ascertaining whether there is any abuse is to have a proper system or regime that we may know the facts as far as possible, and be able to judge of what necessity there may be for interference. This policy has been pursued since 1889. I do not think that, the drug being an intoxicant, it is necessary for Government to make such restrictions as may pre- vent excess. I think temperance good, but liberty better. No doubt the auction system puts a drag on consumption. Of course, on the other hand, if I found that scores and hundreds of people were going wrong through it, I should be inclined to interfere at once. The question was raised last year in connection with some reference regarding smuggling into the Central Provinces. We had no evidence of this, and Sir Antony MacDonnell did not prove it. Nor did we see any reason for special interference in the facts on our side of the border. We reported that; and Government sanctioned it. The whole matter was elaborately reported on; and the papers can be laid before the Commission. My attention has during my tenure of office been constantly kept to this matter of the effects of hemp drugs and opium. And I regarded this complaint as a case in which the extent of culti- vation and use might be tested specially. So it received careful attention. My opinion is that if we had lots of money for supervision and were ready to make people's lives a burden to them, we might improve the present system of administration if it be an object to check cultivation and use. But I do not think that there is any occasion for this in the Madras Presidency; and there is no room for substantial improvement in the present system. It is un- doubtedly desirable that Government should know all that is going on, so as to secure any necessary control; but elaborate supervision would only mean the levying of blackmail on the inhabitants vol. vi. 2 A 2
164 without there being any sufficient justification for the adoption of that elaborate system. I think that the prohibition of cultivation, ex- cept in restricted tracts, would be a hardship in respect to this, that the wrong people would be prosecuted. The Salt and Abkari Department has developed as effective a set of blackguards as we have in India when they are not controlled; and it would be an added terror to village life to let them loose on respectable raiyats. I should not like to be responsible for this. The opium question cannot be regarded as throwing light on this; for there restriction is old and long esta- blished. It has settled down. We have no- thing to do with it in this presidency. It is pos- sible that existing establishments might enforce prohibition of cultivation, but I do not think they could without difficulty and abuse. To drive the people by high taxation from the drug to alcohol might not be any advantage. I am doubtful. I know that the revenue has been recently very largely increased; and I am not sure that we need do more than leave the auction sys- tem to act. I think it would be quite fair to say this is an exciseable article and must not be grown without a license. This would be fair if feasible. I did not see my way to it. The limit of increased taxation as influencing price which I should be inclined to fix at present would be such as would not drive the people to alcohol. I see nothing at present to justify me in thinking that that would be a desirable change to bring about. By the improvement effected in 1889, facts were ascertained which were not known before. This led to the facts regarding private cultivation being ascertained. This information cannot be regarded as general, because in the Madras Presi- dency the village system enables us to get the fullest information regarding all the circumstances of the people. The system differs in this respect from Bengal. Our village agency puts us in possession of very clear views of facts if we in- quire into them. The facts are that the hemp plant is found strewed in certain localities in the back-yards of any people who wish to cultivate it. This is the truth. And all that the Department knows is in a general way that that is so. I should like, for purposes of the careful control I have indicated, to have a return showing actually what was grown and what was done with the drug. But that would cost too much. The only other plan would be to restrict cultivation. If you were to order the stoppage of cultivation of hemp165 with palmyra, jaggery, molasses, honey, and ghee, and is made into a ball, from which small pills are made up for consumption. Other confections, like pooranathi in boluses, are also made from ganja leaves and various spices. In these ganja leaves are used only in small quantities. This is eaten for the purpose not merely of intoxication but as medicine, and it is said to be also used for exciting sexual desires. (C) The above-mentioned ganja powder is put into a little water and drunk. Where the drinker is so inclined milk, sugar and certain spices are added to make the beverage palata- ble. In some cases raw leaves are ground with water and mixed in water and sugar. This drink is popularly called ramarasam. (b) There is no wild hemp grown in this district. 16. It is prepared generally in their houses. No wild plant is grown. 17. Among the people that use the preparation of this drug all classes may be included; but few use it except Rajputs and Maharattas, Musal- mans and bairagis. 18. Bhang (solid) will not deteriorate for six months. Majum will not deteriorate for three months, and ganja for a year if kept carefully bundled without exposure to sun or rain. Rs. License fees for166 62. Vide answer to question 60. 63. Vide No. 59. 64. There are none. 65. I have no reason to believe that any of the preparations are unduly taxed under the present system of annual leases of shops. 66. No. 67. Vide No. 65. 68. Vide No 59. 69. There is no local option and none is needed, as the consumption is so trifling. 70. No. 3. Evidence of MR. E. TURNER, Collector of Madura. 1. Consulting my subordinate officials and certain ganja shopkeepers. Neither I nor any one in the district have any practical knowledge of the subject. It is a district that may be left out of account in taking evidence regarding it. 2. The definitions of the flat and round ganja alone may be accepted for this district. Flat ganja is locally known as Dharmapuri ganja or Javatmada ganja and round ganja is known as Jada ganja. Broken ganja is not used here. 3. Spontaneous growth of ganja in this district is not known, nor do I know of its spontaneous growth in other districts. 4. It is known as ganja here. 5. Round ganja is grown here. It grows in sandy soil. Rain and water wanted for its growth. It grows in low lands. Hard soils are also suitable for its growth. 6. Growth ordinarily dense. 7. There is cultivation here for the purposes (a), (c), and (d) in Tirupuvanam, Kodaikanal, Kalli- gudi, Tirumangalam and Manalur and in some villages of Pulni and Dindigul taluks. It is generally grown in garden and backyards to a very small extent. 8. There has been a decrease and it is stated that it is due to the issue of licenses. 9. Land ploughed when moist and seeds sown along with brinjals and chillies generally. 10. The hemp cultivators do not form any special class. It is mixed in the few cases where it is sown with other seed. 11. No. 12. It is stated that there is no cultivation of wild hemp. 13. Vide answers against questions 5 and 7. 14. Ganja and bhang prepared in all the places where shops have been sanctioned and as far as they are require for sale. Large quantities of prepared ganja are imported from North Arcot District. 15. Preparation of ganja from the cultivated plant: the plants are cut down and left exposed till they get dry. The leaves are then separated from the stems and tied up in bundles. Ganja is smoked thus. The above leaves are mixed with water and tobacco and smoked in a vessel for the purpose. Ganja is eaten thus. The leaves with the drugs prepared from ganja are taken together. Ganja is drunk thus. The leaves are powdered, mixed with dried ginger and other things such as pepper, etc., and drunk. Bhang is prepared for eating thus. Ganja is floated in water, dried, heated, powdered, filtered, mixed with dried ginger, pepper, gallnut, jaggery and ghee and other samans. This bhang is of four kinds locally known as karuppu, purnathi, pur- nathi for children, and thathubushti. The first kind has much of the intoxicating element in it; the second and the third are better tempered; and the last, as its name implies, is used to improve the pulse. For the preparation of purnathi 70 things are required, and the most important of them have been mentioned above. Bhang is drunk as ganja. 16. Bhang is prepared in licensed shops from flat and round ganja. 17. No special class. 18. Ganja deteriorates after one year; bhang, first sort (karuppu), after one week, and other classes after six months. Does not quite lose, but will be less efficacious. It gets a bad smell and becomes dried up. No special measures to prevent deterioration. Stock account of ganja, bhang, and other intoxicat- ing drugs prepared from the hemp plant in the district of Madura during 1892-93. Item. Quantity. REMARKS. Seers. Tolas. 1. Quantity of ganja, etc., remaining in stock at the beginning of the year 7 40 2. Quantity received or manufactured in the year 4,940 56½ Ganja and drugs were sold at from 4 to 7 pies per tola. TOTAL 4,948 16½ 3. Quantity sold by retail to consumers } 4,821 44½ 4. Quantity sold to other vendors TOTAL 4,821 44½ Balance remaining with shopkeepers at the end of the year 126 52 19. Ganja is used for eating, smoking, and drinking. 20. A. small proportion. Low classes consist- ing of fakirs and mendicants smoke ganja where- ver they are. Also some Maruvars, Pallars, Agambadiars and Muhammadans. 21. Flat ganja preferred for smoking. 22. Nothing is known of charas here. North- ern pilgrims use it. 23. Bhang not so used. 24. As stated in the answer to question 20, bhang is generally used by low classes, but some of the higher classes, such as Brahmins, also use it. The bhang is drunk in special cases only. 25. The use of ganja and bhang are on the decrease since licenses for their sale are issued; but of these two, ganja is more largely used, as it is cheaper.
167 26. The habitual and occasional excessive con- sumers of both ganja and bhang are bairagis, weavers and Maruvars. They are also the habi- tual moderate consumers. The other classes are occasional and moderate consumers. 27. Rude classes. Indolent habits lead to the practice. 28. Ganja, 3 pies weight, worth two pies, is enough for (a) consumers; 9 pies weight, worth six pies, is wanted by (b) consumers. Bhang one-quarter to three tolas by a moder- ate consumer, about three up to six tolas by excessive consumers. The price of bhang per tola is two pies. 29. For ordinary ingredients vide answer to question 15. No exceptional ingredients are mixed. Dhatura is not so used. Tobacco is admixtured to add flavour, the other ingredients are used to make the preparation palatable and to promote digestion. Bhang massala is the ingre- dient already described, vide answer to question 15. 30. Smoking and drinking ganja is done in company and eating in solitude. The consump- tion is mainly confined to the male sex. Puru- nathi for children is administered to children. 31. Habit easily formed; difficult to break off, like every other habit. There is tendency to develop into the excessive. The Head Assistant Collector says: " Differs in tendency with differ- ent constitutions." 32. Ganja is offered to Karuppana Swami and other deities and then taken. The pusari takes the offered quantities for his use. The use of the drug in connection with such custom is regarded as essential. The offertory varies with the means of votary. The offertory may lead to a develop ment of the habit by the pusari. 33. Some of the consumers take it as a medicine. Public opinion is against the practice. Its use is regarded as vicious, and one who uses it, becomes unfit for the conduct of business of life. Hence the public opinion is against it. The plant is not worshipped. 34. The consumers of both ganja and bhang who use it to overcome exhaustion may feel it a privation to forego the practice. 35. May be prohibited. Will be consumed illicitly then. Prohibition may be enforced by making cultivation, manufacture, sale, etc., penal. Discontent not serious. No political danger. The prohibition may be followed by recourse to other stimulants and drugs. 36. No. One shopkeeper has, however, stated in reply to the first part " Yes." 37. Charas is not known here. 38. Only flat ganja is used here. 39. There is not much difference. Smoking if in excess is also injurious. The Head Assistant Collector says: " Smoking is said to be more in- jurious." Just as with tobacco, there is a liability that the throat and sight may become affected. Such liability seems slight. 40. Prescribed to promote digestion, to revive appetite and to check diarrh168 may have the power of getting supplies with the minimum of inconvenience. The Head Assistant Collector says that there is no local public opinion on the point to be considered. 70. (a) No. (b) Yes. (c) No. Evidence of MR. W. J. H. LE FANU, Collector and District Magistrate of North Arcot. 51. It appears from enquiry that only a very small proportion of bad characters are habitual or moderate consumers of drugs. The persons who generally resort to the use of ganja and bhang are either mendicants or fakirs, who have no family cares and have an apathy for work. The moderate use of the drugs has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. The use of the drugs has not in this district acted as a stimulant to commit crime. 52. There is no record in this district of crimes being connected with the excessive use of any of these drugs. 53. It does not incite to crime of any kind. It appears that the use of the drugs, far from accen- tuating a tendency to commit crimes, retards it to a great extent, and the consumers become humble and timid. No instance is known in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. This question must be answered only in the negative. The general impression is that such drugs have the opposite effect. 55. Criminals do sometimes induce their victims to partake of these drugs without letting them know what they are in order to deprive them of their property; but such cases must be very rare. The extent of stupefaction depends upon the quan- tity of drugs administered, the nature of the mix- ture, if any, and upon the constitution of the con- sumers. It appears that complete stupefaction can be produced without admixture, if the quantity administered is large. I must add that, in twenty-eight years' experi- ence in South India, I have not seen as many as six cases of persons supposed to be in the habit of using, or under the actual influence of, such drugs. The very rare cases which I have seen were those of religious mendicants, fakirs, etc. None of these persons were violent or dangerous. 5. Evidence of MR. C. B. MACLEANE, Collector of Nellore. 1. From enquiries and observations of those who use the drugs. 3. The plant grows spontaneously in the Ja- waudy Hills between Salem and South Arcot dis- tricts; the drug used in this district is caned Ja- waudy. 14. (a) and (c) are prepared and (b) is not known. Desi or broken ganja and Jawaudy or flat ganja are the varieties known. (A) Smoking.169 before it begins to act on the nerves. It is less potent as it has no resinous matter, which is the most effective narcotic principle. 40. Bhawapakaxi, a work of the 10th century, prescribes it in dysentery. Susruta prescribes it in catarrh. The Arabic and Persian works are, however, more precise and detailed. In Makzanul Aduviaya, written about the beginning of this century, a full description of its medicinal pro- perties is given, and various names are assigned to it. The author says that the leaves and bark make a good snuff for cleaning the brain; the juice applied to the head as a wash removes dandruff and vermin; it checks diarrh170 ment were suddenly to command that no man should ever consume beer, wine, or spirits. I think that it would result in very deep discontent, though it is too much to say that it would amount to a political danger in these parts, because the consumers of the drugs are in a minority. It would be felt as an utterly unreasonable attack on a man's liberty to please himself so long as he does no harm to others. Prohibition to consume these drugs would probably lead to increased con- sumption of alcoholic stimulants and other drugs. 36. I gather not, but on the contrary that the drugs are being substituted for alcohol. 39. Tahsildars all think that smoking is more deleterious than eating or drinking, because it appears to affect the lungs. 40. All Tahsildars say that native doctors pre- scribe ganja for diseases of both men and cattle. 41. The majority of Tahsildars consider that moderate use is beneficial. The only two Brahmin Tahsildars in the district aver that it is never beneficial, but always hurtful. My own opinion is that it has a distinct effect as a febrifuge in feverish tracts, and that natives often use it for that purpose. For instance, the people in the Godavari district, which is feverish, are great consumers of tobacco. In the streets of Coconada the smell of tobacco-smoke is everywhere. Child- ren are made to smoke, and the reason probably is that the natives believed smoking to be a good preventive against fever. I think they consume these drugs for the same reason, very often. 43. I think so, quite. So do all the Tahsildars, except one, a Brahmin. 44. Moderately used it is refreshing. It is slightly intoxicating, allays hunger, increases appetite; effects last about six hours; want of subsequent gratification produces a longing and uneasiness. In fact it is very like alcohol in its effects, when alcohol is taken moderately. 45. Opinions differ, but I think that the general belief is that moderately used, the drug produces no noxious effects. It all depends on how much is taken. One Tahsildar of much experience says that moderate consumers find that the drug excites the mental faculties and enables a man to concentrate his attention on a subject that he wishes to study. Similarly it is said to be of great effect in enabling a religiously-minded man to concentrate his attention on religious sub- jects, and isolate his thoughts from things around him. 46. Habitual and excessive use produces all the bad effects mentioned in question No. 45. It produces languor and insensibility to what is going on. I have frequently spoken to men, as witness- es, or in village streets, who seem unable to under- stand questions or frame answers, who seem as if their faculties were all asleep, and this has been accounted for by the remark by a bystander, or some one in court, that the man is under the influence of ganja or bhang. 49. All Tahsildars, except one, say that it is so. 51. I believe that the drug is constantly con- sumed by criminals in order to deaden their feelings and excite them, but whether use for such purposes would be moderate or excessive, I cannot say. Probably not immoderately, for that would cause drowsiness and laziness. 53. I believe not. All my Tahsildars say that it does not have this effect. 55. Yes; constantly when they want to rob their victims completely and effectually, but without personal injury to them. In these days thuggee is non-existent, but the thugs dealt largely in these drugs; and lesser criminals often find them very useful. I am told that complete stupefaction is only attained by admixture. 58. The present system is vend rent, licenses being issued for sale publicly in shops. I think it is working well. 59. 1 see no need for change. 60 to 63. See answers to 3,14 and 16 above. I do not see how control is possible. We cannot pry into every man's backyard and see what he is doing there. To try and obtain a Government monopoly (like salt) would necessitate an immense- ly expensive staff of officials, and the enhance- ment of cost would be excessively unpopular for no compensating advantage. 63. None. 64. None. 65. Yes. 66. I see no reason for any change in the present system. 67. No. 68. Shops are licensed, and consumption on premises is not forbidden. I see no reason to make a change. I have never had any complaints of rioting or gambling or misconduct in those shops. 69. Yes. Yes. 70. None. 7. Evidence of MR. H. M. WINTERBOTHAM, Collector of Tanjore. 1. I have twenty-four years' experience as a revenue and magisterial officer in nine districts. Locally I have consulted the divisional officers, medical subordinates, missionaries, licensed ven- dors of bhang and others. 2. On actual inspection of the shops, I find that " flat ganja" is the only form of hemp used as raw material. It is simply called ganja. 3. The hemp plant is not cultivated in Tanjore. Stray plants may be found here and there in gardens. The wild hemp plant is not found to the best of my information. 4. It is only known as ganja shedi, 'the hemp plant.' 7. No. 14. Ganja is imported. Charas is unknown. Bhang is not sold, but the local shopkeepers say it is prepared from flat ganja by some consumers in their own houses. 15. Flat ganja is imported ready prepared. Its subsequent treatment is described in answer 29. 16. The local shopkeepers (licensed vendors of ganja) say that bhang is a liquid, prepared by mixing ganja with milk, sugar, pepper and spice. In this form it is only prepared for private con- sumption, and not for sale. 17. Our licensed vendors (of whom there are 16) are Hindu Sudras (Naiks, Pillais, Chettis
171 Kallars) and Muhammadans. A few people of all castes make preparations of ganja for their own use. 18. The licensed vendors say that the flat ganja will not keep good for more than two years. It must be kept dry. Trade.-There is no import or export by sea. The flat ganja is obtained from Kanniambadi and Kannamangalam in the North Arcot district. According to the accounts of the 16 licensed vendors, the quantity sold in 1892-93 was three thousand two hundred and eighty seers, of eighty tolas, of ganja, and nine hundred and seventy seers of purnâdhi, etc. This quantity of ganja would supply about fifteen hundred people with half a tola a day. 19. Charas is not locally known. From flat ganja there are two well-known preparations, viz. (a) Purnâdhi, (b) Mâjiam. Purnâdhi.-The ingredients are ganja, dried ginger, sittarattai (lesser galangal), black pepper, nutmeg, cloves, mace, karva pattai (cinnamon), anise seed, liquorice, cummin, rose buds, surat âvârai (?), gallnut, ghee and sugar. The ingredients are pounded up, and heated over a fire till the mass assumes the consistency of a black jujube. One-eighth of the mass is said to be ganja (excluding ghee and sugar). Mâjiam.172 lower classes to the use of ganja, further restric- tions on the use of the latter will be called for. At present this ground for action does not exist. 67. No. 68. There are sixteen shops licensed for sale of ganja. The drug is never consumed on the premises. 69. The shops are absolutely inoffensive: No public opinion against any such shop has ever manifested itself. 70. The possession of hemp drugs for home consumption is not an offence, but I believe nearly the whole that is consumed is obtained from the local licensed dealers. 8. Evidence of MR. W. A. WILLOCK, Collector, Vizagapatam. 1. My answers are the result of enquiries made for the information of the Commission. In pre- paring them I have disregarded statements which are contradicted by the general body of the evi- dence before me where there is reason to suppose that they are based on mere hearsay. 2. The definitions of ganja and bhang are correct, but the words are very loosely used in this district. Ganja seems sometimes used for any preparation which can be smoked, and bhang for any which can be drunk. Charas is not separately known, but a process of cultivation seems sometimes to be adopted to encourage the production of the resinous matter, which appears to be mixed with the ganja produced at the same time. These are not known here. 3. I do not know any place where it grows spontaneously. 4. Ganja-i-patri and basava-patri. They refer to the same plant. 5. I doubt the existence of wild hemp in this district. The cultivated hemp sometimes springs up unexpectedly, and I think that this is the only reason for supposing wild hemp to grow here. 6. If it grows at all, it is scarce and scattered. I do not know it personally. 7. A plant or two is often sown in back-yards for the production of ganja and bhang. It is not cultivated for fibre, though other fibres are some- times called hemp. It is not cultivated as a crop. 8. I see no reason to suppose that the number of plants grown has varied materially of late. 9. Some of the replies to the Commission's questions would lead one to suppose that the plant is transplanted in selected sites, etc. I do not believe this myself. I think a seed or two is sown, and the rest left to nature. 10. No. Any one who has a rich back-yard may grow it, but only grows two or three plants. 11. I do not think that the wild hemp is known here. 12. Vide reply to the last question. 13. Hemp grows throughout the district. It appears to grow equally well at the sea level and at an elevation of 3,000 feet, provided it has a good soil and abundant rainfall. There seems to be an impression that the produce of the plants grown in the hills is superior to that grown in the plains, but I am unable to say whether the eleva- tion or the greater rainfall is the cause. Provided the monsoon does not fail, it can be grown any- where in the district. 14. Ganja and bhang are, but I am unable to say to what extent (one sees but very few plants). 15. The methods of preparation reported are so various that I am unable to say more than that no very fixed system is adopted. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the people in their homes, and can apparently be prepared direct from the plant. The wild plant does not seem to grow here. 17. Religious mendicants and pensioned sepoys are the chief consumers. A good many of the Maharaja of Vizianagram's people, who have lived with the family in Benares, have adopted Bengal customs with regard to its use. 18. Ganja and bhang keep well for a year, but all depends on the care with which they are pre- served from damp. Protection against it will enable it to be kept good for a long time. 19. I fear that my replies on this subject are not very reliable. My informants seem often to mix up the names in a most perplexing way. Ganja is usually used for smoking, but confections and drink are sometimes made of it. 20. The use of ganja is too rare to allow of my giving any guess at the proportion of consumers. The chief place of consumption is Vizianagram, and the chief consumers are religious mendicants and Brahmins, who have picked up the habit in Benares. 23. Opinions differ on this point, but I believe that bhang is sometimes smoked when ganja can- not be obtained. 24. The use of bhang is not confined to any class. The proportion of consumers is too small to estimate. 25. I am unable to say. I should expect an increase owing to the great increase in tie price of spirits driving people to the use of other intoxi- cants. The accounts available are most imper- fect, and the advent of large numbers of workmen from other parts of India in connection with the construction of the East Coast Railway renders comp arison impossible. 27. Religious mendicants form the chief part of the excessive consumers. They find that it increases their power of becoming absorbed in their devotions, and that it in time destroys their sexual instincts. 28. (a) About 4 pies worth, or ¼ tola of ganja. (b) From one anna worth upwards or one tola and upwards. 29. Tobacco is usually used with ganja for smoking to improve the taste. Opium is some- times used to increase the intoxicating effect. Spices of all sorts are largely used in making up the preparations which are eaten or drunk. None (massala) seems to be known here. 30. Smoking usually takes place in company. The consumption of other forms follows no fixed rule. The male sex are generally the sole con- sumers, but they take to it at any time of life, Some preparations are given to children, but only as medicine. 31. The habit is easily formed and hard to break off, but it does not appear to tend towards excess. 32. No such customs are known here.
173 33. The consumption of any product of the hemp plant is regarded as disreputable. The reason appears to be the fact that it produces intoxication, which is looked on as disgraceful by all respectable persons. There is no custom of worshipping the plant here. 34. Bairagis and fakirs and a few excessive consumers would find it a serious privation, but I think moderate consumers would soon get over its loss. 35. No. It would be impossible without most inquisitorial penal legislation, and would cause serious discontent amongst the consumers and arouse the sympathy of others in their favour, even of those who regard the practice as disreputable. The discontent would not amount to a political danger here, because the number of consumers is small; but the prohibition would arouse the sus- picions of other classes, and raise an outcry against needless interference in private affairs by the State. It is difficult to answer the latter part of the question, but I think that consumers would on deprivation take to alcohol or opium. 36. No. I should say that the change, if it exists, is in the other direction. 39. Smoking is generally regarded as more injurious than other forms of consumption. 40. Yes. They are used in native medical treatment and for cattle-disease, but only to a limited extent. 41. (a) There is a general agreement of opinion as to its improving the appetite. (b) This is admitted by nearly every one con- sulted. The effect is only temporary however. (c) It is used for the purpose, but it is doubt- ful whether it really does any good. The number of consumers is too small to allow of this question being answered. 42. So far as I can learn, the moderate use of these drugs produces no harm in a healthy person for a long time. There seems to be some reason for supposing that after a long series of years it produces premature old age, but this is a point on which it would be impossible to express a decided opinion. 43. Perfectly so. 44. It is refreshing and slightly intoxicating at first, and stimulates the appetite. It seems doubtful whether it allays hunger. The effects are stated by various persons to last from two to twelve hours. Then depression follows. The information I have obtained about the latter part of this question is very contradictory. 45. (b) The general opinion is that in course of time it produces debility. (c) Apparently not. (d) No. (e) It produces laziness, but not necessarily immorality or debauchery. It must, however, be remembered that the custom is regarded as reprehensible by the respectable and virtuous. (f) I am unable to offer any opinion on the remainder of this question. 47. No, but the use of the drug is not common enough here to allow of a decided opinion being formed. 48. No. 49. Its use is said to produce impotence in the long run in many cases, but not invariably. 51. I have hitherto been under the impression that there was a very strong connection. I cannot remember details, but, according to my experience, it has been a common thing for Subordinate Magistrates and Police Inspectors in talking of important crimes recently committed in their charges to explain crimes of peculiar violence or atrocity by the remark that the offender was a notorious consumer of ganja or bhang. On instituting the special enquiries, the result of which I now report, experienced officers in several instances made assertions that such offences often resulted from the use of the drug, but to my surprise on being questioned they were not able to quote a single case which had come to their personal knowledge in which such had been the case. I then called on all Magistrates in this district, 28 in number, to report whether they could remember any cases which they had dealt with in which the use of these articles was in any way concerned. Two quoted one case each in which an offender was found insane, and the insani- ty was supposed to he due to the excessive use of ganja (which, of course, was mere surmise), but not a single case in which the hemp plant was, directly or indirectly connected with crime could be remembered by any of them. I asked for similar information from some of the most experienced Police Inspectors with exactly the same result in the end, though amongst them I found a consider- able tendency to throw blame on ganja at first until closely questioned174 therefore almost unknown. Its consumption undoubt- edly is a form of dissipation, and the criminal classes are far more prone to indulge in all kinds of dissipation than others. Hence the idea that the use of ganja tends to crime, whereas the truth is that crime tends to lead men to resort to ganja. A large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of these drugs, but only because they have not the same reasons for restraint as respectable persons, and are generally more reckless and regardless of evil consequences. 52. So far as I can ascertain, the above remark applies with equal force to excessive consumers, subject to the qualification that excessive use tends to diminish general energy, and that the large class of religious mendicants, who are perfectly harmless, fall under the designation of excessive rather then moderate consumers. 53.No. As used in this part of India, it most certainly does not incite to unpremeditated crime. I not only do not know of a case of its causing temporary homicidal frenzy, but am unable to hear of any from my subordinate magistracy. 54. No. 55. There is an impression amongst experienced officers that these drugs are used to stupefy victims, but I can hear of no case. I am under the impression that the idea has arisen from informa- tion of a vague description given by prisoners themselves. I am unable to express an opinion as to whether the use of hemp products can produce complete stupefaction. 58. I think it meets the requirements of my district well. The use of ganja and bhang is but a very trifling evil here, if an evil at all, and it is difficult to see how to improve the present state of affairs without most serious interference with large numbers of innocent people. The advantage to be gained, if any, would be quite out of proportion to the annoyance and trouble which would result from closer supervision. 60. For the reasons given above, I do not think that any modification is called for. 62. I do not think it would be feasible here. It is not grown as a crop, and is often self-sown. My Huzur Deputy Collector had a plant in his garden lately which sprung up of itself. It would also be useless to control cultivation in the plains of this district, and leave it uncontrolled in the hills; but no one would venture to think of inter- fering with the hill men regarding its cultivation. 68. There are no restrictions as to the consump- tion of ganja on the premises of the shops here, but I do not think that it often takes place. 69. There are only five shops in the district. The neighbours are not consulted about their position. I think that they would regard the matter with indifference. Oral evidence. Question 1.175 My impression is that the quantity of ganja grown in the Agency is trifling; but I had no opportunity of ascertaining facts for myself since this inquiry began. I have never been called upon to make an enquiry in connection with complaints of smuggling into the Central Provinces. I was Collector of this district in 1892. I should see no very strong objection to limiting legal posses- sion to the amount which might be held to be equivalent to the produce of one or two plants. And my opinion applies to the Agency also. I say one or two plants; but my meaning is that no one ought to be made criminally liable for possess- ing the produce of the number of plants that are ordinarily found growing in a garden in this dis- trict. If you go further than this, preventive measures of an inquisitorial kind become necessary. In this district you hardly ever see more than one or two plants growing in a garden. I consider it would be more objectionable to allow cultivation, and have the preventive force marking down plants and searching houses when the crop was gathered with certainty of detection, than to pro- hibit cultivation altogether. The people of the Agency Tracts, specially the hill people, are very much addicted to spirits and toddy. No system of liquor excise has ever been framed for the Agency. The abkari revenue is leased by farms or shops in much the same way as it has been dealt with from the time when Government first began to exercise control over it. I am endeavouring to reduce the number of shops, but consider that it would be impolitic and dangerous to move too rapidly in this direc- tion. I cannot say that it is my experience that where the liquor habit is strong the ganja habit is practically unknown. I know nothing what- ever on this point as regards this district. I do not even know where the ganja habit is most or where least prevalent. Returns from other pro- vinces would lead me to suppose that such is the case; but I have no practical experience on the point. I can say nothing definite regarding the extent to which the ganja habit prevails among the people of the Agency Tracts. My knowledge on the subject is practically nil. I have no reason for supposing the ganja habit to be more pre- valent in one part of the Agency than in another. As regards foreigners, they are almost unknown in the Agency. 9. Evidence of MR. J. THOMSON, Collector of Chingleput. 1. Only such as the head of this district can obtain from or through others. No personal observation. 2. May be accepted. Charas is not used in the district generally. The three varieties of ganja are locally known as padai ganja (flat ganja), vurulai ganja (round ganja), and avilu ganja (broken ganja or chur). Bhang or siddhi is known as bhangi leaf. Charas is known as ganja pal (ganja milk or juice). Ganja is known as kalpam. 3. It does not grow spontaneously in this district. 7. The plant is not cultivated in this district. 13. No restrictions in this district. 15. Preparations for176 27. Habitual moderate consumers are the re- ligous fanatics and mendicants and men of the poorer classes who cannot afford to indulge in the more costly drink of toddy or arrack. The religious fanatics, such as bairagis, sanyasis, etc., resort to the drug (1) for the concentration of their thoughts necessary in the practice of yoga effected by stupefying the senses, (2) as a means of rendering their constitutions proof against diseases. In these will be found a few of the class (b) also. Class (c) are persons who resort to the preparations from the drug as medicine. 28. (a) ½ tola of ganja, costing 2 pies. ¼ tola of majum, costing 1 pie. 1/6 tola of purnâdhi, costing about 2 pies. (b) 2 to 3 tolas of ganja, 8 to 12 pies. Bhang, not known. Charas, not used. 29. (a) and (b) With ganja in smoking, only tobacco is used for keeping the fire and also for preserving the throat from getting parched up. (a) With bhang, poppy seeds, pepper, ginger, sugar or jaggery, aniseed, cow milk or cocoanut milk to. give flavour, improve the taste, and to render it medicinal. (b) Bhang is mixed with dhatura in toddy and arrack to produce excitement and sexual passions and to produce a longing on the part of the consumer to partake of more liquor. Cantharides is also said to he mixed with bhang in toddy and arrack to produce sexual excitement. No bhang massala sold here. Ingredients not known. 30. Ganja smoking is practised in company, generally in matams, etc., where the fanatics or the mendicants assemble while halting during their pilgrimage. Bhang, when consumed by habitual consumers, is done in their households in solitude generally, except on occasions of fes- tivities; such as the last day of Dhasara, the Rajputs make a treat of it to their friends and relatives. Charas not used. Chiefly confined to the male sex and to adults. The confections of ganja are, however, administered as medicine to females and to children. 31. Yes. The habit is easily formed when a person descends to associating with the people using it, both on account of the cheapness of the drug as well as the prevalent custom among the consumers to offer it to those present as good manners and courtesy. The habit once formed it will be difficult to break off, and will develop into excess, as in the case of every other intoxicant, if indulged in by imprudent persons. 32. Ganja and the preparation from it known as majum are used as offerings to the family deities known as Katteri, Muniswaran, etc., who are all known as evil deities made use of in black magic. The offering is then distributed to those present, some of whom if used to it already, or if inclined to use it, make use of it. Bhang is served on the last day of the Dhasara by Rajputs, etc., to their friends and relatives. But these occasions are only periodical. The use on such occasions is considered essential, and is temperate generally, and not likely to lead to the formation of a habit. In some instances ganja and majum, ¼ tola each, are placed in a tray passed round a sick man's head three times and then thrown away in the street. This is done in cases of sick- ness due to the " casting of evil eye." 33. With great disfavour, except when used as medicine. The public hold the consumers in disrepute generally, although the religious fanatics are excused the use of them. This is due partly to the evil effects of the drug and to the low and vulgar people using it. The hemp plant is not worshipped in this part of the country. 34. Yes, to those who are habitual consumers of the drug, and, it is said, may end fatally. But the number of such persons will be very small. 35. No, it will not be feasible, and the cost of such prohibition will be enormous if the result is to be successful to an appreciable degree. Il- licit consumption must be the inevitable result- Complete prohibition cannot be enforced. It may occasion discontent, but it can never amount to a political danger, the users being themselves generally lazy cowards and held in disrepute by the public. The prohibition would he fol- lowed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants in cases where the consumers can afford to indulge in them,. and to other drugs in the case of the poor. 36. No. 37. Charas not used here. 38. Only fiat ganja is used here. 39. Smoking is said to be more injurious its effects than eating or drinking. It is only the smokers that get emaciated and look like living skeletons. Smoking is besides said to. affect the lungs direct. The drug when eaten or drunk is always mixed up with reputed sooth- ing or cooling substances, such as ghee, cow milk, cocoanut milk and poppy-seeds, etc., which, to a. great extent, counteract its injurious effects. 40.Yes, ganja is prescribed as a nervine tonic, as a stimulant for sexual enjoyment, as an as- tringent, as a means of securing digestion or creating good appetite, and, in short, it is held as a means of rendering the constitution proof. against all diseases and for securing longevity. It is also used for making powder of zinc by burning it with thin pieces of zinc. In the case of bowel complaints of cattle, it is administered in plantain. Saltpetre burnt in green ganja. leaves is given to horses. when out of wind. 41. (a) Yes. (b) No, except the drink of bhang, which is made use of as alleviating fatigue. (c) As a febrifuge in ease of fevers arising from, cold. (d) Ganja is primarily stimulant, then it is used as anodyne, sedative, anti-spasmodic. It is also used as a narcotic, diuretic and parturifaci- ent. It is a powerful aphrodisiac. The District Medical Officer says in answer to (a) to (c) that the drug is of no use. Moderate habitual consumers use it chiefly as a digestive. 42. Not very harmful, if moderately used. 43. Yes. 44. Refreshing. Produces intoxication, follow- ed by sleep and coma. It does not allay hunger; on the contrary, it, is said to create appetite. The effect of intoxication lasts for about a couple of hours. The after-effects are exhaustion and semi- prestration. The want of subsequent gratifica- tion produces uneasiness. 45. (a) Ganja smoking (habitual) is said to produce lung disease and to emaciate the body. (b) It weakens the pulmonary action. (c) The stomach is not affected, but the appe- tite may be increased. (d) A few suffer from these diseases.
177 (e) Opinions vary. The District Medical Officer says " no," while some others say that it in- duces laziness, but not habits of immorality or debauchery. (f) The District Medical Officer says: - " The moderate use does not deaden the intel- lect or produce insanity. "It is a predisposing cause of insanity. I saw two cases of insanity produced by ganja being used in excess. In both cases acute mania was present, and in both it was permanent." 46. The District Medical Officer's opinion: 178 13. No; not restricted. As for soils, etc., see answers to question 5. The cultivation is not impossible in any soil except the saline soil. 14. (a) Yes; to a small extent. (b) This is not known in these parts. (c) A sort of drink is prepared from ganja by private individuals to a small extent for domestic consumption. 15. Cultivated ganja179 45. (a) The moderate use of the drug is not followed by any of the noxious effects so long as sufficient food is supplied. (c) No. (d) No. (d) It produces laziness. (f) No information is available. 46. No information is available. 47. There is no evidence to show that the habitual use of these drugs is hereditary; neither does it affect the children of the moderate consumers. 48. No information is available. 49. (a) No. (b) No. (c) Yes. 50. No information is available 51. This question is answered in the negative. There is a consensus of opinion that only in excep- tional cases do bad characters take to the use, moderate or excessive, of hemp drugs. This shews that the use of the drug has no direct connection with crime. Ganja, like alcochol, while producing intoxication, induces in the earlier stages elation of spirits, which leads to brawling and petty assaults; but when taken in small quantities, it is stated, acts as a useful stimulant, both mental and bodily. 52. This question is partly answered by reply to question No. 51. Excessive use of hemp drugs leads to extreme depression of mental and bodily powers. Consumers of ganja have no tendency to any particular form of crime, except perhaps offences against decency; but since its excessive use impairs the power of those who consume it of distinguishing right from wrong, it leads to the commission of crime. 53. This question is answered in the negative by the officers consulted, except the District Superin- tendent of Police and the Joint Magistrate, who state that excessive indulgence in any of these drugs may cause temporary homicidal frenzy. Mr. Lowe, 1st Class Inspector of Police, Tirupatur Taluk, gives three instances of murder which he attributes to this cause. I have no experience on the point. I have heard, of course, of cases where persons under the influence of the drug have committed offences, but it has seemed to me that the offence was not the effect of this drug, but rather that this drug was used to give courage to commit the offence. 54. This is answered in the negative by the officers consulted, who state that criminals avoid ganja in order that it might not subject them to giddiness, and render them unfit for their con- templated designs. It is generally said that criminals, in order that they may be complete masters over their victims, administer preparations of hemp drugs to them, but instances exemplary of this assertion have not come to notice in this district. Complete stupe- faction can be induced by these drugs, but to render it more certain and effective, the head-quarters Deputy Collector reports that admixture of sugar is necessary. 56. Ganja is always mixed up with tobacco before it is used for smoking. In this case, tobacco removes much of the bitterness in ganja. The admixture of sugar, milk, almonds, etc., in the preparation of bhang removes much of its ill-effects and renders the drug highly palatable. In this district, dhatura is not used in the preparation of the drug, either for smoking or for eating and drinking. 57. No information is available. 58. Under the present system of administration the right of vending these drugs for consumption is put to auction and sold to the highest bidder. 59. The present system is working fairly, and no change is called for for the present. 60. The cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant and the process of its preparation are not at present controlled; but they being carried on to a very small extent, the state of things may be left as it is. 61. Charas is not produced. 63. There is only one kind of license at present which allows both wholesale and retail vend. 64. No. 65. (a) There is no charas in this district. There need not be any difference between the rates of the other two. (b) Hemp drug is not in full working order here as the alcoholic drinks, and so no compari- sion can be made. 66. This question will not affect these parts, as only one kind of ganja (flat) is here consumed. 67. No. 68. In the shops here the drugs are not con- sumed on the premises. 69. The objections of the public are first consi- dered before a shop is opened in any locality. 70. The drug is not taxed, but only the right of vend. Oral statement by MR. LOWE, Inspector of Police, appended to Mr. Stokes' evidence. One of the three cases alluded to by Mr. Stokes, as having been mentioned by me, appears in the Tripatur Taluka police register as No. 115 of 1889. This case was tried in the sessions court. All three cases were tried in the sessions courts. They were all cases of murder, section 302, Indian Penal Code. In case No. 115 the accused was sentenced to death on the 16th Octo- ber 1889. The accused's name was Madhan and he belonged to Puliencottah. The second case ap- pears in the same police register as 45 of 1891. The man's name was Chimapillay and his village Guddur. His age was 75, and he was transported for life on 9th March 1892. He killed his wife and wounded a little boy. The third case appears in the same police register as 35 of 1882. His name was Mutta Chatti and his residence Tripatur. His age was 50. He was sentenced to death. I do not know on what date. In all three cases the trying court was the sessions court of Salem. vol. vi 2 c 2
180 Note by the Commission appended to Mr. Stokes' evidence. [Three cases tried by the Sessisons Court, Salem, and mentioned by Mr. Lowe, Inspector of Police at Salem, as attributable to hemp drugs. Only the High Court Judgments have been received in cases 1 and 2.] Case 1.181 29. Vide answer to question 15. 30. Ganja is generally smoked in company. The preparations made from it, " purnadi" and bhang, are consumed generally in solitude, mainly by men Sometimes purnadi is administered me- dicinally in small doses to children in cases of indigestion. 31. (a) The habit is easily formed. (b) It is difficult to break off. (c) No. 33. Hindus consider the use of the drug other- wise than medicinally as not reputable. 37. In the answers under this chapter the use of ganja leaves only is referred to. 40. Ganja is prescribed by native physicians for insomnia, neuralgia, tetanus, hydrophobia, cholera, diarrh182 41. I cannot say; but I believe it is used for purposes (a), (b), and (c). 42. Cannot say 43. Yes. 44. The effect lasts a few hours and is followed by increased appetite. 45 and 46. I am unable to answer with con- fidence. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. Unknown. 51 to 55. No. 56 and 57. Not known. 58. There is no effective control. Shop licenses are sold; but as there is no control of transport or possession, the control is little more than nominal. 60. There is no cultivation or preperation for sale. 61. Not produced. 62. Bhang is not consumed. 65. There is no taxation. 68. No. 69. No; there are only six shops in the district (for retail sale, not for consumption on the pre- mises). 70. As there is no taxation and no control over import, transport, or possession, there is no smuggling. 13. Evidence of MR. M. HAMMICK, Acting Collector of South Arcot. 1. My knowledge of the subject is very limited. In the ordinary course of revenue work, I have not gained a personal knowledge of these drugs and depend on reports I have received from time to time. 3. None. 5 and 6. I do not know. 7. None, as far as I am aware, except scattered plants here and there in backyards, and perhaps a very small area on the Javadi Hills. 8. There has been none, as far as I am aware. 9. I cannot give any information on the point. 10. No, I believe not. 11. I am not aware. 12. I am not aware that wild hemp is specially cultivated. 13. No, the cultivation is not restricted. 14. Yes, for private use and for sale to a small extent. 15. I am not conversant with the preparation of these drugs. 16. It is, I believe, locally prepared. 17. Native doctors chiefly, I believe. 18. It, I believe, deteriorates by keeping, but can be kept some months. 19. Ganja is, I believe, generally used for smoking. It is also, I am told, occasionally taken internally as a medicine. 20. The lower classes, chiefly Muhammadans, smoke ganja. 21. I do not know. 24. Bhang is, I believe, more costly than ganja, and not much used. 25. I am not aware, but I am inclined to think that the consumption may be increasing. But, if so, it is doing so very slowly. 26. I am not aware. 27. Chiefly wanderers from other parts of India and the lowest class of Muhammadans. The better classes use the drug, I believe, as an aphrodisiac. 28. I am told that a habitual consumer can get all he wants for one anna a day. 29. Sugar and jaggery; I do not think dhatura. 30. Neither females nor children resort to the drug. 31. I believe the habit is easily formed, and is difficult to break. Habitual consumers feel the loss of the drug. 32. I believe these drugs are not used in con- nection with any religious custom here. 33. Generally public opinion is against the use of the drug. 34. Local medical opinion is that it would be a serious privation to consumers to forego the con- sumption of the drug. 35. I doubt whether it is advisable to try and stop the consumption of the drug altogether. It would always be consumed illicitly. 36. The better classes prefer alcohol to these drugs. 40 The drugs are used as medicines for men and cattle. 41. I have had no sufficient experience to give an opinion. 43. It is said so. 44. I do not know. 45 to 54. I have had no sufficient experience to answer these questions. 55. I cannot remember any cases. But my impression is that bhang and ganja are used for criminal purposes. I have seen cases in which thefts have been perpetrated, probably by means of the administration of some intoxicating drugs to the victim. 58. I think the present system is as good as any can be. If actual prohibition of the uses of the drug was possible, I should advise it. But I do not consider that it is advisable or possible. 60. We have no control over cultivation, and I do not think any necessary in the district. 62. The cultivation is so small here I do not see any necessity for controlling. 63. I object to the system of sale of shops for retail vend, but I can suggest no better one short of prohibition, which I do not believe is possible. 65. We want to get the highest possible revenue from the drugs with the least consump- tion. I do not consider the present taxation at all too high. 66. I do not know enough to give an opinion. 68. None. 69. Local opinion ought to be consulted. But at present we have only one shop at each taluk kasbah and one at Porto Novo. 70. No.
183 14. Evidence of MR. HERBERT BRADLEY, Acting Collector of Malabar. 1. I was Secretary to the Commissioner of Salt and Abkari when it was decided in 1889 to com- mence to control the use of hemp drugs in this presidency. I have been acting as Collector of a district since March 1892. 3. The plant grows from scattered seed through- out Malabar; but specially in Wynaad taluk. It springs up almost spontaneously. 8. There has, I believe, been neither increase nor decrease. 10. Hemp is only grown in back-yards chiefly for private consumption. All classes grow it in this way. 13. It is not restricted. 34. It would be a serious privation to all habi- tual consumers. It would be worse than depriv- ing a smoker of tobacco. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of the drug. It grows so easily that the consumer would scatter a few seeds in waste or jungle land, and gather it secretly. It would require an army of men to prevent its consumption in this way. Prohibition would cause serious discontent, though not political danger, and would be followed by recourse to other drugs or alcohol. 36. I believe that hemp drugs are in some mea- sure taking the place of alcohol because they are cheaper. There is not much increase in their consumption. 40. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 43. Yes. 58. As far as it goes, it is working well. It might be improved. 59. I would suggest the introduction of trans- port passes for more than small quantities intended for domestic consumption, and preventing all transport in larger quantities except by and for licensed dealers. 60. I do not believe it could be controlled in this district and in several others without an un- necessary amount of expense and probable oppres- sion. 62. I do not believe it could be controlled. 63. The wholesale vend of hemp drugs is not really controlled. I would forbid their sales (otherwise than retail in licensed shops) to any- one except a licensed dealer. 64. There are no regulations as to transport, including import and export. There should be some, I think. 65. At present I do not think hemp drugs are sufficiently taxed with reference to alcohol. I do not see how a heavier tax can be imposed when they can be obtained so easily. 67. I do not see how a better method could be devised here. 68. There are no such shops. 69. They are not consulted. There is no local public opinion on the subject worth the name. Probably an agitator could get up a plausible petition for or against a shop in every town or village in the district. 70. I do not think hemp drugs are imported in any quantity from foreign territory. Oral evidence. Question 1.184 Divisional Magistrate. I have had no official duties in connection with insanes as District Ma- gistrate except as a visitor to the asylum. I was only a Junior Magistrate for seven years, and after that had no magisterial work for six years. Alcohol has certainly not come to my notice in connection with insanity, and I have no recollec- tion of its being connected with any crimes of violence. I can remember no ill-effects coming to my notice in regard to natives. I have no reason to believe that either alcohol or ganja is doing any harm in my district. I allude here only to crime, not to physical effects. I have made two tours in the Wynaad, where the drug is mostly used. I have asked my subordinates to find men who used the drug. They brought up men; but when I asked them, they all but one man denied it. These were not jungle men, though it was in the Wynaad; but jungle men are not the only consumers there. The Wynaad was the only part I visited after getting the Commission's questions. Before that I had never endeavoured to find out in the district whether ganja was used. I had when I was Secretary to the Board. I do not know that a consider- able percentage of insanity is ascribed to ganja in Government reports. I have not studied lunacy. I know that the people will not admit using the drug, and take that to be a popular feeling against it; but I do not know of any feeling among the people that it is injurious. I know nothing of injurious physical effects from ganja; but I have seen a few natives in hospitals whose ailments were ascribed to alcohol. Question 58.185 to auction having decreased the demand. This would apply only to those who cultivate for the market, and might make in this district the differ- ence of one or two acres. I do not see how the back-yard and petty garden cultivation which are for home consumption and private sale to friends could be affected by this. On the other hand, the taxation would increase such cultivation. 9. On this I can merely say that the cultiva- tion is much the same as that of an ordinary garden crop, such as cholam. The ground must be well ploughed and manured. The seeds are sown close together, transplanted when four or five inches high, and attain full growth in about six months. Watering is necessary throughout the cultivation. 10. (a) No. (b) Yes. 11. No. 12. No. 13. No. 14. (a) Ganja.186 pieces and mixed up with the treacle; then cool it. It will become solid and fit for consumption. This preparation is made and sold by the contract- or in small pieces. " (2) Ganja halwa.187 who take it to keep off pain and disease, would become at once liable to such things. 35. In my opinion it would not be possible. The drug would be consumed illicitly. I do not see how the prohibition could be enforced. Pre- venting the cultivation of hemp might be the best way. The prohibition would occasion seri- ous discontent, especially among fakirs. Whe- ther this would be a political danger or not it is difficult to say. Per se, I should say not, and beyond that I do not feel able to give an opi- nion. Judging by analogy, I think that opium or alcohol would be substituted for hemp drugs. 36. No. 37. Charas is not smoked here. 38. Not as far as I could learn. 39. One Hospital Assistant says smoking is more injurious than eating; another says it is less. I could not find out myself. 40. Yes; I believe it is. Two good native doctors have replied to the questions from Cud- dapah, and I presume they have fully answered. I append a copy of the Chitvel Hospital Assist- ant's answer for the convenience of reference:188 58. I am acquainted with it. It seems to be working well. I do not see any other system would be better. 60. They are not controlled, and I do not ad- vocate control over them. 61. It is not produced. 62. No; because I doubt its feasibility. It would give rise to many opportunities for oppres- sion, to extortion on the part of subordinates, and possibly result in cultivation being given up, and large farms started with an actual increase in the amount of the said cultivation. 63. No wholesale vend here. I have no ob- jection to the retail. I object to bhang being prepared at all; but as it is prepared privately, it would be difficult to stop this. I should make its preparation penal, but only have a light punish- ment for the offence. 64. There are no regulations. I think free passes might be issued for transport of the drugs. It will enable more control to be exercised over the production of, and traffic in, the article. 65. It seems reasonable. 66. No. 67. No. 68. There are shops licensed for the sale of these drugs, and nothing is in the license to prevent consumption on the permises. I have no objection to this system, which allows con- trol, and if this be not allowed, gatherings in private houses under no supervision will result. 69. No; they are not consulted. The Col- lector reports to the Board of Revenue on report from Tahsildar, through the Divisional Officer or from his own knowledge, whether a shop is ad- visable or not. I don't think public opinion (so-called) should be considered, because the opi- nion given could not be guaranteed to be the real public opinion. 70. No. 16. Evidence of MR. C. M. MULLALY, Acting District Magistrate, Kurnool. 51. No; the moderate use of hemp drugs has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 52. The excessive use of the drugs merely stupefies the man and renders him incapable of any premeditated and sustained action, and does not necessarily incite him to criminal acts. 53. No; I do not know of any case in which the excessive indulgence in the drugs has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. No. 55. No. 17. Evidence of MR. F. D'A. O. WOLFE-MURRAY, Acting Collector of the Nilgiris. 1. By enquiries from intelligent persons likely to know. 2. For this district the definitions of ganja and charas are correct. 3. In this district, abundantly in the South- East Wynaad portion. 4. Ganja, siddi shrub, or bhangi. Yes. 5. A good soil, well manured by cattle and human dung; moist climate; rainfall, 90 inches; from 2,000 to 5,000 feet above the sea. 6. Dense as a rule in congenial soil. 7. Yes; in South-East Wynaad, in back-yards of houses for (a), (b), (c). Also on the northern slopes of the hills, Sholagars grow a small quantity for smoking. 8. A decrease, as the cultivation is generally thought to be prohibited. 9. Seeds are sown in April and May. After June small plants are cut out. The female plants mature in January, when they are cut and dried. In cattle kraals seeds are sown broadcast. Plants are thinned to 5 or 6 feet apart, so that they may spread branches. When male plants mature and get sticky with resin, the flowering tops are collected. 10. No special class cultivates it. Yes; as a rule. 11. Yes; in parts of the district. 12. Yes; but to a small extent only, and this on the northern slopes of the plateau. It is. 13. No. Vide reply to question No. 5. Plen- ty; there is much barren and poor soil on the plateau, which grows nothing. 14. Yes. No particulars ascertainable as to localities exactly, but to no great extent. I may mention the area of the district is only 957 square miles, and the population 99,801. 15. Flat ganja only is known to be prepared. Mature female plants are cut into lengths of one to one-and-half feet and tied in bundles. These are placed under weights for a few days. Owing to the resin exuded, each bundle becomes a stickly mass. Ganja is used for smoking. The flowers are separated from the mass, mixed with tobacco and smoked in a pipe. Charas is not sold. Persons prepare this for themselves by squeezing the green leaves with the hand, and mixing the exuding resin with tobacco and smok- ing the mixture. 16. Bhang can be prepared by grinding the green leef with pepper, cardamom, dry ginger, and a flower called madanakam. Sugar is added, and the whole boiled in milk and drunk. It is reckoned good for cardiac and stomachic affections. It is not generally prepared. It can be so pre- pared from the hemp plant wherever grown, and so also with ganja and charas. 17. By all consumers. 18. All deteriorate, and in time lose all effect. I cannot say how long it will keep. The chief cause of deterioration is "tempus edax rerum." Preservation in air-tight tin boxes. 19. Not for smoking only. Ganja mixed with other drugs is given as a tonic to cattle and ele- phants. Majum is a sweetmeat in tablets made by grinding up ganja, molasses, and ghee to- gether. Purnadi is made of ganja, jaggery, and other spices compounded together, and used as a tonic.
189 20. All through the district, Sholagars, baira- gis, Rajputs, Mhians, and Muhammadans smoke ganja. The first three, 30 per cent. of the number, perhaps use it; of the others, a very small propor- tion. 21. Flat as a rule; but broken ganja is also sold for the purpose. 22. Native charas. 23. Yes; to a small extent by Muhammadans throughout the district. 24. The townsmen of Ootacamund drink bhang to a small extent. 25. No increase. Liquor has a more warming effect in this cold climate; and beer is also much drunk. 27. I should say the same circumstances which lead all or most people able to afford it to give their guests champagne at dinner parties, viz. the general desire of humanity for some stimulant. 28. (a) Half a tola, costing Rs. 0-0-3. (b) Four tolas, costing Rs. 0-2-0. 29. Tobacco and dhatura. To give a piquancy to the drug. 30. Smoking only is practised in company. Males only. Ganja is given medicinally to children. 31. (a), (b), (c) Yes. 32. No such customs here. 33. Not regarded as disreputable when moder- ately consumed. Habitually excessive smokers are looked down on, just as an habitual drunkard is Bhang is drunk and majun eaten at marriages and feasts. No sects worship the hemp plant. 34. Yes; probable. Habitual consumer, if deprived of the drug, might do mischief. Human beings are creatures of habit. 35. (a) No. (b) Certainly. (c) Yes. (d) No.; not here. (f) Undoubtedly, to both (a) and (b). 36. No. 37. Yes.; ganja is the strongest, and its effect is more prolonged. 38. Flat ganja is supposed to be the best as strongest. 39. Smking is more injurious than eating or drinking. Skilled physiologists must say the reason. 40. Yes. 41. (a) Yes; used as a tonic. (b) Yes; bairagis use it for this purpose. (c) Yes. (d) Bhang is used for asthma and other diseases, and smoked as a germicide and disin- fectant. 42. The moderate use is practically harmless, as witness the rate at which the population of the country is increasing. 43. Yes. 44. (a) Moderate stupefaction. (b) Yes. (c), (d) Yes; hunger is allayed during the stupor. (e), (f) No creation of appetite. Effects last from 20 minutes to 2 hours. (h) The want of it produces uneasiness. 45. (a) Yes; moral and physical deterioration may be caused; no disease. (b) No. (c) No. (d) No. (e) Induces laziness, but no other vices. (f) I know of only one instance where its habitual use has caused temporary insanity A Muhammadan peon in Anantapur, suffering from its effects, saw a man on the road, a cooly. Shout- ing out he was a pig, he rushed at and killed him, and was convicted of murder. I have been sixteen years in India. 46. The excessive use of any drugs is, of course, baneful. 47. No. 48. It must naturally affect the children: in the case of alcohol, "Saturday night's" children are proverbial. 49. (a) No. (d) Yes; if used in excess. 51. No. None. 52. The only instance that has come within my knowledge personally in sixteen years is the one I have quoted against question No. 45. 53. Yes; occasionally. Yes; vide above. 54. Not to my knowledge. 55. Yes; occasionally. The secret police re- ports furnish occasional instances. 56. Dhatura and tobacco strengthen the effects. Vide the secret police reports. 58. I opened a shop in Ootacamund this year and have to control sales. 59. It has only been working a few months, and the time has not yet come to form an opinion. 60 and 61. Not controlled here. The extent of cultivation and preparation is but small. 62. It would be quite impossible to control it here properly owing to the wild and mountainous character of the country and the quantity of jungly places where it could be grown. 63. No. 64. No. 65. Taxation, which is in the shape of licenses issued to the sellers, is certainly reasonable. I would raise the taxation in future if it is found the sales increase, because the articles are more or less of a luxury. 66. No. 67. No. 68. No consumption occurs on the premises of the one shop licensed. 69. Yes; a shop was opened in consequence of applications. Enquiry was made as to suitable location of the shop. Yes; local public opinion should be considered. 70. No Native States near.
190 18. Evidence of MR. L. C. MILLER, Acting Collector of Trichinopoly. 1. I have consulted the subordinate revenue authorities in the district, and my answers are based on their reports, which are enclosed. 2. Charas is scarcely known. Flat ganja is the only commonly known form. It is said to be made by cutting off the flowers of the cultivated hemp plant and allowing them to dry in the shade; they are then pressed. This is flat ganja, known locally as sadai ganja. Ganja is also known locally as koraikarrumoligai. Subji and bhang as known here are preparations made to drink from ganja. The dried leaves of the hemp plant are said to be used by native doctors for medicinal purposes. Flat ganja alone is to be found in the drug shops in this district, with preparations made from it. 3. Does not, so far as I am informed, grow in this district spontaneously. 4. It has only one name in this district, viz., ganja. 5. There is no wild hemp in these parts. 6. Not known. 7. Ganja plants are sparsely cultivated for (a). (d) Ganja is not cultivated for its fibre or seeds. The plant known by the name of Pulichei (Hibiscus cannabinus) is cultivated for its fibre to a small extent. 8. No fluctuations are reported, and the area is very small. 9. Ganja is cultivated on a poorish red loam soil, which is dug up and mixed with red sand and ashes. The seeds are sown in small holes two inches deep. When the plants have grown 1½ feet high, they are manured with pigeon's dung. The plants are watered every day. They require but little water. They take six months to mature. Pulichei seeds are sown in some cases singly on dry lands and in some mixed with ragi (Eleusina coracana) on wet and garden lands. It takes six months to mature, 10. They are of the same classes as other culti- vators. 11. Not here. 12. Not known. 13. The cultivation is nowhere restricted. 14. Almost all that is used here is imported as ganja, and not prepared in the district. 15. There are no preparations from the wild plant. Cultivated hemp is used in this district. (a) Smoking.191 they take it at all ages medicinally. Ganja is boiled with ghee, and a sweet preparation is made for children as a preventive of diarrh192 Oral evidence. Question 1.193 and marvadies are said to both eat and drink bhang, but it is drunk more often in assemblies of fakirs and by Rajputs. 25. Ganja is easily had under present condi- tions. The habit does not appear to be spreading. Its use is not going out, as licenses to sell ganja are being taken out from year to year. 26. In this district habitual excessive consum- ers would seem to be few and far between, though habitual and occasional moderate consumers may sometimes be said to become excessive consumers. 27. Habitual and occasional smokers are found in the same classes; habits of life generally sedentary. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers consume about a tola per day, worth 3 or 4 pies per tola. (b) Habitual excessive, double the quantity, i.e., 6 or 8 pies. 29. (a) Tobacco is mixed. (b) Exceptionally opium, while sweets and spices are also often mixed to give the whole flavour, taste and appetite. Dhatura exception- ally mixed. The consumption of bhang not being universal in this district, the demand for bhang massala is not such as to create a supply regularly offered for sale. The ingredients are ginger, sugarcandy, opium seeds (cuscus), black pepper. 30. The consumption is generally in company and confined to the male sex without regard to limit of age after boyhood. It is occasionally given to infants to induce sleep. 31. The habit with other habits of the kind is easily formed; if not deep-rooted is easily broken off. There is, however, a tendency to develop moderate use of the drug into excessive. 32. There are no particular social or religious customs in regard to consumption of the drug in this district, so that it is not possible to judge exactly whether the use is temperate or excessive, or leading to formation of habit. But there is no doubt that the example is injurious in the sense of its turning out into a vice. 33. Public opinion is not very critical in regard to the consumption of the drug, though the exhibition of persons being known as confirmed ganja users is avoided and not relished. The ap- parent disrepute of being known as using the narcotic is owing to the evil results of the excessive use thereof. Consumers of the drug from Upper India often invoke the divinity just before taking the drug, as well also opium, in the belief that they possess wholesome properties calling for being approached at with meek and humble heart. 34. It is thought that it would be rather a serious privation not to use the drug when there is craving for it, occasioned both by moderate and excessive use. There is no means of ascertaining the numbers of each class. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of the drug, but in such case illicit consumption cannot be totally prevented, as it would be impos- sible to reach every illicit instance of use, the use being so easy. The prohibition can only be en- forced by interdicting its cultivation. As the drug is used as an intoxicant, it would be quite impossible to prohibit its use accordingly. The method of prohibition would be to tax the culti- vation. The total prohibition of the use of the drug my Treasury Deputy Collector, who knows something of Upper India, says would occasion serious political discontent, leading possibly also to a political danger. (a) The Hindu of the tropics has taken to alcohol as only an acquired habit which he can easily shake off, while the use of the drug in question, as with opium, is indigenous, so that it is believed if the consumption of the hemp drug is totally prohibited, he will take more to opium than to alcohol. 36. No. 37. Charas is unknown in this district. 38. It is not possible with the information at hand to detect the difference. 39. Opinion is varied in the matter, some stating smoking is less injurious, others eating and drinking less injurious. 40. It is said that these drugs are prepared as a stimulant for asthma, fever, dysentery, and exter- nally for colic. Yes, in some parts it is used for cattle disease and given to cows for safe delivery. Ganja leaves given to calves; also is burnt to disinfect sheepfold. 41. Charas is not used in these parts. Ganja and bhang used for (a) yes, (b) yes, (e) yes, (d) steadying the mind it is said. What is referred to is the moderate occasional and habitual use. 42. The moderate use of it is not felt to be harmful, provided good nourishment is taken. That is the experience. 43. Inoffensive. 44. Yes; it is refreshing; it produces a little intoxication. It allays hunger only for the time being, but without the same effect on the system as food proper. It creates appetite after the stimulation has diminished. It lasts for four or five hours. After-effects are that the consumer finds himself not quite so equal for any great task as he was when the stimulation existed. Want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 45. (a) Generally impairs the constitution if no proper nourishment is taken. (b) No. (c) Prone to cause lung affections and, in the end dropsy. (d) No. (f) Ganja smoking might bring on insanity, at times violent, but generally consisting of delusion generally connected with religious subjects, gener- ally permanent, no particular typical symptoms. (g) The drug is taken to relieve mental anxiety or brain disease, and there is tendency to go to excess and produce insanity. 46. The same remarks apply more so, and the constitution gets impaired for want of sufficient nourishment owing to the appetite being compara- tively deadened by the excessive use of the drug. 47. No; the children must be in a degree affected. 48. It is believed that owing to the habit being contagious, it may become hereditary and affect also the children. 49. (a) Yes, by young people. (b) Generally not. (c) Generally more injurious, because the consumers are younger and it will have more effect on their constitution, and in these cases there is a greater tendency to go to excess. Opinions differ on the last point. 50. In excessive use it is not used as an aphro- disiac but simply as narcotic. It is said to pro- duce impotence. VOL. VI. 2 E
194 51. (a) No. (b) Perhaps large proportion of gamblers may be consumers. 53. May; it is not unlikely that the indulgence may occasionally induce violent and other crime. An instance is quoted locally wherein a person who indulged in the drug beat a person, resulting in death, on slight provocation. 54. The general opinion is in the negative. 55. (a) Yes. (b) Yes, for a time. 56. Admixture of tobacco with ganja and sweetmeats with halwa modify intoxicating power. 57. Charas is not used in this district. Ganja in moderate use is said to be stimulating, In ex- cessive doses it is narcotic. 58. Capable of improvement. 59. The present system in this district is to put up to auction sale the right to vend the drug. Under this system there are three shops for sale of the drug in the district. It seems to me that the right to sell in places such as the head quarters of each taluk and division of Deputy Tahsildars may be put up to auction. I think that while the sale will bring in revenue, it will not operate as a hardship to the consumers. 60. The cultivation is not controlled. Whether this system requires to be modified will depend whether the use of ganja is bad to health, and, if it is not, on the consideration whether revenue should not be derived from the narcotic (as from other narcotics). 61. No charas is produced here. 62. Same answer as 60. 63. No objection, except that a source of revenue is not availed of by selling the right of vend in many more sub-divided localities than at present. 64. The article being a local product, no re- marks to offer. 65. At present the rate of vending the drug is sold by auction and there is no other tax. I have no remarks to offer as to (b), nor as to any altera- tion in the amount of taxation of any of the articles in relation to each other. 66. Not necessary. 67. No remarks. 68. At present it is consumed without reference to any locality. No restriction in regard to this seems at present necessary. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted, and I do not think it is necessary to do so unless the opening of shop restricts the supply or raises the price. 70. No remarks. 20. Evidence of MR. C. J. WEIR,* Acting Collector, District Magistrate, and Agent to Govr., Ganjam. 1. The definitions may be accepted, but charas is not used in this district. 2. Bhang is known locally as patti and ganja as kalli. The liquid decoction from patti is known as bhang. 3 to 6. I understand that the wild hemp plant is not found in this district. The District Forest Officer has, however, been specially asked for a report on the subject. 7. It is cultivated throughout the district for all purposes, except the production of charas. Its production for fibre is very limited. A special report as to the area under cultivation is being compiled. 8. I am unable as yet to say; but there is a general impression that there has been an increase in the consumption of drugs prepared from the plant, and a consequent increase in the area culti- vated therewith. 9. The system is fully described in several of the replies I am forwarding with this. I have nothing to add. 10. The ordinary cultivators raise it. 11. and 12. I do not know. 13. It is not restricted. On elevated situations. Moderate rainfall and red soils well manured are deemed the most favourable conditions. I am unable to say that it would not grow anywhere. 14. (a) and (c) are. No statistics can be given, as they are largely prepared in private houses. 15. I have no personal experience. Full details are, however, given in some of the replies sent herewith. 16. (a) Yes. (b) I believe so. (c) Not known. 17. The preparation is not restricted to any particular class. 18. Ganja keeps for one year or more and bhang a much shorter time. Mildew and damp are said to be the causes of deterioration. Sun- drying is adopted. 19. Ganja is mixed up with many other kinds of spices and eaten. 20. Ganja is smoked almost universally by bairagis and religious mendicants in all localities. Amongst other classes the practice prevails; but I have had the most varying estimates given of the percentage of the population who smoke. It is probably not very large, i.e., not over 5 per cent. 21. Flat ganja. 23. Very rarely, and only on account of its cheapness. 24. Vide answer to question No. 20. As far as I can learn, drinking of bhang is most generally practised, and the custom is more general than that of smoking ganja. It is not confined to any class or locality, but more preva- lent in the malarious parts of the district. 25. It is the general impression in the district that it is on the increase. Many attribute this to the enhanced price of intoxicating liquors owing to the increased stringency of our abkari laws. I think, if the fact be true, the explana- tion is reasonable. 26. I cannot say. 27. Religious medicants. It is generally said other consumers belong mainly to the lower classes, but some of all classes unquestionably indulge. Drugs are taken as prophylactics to malaria, and in a feverish district like this the belief may bring many to indulge in the habit. *Summoned to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but was unable to appear.
195 28. Widely varying estimates are given, but apparently an excessive consumer can satisfy him- self with about one anna's worth in the day. 29. Details will be found in many of the answers appended. The object of admixture is apparently generally to increase the intoxicating effect or to make the drug more palatable. 30. No rule that I can ascertain. It is mainly confined to the male sex. Children do not usual- ly consume the drug. 31. I believe so. It is, I understand, difficult. Yes; this is the general belief. 32. On two particular occasions it is said to be customary to consume bhang. The consumption is said to be moderate on such occasions, and is not essential to the worship. I consider such a cus- tom is more or less likely to lead to the formation of the habit. 33. The use of ganja seems to be universally regarded with disapproval. That of bhang, es- pecially on certain occasions, less so. But the habitual consumption of all forms of the drug is in disrepute, and consumers, as a rule, endeavour to conceal the habit. The evils resulting from excess in its use, and the fact that it is generally used as an aphrodisiac, may account for the senti- ment against it. I believe the plant is not worshipped by any of the natives of the district. 34. I have no doubt it would to all habitual consumers. I cannot give numbers. 35. In my opinion it would not be feasible. I believe it would be illicitly consumed. It would be practically impossible to enforce prohibition. It might, of course, be practicable with a very large staff to stamp out to a large extent the pro- duction of the drug; but this would involve the evils which attend all such attempts in this country. I believe the prohibition would cause severe discontent among consumers. I do not think that in this district it would amount to a political danger. 36. I have no doubt that prohibition would be followed by recourse to another form of intoxicant. This is, I believe, the result of prohibition always when another intoxicant is available. The ten- dency is, I understand, in the other direction. 39. The bulk of opinion in this district is to the effect that drinking bhang is the least injurious and is sometimes even beneficial. 40. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 41. It is generally believed to be of benefit in (a), (b), and (c). 43. Yes. 44. These are described by the medical officers who have sent in their replies. 45. In my experience as a magistrate, I have on several occasions had lunatics brought before me and their insanity has been ascribed to the use of hemp drugs. In one case, which came particularly under my observation, the lunatic recovered very shortly after he was placed in confinement, I cannot say if the lunatics were habitual moderate consumers or excessive con- sumers. 49. It is widely believed to be an aphrodisiac. The preparations of ganja seem to be in most repute in this connection. 51 and 52. I do not consider there are suffi- cient grounds for saying that there is any con- nection in this district of the moderate use of the drug with crime either particular or general. Excess in any intoxicant is likely to lead to crime. 53. No such case has come under my ex- perience. 54. I do not know. 56. I have no information on the point. 58 et seq. The present system of excise admi- nistration in respect to these drugs is, I under- stand, more or less tentative. It is only within the past few years the Abkari Department has dealt with these drugs at all, and at present our connec- tion is limited to the licensing of shops for the sale of the drugs. It is only since the introduction of the system that it has become possible to form any estimate of the extent of consumption. I consider that there would be very great and serious difficulties in the way of any attempt to restrict the production of a drug so easily and widely produced. Hemp drugs are, however, in my opinion, and I believe in that of the majority of natives, the most pernicious form of intoxicant, and the danger of increased use is the greater, as there is no recognised rule of caste prohibit- ing it. Government should, I think, in connection with its declared policy to enhance the price of alcoholic and other intoxicants, consider the danger of thereby driving consumers thereof to the cheaper and more dangerous preparations of the hemp drug. 68. I think it is undesirable that shops should be licensed for consumption of the drug on the premises. 69. Enquiries are made before a shop is opened whether there are a large number of consumers or not in this locality. The demand for the drug is gauged roughly by the amount offered for the privilege of exclusive vend. If the amount offered is small, shops are not licensed. In very few places would there be any public opinion on the subject. 70. I have no information. 21. Evidence of MR. H. D. TAYLOR, Manager, Jeypore Estate. Oral evidence. Question 1.196 grow it, may sell it where they like. I believe that the true hill raiyats do not smoke the drug or use it for drinking, but only for medicine. I have never heard of a cultivator so using it in the small villages. The drug may be so used in the towns like Jeypore, but I have made no in- quiry, not knowing that 1 was to be examined. I have never seen the drug sold in the markets. It may be sold at Maidalpur or elsewhere. There is nothing to prevent such a sale, but I have no experience of such sales. The drugs are mainly used by foreigners. The hill raiyats keep Shiva- ratri. I have heard a general rumour that ganja is smoked in Jeypore, but I understand it is not smoked in the villages. I have generally under- stood that it is consumed by loafers, idlers, and such people in Jeypore and other large towns. I have never seen any ganja going across the border. I have never conducted any inquiry into the matter of smuggling across to the Central Provinces. The matter has never been brought to my notice. During the last four years I have had nothing to do with the Government Excise revenue. As I know nothing of the use of the drugs among the people generally, I know nothing of their effects among the people generally. I remember a foreigner, an Uriya Brahmin, a schoolmaster in a village, going mad about four years ago. As he was a schoolmaster, I inquired of the villagers (he had, as far as I remember, no relatives with him) why he had gone mad, and they said he smoked ganja. I knew nothing of his past history, and accepted that; and, as far as I remember, I entered ganja in form C as the cause of insanity. I sent the man to the asylum at Waltair as Magistrate. I heard recent- ly of his being back in another school again. I think he has been back some time. I do not know whether it might not be madak that this man smoked. There is a great deal of opium smoked and the people do not discriminate. Vil- lage people are very ready to attribute insanity to ganja in Jeypore. I have heard of lunacy being attributed thus to ganja; but I am unable to recall any other cases. When I sent this school- master to the civil apothecary at Korapat, as far as I remember, I told him that the supposed cause was ganja. I should not as a Magistrate inquire into such cases personally as a rule, but receive report from the police, and examine any witnesses the police brought up. In this case I went to the village to inspect the school. I do not think any ganja was grown in the village; but a good deal of opium was consumed. This is the only ganja case I remember. I have had other lunacy cases, but all this has been more than four years ago, when I was a Magistrate. In view of what I have said regarding the use of the drugs among the general mass of the people, there is no need for restriction. But neither, so far as I know, would any privation be caused if restriction were necessary in the inter- ests of other provinces. I have not inquired as to whether the people use the drugs in their feasts. There would certainly be no privation involved in the prohibition of export. And, so far as I know, there would be no privation of a general character involved in the prohibition of the use of the drugs in Jeypore estate above the Ghats which is under my charge. I think that the introduction of the Government system of licensing sale would meet with no opposition from the people in the estate generally. It would only affect at all such places as the town of Jeypore. It would, however, be the best plan in regard to such towns. If opium arrangements were altered, there might be a greater demand for ganja, and this might alter the conditions of the problem. I would recom- mend the Government system being introduced experimentally by opening a shop in Jeypore. I think there would be great difficulty in interfer- ing with the present growth of hemp. It would require an expensive preventive agency. I do not know certainly whether this little cultivation is carried on with a view to using the drug or to making profit by selling it. I have seen one or two plants of wild hemp in the estate. I have not hitherto discriminated between the excessive and moderate use of ganja as a cause of insanity. But I should certainly inquire into the extent of the use if it could be ascertained. It would be very difficult to get any definite inform- ation as to this. If ganja were mentioned, I should still make the prescribed inquiry regarding other causes, as shown in the form C, going back for a period of two years which (as far as I remember) is prescribed. I believe that people often take to ganja (as to drink) when they have heavy losses; and the two causes might combine. My own impression is that ganja might very well be a cause of insanity. I base this on general report. I should not therefore employ a man in estate service of whom I knew that he used the drug at all. I could not with confidence put such a man on important guard duty lest he became incapable. I should not have the same feeling about the moderate consumption of liquor. 22. Evidence of MR. J. G. D. PARTRIDGE, Assistant collector, Ganjam. 1. Information has been specially gathered for this purpose from some medical officers and traders in these drugs. Also my position as Divisional Officer. 2. Yes. Bhang, as defined above, is locally called patri. What is locally known as bhang is a liquid mixture consisting of milk, hemp leaves or ganja, and some spices. 3. In no district I am aware of does this plant grow abundantly. 4. Trisuli, basavapatri, etc. Yes. 5. Good soil containing manure is necessary for the growth of the plant. Much rain spoils the plant. 6. No definite information. 7. (a), (c), (d) Yes. In this district it is cultivated in backyards of houses and in fields, also in some villages. To a slight extent; but definite information will follow on the receipt of reports from Taluk officers. 8. There may have been some decrease after the introduction of the Madras Abkari Act, I of 1886; but I have no definite information on the point. 9. A well-manured plot of ground is selected for sowing seeds, which is generally done in June. When the plants grow to a cubit's height, the male ones are singled out and extirpated, and the female plants are transplanted, generally in the
197 months of July and August. When the plants are full grown, they are reaped generally in January and February. Manure and water are necessary. 10. No. 11. No, as far as am I aware of. 13. There is no difference in the mode of culti- vating hemp required for producing ganja or for other purposes, according to my information. 14. (a), (c) Yes. Both to a small extent in this district. 16. Prepared by some in their houses and others in temples. It is not prepared from the wild plant in this division. 17. By the licensed vendors and habitual con- sumers, who are not restricted to any particular class. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping. Ganja keeps good for about a year with ordinary care. Afterwards it deteriorates becoming quite dry as dust and losing its resinous matter. It may also be attacked by insects. Patti can be kept only for five or six months. It afterwards gets decomposed. 19. Ganja is not only used for smoking, but also employed in the preparation of several intoxi- cating drugs, such as majum, halwa. 20. Bairagis and fakirs for the most part. The proportion of ganja smokers to the total popula- tion would be very small in these parts. 21. Only flat ganja is used in this division. 29. The ingredient ordinarily used with ganja for smoking is tobacco, and those exceptionally mixed are sandalwood powder, musk, and opium. For drinking purposes pepper is ordinarily mixed; and cloves, cardamoms, nutmegs, cinnamon, and various other spices are exceptionally used. Dha- tura is used both in smoking and drinking to increase intoxication. 30. Though these are for the most part used by adult males, very small quantities may be used by females. 31. The habit is easily formed and difficult to break off. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. Bondilis use bhang (liquid) at the time of the Holi festival. It is also said to be used on Mesha Sankramanam day in Parlakimedi Taluk. 33. The consumption of these drugs is regarded with contempt, although it cannot be said that there is any public opinion on the point. Every object which causes intoxication is generally held in disrepute by the Hindus; more so ganja, as it is supposed to cause derangement of the brain. 35. (a) No. (b) Yes. The prohibition would cause great discontent among the consumers, though it will not amount to a political danger in these parts. The prohi- bition will no doubt be followed by recourse to liquor and other intoxicating drugs. 40. Yes. 43. Yes. 44. Produces intoxication and allays hunger. 45. (b) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes; insanity is caused in exceptional cases. Temporary. Yes. Lately a person who was rendered insane by the frequent use of ganja was produced before me. Enquiry showed that the cause of insanity was ganja, and he was a person to be detained in a lunatic asylum for treatment. The insanity was, however, of a tem- porary nature, as a few days' restraint resulted in a perceptible improvement in his state of mind. 58. The preparations from the hemp plant are consumed to so small an extent in these parts that I do not consider that any changes in the present system of excise administration are called for in this district. 60. There is no control at all in this presidency on the cultivation of the hemp plant. 68. Not in the Ganjam district, as far as I am aware of. 69. Enquiries are made as to whether there is any necessity for a shop at the place in question. No persons raise objections to the opening of a shop. There is only one shop in a fairly large town like Parlakimedi with over sixteen thousand inhabitants. People living in villages do not require a shop as they can grow the plant. 23. Evidence of MR. H. CAMPBELL, Acting Sub-Collector, Guntoor. 1. I have had no personal experience regard- ing the matters connected with hemp drugs, and can only give information which I have collected officially. 2. The hemp products are known under different names198 Peninsula; isjeeroo, consjaina (Mal) kinnab (Arab), and Bin (Burma). 5 and 6. Vide my answer to question 3. 7. Cultivation of the hemp plant is carried on in parts of this division, chiefly in Duggupadu and Pusapadoo, Bapatla taluk199 consumers are habitual moderate consumers. Any proportions that could be given as obtaining be- tween the several classes of consumers would be merely conjectural and not at all reliable. 27. The consumers are not dangerous to society. The wandering fakirs and bairagis are said to smoke ganja to secure concentration of mind in their devotional practices, and to serve as a tem- porary antidote against hunger. Athletes are said to use bhang to serve as a stimulant while they are engaged in wrestling and other exer- cises. 28. Smoking ganja is sold at three or four pies a tola, and a tola or tola-and-half may suffice a moderate consumer or even two. One seer of bhang properly prepared will cost three or four annas, and will be enough for two men to drink. One seer of majum may cost as much as a rupee and will do for 10 men. 29. The ganja procurable in the local markets is, I understand, adulterated ordinarily to increase its weight, and exceptionally to intensify its in- toxicating power. It is difficult to obtain the pure drug. Among the deleterious substances mixed with ganja may be mentioned opium, stramonium seed (dhatura), aconite or monk's hood and nux vomica, each of which is in itself a strong poison, except when used in very small doses. The seeds of dhatura are known to be used in in- tensifying the narcotic effects of bhang and in adding to the strength of country spirits and toddy. 30. The consumption of ganja and bhang is practised in company; oftener in the case of the former than in that of the latter. Majum and other strong intoxicants are generally consumed in solitude or in the company of the habitual con- sumers. Children do not use these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed, and, when once formed, is difficult to break off. As far as I know, there is no particular tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. If anything, alcoholic liquors and hemp drugs are much on a par in this respect. 32. I am not acquainted with any such social or religious customs. 33. Ganja smokers are not generally looked down upon as much as consumers of majum and other strong preparations. The consumption of the latter drugs is associated with licentious habits. The higher castes of the Hindu religion condemn the use of all intoxicants. A habitual ganja smoker or consumer is not generally re- spected, but suffers social degradation. No harm is, however, thought of a bairagi or fakir who consumes the drug on the ground of religious devotion. The custom of worshipping the hemp plant does not obtain here. 34. It would, in my opinion, be a serious pri- vation to the consumers to forego the use of the drug which they have so long been accustomed to. Any attempt to stop the use of hemp drugs by prohibitory duty or by means of executive order would only drive the people to illicit consumption or to the use of still more deleterious drugs, as the habit of indulgence in stimulants, when once formed, will be persisted in in spite of all repres- sive measures. 35. The absolute prohibition of the consumption of ganja could not, in my opinion, be enforced. To prohibit its consumption absolutely, its culti- vation should in the first instance be put a stop to, and this does not seem feasible. The practice of growing the plant in back-yards and in vegetable gardens has long been prevalent. For any person addicted to the habit of ganja, nothing would be easier than to grow a few plants secretly within the enclosure or com- pound of his own house, in nooks and corners, or in the midst of other vegetables. To effec- tually prevent the cultivation of the plant, nothing short of a large preventive establishment working by the most inquisitorial methods would be required. Moreover, it seems to be very little use preventing the cultivation of the hemp plant, for the reason that India abounds with plants growing wild everywhere from which drugs can be prepared far more deleterious in their effects than even ganja. If the cultivation of the hemp plant is put a stop to, the ganja consumers, unable to suppress their longing for a stimulating drug, will be forced to resort to such plants. They can be gathered for the mere trouble of going out to the jungles, and can be used without the possibility of any interference or check on the part of Government. Already the effects of the seeds of one of such plants, namely, the dhatura, are being felt, and it would be a Hercu- lean task for Government to undertake to dis- criminate between the several kinds of plants and suppress their growth or to reserve the lands where such plants are growing merely for the purpose of removing or rectifying a social evil. Apart from the question of revenue there are other grounds why it is impossible to enforce the prohibi- tion of the use of the drug in this country. The drug is also produced in the Native States, and the difficulty of preventing its importation would be immense. Even though political danger may not be apprehended by the adoption of repressive measures, yet there will be widespread discontent greatly disproportionate to the advantages con- ferred on the people by the absolute prohibition of the use of the drugs. The prohibition may, moreover, open the way to the use of alcoholic stimulants. 36. I have not come across any cases of such substitution. 37 to 39. Not known. 40. I have not heard that any school of native doctors prescribes the use of hemp drugs on account of their medicinal qualities. I believe the administration of the drug in the form of a tincture or extract sharpens the appetite and induces sleep. I believe that it is efficacious in cases of delirium tremens where even morphia has failed, and it is said of smoking ganja that it serves as a prophy- latic against diseases contracted in malarious climates. The Civil Surgeon, Guntoor, writes that medicinally the drug is invaluable as an anodyne, hypnotic and sedative. 41. Vide answer to 40. 42. The moderate use of ganja is both approved and condemned by medical authorities of equal weight. The Civil Surgeon, Guntoor, informs me that it is said to cause insanity after long- continued use. I have often read that running "amok" is produced by a large dose of bhang; but I only state this as a popular theory. I understand that fakirs and bairagis use ganja commonly to lessen sexual desire, and that after continued use, it produces impotency. Some of its beneficial effects are noted in replies to questions 40 and 41. 43. Moderate consumers are quite inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of the drug is refreshing. It mitigates physical weakness and mental depression. Intoxication
200 is an after stage. The duration of its effects depends upon the dose and nature of the prepara- tion. They may last from three or six or even ten hours. The after-effects are general weakness of the body and mind. The want of subsequent gratification produces an uneasy sensation. 45. I can give no satisfactory reply to this question, as I have not studied the effects of the use of the drugs in any particular cases. I believe that their habitual moderate use induces a habit of laziness. 46. The effects of the excessive use of ganja are said to resemble delirium tremens, resulting from excessive indulgence in alcohol. The first indication of the, activity of the drug is a child- like gaiety and tendency to find comical resem- blances and contrasts in the surrounding objects. A phase of pleasant humour and urbanity suc- ceeds this state of feeling, and is followed by an interval of tranquil rationality, which is a pre- lude to further excitement. No instance of fatal poisoning by this drug has been heard of. 47 and 48. The use of hemp drugs does not seem to be a hereditary habit, nor does it seem to affect the children of the moderate consumer. 49. Prostitutes are said to resort occasionally to the use of the drug as an aphrodisiac. 53, 54. and 55. As to whether excessive use of ganja necessarily prompts men to violent crime opinions differ widely. While it is maintained by one side that violent crimes have been traced to excessive indulgence in hemp preparations, the other contends that even a moderate use of the drug produces a sense of lassitude and laziness, which is evidently not a predisposition to acts of violence. Chevers remarks that it is a matter of popular notoriety, both in Bengal and the North- Western Provinces, that persons intoxicated with ganja are liable to commit acts of homicidal violence. In some cases of homicide, committed or alleged to have been committed, while under the influence of cannabis, one person only has been attacked. Usually, however, the victims are numerous, the ease assuming the form known as "running amok." Commonly when acts of homicidal violence are committed while under the influence of an intoxicant, some motive is traceable for the crime. It may be a motive which existed previous to the intoxication or one which comes into existence subsequent to the commencement of the intoxication. In the former case, it may be sup- posed that the intoxicant is taken by the criminal with the object of nerving himself for the deed. The criminal statistics show, however, that the amount of crime, violent or otherwise, which can be traced to the use of hemp is exceedingly small, It is probable that any latent propensity to crime may be developed by the habitual consumption of the narcotic; but it is exceedingly unlikely that a continued habit of the use of the drug will create a propensity to crime in men who are constitu- tionally averse to acts of violence. If standard historical works are to be believed, a drink of bhang makes the native soldier reckless of life. In the account of the defence of Arcot, for instance, the most formidable attack which was repulsed was made during the Moharram, at a time when the Nawab's soldiers were primed with bhang. 56 and 57. No information is forthcoming. 58, 59 and 60. The system of administration prevalent in this presidency in respect of hemp drugs has been described in reply to question 8. The system is, I consider, working well. To obtain accurate information as to where and to what extent the hemp plant is cultivated, and the ganja and bhang manufactured thereform are con- sumed or transported for consumption, it is highly desirable that a correct record of cultivation and of sales to the public should be kept. The retail vend of ganja has been brought under regulation only since 1889, no restrictions having keen impos- ed upon the cultivation and possession of ganja. As yet the information available is of too indefinite and uncertain a character to justify the introduc- tion of any stringent repressive measures or the adoption of any elaborate system of administra- tion in regard to hemp drugs. The traffic in hemp drugs may, I think, be left as it is for the present and the results watched, no restrictions being placed upon this cultivation of the plant and pos- session of ganja by cultivators. Cultivators should not, however, be allowed to soil their stock to others than licensed persons, or to transport it to other districts. or provinces without a permit issued. by an authorized officer. To obtain a more inti- mate and accurate knowledge of the subject, it seems desirable to adopt such measures as are cal- culated to involve a minimum of Government interference and friction. At present so little is known of the subject that it is impossible to say with any degree of certainty as to what may be the best method of treatment. It seems, there- fore, better to continue the present system with the modifications above indicated. 62. and 63. Vide reply to questions 58 to 60. 64. and 65. None. 66. In the present stale of affairs it is not desirable to have differential rates of taxation. 67. I have none. 68. There are no licensed shops where con- sumption is permitted on the premises. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. It seems hardly necessary that public opinion should be consulted before a shop is sanctioned or opened. If the people take objection, their objection will always be given due consideration. 70. There does not seem to be any importa- tion or smuggling of hemp drugs from, the Native States. 24. Evidence of MR. E. L. VAUGHAN, Acting Sub-Collector, Dindigul. 1. Only general observation and opinion formed by consulting various officers in my division. 2. The only variety in use is the flat ganja, and the shopkeepers of Dindigul and Palni get their supplies from Trichy, and the shopkeepers of Periyakolam from Madura. 3 to 6. No information can be given. 7. Two varieties of hemp plants, viz., pilichai (Bombay hemp) and shanal (Linem hemp), are cultivated in all the three taluks to a limited ex- tent for their fibre. The villages in which they are grown are201 8. None observed. 9. Pilichai seed is sown with ragi crops, etc., and in garden lands, and shanal is raised on wet lands. 10. No. Agriculturists raise the varieties for their fibre. 11 to 18. No information available. The drug is sold in very small quantities, and no stock is kept. 19. Ganja is used for smoking. The principal trade is in making a compound called lahiam, which is chewed like betel. The preparation is made by pounding the leaves and mixing with jaggery syrup, dried ginger, etc. 20. Religious mendicants as well as day-labour- ers smoke ganja. 21. Flat ganja is used for smoking. 22 to 24. Charas or bhang not known, in these parts. 25. The use of ganja is so very limited that any increase or decrease is not perceptible. 26. No information is available. 27. The lower orders form the main class, al- though consumers may be found among all classes; they want something strong after their daily labours; and as the prices of alcoholic drinks are becoming prohibitive, the poorer classes take lahiam. The latter is very cheap, being sold at four pies a tola. 28. (a) ¼ to ¾ tola. (b) Anything in excess of the above average. 29. For lahiam, syrup of jaggery, dried ginger, ghi, pepper, cloves, etc., are ordinarily added to give taste to the preparation. Nothing excep- tional. The method is as follows: Ordinary flat ganja is cleaned several times, soaked in milk, and dried in the shade. The roots of vilra, sara- saparilla, kuskus, and sirukirai are powdered, and a decoction prepared therefrom. Dried ginger, pepper, thippili, thesavaram, cardamom, etc., are dried and powdered. The dried ganja is boiled in ghi and the juice extracted. The powder of gin- ger, etc., being then mixed with the decoction, the extracted juice, honey, sugar, etc., is again boiled and converted into lahiam. 30. Ganja is consumed both in solitude and in company. Information as to extent not available. It is mainly confined to the male sex. Lahiam is given to children to induce them to sleep and as a preventive of diarrh202 8. Vide answer to No. 7. 9. No special methods were adopted in its cul- tivation. It is grown on the same soil and under the same conditions as brinjal, kodaikal or any other vanpayir crop. 10. No; they were the ordinary agricultural class. 11. No. 12. I have no knowledge of the wild hemp plant. 13. A license is required for its cultivation in this district. Apparently not. When cultivated here it was successfully grown on wet red and black soils, and on dry sand and hilly ground. 14. The plant (for preparation of ganja) was grown formerly. Vide answer to No. 7. Ganja sellers now import their ganja from North Arcot where the wild hemp is said to grow spontaneous- ly on the Javadi hills. 15. These products are not prepared in this division, and no information is available as to their methods of preparation. It is said that the cultivated plant is best made into broken ganja, the wild into flat and round ganja. Ganja and tobacco are chopped and mixed for smoking. Ganja, pepper, ginger, and spices are mixed with sugar and ghee and eaten. Ganja, pepper, and spices are pounded up in water and drunk. 16. No. Ganja and bhang can both be made from the plant grown here, not charas. Charas can be made out of the wild plant that grows in North Arcot. 17. The cultivators themselves used to prepare the drug when hemp was formerly grown here. 18. Charas will keep two years, and bhang and ganja one year without deteriorating. Charas still has some efficacy after five years and the other two after three years. After this they are useless. These periods are given on the assump- tion that the drug is not exposed to the air. If exposure be allowed all three deteriorate more rapidly. 19. Ganja is used for smoking and for eating and drinking (vide answer to No. 15). 20. A very small proportion of the people here use ganja. Charas is never used except by pilgrims from the north. Sudra paradesis consume the most, but Maravas, Pallars, and Agambadians do use it, as do some Muhammadans. 21. Flat everywhere. 22. Charas, as said above, is not here used. Northern pilgrims bring it with them occasion- ally. 23. No. 24. It is said that formerly when the plant was cultivated here, bhang was both eaten and drunk by the classes mentioned in answer to No. 20 along with ganja. This is no longer so. 25. Up to last year the yearly sales of licenses had somewhat increased for three years following. Last year there was little rain, and the consequent heat caused a falling off in the consumption. 26 The classes given in No. 20 and Paradesis are (a) of ganja. North country bairagis may perhaps come under (b) of ganja and charas. 28. If ganja be taken203 (f) No. It dulls the intellect temporarily only during the lethargy consequent upon it. 46. No cases of any injury are here ascertain- able. It is said that habitual excessive use has been known to impair the intellect. 47. No, there appears to be no reason to con- sider that the habit is ever due to heredity. 49. The drug is said to be an aphrodisiac, but there is no general employment of it for this pur- pose. 50. Not as far as can be ascertained. 51 and 52. No. No traceable connection exists. 53. No, on the other hand its effect seems gener- ally in the ease of the moderate consumers of these parts to produce indolence rather than ex- citement. 54. Not as far as can be ascertained. 55. No cases have occurred here. Yes; it is said so. 56. The substances mixed with it here (vide supra) are used as flavouring rather than for modifying its effect. Dhatura, as stated above, is not here used. It is said to add to the intoxi- cation produced by the drug. 57. No differences in the effect of the drug when eaten and drunk and when smoked are par- ticularly noticeable. A given quantity of the drug is more efficacious when eaten or drunk than when smoked. 58. No complaints are made against the pre- sent system. 60. The cultivation is so sufficiently controlled that it has been altogether crushed. Ganja, however, as already explained, is imported ready prepared from other districts, and as long as this continues possible the system need not be changed. The raiyats can cultivate other crops. 61. Charas is not produced here. 62. No additional control seems required. The use of the plant is in no way abused, nor is ganja dangerously common or cheap. 63. The present system appears to supply the needs of this part of the country sufficiently well. 64. No. 65. The three are taxed alike apparently. Consumers of ganja are usually poor, and the increase of the tax would cause much discontent. 66. Not as far as is apparent. Here, however, flat ganja only is known. 67. The ultimate incidence of the tax falls now upon the consumer. 68. No such houses or shops are known here. 69. Shops are located at regular distances so that all consumers may have the power of getting their supplies with the minimum of inconvenience. The shops are in no way a nuisance to their neigh- bourhood, and no complaints against their loca- tion have been received. There is no local public opinion on the point to be considered. 70. Yes, duty is paid. This is no general use of untaxed drugs. 26. Evidence of MR. R. E. GRIMLEY, Acting Head Assistant Collector, North Arcot. 1. I have had no personal experience and have merely been able to collect information on the sub- ject from medical men204 31. It is said that under the influence of bad company the habit is easily formed, and that it is not very difficult to break off the habit gradually. There is a tendency to go from moderation to ex- cess. It is usual to increase the dose from time to time, but it does not necessarily follow that the increased dose is excessive. The dose is usually increased owing to the diminished effect produced by the drug in the course of time. 32. None. 33. The consumption of these drugs is gener- ally regarded as degrading. This is the public opinion (social and religious). The use of intoxi- cants is prohibited by both Shastras and Koran, and is therefore held in disrepute, social opinion being in conformity with religion. There is no such custom. 34. No. It is said that the habit can be broken off much more easily than the opium habit. 35. Prohibition of the use of any or all these drugs would cause discontent, but only amongst the consumers. If the use of these drugs be pro- hibited, recourse will be had to opium or alcoholic stimulants. The discontent amongst the con- sumers would not amount to a political danger. Non-consumers would rejoice. The consumers are too few to be formidable. 37. Charas is a more powerful intoxicant than ganja. Charas is occasionally used by those on whom ganja has ceased to exercise its former effect. It is so powerful that nobody would use it in the first instance. 38. It is said that flat ganja is stronger than chur ganja. 39. Ganja smoking is more injurious than drinking bhang massala. The smoking of ganja (or charas) affects the breathing, and produces chronic cough. 40. Ganja is used in a medicine, called yakoti, for producing sexual appetite. It is eaten. Can- not be bought at the bazar. Hindus call it "Madanakameswara Leghyam." Ganja is also prescribed as a digestive. 41. (a) Yes. (b) Its effect is refreshing. (c) No. 42. Beneficial when used as medicine, otherwise even the moderate use of these drugs is injurious. They increase bile, cause loss of blood, and emacia- tion. If consumers fall sick, they readily suc- cumb. 44. Bhang allays hunger temporarily, ganja causes intoxication at once, while bhang does so after a little time. The effect is said to last for two or three minutes. No after-effects. The use of these drugs is refreshing. 45 (a) Yes. (d) Yes; causes asthma after four or five years. (e) Causes laziness. (f) Deadens intellect Ganja produces insanity when taken in excess. (g) Not used to relieve mental anxiety. 47. No. Children are said to be somewhat weakly. 49. (a) Yes. (c) No. (d) Ganja produces impotence after three or four years. 51. I have not observed any connection between the use of these drugs and crime. 57. Ganja is eaten and drunk, charas is only smoked. 27. Evidence of Mr. H. F. W. GILLMAN, Acting Head Assistant Collector, Nilgiris. 1.By enquiries in the South-East Wynad divi- sion of the Nilgiri district. 2. The dried leaves of the plant are not used for any purpose; but the green leaves, which are known by the name of bangi soppu (ganja leaves) are used in the preparation of a liquor to be here- after described. Charas and ganja are known in the division by the same names and have the same meaning as is here given. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in this (the Nilgiri) district. It is fairly abundant in the South-East Wynad division. 4. As ganja seddi (shrub) and (bangi). Yes. 5. I am not aware of the existence of wild hemp in the division, or that any of the hemp drugs are manufactured from it. 7. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) No. In the South-East Wynad division above referred to in the backs-yard of houses. 8. There has been no great increase, so far as I can ascertain. 9. No particular trouble, such as ploughing, manuring, transplanting, etc., is taken about the cultivation of the plant. The seeds are sown in April and May, and the plants come up with the rains in June. The male plants are cut out when distinguishable. The female plants are left alone until they reach maturity in the next January and February, when they are cut and dried. 10. No. The classes who smoke the drug in this division are Chetties and Muhammadans, and the aboriginial tribes, Koters, Kurumbers, etc. 11. I do not think so. 13. I do not think there is any restriction of cultivation to districts. I cannot say if the cultivation is common to all districts. The cultiva- tion of hemp for ganja is possible in all parts of my division. 14. All these products are prepared in my divi- sion; but the extent is not ascertainable, as the preparation is not recognised or permitted by Government. 15. Flat ganja, the only kind known in the division, is thus prepared. The mature female plants are cut into lengths of 1 to 1½ feet and are made up into bundles. These bundles are then placed under weights for several days, the result of which operation is that each bundle of twigs and leaves is made into a sticky mass by the help of the resinous gum exuding from the leaves. Ganja is only used for smoking. The flowers are
205 separated from the mass, and about 1/6 tola weight of them mixed with tobacco and smoked in a pipe. Charas is not known as an article of commerce. Every smoker prepares as much of this resinous exudation as he requires, squeezing the green leaves of the plant in his hand and so collecting it in his palm. He then takes some tobacco, and thoroughly mixes it with the resinous matter in his hand and smokes the mixture. What is here known as bhang is a liquor prepared by grinding the green leaf of the plant with pepper, cardomoms, dried ginger, and a flower called madanakam, adding sugar to the mixture and boiling the whole in milk. This is supposed to be beneficial for affections of the heart and sto- mach. 16. Not generally. I believe bhang can be pre- pared from the hemp plant wherever grown. 17. By no particular classes. Every consumer as a rule, makes his own preparation. 18. The drugs are not kept, but are consumed at once. 19. Yes. 20. I can give no definite information on this point. 21. Flat ganja alone is smoked. 22. Native charas, prepared as described in an- answer to question 15, alone is used. 23. Not to my knowledge. 24. Particulars not known. 25 to 28. No information available. 29. Tobacco is the only ingredient mixed with ganja and charas, and sugar, milk, and spices with bhang. There is no preparation named bhang massala used here. 30. The consumption of these drugs is confined to adult males. Children never consume them. 31. The habit is easily formed in the case of persons whose fathers are addicted to it. I know of no case in which the habit, once contracted, has been broken off. I believe that the majority of consumers in my division are moderate consumers. 32. There are no customs here connected with the consumption of any of the drugs. 33. A moderate ganja or charas smoker is not considered as a disreputable person. But a habi- tual excessive smoker is considered in the same light as a habitual drunkard, and looked down upon accordingly. No stigma whatever attaches to the consumption of bhang, which is either taken as medicine or drunk or eaten (as the sweet- meat majum) at marriages and feasts. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant known to me. 34. Any attempt to prohibit or interfere with the consumption of the drugs in this division would be misplaced. The consumption of the drugs is very small; so small, indeed, that Gov- ernment has determined to ignore it and not to introduce shops with attendant rules and regula- tions that might foster it. Almost all the ganja smokers in the division are moderate in their use of the drug, and prohibiting its consumption would be an injudicious step, and cause much dis- content without being productive of any good. 36. No. 37. Ganja is the more powerful of the two drugs, and produces more prolonged intoxication. 38. Only flat ganja is consumed here. 39. In this division ganja and charas are only smoked and bhang only drunk or eaten in the form of sweetmeat. The question is, therefore, not applicable. 40. I do not know. 41. I am not in a position to give information on these points. 42. I certainly think that the moderate use of the drugs does very little harm. All the smokers whom I have seen did not appear in any way debilitated. All that I noticed was a slight dulling of their senses. 43. Yes. 44 The immediate effect is to produce intoxica- tion, which lasts for two or three hours. It is said by the smokers to create appetite and presumably hunger is allayed for the period that the smoker is in a stupor from the action of the drug Habitual excessive smokers suffer, I am informed from poverty of blood and debility. In the case of habitual smokers, abstention from the drug creates longing for it. 45 to 48. My knowledge of the effects of the drugs is not so extensive as to permit me to offer an opinion on these points. 49. No information is available on this point, as smokers are naturally averse to speak about it. The execessive use of hemp certainly tends to produce impotence. 51 and 52. No; there is no connection between crime and the use of these drugs. 53 to 55. No cases known here. 56. Hemp is not mixed with any other drugs. 57. They are not in this division. 58. The system has not been introduced into the division, and I have no experience of its working. 60. The cultivation of the plant is not control- led, and as it is very limited, being confined to the backyards of houses in a few villages, I do not think there is any need for it to be. 61. Charas is not produced as an article of commerce. 63. There is no vend of any of the drugs in the division. 64. There are no regulations, and none are needed. 65. There is no taxation. 66. Having had no experience of the present rates of taxation, I cannot say. 68. No. 70. No.
206 28. Evidence of MR. J. H. MERRIMAN, Deputy Commissioner of Salt and Abkari, Central Division. 1. My answers are chiefly based on informa- ion received from my subordinates and relate to the Kistna, Nellore, Madras, Chingleput, North and South Arcot, and the four ceded districts. 2. The term ganja, in this division (centre of the Madras presidency) appears to be applied in- discriminately to the hemp plant, its leaves, and flowering tops, and to the preparations therefrom used for smoking. The term bhang here is applied to the drink prepared from ganja. The term charas is practically unknown. Flat ganja is locally known as kalli ganja, round ganja as karuthanu ganja, and broken ganja as aval ganja. Flat ganja is that best known and used. 3. Does not, as far as I have gathered, grow spontaneously in my division. 4. The different names given to the cultivated plant are:207 28. (a) ¾ tola, costing three pies. (b) Three tola, costing an anna. 29. Vide answer 15. It is not known that dhatura is so used. 30. (a) Can't say. (b) Chiefly males, 20 to 40. (c) Very rarely, except as medicine. 31. Yes to all the queries. 32. Bhang is prepared by Bandilis, Rajputs, and Mahrattas on the last day of Dessara (Durga- puja), and worshipped before being used by the in- mates and friends. It is also used at funeral ceremonies of such as were consumers of it when alive. Among the males on the day of the cere- mony some is placed in the grave and some given to the assembled guests, at least such of them as are consumers. It is an essential part of the above ceremonies. It is also used at weddings, but it is not essential. The use of the drug on the above occasions is often carried to excess, but I can't say whether it is likely to lead to the formation of the habit. 33. Ganja and bhang.208 call oppression involved in prohibition is unneces- sary. There is a good deal of back-yard culti- vation which is untaxed. It would be desirable to stop this sporadic cultivation, if feasible. I think we could do this. I think it would be far simpler to issue an order stopping cultivation; and that would be far easier than attempting to tax it. I believe this cultivation could be stamped out by the mere issue of the order. And sup- posing that there were reasonable facilities for consumers obtaining the drugs, the dissatisfaction would not be great. I speak only of my own division at present, but I know the whole presi- dency except a little on the west coast. I think my remarks apply to the whole presidency so far as I know it. I think that the absolute prohibition would require extra establishment for a time. The present establishment would have to be increased, but not to any large extent. And this extra establishment would only be required for a short time. When the thing was established it might be dispensed with. When you show the people that you want to carry out an order, they will do so at once. Ganja is much more lightly taxed than alcohol, and very much cheaper in consequence. The great bulk indeed is not taxed at all. There is in my opinion a margin for a considerable increase in taxation without equalis- ing the tax on alcohol and ganja. I think that at present a man who takes ganja has to spend on the average three pies a day; and the man who takes arrack pays about from nine pies to one anna six pies a day. The toddy drinker pays about the same as the arrack drinker. These are about the average figures for an average moderate consumer. If a moderate consumer of alcohol took his dram a day, he would pay about Re. 1 as. 8 a month in the interior and Rs. 3 in Madras. Both liquor and ganja are under my charge; but of course ganja occupies comparatively little attention. I cannot say that I can state anything definite regarding their comparative effects. I am not prepared with an opinion. 29. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR R. DHARMARAO, Deputy Commissioner, Salt and Abkari, Northern Division. Oral evidence. Question 1.209 The sale only is under control. The revenue is too small to make further restriction important from a revenue point of view. A restricted posses- sion will necessitate an increase in the number of shops and in the preventive establishment. There is no necessity for such a measure, but I don't think there is any objection to it beyond what I have stated above. 30. Evidence of MR. F. LEVY, Acting Deputy Commissioner, Salt and Abkari, Southern Division. 1. None. The answers below are merely based on the reports of my subordinates. 2. Ganja appears to be the only kind that is common in the south of this presidency. The products referred to appear to be named ganja, bhang and majum. 3. Seldom grows spontaneously. Said to do so in some parts of the Calicut and Kurumbranad taluks of Malabar district, and in the Satyaman- galam taluk of Coimbatore. 4. Ganja seems to be the only name. 5. Said to flourish on tops of hills and in humid climates. 6. Said to be scattered. 7. Stated to be cultivated in the Wynad for sale to licensed vendors, and at the foot of the Western Ghats for private consumption. The Assistant Commissioners say that in the Negapa- tam, Erode, and Tinnevelly subdivisions the cul- tivation is confined to back-yards and gardens, and is very limited. 8. Nil. 9. Transplanting about July is adopted. The soil requires to be highly manured. Sheep and fowls said to be utilized for the purpose. Prun- ing and propping of the plant is essential. 10. Ordinary raiyats. 11 and 12. Not known. 13. Not restricted. Cultivation as above (vide answers to questions 5 and 7). The Erode Assistant Commissioner suggests that its cultiva- tion would be impossible in the higher regions of the Nilgiris. 14. Ganja said to be prepared in the Wynad and imported into other districts. Bhang stated to be prepared to an inconsiderable extent in towns of Madura and Tinnevelly. 15. There is no difference in the methods of preparation. After being cut and dried, the plant is exposed to the night dew, and rolled up and heavily weighted during the day until the tips begin to exude a resinous substance on pressure. (a) The dried flowers are rubbed into powder with the fingers and mixed with tobacco. (b) The flower is soaked in water or cocoanut milk and then boiled in milk. Butter is then made from the milk, to which is added sugar and spices. (c) Prepared from the dried leaves of the male hemp plant by being ground into a paste and dissolved in some liquid210 44. The effect is said to be refreshing and to allay hunger temporarily. It partially intoxicates. Abstinence causes great uneasiness and is difficult to practise. 45. It is accompanied by physical retrogression, and conduces to indolence. It is not thought to lead to immorality, or to seriously impair the mental powers except in so far as the physique is weakened. 47. Information meagre, but thought not to be hereditary. 48. Insufficient information. 49. Not known whether so used by prostitutes, but believed to induce impotence in males. 51. The consumption does not seem to be specially connected with the criminal classes. 53. No. 54. to 57. Nil. 58. The sale only is now under control. In- sufficient information as to improvements desirable and possible, but it is generally thought the cultivation of the hemp plant and the manufacture and possession of the drugs prepared therefrom should be brought under thorough control, and in this opinion I concur, considering the pernicious effects of such drugs, the entire absence of check at present upon the consumption and the conse- quent want of accurate information as to the extent to which they are used. 61.Nil. 62.Vide answers to question 58 supra. 63.Nil. 64. There are no restrictions. 65 to 67. No information. 68. No. 69. No information. 70. Nil. 31. Evidence of MR. C. BENSON, Deputy Director of Agriculture. Oral evidence. Question 1.211 32. Evidence of P. PUNDARIKAKSHUDU, Brahmin, Deputy Collector, Venukunda, Kistna District. 2. Charas is not known here. The definition of ganja is correct.. Flat and round ganja have no local name. The broken ganja is called kali. 3. The hemp plant does not grow here spon- taneously. It is abundantly cultivated in Daggu- pad in the Bapatla taluk. None in this division. 4. It is known only by the name of ganja. 5. There is no cultivation of the plant here. It is said that it grows well in pati earth. 6. Not known. 7. There is no cultivation. A few hemp plants are grown very rarely at Narasaraopeta, and this is only in a back-yard for production of only ganja for domestic consumption. 8. None. 9. Seeds are sown in small beds in back-yards. When they grow a foot high, they are transplanted like chilly plants at a cubit's distance from each other. 10. No. 11. The wild hemp is known here as male plant, and is not used for ganja. Its seeds are sometimes mixed with the seeds of the female plant, and are therefore indiscriminately sown. When the plants come up only the female ones are used for ganja. The female ones are those that bear flowers. 12. No. 13. No. 14. Yes; ganja and bhang are prepared at Narasaraopeta to a very small extent. 15. Ganja is the mixture of the ears of the hemp plant, water, and tobacco. Mixture of the ears, water, jaggery and tobacco is called bhang. Both these are prepared here. The one is con- sumed at once, while the other is kept for daily use for about a week or ten days. Ganja obtained from Daggupad is sold here. The preparations of only the cultivated hemp plant are made. Ganja is used for smoking. The flower tops are powdered by the finger and the seeds are removed. Then it is moistened by a few drops of water, and then pressed under the finger and the water removed. Small tobacco pieces are then added and mixed up. The mixture is put on a chillum, in which fire is placed, when it is used for smoking. No preparation is made from hemp plant for eating or drinking. 16. (a) Bhang is prepared generally by the consumers on occasions of festivities in their houses. (b) Yes. (c) No. 17. By bairagis, fakirs, the lower orders of Sudras, Muhammadans, pariahs and chucklers. 18. Yes; ganja is made for immediate use; charas is not known here. Bhang is kept on for a week or ten days, when it becomes unfit for use. It loses its force. No measures. 19. Ganja is used here only for smoking. Charas is not known here. 20. As to classes, see answer to question No. 17. The proportion is very nominal. Here and there. 21. Flat ganja. None. 22. None. 23. No. 24. None. 25. Neither. 26. There are very few consumers in these parts, and they may be said to be habitual mode- rate consumers. 27. Vide answer to question No. 20. Ganja is used as medicine for belly-ache, cough, and such like diseases. Wandering people take to it, as also people of immoral character. Bairagis take to it for purposes of devotion. 28. (a) One tola, costing 4 pies. 29. (a) See answer to question No. 15. (b) None. No dhatura. No bhang massala. 30. The consumption of the drugs is practised generally in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex and in middle age. Children do not consume any of the drugs. 31. (a) No. (b) Yes. (c) There is no tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. The gosains and bairagis, who profess to be religious devotees take to the practice. Yes. Temperate. Yes; it is believed to be injurious. 33. As derogatory to rank and injurious to health. The social and religious opinion is strong against the practice. The disrepute is because of the intoxication brought on by the practice, and its concomitant evils, affecting the sobriety and health of the consumer. 34. It is believed that the privation of the drug does not so seriously affect the consumers as in the case of opium eaters. There are some 30 consumers. 35. (a) Yes. (b) Perhaps occasionally. (c) Enforced by legal enactment. (d) and (e) No. (f) I do not think. 36. No. 37. Charas is not known here. 38. Only flat ganja is here. 39. So it is believed. 40. Yes; for belly-ache, etc. No. 41. (a) I think not. (b) I think not. (c) I think not. (d) No; on the other hand, I am inclined to think that the use of the drugs weakens one's constitution and affects his health in course of time. 42. Except in so far as it affects the brain in a measure. 43. Yes. 44. A sort of pleasure. It is refreshing for a time. Yes; for a while. It does not create appetite; on the other hand, it deprives one of appetite. It lasts for three hours. No. vol. vi. 2 G 2
212 45. (a) I think it does. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) No. (e) Yes. (f) Deadens the intellect, but does not produce insanity. 46. The moderate use brings on mischief as above, to say nothing of the consequences of any excessive use. 47. No. 48. I can give no opinion. 49. I have not heard of any case. I do not believe; it does not cause impotence. 50. I can give no opinion. 51. No. None. 52. None. 53. No. No. 54. I do not think so. 55. No; I think not. 56. The admixture of ummetta kaya (dhatura) increases intoxication. This is not resorted to here. 57. Ganja and chards are not eaten or drunk here. 58. Yes; working well. The sale of ganja is regulated by the issue of licenses. No licenses are issued in this division for drugs. In the former case, only two licenses have been issued in this division, one at Narasaraopeta, and the other at Dachapalli. 60. There is no cultivation here of the ganja- bearing plant, so to speak. A few plants are raised occasionally in a back-yard. No modifica- tion of the system seems called for. 61. Charas is not known here. 62. No. 63. None. 64. None. 65. (a) Only ganja is taxed here by the exclu- sive right of its sale being sold to one or more persons. The tax on ganja is reasonable. 66. I do not recommend different rates. 67. None. 68. None. 69. No; the information as to the necessity of a shop is gathered from the number of consumers through the tahsildar of the taluk. It is unneces- sary here to consult local public opinion as the consumers are rare. 70. None. 33. Evidence of D. JAGANNADHARAO PANTULU, Brahmin, Deputy Collector, Anantapur. 1. My information was obtained from my subor- dinates, men selling the ganja, and the medical officer of Anantapur. 2. Bhang, as herein defined, is not used in this part of the country by human beings, but administered to cattle if they become troublesome at the time of milking. Charas is not prepared here separately, but allowed to remain as part of ganja. Rightly described here. In this district this drug is called ganja by Muhammadans and bhang by Hindus. But from my knowledge and that of the medical officer, bhang is a preparation of the dried flower tops of the plant grounded after the seeds, leaves and stalks are removed, and then mixed with condiments, sugar, and milk or water and drunk by the people. This flower top is also called by natives kali. Of the other products, bhang is called bhangi, and charas is not known here. 3. This plant does not grow spontaneously any- where in this district. The plant grows spon- taneously in the hill tracts of Ganjam and Vizagapatam, and to some extent on the Rumpa side in the Godavari district. 4. It is called ganja or bhang tree; but by some religious fanatics who use or consume the plant it is called sudhapatri (pure leaf), gnana- patri (wisdom leaf), or alwar, sivapatri. 5. Not known. 6. Dense. 7. Yes; it is cultivated to a very limited extent for production of ganja for smoking only here, and for smoking and drinking to a very limited extent in the northern districts of the presidency. 8. Neither increase nor decrease. 9. Seeds are sown here and there in gardens and watered once or twice a week, but by some anatics very rarely. The tree, when it is ripe, is somewhat twisted round, and at the bottom the stem splits, in which a little opium is inserted perhaps with the object of making ganja or bhang more narcotic. 10. No special class and no special attention paid to the matter. Ordinary agricultural cul- tivators cultivate it. 11. No. 12. I have no kowledge of this. Generally the male plant is extirpated at the flowering season, 13. Not restricted. Cultivation common to all districts. Not known. 14. To a very little extent consumers prepare ganja. 15. (a) Ganja for smoking is prepared from the cultivated plant, by removing the seeds and stalks and rubbing it with water and rarely with milk in the palm of the left hand with the thumb of the right till the mass becomes little tenacious and then smoked. (b) Ganja, known under the name of majum, is a confection, and is mixed with condiments and sugar and preserved for some time for eating. (c) Ganja for drinking, known under the name of bhang, is prepared from the dried flower tops grounded after removing the seeds, leaves, and stalks, by mixing with condiments, sugar and milk or water. 16. The aforesaid bhang is prepared in their houses and wherever the plant is grown. Not known. 17. All classes prepare and use the drug. 19. Charas not used at all. Ganja is used in three different ways, as enumerated under question 15, chapter III, smoking, eating, and drinking. Smoking only is in use in this district.
213 20. Generally bairagis or religious mendicants that come from Northern Hindustan smoke ganja, but very rarely others use ganja in this country. The proportion is but a trifle. 21. Flat and round ganja are both prepared and used for smoking. 22. Not used. 23. Bhang as defined in section 2, chapter I, is not used for smoking. 24. Nobody uses it here. 25. No increase or decrease. 26. The consumers themselves form a very insignificant proportion, and no details can conse- quently be given. 27. Information not available. 28. Habitual or moderate consumers may use one tola worth, about 3 pies a day, and excessive consumers double that quantity. 29. (a) Ordinarily tobacco, and (b) exceptionally opium, and very rarely dhatura are used to increase intoxicating effects. No. 30. Used in company by low mendicants. Never used by females. Confection of ganja known as majum is given rarely to infants to induce sleep at nights. 31. The habit is not easily formed, and, when once formed, it is difficult to break it off, and there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There are no such customs existing in either this or other districts with which I am acquainted. 33. Public opinion regards the consumption with contempt on account of its intoxicating and slightly demoralising effects. No such custom to my knowledge. 34. It would be a serious privation to consumers in large quantities, because the privation brings on restlessness, indigestion or other complaints. Such people are almost nil in this district. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use with some difficulty. The drug would in that case be consumed illicitly, end the prohibition can be enforced by prohibiting the cultivation of the plant and the import of the drug. It would cause discontent among the consumers to some extent, but no political danger need be apprehend- ed. The prohibition would to some extent be followed by recourse to toddy and country grog end other deleterious drugs prepared of dhatura and nutmeg. 36. No. 37. Charas is not used in this part of the coun- try. 38. The round and flat ganja are preferred by people to chur, which is not independently used here. The effects of the two former are supposed to be the same, and considered superior to chur. 39. Smoking has a less injurious effect than drinking or eating, inasmuch as the latter two keep the consumer under intoxication for a longer time. 40. Yes; prescribed by native physicians. Not known. 41. The use of charas is not known. Limited use is considered beneficial by a few as digestive. (b) Alleviating fatigue. (c) As preventive of diseases in malarial and unhealthy tracts. Those that use it here, being but an insignifi- cant number, cannot be grouped into classes. Moderate habitual use is the one referred to above. 43. Yes; inoffensive. 44. It is refreshing and stimulating and pro- duces mild intoxication. It does not allay hunger, but it makes a man indifferent. Creates appetite. The effect lasts about four hours in smoking and double that in eating and drinking. The after- effect is depression of spirits. The want of subse- quent gratification produces uneasiness and restless- ness. 45. (a) After some years' use the physical con- dition suffers, not mental or moral. (b) and (c) Impairs the constitution. After long use it affects the digestion and causes loss of appetite. (d) No. (e) It does not impair moral sense. Induces laziness, but not habits of immorality or debau- chery. (f) I have no special knowledge. 46. Habitual excessive use affects a man in a short time, makes him impotent, emaciated, and may probably become insane in the end. 47 and 48. Not known. 49. The confection of ganja called majum, de- scribed under question 15, is used as an aphrodisiac. It is not known whether prostitutes use it or not. It is more injurious as an aphrodisiac than its use as a narcotic, as in the former the man dissipates himself. The use of hemp after some years tends to produce impotence. 50. In excessive use it is not used as an aphro- disiac, but simply as narcotic. It produces im- potence. 51. Not here. 52. Not here. 53. There was a dalayet in the Head Assistant Collector's office, Anantapur. He was, before he became a dalayet, a sepoy, but retired from the military profession. He was indulging in it. He appeared to be very quiet; but all of a sudden he killed one Dadagadu with his stick, who was pass- ing along the road in Anantapur town. 54. No. 55. Not to my knowledge. 56. Ganja is used alone for smoking in excess In moderation it is mixed with tobacco. For eating and drinking it is always mixed with other substances, as explained under question 15. Dhatura is not mixed in this part of the country. 57. Charas is not used. In moderate doses it is said to be stimulant and mildly intoxicating. In excessive doses it is narcotic, and the consumer labours under a semi-conscious condition. 58. Capable of improvement. 59. At present persons buy ganja not only from the licensed vendor, but also from others who are either cultivators or middlemen. The sales, ex- cept by licensed vendors, should be stopped. 60. There is no control at present. Cultivators give ganja to consumers either gratis or sell the same with impunity. Its cultivation should be restricted, except by persons licensed to culti- vate it; otherwise there will be illicit cultivation and sale. 61. No charas produced here. 62. Bhang, as described in question 2, is not produced here.
214 63. There is at present no difference observed between wholesale and retail vend, and I think there need be no such difference, as the transac- tions in this district are very little. But the cultivation and sale by others than licensed persons should be stopped. 64. Neither exports nor imports here. 65. At present fees are collected from vendors licensed to sell ganja, which seems reasonable. The present fees may be continued, but unlicensed sale must be stopped. 66. Not necessary. 67. None. 68. There is a shop licensed in Anantapur town for sale, but the consumers are not allow- ed to use the drug within the premises of the shop. This should be continued. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted before the opening of a shop; but I think they as well as local public opinion should be consulted. 70. None. Cultivators use untaxed ganja and sell it to licensed and unlicensed persons either for consumption or for sale. Licensed vendors get it from cultivators and sometimes from middlemen and sell it in their shops. 34. Evidence of W. VENKATAPPIAH PANTULU GARU, Brahmin, Deputy Collector, Chatrapur, Ganjam. 1. I enquired of the sellers, cultivators, eaters, smokers, and drinkers of ganja, bhang, majum and hemp plants in Chatrapur, Berhampur, Injili and Aska, on the 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th November 1893, having only returned from leave on 1st November 1893. My information is based upon the custom prevailing generally in this district, and particularly in the above places. 2. The definitions may be accepted with the following modifications, viz.:215 Madankameswaram is a refined preparation of majum made by native physicians for the use of higher classes. 16. (a) Bhang is generally prepared by the people in their houses. (b) Yes. (c) Wild plant and charas are unknown here. 17. By all if they are accustomed. 18. Not for a year if properly preserved. It will lose its effect in time, 18 months at the utmost, if the plant was not injured by rains, which affect its efficacy. No special measures can be taken to prevent deterioration. Old drugs are preferable to new ones on medical grounds. 19. Ganja only is used for smoking. 20. Cannot be said approximately; probably 5 per cent. of the population use the drug in its various forms. There is no special locality for its use. 22. Unknown in this district. 23. No. 24. People for the most part drink bhang. Very few eat it in balls before being mixed in water or milk. Classes and localities are not restricted. Proportion cannot be ascertained. 26. The majority are habitual moderate con- sumers. Bairagis are chiefly habitual excessive smokers of ganja. 28. Average cost for216 4. It is known only by one name, viz., Ganjayi chettu (tree). 6. I have no information about the growth of the wild hemp. 7. Vide my reply to question 3. 14. Yes, ganja and bhang; the latter is used by me in the sense that I have referred to in reply to question 2. These are prepared at home and for the consumption of the person that prepares it. Bhang cannot be had for sale, and the ganja available for sale is imported from Daggupadu. 15. I can give no information about the wild plant. All that I state below refers to the culti- vated plant. Ganja.217 27. Bairagis contribute most to class (b) under ganja. They believe that its use makes them wise by extinguishing in them all passion for sexual pleasures. All classes of natives residing in these parts represent class (c) and the remainder under class (b) in ganja. Class (a) under ganja is represented by Muhammadans, pariahs and lower classes of Hindus. These people contract the habit on the advice of native doctors and by association with bairagis and other ascetics. Bondilis, pensioned sepoys, Dommaras and other wandering tribes contribute to class (c) under bhang. These people acquire the habit by bad society and on account of occasional indulgence, as in the case of Bondilis, as a religious drink. People that have a sickly constitution and that can ill afford to get proper medical advice and that have bad society, get into these practices. 28. Habitual moderate consumers of ganjayi use every day about 2 tolas of the stuff referred to in my reply to question 15, and its cost will be about 7 pies, of which 3 pies relate to ganja and 4 pies to tobacco, etc. Habitual excessive con- sumers use every day twice the above quantity. Occasional moderate consumers of bhang use half a seer of the bhang prepared in the manner de- scribed in my answer to question 15. 29. Vide my answer to question 15. Dhatura is never mixed here with ganja. Bhang massala is not sold in the bazar, but a preparation of cardamom, nutmegs, pepper, Kunkumapuvvu (saffron), patcha karpuram (fair-coloured camphor), etc., is the powder usually mixed in the beverage of bhang. 30. Ganja is smoked publicly in bairagi mat- tams and such other places. Company is preferred to solitude. At home it is smoked stealthily, but even there company has its fascination. It is confined exclusively to the male sex. Females never use it. Bhang is always drunk in company; males only drink it and females seldom do so. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs is not easily formed, as it does not agree with any but persons of phlegmatic temperament. It is not difficult to break off the habit before it becomes excessive, but when it becomes excessive, it be- comes second nature. 32. There is no custom, social or religious, in regard to ganjayi, but in regard to bhang, the Bondilis have a religious custom to which I have already referred in my answer to question No. 17. 33. The consumption of the drug is regarded with disfavour; there is a public opinion about it, and it deprecates its use and looks upon its devotees as people unworthy of good company. Society shuns them, and no respectable man uses either ganjayi or bhang openly, and if he should do so, he be- comes at once a marked man. The use of the drug is certainly in disrepute as it is believed to indicate low society, unsteadiness of character, want of assiduity, and general in- capacity for any intelligent work or sustained effort. The hemp plant is not worshipped by any- body in this part of the country. 34. No, except to bairagis, who are excessive consumers of ganjayi, but their number is so small that the inconvenience arising from the prohibition of its consumption is practically very little. The number of these bairagis will be about 10,000. 35. It is not worth while to prohibit the use of ganjayi and bhang, but it should be restricted; there will be no illicit consumption of the drug, no private discontent among the consumers, nor any public danger, social or political. I think that such a prohibition will not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. No; the effects of alchol are different from ganja218 I know of no cases of insanity. 46. Physical.219 30. Ganja is smoked both in solitude and in company. It is not confined to the male sex or any time of life. Children take ganja in the form of majun. 33. Use of ganja is socially held in disrepute. It is considered a moral depravity. 40. Yes; native doctors prescribe ganja for weak children for medicinal purposes and also for cattle. 51. No. None. 53. None that I know of. I know no such case. 54. No. 55. Yes; occasionally. Yes; without admix- ture. 58. The present administration calls for no remarks. 60. There is no control at present, nor does it require any. 63. None. 64. None. 65. I have no suggestion to make. 67. None. 68. There is one retail ganja shop at Arni, where ganja is sold, but not consumed in the premises. 69. Yes; the local revenue officers generally make the enquiry in consultation with the police. The public should be considered. 37. Evidence of M. AZIZUDDEEN, SAHIB BAHADUR, Deputy Collector, North Arcot. 1. Personal experience and information collected from Tahsildars. 2. As in Northern India, in this province also three narcotic articles are obtained from hemp, viz.:220 27. Bairagis, fakirs, Rajputs, Muhammadan mendicants and some Sudras smoke ganja and drink bhang and eat other preparations made from the hemp plant to keep themselves in a state of intoxi- cation, to prevent the evil effects of water, to keep the body warm, and to endure hunger. They say by smoking ganja they don't feel the effects of appetite, and that it increases manhood. 28. (a) 3 pies. (b) 6 pies. 29. (a) Jaggery, ghee, milk, sugar, chick pea, parched rice, tobacco, poppy are ordinarily used as ingredients. (b) Dhatura, jaggery, ghee, milk, chick pea and parched rice are used to lessen the bitterness of the hemp leaf. Tobacco and dhatura are used to increase the intoxication. Nothing like bhang massala is sold in the bazar. 30. The consumption of bhang and ganja is practised generally in company, and is confined to male sex. Children of fakirs and bairagis of about seven or eight years of age also smoke ganja. 31.The habit of consuming ganja and bhang is easily formed. It is difficult to break off. There is a tendency to develop into excess. 32. The Rajputs drink pannia and make pre- sents of ganja on occasions of festival and marriage. Neither the Musalman nor the Hindu religion re- quires the use of these drugs on religious occasions. On the other hand, it is prohibited. Nevertheless, as a matter of fact, in the mutts of bairagis, such as at Tripati and at the shrines of Muhammadan saints, such as at Nagore, Conjeveram, Arcot and other places, the janisheen or the manager of the shrine distributes ganja to all the fakirs who as- semble during the ooroos or festival. In none of these places, religiously speaking, ganja should be distributed; but, according to custom among the fakirs, its distribution is essential. On occasions like these, some consume these drugs excessively, while others are temperate. These habits are cer- tainly injurious. 33. Public opinion is always against its con- sumption, as it demoralises the consumer. No- where the hemp plant is worshipped in this divi- sion. 34. Ganja smoking is not like opium eating. Ganja consumers can forego its consumption with- out much difficulty. 35. Absolute and. sudden prohibition is not feasible. The drug will be consumed illegally. Prohibition can be enforced by enhancing the price of these drugs and checking the progress of hemp cultivation. Absolute prohibition would cause serious discontent among the consumers. Such discontent can never cause a political danger. Pro- hibition will be followed to some extent by recourse to alcoholic intoxicants and other drugs. 36. No. 37. Charas smoking is stronger than ganja smoking. 38. Flat ganja is more intoxicating than round ganja or chur. 39. Smoking ganja is more injurious than eating or drinking bhang; the former affects the lungs and brings on cough, which keeps them always sick. 40. Native doctors use ganja for some diseases. Ganja is used in cattle treatment also. 41. (a) No. (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) Yes. 42. Is harmful. The consumer becomes em- aciated. 43. Yes. 44. Causes immediate intoxication and keeps the body warm. Is refreshing to some extent. Allays hunger. The effect lasts for an hour or two. 45. (a) Yes; physical, mental, and moral. (b) Yes. (c) No. (d) Causes dysentery and asthma. (e) Causes laziness and debauchery in the begin- ning. (f) Causes insanity, deadens intellect. The in- sanity is in some cases temporary and other cases permanent. 46. Habitual consumers are subject to fatal diseases to which they succumb. 47. No; the children of the moderate consumer are not effected. 48. The use of the drug is not hereditary; but the children of excessive consumers are weak and unhealthy. 49. No. No. 51. No. 52. No. 54. No. 55. Yes; ganja is mixed in cakes and other eatables, by eating which the victims become com- pletely stupefied, when the criminals seize the opportunity to supply themselves. Complete stupe- faction is induced by ganja without admixture. 58. The system is not working well. It gives room. for illicit sale. Some check should be placed on the cultivation of hemp. Its cultivation with- out license should be made penal. 60. There is no restriction as to the cultivation of hemp plant. 61. Charas is not prepared in this division. 62. Vide answer to question No. 59. 63. No distinction is made between wholesale and retail dealers. The licensed vendor can sell any quantity for any price whatever. 64. No. 66. Difference in taxation is not necessary. 68. No. 69. No; if the sale of the ganja is sanctioned, there can be no use in considering public opinion about it. 70. No; the right of selling ganja, is leased out annually. Oralevidence. Question 1.221 and he will shortly be sent to the lunatic asylum. A barber, who used to come to my house in Madras became insane from ganja smoking, and his brother told me a few days ago that he was still insane. He was barber in my family for three or four years. He is being looked after by his relatives. I don't know when he became insane, but I learnt in September 1892, when I visited Madras that he had become insane. I only come to Madras during holidays and on special occa- sions. I was told by his own brother and several other persons that his insanity was due to ganja. I never saw him take ganja or smoke it. I enquired into the first case here mentioned in my capacity as Magistrate, and ascertained that he was a ganja smoker. I did not myself examine witnesses. The enquiry was made through the police and the Subordinate Magistrate of Chittor, where I am stationed. The police produced the man, and I ordered enquiry to be made. I gave orders to the police who reported directly to me. I think I issued order to the Subordinate Magistrate to en- quire for the man's relations. I don't recollect whether the Subordinate Magistrate touched upon any other point in the case, but I recollect that the police reported that the cause of insanity was ganja. The station officer of the place where the man lives wrote the report. The station officer is the head constable in charge of a division. The report said the man was a great ganja smoker, that his insanity was due to it, that he was dangerous, and his rela- tions declined to take charge of him. The report covered, I think, one page of a printed form. The report contained no account of the way in which the enquiry had been conducted, no separate statement of the witnesses, a mere statement that such and such information was given by the relatives, and the result arrived at. I learnt from the report that the head constable had personally made local enquiry from relations and others at the place where the insane lived. What I received was a summary of the result of that enquiry. I wrote a letter to the District Surgeon which mentioned the facts gathered in the enquiry, and requested that the insane should be kept under observation, but I did not forward the police report. This is the usual procedure, When a case goes to the asylum, the Medical Officer has to prepare forms A and C. Ganja-smokers and eaters become generally en- feebled and emaciated, and get cough, and die of asthma and general decay. Question 47.222 particular class of persons. All classes accustomed to it will cultivate this plant. 11. No. 12. No wild hemp plant could be found here. Male hemp plants are, as a rule, removed from the female plants and destroyed. 13. No restriction is placed on cultivation of the hemp plant in the two districts already men- tioned, and the cultivation is common in these two districts. It grows both along the sea coast and in the interior; in the plains and in the hill tracts as well. Red earth is said to be more favourable to its growth and effects than any other soil, and so in cold climate. The ganja produced in elevat- ed tracts, such as Malayas,is considered superior to that cultivated in the plains. 14. (a) Ganja and bhang are to a small extent prepared in some cusba stations and muts where ascetics and bairagis assemble, and in some such places. (b) Charas is unknown. (c) Bhang is a preparation made of dried tender leaves of female hemp plants, sugar, spices, and milk. Sometimes water is substituted for milk, when pepper also is mixed. 15. Wild hemp plant is unknown in these parts. Ganja and bhang leaves are gathered from the cul- tivated hemp plant. The former is used for smok- ing and the latter for drinking. The broken ganja locally called gunda or ganja is made into majum balls with sugar and spices. (a) Ganja is smoked in a chilhem. (b) Majum balls are eaten. In addition to this Madanakameswaram and similar intoxicating lehams are prepared from ganja for eating. (c) Bhang is prepared for drinking. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the people in the houses for their own consumption. It is prepared from the leaves of the cultivated hemp plant. No wild plant is grown here. 17. These preparations were used to be made formerly by any class of people who wanted them for private use or sale; but they are now made by the ganja licensees alone for sale. 18. Ganja will keep for two years, but begins to lose its effect after one year. Bhang leaves will keep for one year only. Deterioration takes place by mildew, and in order to prevent it, proper care should be taken to expose it to the sun as often as necessary. 19. Ganja is used for smoking and eating in the shape of majum and other lehams of which it forms an ingredient. 20. Much of the Uriya population and some Telugus and Khonds (hill people) and almost all the fakirs and every bairagi and ascetic smoke ganja. 21. Flat and round ganja is equally preferred to kali, gunda, or broken ganja. Chur is not known here. 22. Charas is not known here. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is used as drink by a very small and insignificant proportion of people who are fond of getting intoxicated, but who are averse to or prohibited from, by caste or position, the use of alcohol; but its use is not restricted to any parti- cular locality. 25. The use of ganja appears to be on the increase owing to the restrictions placed on the manufacture and consumption of illicit liquor. 26. Ganja. Bhang. Majum. (a) 50 per cent. 80 per cent. 60 per cent. (b) 30 per cent. 3 per cent. 20 per cent. (c) 15 per cent. 15 per cent. 15 per cent. (d) 5 per cent. 2 per cent. 5 per cent. of the consuming population. The above proportion is not accurate but approxi- mate. The proportion of the consuming popula- tion may be 1 per cent. on the whole to the entire population. 27. Those that resort to ganja smoking are mainly taken from the lower castes having no social position; but instances are not wanting where high caste men of dissipated habits indulge in this smoking. Majum and bhang are used by all classes given up to luxurious and vicious habits. The society in which men constantly move, and lazy and sensual habits lead to the practice. 28. (a) Smoking.223 leaves of spiritual knowledge. Hemp plant is not an object of worship. 34. It would be a serious privation to forego the use of ganja smoking to fakirs, ascetics, and other habitual excessive consumers who have be- come complete slaves to the habit. For when they cease to smoke ganja, they become awfully restless, and suffer from pulling sensation in the body, life itself becoming a burden. 35. It is not feasible to prohibit the use of this drug. If prohibited, an illicit use will be made of it. The prohibition can be enforced by a special enactment; but such a course is most inadvisable, as a serious discontent will be felt upon it by con- sumers and. cultivators of this plant. Such discon- tent may lead to political danger, as it will be very seriously felt by the numberless bairagis and other religious ascetics when they are deprived of their only luxury in this world. They may probably grow desperate, and may even be backed up by many bad characters given up to the same habit. (a) No. (b) Yes; to muddat, a drug more pernicious than ganja. 36. No. Alcohol is not being substituted for this drug. 37. Not known here. 38. Flat or round ganja, which contains less seeds, is said to give more intoxication than broken ganja. 39. Smoking ganja is less injurious than eat- ing and drinking, because smoking does not pro- duce the same amount of intoxication as eating and drinking. 40. Native doctors prescribe this drug in some cases to improve digestion; but it will be discon- tinued soon after the desired effect is produced. It is generally prescribed with other ingredients. It is first well purified and then mixed up with medicines, and prescribed for diarrh224 (b) If taken in excess is injurious in proportion to the quality and quantity of other substances with which it is mixed. Dhatura is unknown here. 57. Already answered. 58. Excise system extends at present only to the sale of this drug. It is working pretty well. 59. The hemp plant is home cultivated, and any restriction on the cultivation and possession of the drug for domestic use may prove a hardship. All that is required is the exercise of vigilance, com- bined with prudence, on the part of Abkari officers to prevent illicit sales, which, I think, are to some extent carried on, and to place some restrictions on the cultivation of this plant for sale. I am aware that difficulties crop up in carrying out the restrictions proposed; but to restrict at once the cultivation itself may be felt severely by the people concerned. 60. The plant is not cultivated here in fields. A few scattered trees will be found in the back- yards of some houses. No restrictions are yet placed on cultivation. 61. Nil. 62. Vide reply to question 60. 63. None. 64. I have no objection. 65. Taxation on ganja and bhang is not advis- able, for the consumers are mostly fakirs, ascetics, beggars, and others of the cooly class. 66. Different trades are not necessary here if taxation is not at all introduced. 67. Since the exclusive right of selling ganja is leased out the price of ganja is raised to two annas a tola, whereby the consumers are put to some diffi- culty. 68. There are no such houses or licensed shops in this district where the drug or its preparations may be consumed in the premises. I am not in favour of opening such houses, as they may have the demoralising and stimulating influence upon beginners who may be led away to these places. 69. The wishes of the people are consulted before a shop is opened through the police and Abkari officers. 70. Hemp drugs are imported into the district from the Agency tracts as well as from the Tributary Mahals of the Cuttack district. 39. Evidence of K. NARAYANA IYER, Brahmin, Deputy Collector, Gooty. 1. My opportunities were next to ml, except local enquiries made at a few places in this divi- sion. 2. I cannot say with certainty whether the de- finitions may be accepted or not. The people who use the plant in these parts can hardly distinguish the male from the female plants. The leaf of the hemp plant is generally known as ganja, and the powder of the leaf bhang. Charas does not seem to be made in these parts. 3. I do not know. 4. The plant is known by the name of ganja. 5. The plant requires occasional watering. No special climate or condition appears to be necessary for it. 6. I do not know. 7. The plant is cultivated to a very limited ex- tent, its cultivation being confined to back-yards or vegetable gardens. It is used for (a), (c) and (d). 8. No increase. 9. The hemp plant is cultivated just like ragi. The seeds are first sown, and then covered with a layer of earth and watered. After a week or so the seeds begin to sprout, and they are subsequent- ly transplanted. The plant requires watering now and then till the leaves ripen, after which the wa- tering is generally stopped. 10. It is generally fakirs and ascetics who cultivate the plant. Agricultural cultivators also cultivate it; but to a very small extent in vege- table gardens for medicinal purposes or for fibre. 11. Not known. 12. I do not know. 13. It is not restricted. No special conditions seem to be required. 14. (a) and (c) are prepared to a very limited extent in large towns, but secretly, (b) is not pre- pared here. 15. The cultivation being very limited, no special methods of cultivation are observed. Ganja is generally used for smoking. Bhang is consumed along with jaggery and spices or in the form of a syrup known here by the name of Ramarasam. 16. It is prepared by bazar men and sold. Bhang and ganja can both be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. 17. It is not restricted to any class. 18. Yes. These deteriorate if kept for over a year or a year-and-a-half. The strength of the drugs is lessened by the length of time. 19. Ganja is used for smoking or with legiams (jellies). Charas is not to be had in these parts. 20. Ascetics, fakirs and people addicted to drinking use ganja. The percentage of the population who use the drug is not accurately known. 21. The ganja generally used in these parts is called mulki, which is neither flat nor round. The flowering tops are not pressed so as to assume any shape; they are allowed to dry and then used as they are. 22. Charas is not at all known to many. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking, vide answer to question 15, chapter III. 24. Generally Rajputs and Marwaris living in these parts use bhang. 25. The smoking of ganja may be said to be on the increase, though it is sold at a higher rate than before. 26. The consumers are generally habitual moder- ate consumers. 27. Vide answer to question 20. Wandering fakirs and hard-working cooly classes take it to alleviate the fatigue they feel. Idleness also begets the practice. 28. (a) Generally a tola, worth four pies. 29. Tobacco is mixed with ganja for smoking purposes to lessen the bilious character of pure ganja. Dried ginger and jaggery are also used with bhang for taste. Dhatura is also said to be rarely and clandestinely used to increase intoxication.
225 Bhang massala is quite unknown in these parts. 30. These drugs are generally consumed in company. Children and women are generally not known to consume them. 31. The habit is easily formed; but it is difficult to break off the practice. 32. No customs that I know of. 33. The use of ganja is generally held in disre- pute by the higher castes; but there is no public opinion, social or religious, among the class of people who use the drug. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. It will be a privation to the consumers if they are made to forego the consumption, as it is the cheapest way of indulging themselves in in- toxication and forgetting their cares and anxieties. 35. It is quite possible to prohibit the use of the drugs; but it will require a large preventive party. There will no doubt be discontent; but I cannot say whether it would amount to a political danger. The consumers will surely have recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 36. No. 37. Charas is not used here. 38. I do not know. 39. Smoking is said to be less injurious than eating or drinking the same. 40. Bhang and ganja are taken with halwa or lagiem as stimulants. They are also occasionally given as medicine to cattle. 41. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Not known. Musalmans and other classes of people. The moderate occasional use of the drug will bring about the above results. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect is that the consumer feels intoxicated and is in a sort of dream. Occa- sional moderate use creates appetite. Its effects last for about three or four hours. After a meal the effect of the drug generally ceases. Want of subsequent gratification produces a longing for it, and makes him uneasy. 45. (a) None. (b) It does, if proper nourishment is not taken. (c) No. (d) No. (e) No. Moderate consumption does not produce any of the above results. And it is only when taken in excess that it is likely to produce evil results. 46. In very rare instances the habitual exces- sive use of bhang and ganja are known occasion- ally to have made people temporarily insane. 47. No. 49. No. No. No. 51. I do not know. I am not aware of any connection between it and crime of any special character. 53. I do not know. 54. No. It is said that men using the drugs get timid rather than bold. 55. I do not know. 57. I do not know. 60. The cultivation is very limited. No con- trol seems to be necessary. 61. Charas not produced here. 62. No. 63 to 65. None. 66. No such distinction appears to be desirable. 67. No. 68. There are three shops in the division. The preparations are not consumed there, but only sold. 69. Wishes of the people are consulted before a shop is opened. The site is approved of by the Police and Magistracy before it is sanctioned. I think public opinion ought to be consulted in the matter. 40. Evidence of MR. J. H. GWYNNE, Deputy Collector, Wynaad, Malabar District. 1. My answers are framed on the result of local enquiries. 2. The dry leaves, when prepared for smoking purposes, are called bhang. The definition for ganja may be accepted for this taluk. 3. The hemp plant is said to grow spontaneously in the hills and forests in the south-eastern parts of the Wynaad taluk. 4. It is everywhere known as the ganja plant. 5. Hilly tracts are best suited to the growth of the wild hemp. 6. The growth is scattered. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated in parts of South Wynaad, especially in Sultan's Battery and its neighbourhood, for the production of ganja only. Roughly speaking, not more than 12 acres altoge- ther are under this cultivation. Usually a few plants, varying from two or three to a dozen at most, may be found in the compounds attached to dwelling houses. 8. There has been no appreciable increase or de- crease in the area under cultivation recently. 9. Beds are prepared in nurseries, the earth is properly turned up and made loose. A quantity of manure composed of dry powdered cow dung and ashes is then mixed up with the earth. The seeds are then scattered over the beds, and a thin layer of earth laid over. A month or six weeks after ger- mination, the seedlings are fit to be transplanted. 10. Cultivators of the hemp plant do not belong to any special class. They are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 11. No; at least not in this taluk. 13. The cultivation is not restricted; but agri- culturists here, as a rule, do not give their atten- tion to it. A cold climate and black gummy soil arc very favourable. Heavy dew is more suited than rain. The elevation above sea level need not be great. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared here. Both are VOL VI 2 I
226 used for smoking purposes. Their use is, however, not general. Probably 40 per cent. of the popula- tion use them. 15. There is no difference in the method of pre- paration from the cultivated and wild plant. The plants are cut and dried as they are by exposure to the sun. When they are well dried, the branches with their leaves and flowering tops are piled up in bundles and pressed. For smoking, take a small quantity of the flower- ing tops and leaves, place it in the middle of the palm, add a quantity of water, and rub it well over with the thumb; when it is reduced to a pulpy state sqeeze out the water. This process should at least be repeated three times. Then add a quan- tity of tobacco in the proportion of one to two of bhang, mix it well and then use in a pipe. 16. Bhang is generally prepared in their houses by the consumers themselves. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja can be prepared from wild plants. 17. Usually by those who cultivated it, viz., Chetties, Urali Kurumars, Mulla Kurumars, Pathi- ans, Katunaikars, Tenkurumars, etc. 18. The leaves of the female plant are said to possess greater narcotic property in them. Bhang will keep good for about a year, provided it is kept air tight. After that it gradually loses its power. Ganja will keep good for a few years, provided it is periodically exposed to the sun and kept secure from damp. 19. In this taluk both bhang and ganja are used for smoking. Latter is also used for eating. 20. Ascetics of all castes smoke ganja and bhang, also Chetties, Paniers, Kurumars, and a few Mu- hammadans. Their use is more extensive in the villages surrounding Sultan's Battery, and also in Muppeinad and Kottapadiamshoms. About 40 per cent. of the population use them. 21. The round and chur varieties are preferred. 23. Yes; in the villages where the hemp plant is grown. The cultivating classes smoke it. 40 per cent. of the population use it. 25. The use of ganja and bhang may be said to be on the increase. In former days, only those advanced in age indulged in these drugs, but now the case is different. Bhang is cheaper than other intoxicants; its consumption is developing. 26. (a) About 50 per cent. fall under the head. (b) About 20 per cent. fall under the head. (c) 227 41. Evidence of M. R. RY. P. VEERASWAMI NAIDU, Deputy Collector, Masuli- patam. 1. From enquiries made. 3. I have no knowledge of its spontaneous growth anywhere. 4. Ganja is also known as guanapatrika, varakul- kyal and bhangy aku. Yes. 7. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) Yes; for fibre and seeds. This is called janumu here. Janumu is a kind of hemp which is cultivated abundantly in this dis- trict. The seeds are sown broadcast in paddy-fields just 15 days before harvest. It is also cultivated in dry fields. Janumu flowers within two months, and will then be cut and used as fodder for cattle. Cattle like this fodder well; but their health is impaired if no other fodder, such as straw, is not used. Janumu seeds after three months and the seeds are useful for sowing; but its stalks are not fit for fodder. The stalks are dried for several days, and then tied into bundles, and steeped for a fortnight in water, where they are kept under pres- sure, then taken out and beaten with mallets; the fibre is thus stripped off from the stalks and then sold for the manufacture of bags, ropes, etc. Ganja is grown extensively in Daggupad village, Bapatla taluk. It is said to grow also in the Kistna accretions near Challapally, Pidugullanka at a distance from Chitgudar, Pamarru, Bommulur near Gudivada, and in the compounds of certain people at Masulipatam. The cultivation of hemp (Janumu) is carried on in both wet and dry lands. 9. The fields will be ploughed up, and the seed sown broadcast. In compounds, people dig up earth and sow the seed. The seedlings spring up in a week, and will be thinned after 15 or 20 days. The plants grow well in black-cotton soil and yield good crop. The sowing season is generally early part of October, and transplantation takes place about the early part of November, while the follow- ing February is the time for harvest. 10. No; they are of the same class as other agri- cultural cultivators. 11. Wild hemp is not known in these parts. It is only by raising ganja plants, ganja is pro- duced. 13. No restriction in this district. It is culti- vated in all places and everywhere. If the soil is manured, it grows well and ensures a good crop. In black-cotton soil it grows luxuriantly, and is the best that can be had here. 14. (a) Yes. (b) Charas is not in use here. (c) Yes. Ganja is extensively cultivated at Daggupad, Bapatla taluk. Bhang is made of ganja. 15. (a) Ganja plant is of two species, viz., male and female. Male plant does not produce resin, nor does it seem to be fit for any purpose except for good fibre. It is from the female plant that ganja is extracted. In the female plant the flower and the fruit mix together and assume the form of an ear. The ear ripens just like that of millet and will be cut and the seeds separated. The remaining substance will be kept in the snow for two days and then dried up and filled in bags. It will be sold to the pur- chaser at the rate of 3 pies a weight of the 3 pice coin. The purchaser takes the substance, separate the seed, if any still remaining, washes it well in. his palm, dries it by pressing the same with his cloth and keeps it separately. Then he mixes it with thick tobacco powder in proportion of 3 to 1 in weight, and smokes the mixture and gets intoxi- cated. Some people get intoxicated by eating the ganja substance without any admixture; some by taking it in the form of powder mixed with pepper; some ground the mixture well, put it in a piece of paper, and roll the paper into the form of a cigar, and then smoke it to get intoxication. Bhang is prepared from the leaves. The leaves are repeatedly washed to remove the green colour- ing matter. They are then pounded well, and then mixed with the juice prepared of cocoanut pulp, black pepper, dried ginger, and poppy-seed. Then either sugar or jaggery is mixed with this, and the mixture thus formed is drunk. Some people drink the mixture, adding to it some sweet plantains or milk according to their taste. One-eighth of a seer of this draught is enough to intoxicate a person. Its effect is to cool the system, and varies according to the constitution and temperament of the con- sumer. The use of bhang is better than that of ganja. Bhang makes the consumer more active and lively in his work. Charas is prepared from the resin which exudes from the leaves of the plant. The resin will be a little heated, and then well grounded in the palm with some tobacco till a mixture is formed. This mixture is then put into a pipe and smoked, and the man gets intoxicated. But it is not in use here. Majum is another kind of preparation from the resin. But this resin is not that which exudes from the leaves, but is what is obtained by boiling the ganja leaves in water with ghee. The resin is cooked with sugar, and the powder prepared of cardamoms, nutmeg, etc., spices, into a paste and then eaten. The effect will be a little intoxication. It is a good remedy for dysentery. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses. I hear that some who practice bhang grow ganja plants in their compounds. Bhang can be prepared by ganja wherever grown. 17. Ganja chillum, i.e., a pipe prepared by people who smoke ganja through it. Ganja bhang by those who drink it, and majun by the licensed vendor. 18. Ganja, charas or bhang deteriorates if it is not consumed within one hour, and loses its effects entirely after two hours, though it may retain its full effect for one hour after its preparation. If diluted in water it deteriorates quickly, and no measures are possible to preserve its effect long. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking, while bhang is used as a drink in all places. 20. Chiefly used by byragis, sanyasis, and fakirs, and generally working classes. I hear that those who delight in intoxication smoke ganja as it serves their purpose at a comparatively very small cost, equally with liquor, arrack, and toddy. One pie worth ganja or ½ anna worth bhang has the same intoxicating effect as 2 drams of arrack of 30° U. P., costing 2 annas 6 pie. 21. Flat ganja is prepared for smoking here, and in fact seems to be the only kind in use. I hear that round ganja also is used in Madras. VOL. VI 2 1 2
228 22. Charas is not used here, but is said to be used in Madras and Hyderabad. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Bhang is drunk generally by all classes of people, except higher classes, and by monks and fakirs particularly. In almost all countries one- fortieth of the population drinks bhang as a beve- rage. Three pie worth bhang is sufficient to in- toxicate 10 people if administered equally. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the decrease, as it has been experienced to be injurious to health by those who use them excessively. 26.(a)One-fortieth of population habitual moder- erate consumers. (b) About 1 per cent. habitual excessive con- sumers. (c) About 1 per every 200 occasional moderate consumers. (d) About 1 per every 1,000 occasional excessiveconsumers. 27. Generally from all classes. People that suffer from spleen or dropsy use it as a remedy and get themselves accustomed to it. Fakirs, monks and ascetics consume it in order that their minds may be concentrated with more or less forgetfulness of worldly cares in offering their prayers to the Al- mighty. 28. (a) One pie worth ganja and ½ pie worth bhang. (b) ½ anna worth ganja. 1 ½ pie worth bhang. 29. Tobacco is mixed with ganja and resin. Rich people mix with it sweet plantains, milk and sugar and take the mixture as a cool refreshment. But the poor purify the ganja, then make powder of it, and make a mixture of the same with water and jaggery and drink the mixture. Dhatura is not mixed with ganja. 30. The consumption is practised in company. A few females also use bhang and ganja. Children do not generally use it. 31. Habit is easily formed. It is difficult to break it off. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. No custom, either religious or social, obtains here. 33. The consumption of these drugs is not regard- ed as good, and the consumer a good man. He becomes excited and loses temper. As the consump- tion affects manhood, it is in disrepute. The wor- shipping of ganja does not obtain here. 34. Yes; the person accustomed to it cannot give it up, as without it he cannot generally digest his food. Medicine will not act properly on those who use the drug. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of ganja. The drug is consumed illicitly. The prohibition may be enforced by an act declaring that the culti- vation of the drug is illegal and criminal. But this gives rise to discontent among consumers, although there is no apprehension of political dan- ger. The prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants and other drugs, such as the seeds of mushtikaya (nux vomica), which is used as follows: the seeds are separated from the fruit. Each seed is of the size of 1 pie, and. is cut into two parts. Each part is sufficient to intoxi- cate a person accustomed to eat it raw. If eaten by those unaccustomed to it, they will be subject to the symptom of aconitic poisoning. Those who are well accustomed to it can eat one seed. Some peel off the skin of the seed and powder it with dried betel leaves and smoke the mixture to get intoxication. 36. No; alcohol is not substituted for drugs. 37. There is no charas here. 38. There is only one kind of flat ganja here. 39. No; smoking affects the breast; eating it raw will tend to madness. Bhang drinking is not bad. It is believed that those who practise ganja keep their health properly, i.e., can bear the climate of any place they go to and digest their food pro- perly, and that if they give up smoking indigestion comes on. 40. Native doctors prescribe majum for dysen- tery. 41. (a) Moderate use of ganja or bhang is bene- ficial as a food accessory or digestive. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) It is used as medicine for dropsy and spleen. Ordinary classes. Working people. It is the moderate habitual use. 42. I consider the moderate use of any of these drugs to be somewhat harmful on the whole, the reason being that it gradually affects chest and manhood to some extent. 43. Yes. 44. Immediate effect is intoxication. It is refreshing. It produces intoxication. It creates appetite. Its effects last for 6 hours. The after- effect is a longing for it again. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. If the person does not get the drug he will at last eat opium. 45. Yes; it impairs the constitution. Gradually destroys the digestive powers. It causes asthma. It does not impair the moral sense or induce laziness or habits of immorality or debauchery. It deadens the intellect or produces insanity if excessively used. The insanity is temporary. The symptoms may be re-induced by the use of the drug after liberation from restraint. 46. The effects of excessive use are:229 make use of it. As every one who wants it can get it easily, the revenue too will not be increased. If the crop is cultivated under the direct management of Government, cured and sold as in the case of salt, revenue will be increased and good ganja will be produced. Its use also may fall into disrepute gradually to some extent. 62. Bhang is not a separate crop here, but is made of ganja. 68. There are two ganja shops at Masulipatam. In one of them majum also is sold. But some pur- chasers will consume there. 69. Public opinion should be considered in open- ing a shop where consumers should smoke. 42. Evidence of TADEPALLI SIVARAMAYYA, Brahmin, Pensioned Deputy Collec- tor, Chatrapur. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in this dis- trict, but not charas. They are prepared in all the mutts, and by those persons in whose backyards the plant is grown to a certain extent. 16. Bhang is prepared by the people in their own houses. Ganja and bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown if the plant does not blossom. 19. Ganja is used for smoking and in the pre- paration of majum (the balls ordinarily sold in the bazars of all the towns by the licensed vendors). It is also used by the native doctors in the prepara- tion of several medicines. 20. All the bairagis and fakirs, a portion of the lower classes including a small portion of the upper classes smoke ganja in almost all the localities. About 25 per cent. may be said to use it. 24. Bhang is used by people comparatively in easy circumstances in a less proportion, and it is not confined to any particular locality. 25. The use of ganja may be said to be on the increase, because a large number of the lower classes who were formerly using country liquor are said to have betaken themselves to ganja smoking in consequence of the higher prices which they are obliged to pay for the liquor. 28. It cannot be correctly stated, but it may be safely said that its cost is certainly less than that of the liquor. 32. On the 1st day of the month of "Mesham" (Aries) which generally falls on or about the 11th April, bhang and spices are ground and mixed in sugar water and offered to the idol of Hanuman in all the mutts and freely distributed to all the people then present, i.e., to such as have no objec- tion to drink it. 33. Those that do not use the drug hold the smokers of ganja and drinkers of bhang in con- tempt just like teetotallers do those that use the liquor. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 39. Drinking bhang is better than smoking or eating ganja, because the several ingredients which are used in the preparations of the drink lessen the force of the bhang, and because the strength of the bhang itself is less than that of ganja. 40. The use of ganja is prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities in the preparation of several medicines by most of the schools of native doctors. Ganja is boiled in cow's milk, and the butter which is extracted from this milk is used in the prepara- tion of these medicines. None of these drugs is used in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. Moderate use of ganja and bhang is benefi- cial in their effects. 42. Moderate use of these drugs is quite harm- less. 43. Moderate consumers are certainly inoffen- sive to their neighbours. 44. It is refreshing. It creates appetite and gives sound sleep. It produces slight intoxication which lasts a few hours. Its want at the usual hour will produce longing, just like that of liquor, cigar or snuff. 45. No. 49. Yes. 51. Most of the bad characters are habitual con- sumers of either ganja or of liquor. It has no connection with crime. 53. Excessive indulgence will render the con- sumer unfit for any active work, either good or bad, just like an inveterate drunkard. 55. They do in rare cases. Complete stupefac- tion cannot, however, be effected by the use of this drug alone without the admixture of certain other ingredients, such as opium and the seed of "Ummetha" (dhatura fastriosa). 43. Evidence of MR. W. E. GANAPATHY, Retired Deputy Collector, Palamcottah, Tinnevelly. 1. When I was serving as Tahsildar under Gov- ernment, I had frequent opportunities of observing and hearing of the cultivation of the ganja plant and its uses. 3. In the district of Tinnevelly, of which I have most knowledge, no hemp or ganja plant grows spontaneously. 7. In the Tinnevelly district, it is not very extensively cultivated. It is grown here and there amidst other garden or kitchen cultivation. It is cultivated for production of (a) ganja, (c) bhang, and (d) seed. 8. The cultivation of this plant has of late almost entirely ceased, since the imposition of duty upon it. 9. There is not any particular method pursued in the cultivation of the plant. It is grown in the usual way that is adopted for raising ordinary garden cultivation. It is raised from seeds, but when it has attained a certain height, the top shoot is nipped in order to enable the plant to throw out additional branches and to become thick and bushy. 10. There is no special class of people who cul- tivate this plant. It is cultivated by garden culti- vators in general. 13. It can be raised everywhere in the province
230 Its cultivation is not affected by climate, soil, rain- fall, elevation, etc. 14. Charas is never made in this province, but the other two preparations (ganja and bhang) are made and those, too, to a very limited extent. 15. From the cultivated plant it is prepared for smoking thus:231 mundry, Ellore, Narsapur, Peddupur, etc. Bhang is not consumed. in these districts. Charas is not a word in use, and it is not known here. 16. Bhang is not used here. It is not known if it could be prepared from wild hemp. Charas is not known here. There is no wild growth of ganja here. 19. Ganja is used not only for smoking, but also in preparing intoxicating stuff, called majum, halua and some medicines. It is not known for what other purposes ganja is used. 20. Ganja. Muhammadans on a large scale. Sudras specially addicted to this habit to some ex- tent. Religious devotees, such as bairagis and bavajees. The proportion is too small, say about 10 per cent. amongst Muhammadans, and about 1 to 2 per cent. amongst Hindus, excluding bairagis and bavajees, all of whom, without exception, smoke ganja. The localities are those mentioned against question No. 14. 24. None. 25. The use of ganja is slightly on the increase, as it could be seen from the quantity of ganja brought for sale into the licensed shops. 28. Three pie in case of ganja. 32. In social life, amongst lower orders, the smoking of ganja is not taken objection to and so religiously. In higher orders of society, there are hardly any cases of ganja smoking. Consumers of preparations made with ganja, such as majum, halua, etc., are looked down in higher orders of society. Religiously the consumption of ganja is taken objection to. Ganja goes by the name of gnanapatri. It means wisdom leaf. There is a notion amongst certain classes of religionists that ganja smoking helps steadiness of mind in devo- tion. 33. The consumption of the drug is considered as degrading. The public opinion against the con- sumption is socially demoralising and degrading. Religiously it is prohibited in this part of the country. The use of ganja is in disrepute, as it is considered to produce unwholesome effect on the mind of the consumer, in making him unsteady in his avocations, unfit to manage any business, unfit to be the managing head of a family, and unsuit- able generally for the purposes of society. It is very often found to accelerate death in cases of ex- tremes. Many instances are within my knowledge in which parents of young men accustomed to the use of this ganja and its preparations have had serious thoughts about their sons' future. The plant is not worshipped in this part of the country. To show to what extent ganja smoking is despised, I take the liberty to quote the following folk-song sung in public dramas:232 is made in regular rows, with an interval of three spans between very two rows. A little quantity of water is poured at the root of every plant at the time of transplantation. The time for this is generally October. After transplantation the crop is not water- ed, but is left to itself. Rain is not much needed; one or two showers within the first month after transplantation will be quite sufficient, and the crop will thereafter grow with the cool and dewy winds of the cold season. The fields are ploughed twice over between the rows of trees just to turn up the soil and facilitate their growth. The fields become ripe for cutting in February. This time is deter- mined by the growth of kalle and the seed in it, and the change of colour of the whole tree into yellow. The trees are cut with the ordinary sickles before they get dry. This cultivation is analogous to that of chillies in these parts. The fields range in size between 1 and 6 acres; rubbish gatherings in the cattle stalls and sheep manure are very essential, and where these are not applied to the field before the transplantation, the growth of the crop is very poor. 10. There is no special class of cultivators of this plant. The raiyats of the village generally grow this crop in the best portion of their holdings. 11. Wild seeds are not brought into these parts, nor are they ever used for growing the crop. 12. It is not known to the growers or dealers of this plant here if wild hemp is anywhere grow- ing spontaneously or specially cultivated for the production of ganja. 13. There has been no restriction for the culti- vation of this plant but that of usage or custom. It is not known to be grown anywhere in the Godavery District or Vizagapatam District, and even in the Nellore District its cultivation seems to be restricted to only one village of Kuditipalam in the Nellore Taluk. The special conditions as regards climate, rainfall, etc., are noticed in the answer to Question 9. The soil best suited is the black cotton soil, without any admixture of sandy or saline soil. 14. Only ganja is prepared by treading under feet the kalle or dried flower tops. What is called bhang in these parts is not any special preparation. Small leaves also grow up round the kalle. As the kalle is trodden down, these leaves do not fall off, but remain with kalle, which assumes the form of cakes by thus being trodden down. For purposes of bhang these leaves which fall off when the flat ganja (cakes above mentioned) is separated into small pieces, are collected together and used. 15. Ganja is used for smoking only and bhang for drinking only. The flat ganja is taken up, and small portions of it are used at a time. When a bit is taken off from a large cake, the dried leaves fall off, and the flower portion is then well rubbed in one palm with the thumb of the other hand and washed clean in water. This is then again rubbed with a small quantity of tobacco and then put into the chillum with fire for smoking. The leaves separated from the kalle in the above manner are used for drinking bhang. The leaves are boiled in water and then ground down into a paste. This is then put in a cloth and the juice pressed out between fingers. This juice is then mixed with milk and sugar and then drunk. Those who can- not afford milk mix the juice with water and sugar. As for eating,233 with sugar and milk to serve both as a stimulant and renovatory food for the body. 28. Ganja or bhang is sold at 4 pies per tola. At this rate, an excessive consumer may use 4 annas worth of the drug, while a moderate con- sumer may use about ½ anna worth of this. The quantity of consumption generally depends on the way in which a man spends his time, an idler con- suming more and a business man less. 29. No ingredients are ordinarily or exception- ally mixed with this except those mentioned above. (Answer to No. 15.) The dhatura seed is used only by persons who can eat poison and yet bear it, but such men are very rare. 30. The secret consumers alone use it in solitude, but it is best enjoyed in company. Bairagis enjoy it most in this way. Women also use it just like men, but the children do not seem to be allowed its use, until they grow up into men. 31. The habit is easily formed, and it is difficult to break off when once formed. The tendency to excess depends only upon the opportunities one has to use it frequently. 32. No social or religious customs connected with the use of ganja or bhang are known to exist. It is used by the bairagis and others who want to give up society and lead the life of ascetics as a thing that induces concentration of mind necessary for meditation and devotion, and also as one that makes a man indifferent to thirst and appetite. 33. Socially, it is not considered a good thing to use it, and the consumers are condemned as unfit for company on occasions of social gatherings. Even in a religious point of view, it is praised only by those who use it, and public opinion is not so much against them who use it as an incentive to religious devotion. There is no custom of wor- shipping the plant. 34. It will be a serious privation to the con- sumers to forego its use in the same manner as deprivation of opium to an opium eater, and of liquor to a habitual drunkard. 35. The use of ganja tells only upon the con- sumer like that of opium. It does not make the consumer dangerous to society as arrack or toddy. The prohibition of its use entails great hardship on an innocent class of men. It does not seem to be possible to successfully prohibit its use, as illicit consumption is sure to go on. 36, 37, 38, 39. Experience is wanting on these questions. 40. This is seldom prescribed by any native doctors. But those who consume it give it as their experience that it keeps off indigestion, cough or some similar ailments, and that, if they give up its use they will have a recurrence of these complaints. One tells me that, in case of coughs and severe consumption, ganja was tried and found to give relief to some extent, and that it is also used to stop purgings in very serious cases. The Civil Apothecary, Bapatla, reports that, as medicine, the pharmaceutical extract prepared from it is useful in painful affections. It possesses antispasmo- dic and anodyne powers and is useful in neuralgic affections, whooping coughs, asthma, tetanus and hydrophobia. It is also given to produce sleep. Tincture of Indian hemp is also prepared from the drug. Its use in the form of medicine is not objectionable in the administration. But its being allowed to be used as an intoxicating drug has grave objections since it exercises its most baneful effects on the nervous system. 41. The consumers assert that the use of ganja and bhang have the three effects referred to in this question. Similarly those who are addicted to tobacco smoking or opium eating affirm that there qualities are inherent in their favourite articles. The use referred to is only moderate habitual use and not occasional use of the drug. 42. The use of this drug tells upon a man's constitution and habits by reducing his appearance and affecting his brain, and rendering him unfit for social enjoyment. 43. They are inoffensive. 44. The immediate effect is refreshing. In- toxication follows later on. Bairagis use it to allay hunger; other classes practise it for creating appetite. The effect of ganja smoking is said to be momentary, but the use of bhang and majum more lasting, from 6 to 10 hours. The after- effects are general weakness and a longing after the thing again, which, if not satisfied, produces uneasiness. 45. Vide answer to No. 44. It does not impair the moral sense, but induces laziness. It does not bring on habits of immorality or debauchery. Experience wanting. 47. The habit of using the ganja is not known to be hereditary, nor to have any effect on the children of the consumers. 49. It is said to be used occasionally by prosti- tutes as an aphrodisiac and. also to give staying- power. It is not known to produce impotence. 51, 52, 53 and 54. Toddy and arrack are used by criminals to fortify them in the commission of grave offences; but this hemp drug is never con- nected with crime in this way. 55. As above. 56. No experience. 57. Ganja is not eaten or drunk in these parts. The dealers say that Hindustani Brahmins of the north are known to be in the habit of powdering the kalle and pepper seed together, and eating the powder with a small quantity of water, with a view to avoid drivel. 58, 59, 60, 61, 62 and 63. The present ad- ministration of this drug appears to be sufficient for its purpose. The crop is grown by raiyats without any check. The dealers who purchase the privilege of sale buy the leaf from the cultivators and sell it in licensed places. There are frequent complaints of illicit sale. There seem to be no orders prohibiting the growth of the plant in back- yards for private consumption by the grower. This drug is considered as harmless as tobacco. I do not consider that it is necessary to provide for any restraints in its cultivation any more than that of tobacco, as it is not injurious to the public and as Government interference in regard to its growth will unnecessarily cause hardship to inno- cent consumers. At present there is only one shop for this taluq in an out of-the-way village at Daggapad. Better provision may, however, be made for its sale to public in more places and also for its preparation and manufacture with reference to best medical opinion on the subject. 64. No regulations are in force in regard to the transport of these drugs. 68. There are no shops where consumption on the premises is allowed. 69. The wishes of the people or neighbours are not consulted before the opening of the shop in any locality is sanctioned. It does not seem to be necessary to consult others, in as much as the shops are not places of resort for bad men. 70. There are no importations of this drug in this district from other provinces. VOL. VI. 2 K
234 46. Evidence of V. KASTHUR CHETTY, Tahsildar of Adoni. I beg to state that there are none in this taluk who profess to have any special knowledge on the matter. The hemp plant, that is ganja, is grown in Adoni, Kosgi and Cowtalam in back-vards here and there (one or two trees) for domestic use. The drug or dry ganja is imported in small quantities from Daggupad in the Cuddapah dis- trict, Alamur, Nandyala taluq in the Kurnul district, Shamshabad and Umnabad, Bengal pre- sidency. It is a wild plant grown spontaneously in those places. About 40 or 50 maunds are im- ported annually. There is no restriction or prohibition for the cultivation of the hemp plant. One Gejjai Kanteppa imports the above drug from the places noted above. He sells the drug to two retail licensed vendors, Kamalpur Nagayah and Anikeri Nogappa of Adoni town. The former pays annually a tax of Rs. 85 and the latter Rs. 180 to the Government. The drug is sold at a retail price of 4 pies per tola or 8 annas per seer. This is the minimum price at which it can be sold. About 76 per cent. of the population of Adoni town consume this drug. The class is generally a sect of bairagis, fakirs, sanyasis, and other ascetics devoted solely to religious purposes. It is not used by persons connected with family matters generally. The subordinate medical staff of officers in the Adoni Municipality and other Hospitals in this taluk is least acquainted with the subject. 47. Evidence of P. S. SINGARAVELU PILLAI, Tahsildar of Erode. 1. I served for eight years in the Abkari Depart- ment as Distillery Officer and Inspector. 2. Charas not known in the southern (Tamil) districts. This (ganja) is known as sadai ganja locally. The distinction of round and flat ganja is not known. The manner of manufacturing is to break off the branches or twigs of the ganja plant, spread them on the ground layer after layer, until it reaches a height of about a foot, then place a plank over it and weight it down with stones, etc, Ganja is also known as kalpram. 3. I am not aware of its spontaneous growth anywhere. 4. It is not known by any other name. 5. It is a tropical plant, and wants the same conditions as other tropical plants. I am not aware of any special conditions. 6. Scattered. 7. (a) and (c) Yes. A plant here and a plant there is grown in gardens. There is nothing like systematic cultivation. 8. No. 9. I don't know. 10. No separate class. The ordinary raiyat raises it in his gardens. 11. I don't know. 12. I know that the male plants are extirpated. 13. (a) No. (b) No. (c) Perhaps on the Nilgiri and Shevaroy Hills. 14. (a) and (e) Yes. Manufactured in the towns, and to only a small extent. 15. (a) (A).235 (b) Ghee, jaggery, spices, almonds, fig seeds and opium, etc., to intoxicate. 30. Smoking is done in company and eating in solitude. On marriage occasions, among the Mahrattis, Rajputs, and Guzeratis, drinking is done in company. I don't know if females in- dulge in ganja. I am not aware of children con- suming ganja. 31. Yes; easily formed and difficult to break off. The last question depends on the degree of self-control exercised by the consumer. 32. In demon or hero worship, intoxicants of all kinds are offered to the gods and then swal- lowed by those offering them. In hook-swinging, fire-walking festivals, the operators are drugged with ganja and they become insensible to pain. Yes, regarded as essential. Generally temperate. May lead to the formation of the habit; but does not generally. 33. With disfavour. Yes; public opinion has a bad opinion of the consumer. The sentiment is due to the fact that the consumer becomes lazy and good for nothing. I am not aware of any worship of the kind. 34. It would be a serious privation to a moderate habitual consumer. I am not aware of any special classes. 35. No; not feasible. Yes; illicitly. Yes; it will cause discontent. No political danger. (b) Perhaps opium; but not (a) alcohol. 36. No. 37 to 39. I don't know. 40. Yes; as a sedative, in cases of irregularities of stomach and rectum. I don't know about cattle disease. 41. (a) Yes. To dyspeptics and gourmands. (b) Yes. To bairagis, sepoys, and footpads. (c) Yes. To dwellers in malarious tracts and hill villages. But opium is more largely used. (d) To deaden pain, or at least to induce in- sensibility to it in painful performances, like hook-swinging, fire-walking, etc. (a), (b) and (c) Moderate habitual use. (d) Occasional use. 42. The moderate use is, I believe, harmless in the same way that a pint of beer is harmless. 43. Quite so. 44. It produces a slight degree of intoxication, I believe, and therefore refreshes. Smoking allays hunger, and eating or drinking creates appetite. I don't know how long the effect lasts. Yes; the after-effects are languid drowsiness. 45. It weakens the constitution a bit; but I don't think it has effect on the mind or morals. It does not affect the digestion. Excessive smok- ing is known to produce lung affections. It pro- duces laziness, but certainly does not induce im- morality. 47. I don't know. 49. I don't know. 51. I don't know if many bad characters are habitual consumers; but I do know that ganja consumption does not make a man a bad character. 54. The drug will muddle the senses and stupe- fy. It will render the man unfit for much violent exercise. 55. Yes. 56. (a) For smoking, tobacco is added to give flavour and heighten intoxication. For eating and drinking, the addition of spices, perhaps, adds a little to the effect of the ganja, but not to any extent. (b) I don't know about dhatura. 57. I don't know. 58. Works well. 60. Cultivation and preparation are not under control, and I will not advocate any modification. Sale is under control, and that is enough. 62. No. 63. None at all. 64. As an old Abkari officer, my honest opinion is that ganja should be let alone in this presi- dency. It is used by such a small, almost infinite- simal, portion of the population, and its effects are so harmless that I would not interfere with it. 65. There is no taxation except vend rents. The incidence is light. 66. No. 67. None. 68. No. 69. There is no local opinion. But there is no necessity for any. The shops are so few and the drug so inoffensive that I would not interfere with them. 70. The vendors pay for the privilege of selling and that is sufficient. 48. Evidence of S. VASUDEVA. RAO, Tahsildar, Tadpatri. 1. Local enquiries made at Tadpatri Kusba town. 2. The definitions of bhang and charas are accepted. As regards ganja it is said that the dried flowering tops of female plants are not used, as they are said to affect injuriously the sight. I am not sure that the people understand clearly the distinction between male and female plants. Bhang, charas and ganja are the names used in this taluk for the three products referred to. 7. The cultivation of hemp-plant, which is extremely limited, is intended for production of ganja only. The cultivation is confined to com- pounds and back-yards of houses. A few plants are also found grown amidst chilly crops. 8. The cultivation continues to be limited. No variations. 9. The plant is periodically watered. As soon as the leaves ripen the watering is stopped. 10. The cultivators are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 11. Yes; but not in this taluk. 13. Cultivation of hemp plant is not restricted. 14. (a) Yes. (b) and (c). No. Very limited extent. The owner of the house VOL. VI. 2 K 2
236 in the back-yard of which such plants are raised uses along with a few friends perhaps. The cultivation is so very limited that there is no special method of preparation at all. Ganja is used only for smoking in this taluk. 16. Bhang is not used or prepared, in this taluk. 18. Yes. Ganja cannot be kept for more than a year without deteriorating. Time lessens the stupefying effects of the drug. It keeps better if preserved in granaries inaccessible to molesta- tion of rats. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking in this taluk. Charas and bhang are not used here. 20. Fakirs, Madigas, mains and weavers gene- rally use ganja. Fifty per cent. of the population smoke ganja. 21. What they style " Mulki" ganja is used in these parts. This appears to be more allied to chur than to flat or round ganja. The flowering tops are not subjected to any particular form of pressure. They are allowed to dry and packed up in packets or bundles. 22. Charas is unknown to men of these parts. 23. Bhang is not used for any purpose in this taluk. 24. None. 25. The smoking of ganja is on the increase. It is much cheaper than toddy or arrack, and is therefore made to supersede the latter gradually. 26. The consumers are generally habitual mod- erate consumers. 27. Vide remark against paragraph 20. 28. One tola, valued at 4 pies, is sufficient for a habitual moderate consumer. 29. Tobacco is mixed with ganja for smoking purposes. The object is to lessen the bilious character of pure ganja. Dhatura is not used. 30. The consumers generally practise the drug in company. 31. It is not difficult to break off the practice in the case of moderate consumers. In the case of those indulging in excesses it is very difficult. 33. The use of ganja is held in disrepute by the public. It is perhaps owing to the injurious results that would follow in the case of excesses. No custom of worshipping the plant exists. 34. No serious privation to any class of con- sumers if they are made to forego the consump- tion, as there are hardly any who indulge in excess smoking. 35. It is quite feasible in this taluk to prohibit the use of all the three drugs by making the cultivation of the plant and the possession of its products penal. No political danger would ensue, The consumers of ganja will take recourse to drinking toddy or arrack. 36. Yes, due to the gradual increase of the cost of liquor and toddy. 37. Charas is more intoxicating than ganja. 40. External application for scrotum mixed with halva or leham. 41. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Not known. The moderate use of the drug will bring about the above results. 42. Even the moderate use affects health unless proper nourishment is taken. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect is that the body gets hot and the man gets slightly intoxicated. It creates appetite. Lasts for about four or five hours. After a meal its effects cease, Want of subsequent gratification unsettles the man by making him bilious. 45. (b) Man gets weak if he does not take good nourishment. (c) Eventually does so. (d ) No. (e) No. (f) No, Moderate use does not produce any of these results, It is only excess use that is likely to produce such results. 46. By excess use men do not stand in need of food. They keep up without nourishment. The result is that physically and mentally the men get impaired. So much so that some get insane. The insanity is however temporary. In the case of two of my peons they had become practically insane owing to indiscriminate and excessive smoking of ganja. They are both doing well now. One has rejoined his appointment. 47 and 48. No. 49. No. 51. No. No connection whatever. 53. Yes, if sufficient nourishment is not taken. No. 54. No, Men using these drugs become timid rather than get bold. 55. No. 57. They are neither eaten nor drunk in this taluk. 60. The cultivation is very limited and requires no control. 61. Charas not produced. 63. None. 66. No such distinction appears to be desir- able. 68. There is only one shop at Tadpatri, where the preparations are not consumed, but only sold. 69. Wishes of the people are consulted by the contractor. He selects a site which is least objec- tionable by way of securing privacy. The police and the Magistrate then give their opinion about the site. It is necessary that public opinion should be consulted in the selection of the site.
237 49. Evidence of T. KODANDARAM NAIDU, Tahsildar, Hospett. 1. Enquiries made for the express purpose of answering these questions. 3. Not spontaneously grown in the Hospett taluk. 14. (a) Ganja is not systematically prepared in this district. The hemp plant is not grown as a regular crop, but one or two of it may be found in back-yards here and there. Some raiyats grow it in their fields, but the plants are generally very few and intended for personal use. (b) Charas is unknown in this part of the country. (c) Bhang is likewise unknown. 19. Ganja is not only used for smoking, but it enters also into the composition of certain be- verages and medicines. A preparation called majum is made of ganja. 20. All classes use ganja from the Brahmin down to the Madiga. Two per cent. of the population may be said to be addicted to its use. 25. Seems to be stationary. Looking to figures, one may say that it is declining, but experi- ence shows that it is otherwise. 28. Ganja, 3 tolas; value Rs. 0-1-3. 32. No customs alluded to exist in this dis- trict except that when a person smokes ganja he invariably hands the pipe to those happening to be with him at the time, provided they are habi- tual smokers of that drug, and often offers it to strangers as well. 33. The consumption is looked upon as a bad habit. There is certainly public opinion which is not in favour of the consumption. All com- munities look down upon the consumer, and re- gard him as low in the social ladder. The use of the drug is in disrepute whatever may be the form. The hemp plant is not worshipped in this district. 39. Smoking is said to be more harmful because it affects the lungs. 40. Yes, but to very inconsiderable extent. A paste of ganja is applied to sores. It is said to serve the purpose of carbolic acid. The tongues of animals refusing to eat are rubbed over with a powder made of ganja, saffron, and salt. Ganja mixed in gram gives strength to cattle, and keeps them in good condition. 41. Yes. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja is that it removes restlessness and fixes attention on any particular subject. It is said to be somewhat refreshing. It allays hunger, but does not produce it. The effect lasts from 1 to 6 hours. Want of subsequent gratification pro- duces longing or uneasiness in the habitual con- sumer. 45. A moderate use does not produce any bad effects. On the other hand it fixes the attention of the consumer on objects over which he wishes to devote his time. It keeps down manly power and that is the reason why sanyasis take to it. The consumer is quiet and appears to be in a con- templative mood. 49. Yes; when mixed with opium, etc., and used in the form of electuaries, ganja increases venereal desire. 51. No. It has no connection whatever with crime like alcohol. 53. No. 54. No. 55. No. No. 50. Evidence of M. BIMACHARI, Tahsildar, Rayadrug. 1. I instituted special enquiries after the receipt of the order directing me to answer these ques- tions. 3. Not in this district. 14. No; only ganja is imported. 16. Bhang and Charas are neither prepared nor used in this part of the country. Ganja can be prepared from the ganja plant or its dry flowers. 19. Charas not being used here. Ganja is used for smoking and in making a sort of sweetmeat. The process of this preparation is that essence of ganja is collected by boiling it with ghee. Then mix it with syrup and poppy-seeds, and spread in places and cut them in square pieces. 20. Generally Rajputs, Muhammadans, fakirs, bairagis, and persons who are supposed to have renounced worldly cares and desires and military people. It is impossible to form the proportion by figures and facts. In this taluk I have found persons smoking in Rayadrug and Kanekal. 24. Bhang is not used in this part of the country. 25. Only isolated instances are found there. From inquiries I have made of the people who are accustomed to the use of ganja, I am of opi- nion that its use is decreasing on account of re- strictions and high prices at which ganja is sold. 28. The average quantity for each man per day is about half tola, and its cost will be three pies in Rayadrug and Kanekal. This is for ganja. 32. Ganja is used only as a religious custom among those who have some veneration for siva, specially on Sivaratri day. They on that day worship Siva with water mixed with ganja, poppy-seeds, sugar, other spices. This custom is partially observed by Rajputs. 33. It is considered as injurious to health; it disorders the brain, and brings on lung affections. Respectable class of people and officials do not give credit to the statement of the persons who smoke ganja or use bhang. As it is said that Siva even used ganja, Rajputs sometimes worship ganja plant. 39. Smoking ganja is injurious to health be- cause it affects the lungs. Drinking and eating in the form of bhang is not so bad as that of smoking, because in preparing it for either drink or eating, milk, sugar, almond, melon seed, pepper, rose petals, and other ingredients and spices are added to ganja; consequently, these articles being nourishing, tend to counteract the bad effects of ganja. Hukka smoking is more injur- ious than drinking or eating. 40. Native doctors prescribe ganja cigarettes for asthma. The ashes of ganja are used for
238 cattle to prevent dysentery. It is also used for men in a delirious state. 41. No; it is condemned. 42. It cannot be considered as harmless, be- cause when it is used it keeps the mind in an unsettled condition, and makes persons laugh within themselves and utter all sorts of words and begin to sing mad songs. 43. Not always; sometimes they are inoffen- sive. 44. It produces sleep, keeps down hunger, in- duces them to work even when starving for a length of time. Its immediate effect is that it dries all the moisture on the tongue and lips, and produces a peculiar sensation in the brain when it is taken in the form of beverage. With the ingredients mentioned above it is refreshing. In small doses intoxication is less perceptible. Generally its effect lasts from two to six hours. Its after-affects are that brain and lungs ate in- volved. 45. First it acts like a stimulant and then as a sedative upon the nervous system. 49. Yes; some native doctors use it in prepar- ing confections. 51. They do not allow their thoughts, under the influence of ganja, to run towards the com- mission of offences. Criminality cannot be at- tributed to ganja smokers or drinkers. They would rather beg than steal. 53. It would rather create a suicidal tendency in the man. Excessive indulgence generally pro- duces madness. They generally like solitude to society and disregard their food, dress, etc. I do not know any case in which it had produced homicidal frenzy. 54. No. 55. Yes; complete stupefaction cannot be in- duced without admixture. 51. Evidence of MUNSHI S. MOHAMED UNWUR SAHIB, Tahsildar, Suthanapully Taluk, Kistna District. 1. I consulted several persons who are addict- ed to the use of ganja, and my information is based on the facts thus elicited from them after careful enquiry. 3. I have no knowledge of any district or dis- tricts in which the hemp plant grows spontane- ously, i.e., without undergoing the operations of cultivation. 14. Hemp plant is not grown in this taluk, and hence ganja, charas, and bhang are not prepared here from it. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant not only wherever grown, but also wherever it is procurable. I have no idea whether ganja or charas can be prepared from the wild plant or not. 19. Charas is unknown in this part of the country. I have no idea of it. Ganja is used to a large extent for smoking. Bhang is prepared from the leaves and seeds of the hemp plant. The leaves and seeds are ground well with water till it becomes pulpy; then this pulpy substance is strained in a piece of thin cloth and the juicy matter is gathered in a cup; milk, sugar, spices, etc., are added to give flavour to the juice thus gathered. Then this is drunk by the people, and it serves as a beverage, especially in hot season. Majun.239 God) and makes some obeisance. The Musalmans place the earthen bowl on the hukka and then smoke. 33. The consumption of ganja is generally regarded contemptuously. Both social and reli- gious opinion is against its practice. Among the Musalmans the use of ganja or the use of any form of the narcotic is forbidden by religion; but among the Hindus, though not forbidden by religion, yet the consumers are treated by their brethren with disregard. The reason why the use of any form of narcotic is in disrepute is that the consumers are generally a set of lazy people, quite averse to work as long as they can help and talk vain stories. I do not know of any custom pre- valent among certain sects of the people regarding the worshipping of the hemp plant. 39. Drinking or eating of any preparation of the hemp plant in this part of the country is not in practice, and so it is impossible to say whether smoking is less injurious or not. 40. Ganja is largely prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by native doctors to cure cough, asthma, rheumatism, and cold. Ganja is not used in the treatment of cattle disease here. 41. The people addicted to smoking of ganja say invariably that its moderate use is very bene- ficial in its effects, namely, curing cough, asthma, rheumatism, cold, and promoting digestion. 42. As the moderate use of ganja is beneficial in its effects, I think its use will not cause any harm to the consumer. 43. The moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours, and cause no disturbance of any kind to them. 44. The immediate effects of the moderate use of ganja are very refreshing and produce a little mild intoxication. The consumer lies down quiet- ly for one or two hours. The eyes become red. It creates great appetite. There are no after- effects. The want of subsequent gratification pro- duces longing and uneasiness, his thoughts roam about, he feels painful sensation in the limbs, no inclination to eat, he does not seem inclined to follow his ordinary pursuits till his want is grati- fied. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja does not produce any noxious effects on the consumer, either mental or moral; but it affects physically, i.e., he gradually diminishes in weight. Even stout people accustomed to ganja smoking become by degrees in the course of a few years thinner and thinner. I have seen many habitual consu- mers. I did not observe any change either mental or moral when compared with non-consumers. 49. I am informed by native doctors and others that the use of bhang and majun and curry ex- cites aphrodisiac; but, on the other hand, smok- ing ganja diminishes in course of a few years the manly powers, and hence it is largely and invaria- bly used in this form by the religious mendicants, and devotees both of Hindu and Muhammadan community. 51. In this part of the country, as a rule, the habitual consumers do not come within the cate- gory of bad characters. 53. The excessive indulgence in any of these drugs incites to unpremeditated crime. I know a case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. A certain man of goldsmith's caste, who indulged himself excessively in drinking bhang, squeezed the neck of his own son, about two or three years old, and murdered him, saying that the deity whom he worships directed him to sacri- fice his own son. He was not at all sorry for the loss of his beloved child as long as he was under its effects; but subsequent to the removal of its effects, he was very penitent, and begged that he should be hanged. 54. The criminals do not use these drugs to fortify themselves to commit premeditated crimes as far as my knowledge goes. 55. The criminals, in order to further their de- signs, induce their victims (generally children and females) to partake of these drugs and stupefy them. The use of bhang or majun, which are palatable, produces complete stupefaction for a short time. While the victims are in that state the criminals remove the jewels, etc., from their persons, and walk away quietly. Sometimes the young women are seduced by their paramours to leave their parents and husbands' houses, and follow them. Note by the Commission on the case referred to in Question 53, appended to MUNSHI S. MAHOMED UNWAR SAHIB'S evidence. On 12th December 1883 this man caused the death of his son, a child of two years, under the following circumstances. The man dabbled in alchemy and tried to transmute the baser metals into gold, or discover hidden treasure. Three or four days before the murder, a certain Pandaram (name unknown) came to his house. Under his advice and example, Kuppia smoked ganja, which he had not touched before. He smoked for the last time before 8 A.M., on 12th December. At 3 P.M. that day (according to his own statement, which was accepted as true), "I made the child to sit near the fire. After my return I found the child absent. I caught the child and brought it near the fire. I placed the two palms on the fire and pressed them. The child cried. It was a Kartika Nakshatram day. It came to my mind that it would be better to send the child to God." So he killed the child, and was found lapping the blood that had fallen from its mouth when strangled. There was no evidence of insanity, except the prisoner's wife's. She said that the prisoner was a little insane, and was now and then queer in his manner. After making special medical inquiry as to his state of mind, the High Court passed the following final judgment:240 52. Evidence of M. SAMBA SIVA RAU NAIDU, Tahsildar, Bellary. 1. From enquiries made of renters, smokers, and consumers, and from observation of those accustomed to the drug. 3. The hemp plant is known to grow spontane- ously in some isolated tracts bordering Nallama- lais. 14. (a) Ganja and (b) bhang are prepared in the Bellary district, in scattered localities to a small extent. 16. Bhang is prepared in houses, gardens, or other recreative places. It cannot be prepared from the plant at the places grown, because the leaf has to be dried before it could be used for it. Ganja or charas can be prepared at the places where the wild plant grows. 19. Generally for smoking. 20. Bairagis, fakirs, and mendicant classes generally smoke ganja and charas freely. No particular localities or proportion can be specified. 24. Muhammadans, Gujeratis, and others that have come down from Northern Hindustan eat and drink bhang mostly. 25. There has been an increase in the use of the drugs. This species of intoxicant is within the grasp of the poorest classes. It costs but little, and the habit is easily and readily contract- ed among the lower orders. Each folk has a tendency to contract the habit and his comrade the tendency to impart it. The drug imported from Daggupad in the Kistna district is said to produce greater intoxication than the local pro- duce. Formerly, strong country liquor was very cheap. Its value has gradually increased though the quality is inferior. Thus the poorer classes have been led to have recourse to ganja and bhang. Hence the increase. 28. Habitual moderate consumers use each per diem 1 tola ganja, cost 3 pies, ¼ tola cost 1½ pies. 32. Before drinking bhang, the preparation is offered to the deity by Hindus as a religious observance. People drink bhang and smoke ganja in pleasure parties. 33. The consumption of these drugs is regarded by the Hindus as a detestable habit. The prac- tice is in disrepute generally in Southern India. The plant is not worshipped as far as known in this country. 39. Smoking is considered a more injurious form of consumption than drinking or eating, for the smoke inhaled affects the internal organs of the stomach. 40. Medical question. 41. Yes: beneficial. 42. Beneficial and harmless if moderately used. 43. Yes; inoffensive. 44. The moderate use of the drugs produces slight intoxication. It is refreshing to some extent. It allays hunger when under the influ- ence of the drug and creates appetite when. intoxi- cation gets down. 45. Moderate use of the drugs does not seem to produce any noxious effects so far as known. 49. The use of bhang is practised as an aphro- disiac, but not freely. 51. Not so far as known. The consumers of this drug delight in ideal pleasures and are not known to be freely connected themselves with crime. 53. Not known to incite to unpremeditated crime. 54. Not used for such purposes so far as known. 55. Yes. Instances of this kind are known to have occurred, though rarely. Complete stupe- faction is possible when administered in immoder- ate quantities to people not up to the habit. 53. Evidence of P. RAM RAO, Tahsildar of Hadgalli. 14. The preparations are made in India, more es- pecially in Bengal presidency. Charas is used in these parts very rarely. Ordinary bhang is used here. 20. Ganja is used in smoking by bairagis or sanyasis, fakirs, lingayets, jengamas. Charas is used by Muhammadans. 24. Especially the bhang is used by Raj puts, Maravadis, Boyas, and Musalmans. Some of them eat it in a form of majum. 28. The average cost of ganja for every person per diem will be only one anna. 32. Some of the mendicants, under the impres- sion if they take any of these preparations their minds will be devoted towards God. 39. Some say by smoking ganja they will get chest diseases and brain affections. Sometimes many of them turn mad by using much ganja. Eating ganja is not more injurious to the health than smoking it. 40. Some of the native quacks use ganja, as medicine for cattle diseases. 41. Yes. 44. Some say that the moderate use of ganja will increase appetite. It will produce intoxica- tion if it is used newly. Its effects will last about 6 hours. Afterwards it will cause uneasi ness and longing. 45. Yes. 49. Yes. 54 and 55. Yes.
241 54. Evidence of ADAKI JAGANNADHA RAO,Brahmin, Acting Tahsildar, Hindupur, Anantapur District. 1. As I am a public servant of 12 years' stand- ing, I have had several opportunities of obtaining information regarding matters connected with hemp drugs in the Madras, Cuddapah, Nellore and Anantapur districts. 2. The terms siddha-patri, ganja and bhang are used for denoting dried ganja leaves. 3. I have not seen the hemp plant growing spontaneously: but raiyats grow it purposely for private consumption or sale. 4. Ganja or bhang or siddha-patri. 7. Hemp plant is cultivated by raiyats on por- tions of their fields (a) for production of ganja; (b) for use as bhang; (c) for its fibre. 8. The growth of hemp plant is not prohibited by abkari laws. There has, therefore, been neither increase nor decrease in the area under such cultivation in back-yards and fields and gardens at- tached to mutts of lingayats. 9. Where the seeds are thickly sown in a hot- bed, the seedlings are transplanted. 10. Linga Balijas are much addicted to ganja smoking. Muhammadans use bhang. Other agricultural cultivators rear the plant for specu- lative purposes. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is not restricted in the Madras Presidency. But the sale of ganja without a license is an offence under the Madras Abkari Act, 1886. 14. (a) and (c) are prepared in this taluk. 15. (A) Dried ganja leaves are mixed with tobacco for smoking purposes; (B) habitual smok- er of ganja at times uses ganja leaf for eating; (C) liquid preparation called ramarasam is pre- pared by Marathis on festive occasions to keep their spirits up. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses. 17. Muhammadans, Linga balijas, bairagis and boyas. 19, Ganja is used for smoking and drinking purposes. A sort of beverage is prepared from ganja leaf like tea by Kshatryas and Marathis. The preparation is styled " ramarasam." 20. Muhammadans, lingayats, bairagis and boy- as smoke ganja in this taluk. 21. Chur is preferred for smoking. 23. No distinction is drawn between ganja and bhang in this taluk. 24. Muhammadans, bairagis, lingayats eat or drink bhang. 25. It is on the increase, as it is cheaper than arrack. A man with smoking one pie worth of ganja can have as much intoxication as one that drinks one drachm of arrack. Further, the use of ganja can be done more secretly than the use of arrack. 26. Lingayats are habitual moderate consumers. Bairagis are habitual excessive consumers. Ksha- triyas are occasional moderate consumers. Boyas are occasional excessive consumers. 27. Men of sedentary habits contract the habit of smoking ganja. Persons of voluptuous habits smoke ganja or bhang, for it is highly aphro- disiac. 28. (a) One-fourth seer of 21 Colas = 1 ½ annas. (b) Half seer of 21 tolas = 3 annas. 29. Only tobacco is mixed with ganja. Dha- tura is mixed with ganja by criminal classes to facilitate robbing the victims. No bhang massala is used here. 30. Ganja smoking is usually practised in com- pany. It is not confined to the male sex. It is practised by adults. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed. It is difficult to break off. There is a tendency in the case of ganja or bhang for the moderate habit to develop into the exces- sive. 32. In marriages and festivals the use of the drug is regarded as essential. It is generally tem- perate. It is used by Marathis and Kshatriyas on such occasions to keep up their spirits. 33. The consumption of these drugs is generally abhorred. The person that uses bhang or ganja is looked upon as a bad character. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. It would be a serious privation to forego the consumption of the drug they use. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. The drug would be consumed illicitly. The prohibition would occasion some discontent among the consumers. Such discontent would not amount to a political danger. The pro- hibition would to some extent be followed by re- course to (a) alcoholic stimulants; (b) opium. 36. Alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for these drugs by the rich who can afford to buy costly liquors. 39. There is a popular belief that smoking ganja is a less injurious form of consumption than drink- ing or eating the same. 40. Ganja leaf is used by quacks. The leaf is applied externally when a man is suffering from stomach ache. These drugs are not used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of charas, ganja or bhang is beneficial in its effects242 47. The habitual moderate use of ganja appears to be a hereditary habit. 49. Yes. 50. The excessive use of ganja or bhang leads to an untimely grave. 51. Yes. Ganja smokers are gamblers and thieves. 52. The excessive use of ganja or bhang makes a man loose in morals. 53. Yes. Excessive use incites to unpremedi- tated crime. I know of no case of temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Yes. 55. Yes. Dhatura seeds are mixed with ganja leaf. 56. The admixture of tobacco with hemp does not increase the effects of hemp. Dhatura is ad- mixtured for being administered to others. 57. Ganja, when drunk in the shape of rama- rasam, is more intoxicating than liquors. 58. It is capable of improvement. 59. The cultivation of the hemp plant should be attended with the same restrictions as the culti- vation of poppy plants. 60. The system requires modification in respect of laying restrictions on the cultivation of the hemp plant. 61. Charas is not produced in this province. 62. Yes. Village karnams may be asked to enter in the monthly cultivation account the area of ganja cultivation. 63 and 64. No. 65. Reasonable. 66. Not necessary. 67. No. 68. No. The brothels should be stifled. 69. The magistracy and the police are consulted. The local public opinion may be considered. 70. There are no facts regarding importation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States. Yes, duty is really paid. There is no general use of untaxed drugs. 55. Evidence of G. JAGANNAYAKULU, Acting Tahsildar, Gooty. 1. On enquiries made at Gooty. 2. These definitions are quite acceptable. Per- sons who use ganja are not able to distinguish between male and female plants. Bhang, charas, and ganja are known here by the same names. 3. I have no knowledge of other districts, ex- cept this district. It grows spontaneously here and there in parts of the country. 4. It is known as ganja and bhang. These refer to the same plant. 5. No special conditions appear to be necessary for its growth but that it requires watering often. 6. Scattered ordinarily. 7. There is cultivation only in back-yards of the hemp plant for purposes given in (a) and (c). 8. No increase. 9. Seeds are first sown and then covered with a layer of earth and watered. The seeds sprout in a week and are transplanted. 10. Sanyasis, fakirs, and jogis generally culti- vate the plant. They are quite different from the agricultural class. 11. Yes. 12. Nil. 13. No. 14. (a) and (c) are prepared to a small extent in the back-yards of houses. 15. No difference between the wild plant and the cultivated one. 16. Not prepared in houses. Can be prepared from hemp plant wherever grown, as also ganja. Charas is not prepared in these parts. 17. Mostly Musalmans. 18. These three products deteriorate if kept over for two years, and the efficacy is lost entirely after a lapse of four years. No special measures are known to prevent deterioration, except by keeping it from being meddled with by rats and insects, and from exposure. 19. Charas is not to be had here, and nothing can be said here regarding it. Ganja is used for smoking and also for manufacturing a legam called purnathilagam. Ganja is grown here and there in this taluk. 20. Sanyasis, jogis, and fakirs use ganja for smoking wherever they are, and in all parts. Twenty per cent, of the population may be con- sidered to be using ganja. 21. I think round. The smokers of gauja are not able to say decisively about it. The flowering parts of the plant are not given any pressure to assume a certain form. The dried ones are used as they are. 22. Charas is not used. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Sanyasis, bairagis, jogis, and fakirs eat and drink bhang wherever they are found in this taluk. 25. It is on the decrease, as it is sold at a higher rate than before. 26. Not able to give. 27. It is only among fakirs mostly that the above classes are taken from, who go a-begging. 28. (a) Quarter of an anna in weight, worth the same price. (b) One anna in weight, worth the same value. 29. (a) Tobacco. (b) Dried ginger and jaggery. Dhatura not used. These admixtures are used to add to the taste and to lessen the intoxication. Bhang mas sala is not known here. 30. Ganja and bhang are more used in company than in solitude. It is confined to the male sex. It is not given to children at all. 31. The habit is easily formed and can easily be broken off. There is no tendency, it is stated, to develop from moderate into excessive habit. 32. There are no customs, social or religious, regarding the use of these drugs. 33. There is no public opinion prohibiting the use of these narcotics, at least among the lower orders of the population. No custom of wor- shipping the plant exists.
243 34. No serious privation to habitual moderate consumers by preventing them to consume the drug they use. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs by heavy duty. It would be consumed illicitly. The prohibition will cause much discon- tent among the consumers without any political danger, The prohibition will lead the consumers to take recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 36. It cannot be stated. 37. Charas is not known here. 38. It cannot be said. 39. Smoking ganja is less injurious than eating and drinking bhang. Reasons cannot be given. 40. Bhang is said to be used on account of its medicinal properties. Bhang leaves are used for cattle for nourishment. 41. (a) The moderate use of bhang gives the effect of increasing the digestive process. (b) The smoking of ganja alleviates fatigue. (c) Bhang and ganja are used as a preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. The moderate habitual use that is referred to as regards (a), the moderate occasional use that is referred to as regards (b) and (c). 42. The moderate use of these drugs is stated to be harmless. Reasons cannot be given. 43. Inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. A habitual consumer, taking a moderate quantity of any of these drugs, will feel giddy and then intoxicated. It does not allay hunger, but increases appetite. It has its effect for an hour or two. The want of subsequent gratification does not produce any longing or uneasiness after food is taken. 45. (a) None. (b) to (e) No. (f) It does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. 46. No cases have come within my experience. But it is said that, owing to excessive use of ganja, as any other stimulant, lessens the appetite, and works both upon the body and mind so as to im- pair the physical and mental faculties. Such con- sumers will, however, be restored to their former vigour by moderate use of the drug and proper nourishment. 47. No. 49. It does not produce impotence. 53. It does. I have heard of a case that a Muhammadan peon, owing to excessive use of ganja, had become so intoxicated that he beat an old man, who happened to pass before him, to death. The latter appeared to the Muhammadan as a pig in his intoxicating mood, and he, according to the principles of his religion, smashed the head of the old man with a stick. 54. No. 57. These are neither eaten nor drunk in these parts. 60. The cultivation is scarce. 61. Charas is not produced here, nor is it used. 68. In this taluk there are four shops where the drugs are sold. The buyers do not consume them in the places where they are sold. 69. Wishes of the people are consulted before any shop is opened. The least objectionable site will be selected, approved by the police and magis tracy. Public local opinion should be considered. 56. Evidence of CHAGANTI SOMAYAJULU, Brahmin, Acting Tahsildar, Palakonda. 1. As a Taluk officer for 11 years, I have had to inspect opium and ganja shops at times. 14. Ganja is prepared in this, Cheepurupally, Vizianagram, and Vizagapatam taluks. Bhang also in Vizianagram. It is prepared to a moderate extent. 16. By those who are addicted to it, bhang is prepared generally in their houses in Vizianagram. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown, but the material got from Calcutta and Benares is preferred. Ganja also can be prepared from the hemp wherever it is grown. I know nothing of charas. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking. 20. All Hindu ascetics known as bairagis and sanyasis, [some Muhammadans, and some lower classes of Hindus smoke ganja. Retired sepoys also are in the habit of smoking this. A large number of smokers will be found in Vizianagram, Vizagapatam, Ellamanchelli, and Anakapalli. Their proportion may be estimated at about 2 per cent. of the population. 24. So far as I know, it is only in Vizianagram that bhang is used mostly by those who belong to the Bengal Presidency, and who have visited Benares and other places. Hindustanis and some Brahmin students and pandits consume it to a large extent. The number of such men may be estimated at about 3,000. 25. Cannot say. 33. The use of ganja and bhang are looked down as disgraceful. In these parts the consump- tion of ganja and bhang are considered socially and religiously objectionable. These drugs are held in disrepute, as they intoxicate and gradually enfeeble the constitution and make one impotent. 39. Smoking is considered to be more injuri- ous than eating and drinking. Smoking gradually weakens the chest, stoops down the consumer, renders the countenance ghastly, and makes one timid and impotent. 40. Opium is the only drug which is medici- nally used in cases of diarrh244 The after-effect is that the limbs become languid and weary, and, if not repeated at stated intervals, there will be uneasiness and a great longing. This is more in the case of ganja and charas than in the case of bhang, which a consumer can afford to give up for some time. 45. There used to be two peons in my father's service for about 12 years. They were both addicted to smoking ganja. They were at first smart and good looking, and by smoking ganja gradually acquired an emaciated countenance, timi dity, and were gradually bent down, and became very weak and unfit for active work, and were ultimately discharged. When in school, two boys of my class who belong- ed to the native regiment stationed at Viziana- gram, acquired the habit of smoking ganja and maddak from a bairagi, who used to frequent their house. These two boys were at first very smart and intelligent, and used to get up their lessons very well; but within a year and-a-half after they learnt smoking ganja they became languid and drowsy, and gradually gave up their studies and left the school. A few more cases may be mentioned, but their history is the same. 54. No. 55. Yes. Complete stupefaction cannot, I hear, be induced without the admixture. Oral evidence. Question 1.245 (b) Jammalamadugu Taluk246 is no particular place allotted for it, although in towns the lower order and fakirs or sanyasis col- lect in makam or mutts and smoke. 21. All kinds are preferable for smoking. 23. My enquiry shows that bhang leaves are not used here for smoking. 24. Vide answer to Question 17. 25. No marked increase or decrease within the last five years is perceptible. 26. (a) 25 per cent. (b) 50 per cent. (c) 10 per cent. (d) 15 per cent. 27. Habitual moderate consumers are generally of the lower order of the population, while the habitual excessive consumers form the fakirs and dervishes and their followers. The occasional moderate consumers come from the class of men above the lower order, while the occasional exces- sive consumers generally belong to the lower orders of the Muhammadan, Rajput and Mahratta com- munities. 29. No other ingredients than those already mentioned are mixed. Dhatura is not used here nor sold for the purpose. The articles which form bhang massala are stated in the last paragraph of answer to Question 15. 30. About 75 per cent. of the consumers pre- fer company, 5 per cent. seek solitude, and the rest are indifferent. It is not confined to any time of life. Drinking and eating are partaken by low class of females also, while smoking is not. Children above ten years begin to contract the habit. 31. Yes. 32. There are no customs, either social or reli- gious, but the habit is contracted by association. 33. When fakirs and dervishes take it, it is not considered objectionable; but in the case of others it is considered degrading. Society views the practice with disfavour. Smoking, drinking, eat- ing or having recourse to any other form of the narcotic drug is in very great disrepute with the majority of the population, because the man using it, besides being a burden to the family, is useless to society. No custom prevails here of worship- ping the hemp plant. 34. In the case of fakirs and dervishes who have little to do in the world, it will be a serious privation. All that they have to do is to go about begging and to spend the day in intoxica- tion. They probably cannot do without it. In the case of others, I do not think the privation will be serious. About 20 per cent. of the con- sumers may feel it a serious privation. 35. There can be no possible difficulty in pro- hibiting the use of this drug. No doubt they might be consumed illicitly. The prohibition can be enforced by making it penal to cultivate the hemp plant without previously obtaining the license for which a heavy fee should be fixed. As the taxation of ganja has already decreased the extent of cultivation, this license system would in the long run dissuade the raiyats from cultivating it. There might be disappointment, but not dis- content by the prohibition. This would not create any political danger any more than the prohibition of the manufacture of earth-salt has done Some of the consumers would no doubt have re- course to other stimulants or drugs. 38. Round ganja is said to be more intoxicating than flat ganja. I am not in a position to com- pare it with chur. 40. Ganja is used by native doctors for medi- cinal purposes. It is also used by raiyats for the treatment of rinderpest among cattle. 41. (a) The moderate use of ganja mixed with medicine is said by native doctors to be conducive to digestion. (b) People addicted to ganja are said to be, when under its influence, capable of physical efforts above their ordinary powers; but a reac- tion soon sets in which takes away their powers of endurance, and they break down. (c) I have ascertained from ganja consumers as well as native doctors that the use of ganja acts as a prophylactic against fever. People using ganja here take it for its narcotic effects rather than for any beneficial purpose. I refer to moderate occasional use. 43. Yes. 47 and 48. The habitual moderate use of ganja does not appear to be a hereditary habit or to affect the children of the moderate consumer in any way. 51, 52 and 53. No. 55. (a) Yes; I have instances in which cul- prits have stupefied children by majum and removed ornaments from their persons. (b) No. 58. I consider the present system of excise ad- ministration in respect of hemp drugs capable of improvement. 59. The improvement which suggests itself to me is the introduction of a license fee for the cultivation of the plant. My object is to prohibit the use of the drug without causing serious discontent. 60. It is not controlled. The raiyat is at the mercy of the contractor and the police as already stated. 62. No; it is impossible. 63. I object to the system of both wholesale and retail vend of ganja or bhang or any prepar- ation thereof, and I would abolish all tax, be- cause247 58. Evidence of K. RAMA KRISTNA BRAMHAM, Brahmin, Stationary Sub-Magistrate, Kudlighi, Bellary District. 1. I have not had very many opportunities. For the last two years I have been a Magistrate, and have bad to make enquiries now and then regarding the habits of people. In the course of such enquiries, I happened to know something about the use of hemp. 3. Bellary. It is abundant. 14. Ganja and bhang. They are prepared to a pretty large extent. 16. Bhang and ganja can be prepared in their houses easily by the people. 19. Ganja is used for smoking only. 20. Chiefly Boyas; Lingayets and religious mendicants of whatsoever class also use it. Three- fourths of the males amongst Boyas are believed to have been addicted to it. Amongst Lingayets it can be said that one-fourth of the males have been so addicted. 24. Eating and drinking of bhang are used equally. They take place only on festival days. 25. Is on the increase. Ignorance and associ- ation. 28. Between six and nine pies a day. Each man is supposed to use two and a-half Colas a day. 32. In the places I have known, religion has nothing to do with the use of these drugs. On occasions of social gatherings such as marriages, and also when large numbers are collected at car festivals, etc., the drug is mixed up in eatables just in view to make a fun of the people who ate them when they get into delirium. 33. Certainly the use of these drugs is held in disrepute. People addicted to them are held in low estimation. This is on social grounds. The reason is that all intoxicants are so regarded amongst the Hindus. There is no custom of worshipping the plant by any class of people. 39. No; eating is considered less injurious to health than smoking of any kind. Smoking is considered to induce consumption, and other dis- eases of lungs and chest. 40. Yes; the plant is used by native doctors as an astringent and tonic. 41. I think so; very moderate use will act as a prophylatic to certain diseases, especially fevers, cold, etc. 42. Vide above. 43. Quite inoffensive. 44. It is refreshing after long habit; of course it causes intoxication. It does not allay hunger. On the other hand, it creates appetite. The length of the time for which the effects last de- pends on the quantity used. For a moderate con- sumer, the effects are believed to last for six hours. 45. Any use of the drugs will tell more or less according to the extent to which the consumer is addicted to it, upon both his physical and mental conditions. But I have seen no case where a man's morals are spoiled on this account. 49. No. 51 to 53. No. People, by the use of these drugs, become more and more timid and will be quite unfit for any violence. 59. Evidence of M. SESHACHALA NAIDU, Baliya, Pensioned Tahsildar, Vellore. 1. From personal experience and from informa- tion obtained from the manufacturers of hemp drugs. 2. According to the definition given by Dr. Prain, bhang only appears to be in use in this (North Arcot) district. 3,4,5 and 6. I have travelled over many districts and States in this presidency, viz., from Travan- core to Bellary; was a Tahsildar in Coimbatore, Bellary, and Anantapur districts, but I have not seen or heard that hemp plant grows wild in any of these places. 7. I hear hemp plant is cultivated in the Javadi Hills, Polur and Vellore taluks, in this district. I have seen Pandarums cultivate small plots of ground attached to their matams in Quilon, Tra- vancore State, and Mattoopolliam, Coimbatore district, for use as bhang. 8. I don't know. 9. No special knowledge is required for the cultivation of hemp plant. It is cultivated in drills or in beds. 10, 11 and 12. Don't know. 13. A moist climate, rich soil, excessive rainfall, are necessary for the luxuriant growth of culti- vated hemp. Elevation is not very necessary, as it can be cultivated in plains also. 14. Bhang appears to be prepared in this dis- trict. 15. From the cultivated hemp, the following preparations appear to be made:248 (4) Ramarus. 249 time he became a very violent insane, tried to break the iron bars of the sub-jail in which he was kept for safe keeping, became very abusive, and several times attemped to dash his brains by striking against the walls. When he was sent to Coimbatore Hospital, he became cured of it. I now hear that he now leads a quiet life as a cultivator as he was dismissed from the service when insane, 54. I don't think. 55. I don't think complete stupefaction can be induced without the admixture of dhatura. I don't think criminals stupefy their victims and steal their things as they do in Northern India. As caste is rigidly observed in Southern India, cri- minals have no opportunites of inducing caste travellers to partake of their sweetmeats and stupefy themselves. 56. I have given my reply to this question in answering Question 29. 57. I don't know. 58. I have not studied the rules promulgated for the present system of excise administration, but I hear the plant is indiscriminately culti- vated. 59, 60, 61, 62 and 63. I think this indiscriminate cultivation must be checked. It must only be allowed to be cultivated in selected localities in each district or province, as poppy, and sold by licensed dealers at enhanced prices. 64, 65, 66 and 67. I don't know. 68. I hear licensed dealers only sell these drugs, but never heard that they prepare and sell the preparations themselves, I think it would be well to order these licensed dealers to prepare these drugs under proper control and sell in small quan- tities to the public. 69. The wishes of the people must be consi- dered before opening a shop in a locality, other- wise the opening of a shop in a place where it is not wanted will cause the greatest annoyance to the people living in the neighbourhood. Oral evidence. Question 1.250 The former is used by adults and latter by children as a medicine. Poornathi lagiemis a different preparation from the last two, and contains more spices and drugs. Except the first, the rest are manufactured in the ganja shop and sold by the shop keeper. Ganja is also used for other medical prepar- ations. 20. All classes of people use ganja for smoking, but chiefly Bairagis, fakirs, and sholagers. It is said that those who are not given up to alcoholic liquors use ganja. There are not, however, many persons resident in this place who smoke ganja. Peons, etc., attached to Government offices, me- nial servants following European visitors, and different classes of persons coming to weekly mar- ket from low countries are the principal con- sumers besides the above three classes of persons. 21. Only two kinds of "flat and broken" ganja are sold in the local bazaar. Of these, the former is considered best; but both are equally used for smoking. 22. Charas is not known in these parts. 24. Vide No. 16. Very small number of the population of this division prepares these bever- ages. The consumers are some of the people living in the town. 25. Use of ganja is steady in this place. 28. (a) Three pies worth, or half a tola. (b) Four tolas, or two annas worth. 29. Tobacco and dhatura are mixed as a variety, according to the practice of the consumers to produce stronger effect. 30. Ganja smoking is openly carried on by males in company generally. Ganja preparation is given to children as a medicine to check indi- gestion and diarrh251 61. Evidence of R. SAMINATHA IYER, Brahmin, Acting Deputy Tahsildar, Coonoor. 1. By conversation with men who have seen people using ganja. 2. There is no manufacture of ganja made in this division; consequently no information is avail- able on the subject as derived from local know- ledge. 3. Coonoor. It is not abundant anywhere in the division. It is scattered spontaneously. Grows in certain places. 4. The plant is known as ganja plant. 5. Wild ganja plants are seen to grow at a height of about 4,000 or 5,000 feet above sea level. 6. The wild plants in this division are scattered. No systematic plantation is going on. It is pro- hibited. 7. No. 14. No. 15. Vide reply to No. 19. 16. Yes; the ganja leaves from plants growing in these parts are seldom used by anybody. It is said that ganja can be prepared from the wild plants growing in these parts. 17. Muhammadans, Bairagis, and other class of people. 18. It is said that ganja and charas will last for years without deterioration if kept in closed vessel. 19. Ganja is used for smoking. It is also used with milk as a sort of drink; for consumption with sheep's brain and condiments in the shape of pills; in the form of cake containing mixture of it with sugar and jaggery. 20. Ganja is used by some Muhammadans, many of the Bairagi pilgrims from Hindustan, some of the other classes of people who have come from Bangalore and Mysore in Coonoor, and Wellington and other isolated places. 22. Charas is not used in these parts. 23. No. 24. Not known. 25. Use of ganja, bhang, etc., cannot be said to be on the increase here. In these hilly parts liquor is resorted to by many classes of the community for intoxication in preference to other means. The Badaga tribe and. perhaps also the hill tribes use opium for intoxication. It has not come to notice that there is sale of large quantities of ganja going on. 26. (a) About one-half are habitual moderate consumers. (b) About a quarter are excessive consumers. (c) and (d) The remaining quarter may perhaps be distributed under (c) and (d). It is said. that nobody resorts to any of the above means of intoxication who has not pre- viously been accustomed to it. 27. Fakirs and travellers and labourers generally resort to intoxication from ganja. 28. Small value of about 1 pie or less for each smoke. 29. (a) No ingredients are ordinarily used. (b) Exceptionally. The following articles are used for preparing pills: 252 62. Evidence of R. C. RAMA IYENGOR, Brahmin, Village Magistrate, Berangy, Mudanapulee Taluk, Cuddapah District. 1. As the village headman, I have obtained some information from the raiyats and others with whom I came in contact. 2. There are two kinds of this plant, i.e., male and female. Female plant simply bears flowers, and is therefore rejected as useless in these parts. Male plant produces what is called kali, that is, gummy bunches of seeds and very small leaves. This kali is considered essential as containing narcotic substance. The name by which the useful and essential part of the plant is known is kali, which is prepared from male plant. This informa- tion I obtained from persons who raise the plant for preparing the said kali. 4. The plant is known by the name of bhangi chettoo in Tellegu. 7. This plant is grown to a very limited extent in these parts, and is generally used for the pur- pose of smoking. It is grown in chilly gardens. It is not separately raised. 9. It is raised in chilly gardens to a limited ex- tent, as stated above. 10. Agricultural cultivators also raise this plant. 13. Red soil is supposed to be quite suited for its growth. It should be well manured. 14. I beg state that kali, referred to in my answer to Question No. 2, is obtained from the plant as follows, i.e., when the male plant attains its maturity, the small branches containing kali are cut from the plant and tied in small bundles, which are placed beneath a heavy plank or a slab of stone for a few days. Then they are taken and dried in the sun and tied into large bundles. 15. This is smoked as follows:253 12. No. 13. It is not restricted to any particular district. It is commonly cultivated in the districts known to me. It requires no special conditions of climate, but requires rich soil, such as black-cotton or per- manently improved land. 1 do not know if it requires any particular elevation above the sea. But it requires a good and seasonable rainfall, and in its absence irrigation. I do not think it will be successfully grown with less than 25 or 30 inches of rain properly distributed over the whole culti- vated season. In no part of this district its culti- vation is considered to be impossible. 14. A mixed article of ganja and bhang is prepared, but no chains. The locality and extent are given in my answer to Question 7. 15. No. 16. Bhang is prepared generally in their houses, and it can be prepared from the hemp plant where- ever grown. There is no wild plant in this dis- trict. 17. No particular class. Preparation of hemp drug is made by Musalmans and Sudras among the Hindus. 18. Ganja or bhang does not deteriorate unless kept for a very long period. Its properties re- main unaffected for a year or two. I believe it slowly deteriorates if kept after two years. I am not aware of any measures to be adopted. 19. Charas is not used here. Ganja is used for smoking as well as eating. It is also used for making majum. Majum is a paste made by mix- ing jaggery with ganja well powdered. Ganja is well ground and mixed with jaggery and taken in as a beverage. To this ginger and spices are sometimes added. 20. All Gossains, fakirs, wandering tribes of pro- fessional beggars among the Hindus, all idle men of whatever caste or creed who pretend to be religious devotees and their disciples. The con- sumers are very small, and the proportion may be 5 per mille of population. Even this may be con- sidered as a liberal estimate. 21. Flat ganja is used in this district. 22. None. 23. In this district the preparation being a mixed one, it is used for smoking also. 24. Among the consumers of this article, two- thirds are smokers and one-third are eaters. 25. Neither increase nor decrease. 26. Habitual consumers only are found in this district. They are, as specified above, 5 per mille. Habitual, excessive consumers are very few254 cares. It is, I suppose, more intoxicating than refreshing. I don't think that it allays hunger. But it creates appetite by digesting food. The effect lasts from three to six hours. There are several after-effects, the chief of which is disin- clination to hard work. 45. Habitual moderate use produces noxious effects, physical and mental. It does impair the constitution. Moderate use does not injure the digestion or cause loss of appetite. It does not cause dysentery, bronchitis, or asthma. It in- duces laziness, but it does not impair the moral sense; nor does it lead to habits of immorality or debauchery, except in rare cases. It does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. 46. Excessive consumption of ganja strengthens digestive powers, alleviates fatigue, gives staying- power under exposure, and is a preventive of dis- ease in malarious tracts. Excessive use is not, however, harmless, for it ruins a man in every way. Excessive consumers are not also offensive to their neighbours. Immediate effect of excessive use is instantaneous stupefaction and intoxication. Its effect lasts from six to eight hours. After-effects are lowness of spirits or depression of mind and indisposition to hard and honest work, laziness, and an attempt to satisfy the stomach in an easy manner, begging or pilfering. it produces noxi- ous effects, physically, mentally, and morally. It impairs the constitution by weakening the chest and stomach or intestines, and thereby produc- ing asthmatic symptoms. It deadens the intel- lect altogether and produces insanity. It leads to insanity, which may he cured by a gradual but thorough change of habits. The symptoms may be reinduced by the use of the drug. Typical symptoms are that the persons are always harm- less and jovial. They have, as a rule, thin and emaciated constitution. I know instances of people of weak intellect having gone mad on ac- count of the use of this drug; but I have not had any confessions made to me by them. Yes; I have considered the subject of persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease using the drug to obtain relief. In cases of mental anxiety or brain disease due to other causes than the use of the drug, a moderate use will afford relief; but the consequences of a habitual use are more serious. I am acquainted with some cases; but I am not able to enumerate them for want of a par- ticular record of them. 47. I have no instances to show that the mo- derate use of the drug is a hereditary habit; but I believe with some families, such as wandering professional beggars, it has become hereditary. When the constitution of the consumers is affected, of course the physique of the offspring must be affected. 48. Except the tendencies mentioned in the above answer, I am not disposed to believe that excessive use is hereditary. 49. Moderate use is considered as an aphrodi- siac. In this country it does not seem as if the prostitutes use this. The use for this purpose is no doubt more injurious, because it leads to habits of moral depravity, waste of money, and subse- quent impotence. 50. Perhaps excessive use will not attain the object contemplated in Question 49, for excessive use stupefies the man and renders him useless. 51 and 52. I am not prepared to say that any proportion of bad characters are accustomed to this, or the use of the drug connected with any crime in general or in particular. 53. My experience does not permit me to an- swer this. 54. No; I don't know if criminals use the drug to fortify themselves to commit offences. 55. I have known a few cases in which crimi- nals have administered these drugs to their vic- tims before crimes were committed. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced by this drug with- out the admixture of dhatura. 56. No answer to the first part. I know a case in which a traveller who had some property with him was administered bhang mixed with dhatura and sugar, which caused immediate stupefaction and thus facilitated the theft. The man recovered his senses after 24 hours. 57. None. 58. Present system, so far as it has been intro- duced, is working well. 1 do consider that it is still capable of improvement. 59. At present taxation and control have been imposed on the sale of the drug only. No con- trol is exercised over cultivation and transportation. Nothing now prevents consumers getting the drug from the cultivators direct, or cultivating it in their own compounds and using it for them- selves, If cultivation and possession are allowed only under check, the revenue may increase. But the consumers in this district being very small, special endeavours in this direction are not needed. 60. They are not at all controlled, The system requires modification. The cultivation of the plant should be allowed under license, and the crop harvested under supervision and the produce weighed and the duty levied. Then it may be allowed to be sold as freely as possible. The import of ganja should be prohibited save on payment of duty. In this case sale may be allowed free or on licenses on fixed fees. 61. No charas. 62. Yes; feasible. Cultivation without license may be notified as an offence. Licenses may be granted by Tahsildars or Salt Inspectors. Cultiva- tors may be made to keep a record of the plants sown in the licensed area, where a blackboard in- dicating that it is a licensed area should be hung up. Periodical inspection should be made, and the plants counted to tally with the registers maintained by the cultivator. The crop, when it is mature must be watched and. harvested under the supervision of a Revenue or Abkari officer, and when it is ready for market, it may be weighed and fixed duty levied. If no duty could be paid by the cultivator, it must be stored and preserved under lock and key of Abkari or Revenue officer, and occasional deliveries being made on payment of the said duty. 63. So long as the present system of controlling the sale is carried out, and not that of controlling the cultivation and possession, there are no objec- tions. If cultivation, transportation and posses- sion are restricted, sale of the drug on license with fixed fees may be introduced. At present the drug is sold in shops selected and apprised for sale. The whole quantity consumed by the consumers does not probably pass through these shops; hence modification 64. Yes; for reasons given above. 65. There is only one article here in this district, and does not allow any comparison with the other drugs. The consumers of this article are very few, and therefore no comparison is possible
255 between revenue on this and the revenue on other intoxicating drugs. 66. No. 67. My objections have been given above. 68. There are no shops for consumption. 69. The demand being very little, as evidenced by the small number of shops in existence, the wishes of the people have not been consulted. But District Officers and Tahsildars have been origin- ally consulted as to the places where the drug is mostly wanted and the necessary shops advertised for sale. Those shops where there have been no demand have been closed and the remaining ones continued. As the demand is very little and the consumers are low caste people, it is not consi- dered necessary to consult their wishes. 70. Importation from Native States is not pro- hibited, nor are cultivation and possession restrict- ed. It is not possible to give any facts restricting the use of ganja duty on which has not been paid. On the other hand, there is at present room, as explained in answer to Question 63, to show that all the article consumed by the people is not obtained from the sanctioned shops. 64. Evidence of P. LAKSHMINARAYANA, Brahmin, Manager of Court of Wards' Estate, Nuzvid. 1. One day about half a year ago a man travel- ling in boat was found intoxicated having been given by a friend of his as a joke ganja mixed in jaggery. At times I used to see Bairagis using this drug. I used to make enquiries about the use and effects of this plant. 1 have made some enquiries to secure some more information from Musalmans and Boudilies in Nuzvid who often use this drug. 3. The hemp plant, so far as I understand, does not grow spontaneously. I learn that it does not grow unless special care is taken, just as in the case of vegetables, tobacco, etc. It requires irriga- tion. 14. (a) Ganja is prepared in this part of the country moderately. It is abundant in Bellary, Cuddapah, Rayavellore and Hyderabad. In Kabul and Kandahar also this is grown very abundantly. In Nuzvid and Ellore the hemp plants are grown in back-yards and ganja pre- pared. (b) Charas. This is not in use in this part of the country. This is I learn charrs and not charas. The word charas also is in use, but it is the mixture prepared from opium and ashes of betel leaves or leaves of Acacia arabica plant and made into pills. These are called maddat charas, but the one in question is found to chairs which is not made in this country, but in places where the dew is very much. It is the sediment depo- sited on the ears of hemp plants (like on tobacco plants) removed by persons covered with leather shirts and coats by moving through plants by which process the sediment comes out along with their coverings and it is taken out and placed in a cup when it becomes. congealed like wax. It is cut into pieces like rubber pieces. This is found very valuable and cannot be had by ordinary people. This product is mostly prepared in Kabul and Kandahar. (c) Bhang is also prepared and used in this part of the country just like ganja, but in a less quantity than ganja. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by people in their houses. It is made with hemp plant grown by people, but not with that grown spontaneously. Ganja and charas also cannot be prepared with the hemp plant grown spontaneously. These are all made with plants grown with special care. If there be plants spontaneously grown anywhere, they may be used for ganja and bhang, but not certainly for charas. 19. No. Ganja and charas are used for drink- ing in the following manner: 256 guests; so also it is supposed that there might be such a custom of giving out bhang or ganja to guests in Cuddapah, Kurnool, Bellary, and Hy- derabad. Amongst bairagis and others who are accustomed to use these drugs will as a custom give the same to their friends accustomed to them. As regards religious custom, bairagis chiefly use these drugs as it would tend to keep up their religious enthusiasm. 33. The consumption of these drugs is con- sidered a bad habit by one and all, and irreligious by the first three classes of Hindus. The public opinion about this is against the use of these drugs, as their use is prohibited amongst the said three classes; but the prohibition is not so seriously observed as there is no excommunication from caste on this particular ground. The use of any form of the narcotic is generally in disrepute, and it is attributable to its intoxicating nature, as it makes a man lose his temper if it be a little ex- cessive. It is taken although it produces dis- repute as it gives some excitement if taken moder- ately. None, I hear, worship hemp plants on any occasion. 39. Smoking is not less injurious than drinking or eating the same; one accustomed to smoking loses blood in the body and becomes a skeleton and at last falls a victim to it. Some say it is less injurious as its power is weakened by the fire, hut it does not appear to be so; one who smokes loses his courage and grows timid and fearful of any attack from a foe. Drinking and eating ganja gives a man strength in body and befits him for any hard exercise, but they produce bad results if one remains idle after drinking. 40. The use of ganja is prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities. It is used in native medicines such as Lokanadharasam and choleraic medicine. They are prepared with the juice of hemp plants. It works on patients suffering from swelling diseases and asthma. Ganja used in the treatment of cattle diseases such as Chalidomma. 41. The moderate use is beneficial to some ex- tent. It causes proper disgestion and keeps a man off ordinary sickness. It gives some strength. Smoking ganja prevents any change coming over the system of a man by frequent change of climate and water used for drinking. Drinking and eating ganja gives strength tem- porarily for bearing any bodily strain in taking physical exercises. 42. If in any case it is not proved beneficial, it can be said to be harmless for the reason explained under question 41. 43. They are mostly inoffensive. They always lead the life of hermits. 44. It gives refreshment. It allays hunger for a short time. It does produce intoxication and creates appetite a few moments after. The effect will last for an hour or so. There will be no after- effects. The want of subsequent gratification does produce a little uneasiness. 45. No. It does not produce physical, moral or noxious effects. The cases of bairagis (wandering Hindus) or fakirs can be taken for instance. 49. Yes. This is mixed in some other medi- cines for using as an aphrodisiac. 51. No. This has no connection with crime of any character. By using this the man does not become a bad character tending to do any violent actions. 53. Excessive indulgence does not incite to un- premeditated violent crimes, as it would not keep a man in very active condition with bad temper. 54. These drugs are not used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit any act of violence or other crime. 55. Criminals induce their victims to take these drugs in view to stupefy them. If it is given to a person who is not accustomed to it, and if given in an excess quantity to one accustomed to it, it will cause stupefaction. Complete stupefac- tion can be induced by this drug alone without admixture. 65. Evidence of COLONEL G. CHRYSTIE, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Central Range, Vellore. 51. The lowest class of Muhammadans, among whom there are a good many bad characters, consume ganja and bhang prepared from it. Korchers or Yerikallas and Lambadies or Sugal- lies are said also to consume it largely. These tribes often commit crime. The use of the drug tends ordinarily to make the consumers lazy, supine, and averse to regular work, and in this way probably conduces to offences against property. On the other hand, as it appears to enervate and unman its partakers, such criminals would be the reverse of enterprising, daring and skilful. It is to be remarked, however, that the Lambadies, who use it regularly, are of superior physique and bolder than the ordinary population. An old and intelligent pensioned Police Inspector of great experience suggests that this is owing to the use of ganja being hereditary with them. This may be so, or it may be that they use it only moder- ately, and that the sottish creature who represents the ordinary recognised specimen of a bhang-eater is an immoderate consumer. I have been called on to make an early report, and I have not suffi- cient information to enable me to distinguish between moderate and immoderate use of the drug. 52. See 51, 53. The only instance I can recall of ganja exciting to crime is the following. On the 1st December 1890, at Anantapur, a peon of the Head Assistant Collector, named Shaik Hussain, a well-known bhang smoker, having been fined four annas for some breach of duty, got into a high state of irritation and went and smoked bhang in a mukkan in Anantapur, at noon. The bhang appears to have excited him to madness; he ran by the Anantapur-Bellary road with a heavy stick in hand, struck with it a shepherd boy, who was grazing sheep just outside the town as he went on, then attacked an old man named Dadi Sahib of Narpala, village, who was going by the same road, struck and felled him with the stick, then beat out his brains and murdered him, and ran along the same road striking and threaten- ing the persons whom he met. He was arrested by reserve constables, who were sent at once in search of him the same afternoon, at a distance of four miles from Anantapur. The murder was com- mitted on the public road within two furlongs from the Collector's compound. The peon was tried for the murder of this old man, who was previously unknown to him, convicted and sen- tenced on 4th February 1891 by the Sessions Court to transportation for life, but subsequently
257 the sentence was commuted to one of rigorous imprisonment for 10 years by the Government. The drug the peon was addicted to was ganja, and this was the only occasion on which he was known to have broken out into the fit of madness. The Sessions Court judgment is submitted herewith. 54. Lambadis are said to fortify themselves with ganja before committing dacoities. 55. I have never heard criminals inducing their victims to partake of hemp drugs to further their designs. The use of dhatura for this pur- pose is of course well known. I am not aware whether hemp drugs produce complete stupefac- tion without admixture. Appendix to COLONEL CHRYSTIE'S evidence. IN THE COURT OF SESSION OF THE BELLARY DIVISION. The 4th day of February 1891. SESSION CASE No. 7 OF 1891. Preliminary Enquiry No. 1 of 1890, on the file of the Sheristadar and 2nd Class Magistrate of Anantapur. No. Name of accused. Father's name. Caste or Race. Occupa- tion. Resi- dence. Age. 1 Shaik Hussain. Fakhrud- din Maho- medan. Dala- yet. Penu- konda. 30 Date of Judgment. 1 Occurrence. 1 12 90 Queen Empress of India 2 Complaint. 1 12 90 versus 3 Arrest or appear- ance. 2 12 90 Shaik Hussain. Offence. Murder under section 302 I.P.C. 4 Commencement of trial. 4 2 91 Plea. not guilty. 5 Close of trial. 4 2 91 Opinion of assessors guilty. 6 Explanation of delay. Finding of Court. guilty Sentence. transportation for life. The facts of this case are hardly in dispute. Shaik Hussain's plea is that he beat out the brains of a pig and not of a man. The evidence of Irisha Ali and his own statement show that he on the morning of the 1st December, about noon, was smoking bhang in a makan in Anantapur. That he lost his temper after smoking it, and spit at and abused some children who were playing there. Irisha Ali left him there. 2. About one o'clock Sadruddin, Shamsuddin, Honnur Sahib and Fakeerugadu (1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th prosecution witnesses), who were working on the new railway where it crosses the road to Bellary, saw him beat an old man, proved to be Dade Sahib, to death with a heavy stick, and pass along the road towards Bellary. The first two witnesses saw him coming along the road behind the old man, fell him with the first blow and then beat out his brains. They were afraid to interfere. They are three of them little more than boys in strength, and the fourth is an old man. As soon as he passed on they sent word to the Police. 3. He was followed by five constables, and secured after a struggle, evidently in a state of violent madness, from which he appears to have been still suffering when brought to the hospital. The medical evidence shows that he was suffering apparently from some intoxicant, and that he did not altogether move for some days. 4. His defence is that he beat out the brains of a black pig, and not of a man. The evidence is conclusive that he did beat out the brains of Dade Sahib. 5. It is certain that he did it while in a state of madness brought on by smoking bhang. This is no defence to a criminal charge, and: he must therefore be convicted of murder. 6. He has been employed as a dalayet in the Head Assistant Collector's Office, and may be presumed to have been a respectable inoffensive man until now. I think that I may justly distinguish a murder committed in these circum- stances from a murder committed with delibera- tion, and with real intention, and need not pass a sentence of death. 7. The Court concurring with the Assessors finds that Shaik Hussain is guilty of murder punishable under section 302, I. P. C., and sentences him to be transported for life. IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS. THURSDAY, THE SIXTEENTH DAY OF JULY ONE THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND NINETY-ONE. Present: The Honorable T. MUTHUSAMI AIYAR, C. I. E., Officiating Chief Justice, and The Honorable MR. JUSTICE SHEPHARD, CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 70 OF 1891. SHAIK HUSSAIN.... Appellant (Prisoner). Appeal against the sentence of the Court of Session of the Bellary Division in Case No. 7 of the calendar for 1891. This appeal coming on for final disposal after the receipt of further evidence called for in the order of this Court, dated 22nd April 1891, and counsel not appearing on behalf of the appellant. Upon perusing the petition of appeal and the record of the evidence and proceedings before the Court of Session, and upon hearing the argu- ments of the Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor in support of the conviction, the Court delivered the following258 of the High Court of Judicature, Appellate Side, Madras, dated 25th August 1891, No. 1057 (Judicial):259 suffering from diarrh260 68. Evidence of Mr. H. G. PRENDERGAST, District Superintendent of Police, Kistna. 51. There is in this district a considerable pro- portion of bad characters who are habitual moderate consumers of ganja. But I believe the connection is accidental. It happens that this district is specially subject to the inroads of houseless nomads, such as Yanadis, Yerukalas, Lambadis, and Wodders. Owing to exposure in the malarious tracts they haunt, these are very liable to attacks of fever and rheumatism, and thus take to ganja smoking, which they believe to be prophylactic in such cases. Other criminals also are often ganja smokers; but I do not know of any instances of criminals who were habitual consumers of hemp drugs before taking to crime. In these cases it is generally a glorying in vice for its own sake that seems to induce the habit. It may, however, be possible that a wish to in- crease their powers of endurance is the object with them as well as with the nomads. I return to this subject in my reply to question 54. 52. Bhang is seldom used in this district. Those who do indulge in it are descendants of Rajputs, Bondelis, and other immigrants from the north. Majum, a confection, one of the ingredients of which is ganja leaves, is used as a soporific, mostly for children and invalids, and as an aphrodisiac. Its latter use and the habit of ganja smoking often end in excessive use. But this, so far as I know, does not produce any effect on habitual crime. 53. The excessive indulgence in majum and ganja smoking incite to unpremeditated crime, such as indecent assaults, homicide, and arson. I know of instances in which all these crimes have been attempted by persons suffering from the frenzy induced by excessive indulgence in ganja smoking and majum eating. 54. Most of the dacoity committed in this district is the work of the nomads mentioned in my answer to question 51. As many of them are found to be under the influence of ganja when committing the most cruel dacoities, and there is no reason to think that they are ignorant of the reputation ganja has of increasing powers of endurance and lending Dutch courage, we have every reason to suppose that they do fortify themselves with these objects before undertaking specially dangerous and arduous crimes. 55. Majum is often used by criminals to stupefy their victims, and complete stupefaction can be induced by majum without further ad- mixture. I know of one instance of a boy being induced to smoke ganja as an aphrodisiac, and rendered so incapable as to allow of his ornaments being removed by his tempters without protest from him. The boy, however, said he was not so stupefied as not to be aware of the removal. He afterwards slept for a long while. Ganja leaves are smoked mixed with tobacco. Oral evidence. Question 1.261 with a view to stupefaction. Ordinarily a liquor drinker would fortify himself with liquor. On the contrary a ganja smoker would certainly not take alcohol to fortify himself. In this answer I do not attribute the crime to the ganja habit. We have a great many ganja smokers who are criminals, but that is purely an accident. In the register which is kept of bad characters the ganja liquor or opium habit is noted. I am speaking of the district in which 1 am now serving. I think, however, that the fact is generally noted. The reason for noting it is that the man's sources of livelihood and expenditure are recorded as far as possible. No use would be made in court of this information. 69. Evidence of RAI BAHADUR K. NARAINASWAMY, Telaga, Inspector of Police, Vizianagram. 1. In the discharge of my duties as a police officer, I have often had opportunities to come in contact with the habitual consumers of the various products of the hemp plant. From my personal knowledge of such men, and also from the inform- ation given by them, I make my answers to the following questions. 14. Yes, ganja and bhang are prepared in this country. Mostly in the agency tracts, and to a small extent on the plains. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses, It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja can be pre- pared from the wild plant wherever grown. 19. Ganja is used for smoking in confection, called madum and in electuaries. Madum is pre- pared by the admixture of sugar and jaggery, ganja, and some spices. Some make ganja into powder after roasting it in ghee and use the powder in electuaries, while others use the very ghee in which the ganja is boiled after the latter is strained away. Some use the strained ghee by applying it to betel leaves. This is done to pro- duce sound sleep or liveliness. These uses are prevalent in towns. 20. There are ganja smokers among all classes of people, except banians. Bairagis (mendicants), as a rule, are all ganja smokers. Of others, some of those that frequent the hilly parts of the dis- trict are also ganja, smokers, About 10 per cent, of the population of Vizianagram are either ganja smokers or bhang eaters or drinkers. These uses are more prevalent in towns than in villages. 24. Brahmins and Musalmans eat or drink bhang. The drinkers outnumber the eaters. In towns. 25. From April to September 1893, ganja 781 seers, madum 77 and odd seers, and bhang 182 and odd seers were sold in the Vizianagram town against. 781 and odd seers of ganja, 67 and odd seers of madum, and 266 and odd seers of bhang for the same time in 1892 both in Vizianagram and cantonment. The difference being so very trifling, that cannot account for either increase or decrease. 28. Quarter anna worth of bhang or ganja per day is enough for a habitual moderate consumer. 32. No social or religious customs in regard to the use of any of these drugs I have known of as existing. 33. The use of any of these drugs is considered an evil practice. No public opinion (social or religious) exists in regard to the practice. Ganja smoking is considered bad, and therefore the con- sumers stand very low in the estimation of re- spectable people. They cannot be steady-minded. I know no custom of worshipping the hemp plant in the district. 39. Smoking ganja is more injurious than eat- ing or drinking, because smokers look more un- healthy than eaters or drinkers. 40. None recommend the use of ganja on ac- count of its medicinal qualities. It is used in the treatment of cattle diseases. The Maharaja's stable doctors often purchased ganja or bhang to use it in medicines for treating horses and other cattle. 41. Even the moderate use of either ganja or bhang is in no way beneficial in its effects. 42. Though the moderate use of bhang is not beneficial, it is harmless if taken with spices, milk, sugar or jaggery. I have known many persons Who drink bhang in the way given above who have not lost their health or mental or bodily vigour. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of even the moderate use of any of these drugs is the excitement of the brain, It lasts for about an hour. The want of subsequent gratification produces desire or uneasi- ness unlike that which is produced by opium. In the latter the desire or uneasiness is much stronger than in the former. Some say it adds to the digestive powers and creates appetite, while some others that it does not. 45. Even the moderate use of any of these drugs affects to some extent the virile powers, and tends to increase the belief in God. I have known of several men who complained of the loss or weakness of their sexual desire by the use of ganja smoking. I have also known of some cases in which the users of ganja smoking have become sadhus or mendicants. 49. The use of any of these drugs is not prac- tised as an aphrodisiac. 51. Yes, out of 21 on the active list of crimi- nals in the Vizianagram town, 15 are habitual ganja smokers and opium eaters or smokers, These men commit thefts and house breakings, though not of a serious nature. 53. I have known of cases in which the exces- sive use of ganja smoking has made the con- sumers mad; but I know no case in which it led to homicidal frenzy. 54. No never. 55. Yes, several cases occurred in which crimi- nals induced their victims to partake of madum or confection, and so stupefied them to rob them of their personal property. No complete stupe- faction can be had by ganja if taken moderately. An unusually large dose, of course, brings upon the consumer complete stupefaction.
262 Further pap er put in by RAI BAHADUR K. NARAINASWAMY. 55. I most respectfully beg to submit with re- ference to the remarks made by the Collector, in his letter No. 1407, dated 14th November 1893, as regards my answers to question 55 of the Hemp Commission that about the year 1879 a goldsmith named Manapilli Sooryanarain and another person who was a sweetmeat-seller gave sweetmeat mixed with some preparation of ganja to a goldsmith boy aged about 8 years and decked with ornaments worth about R500, and when the boy became stupe- fied under the influence of the drug, he was robbed of the jewels he had on his person and then strangled to death. This happened at Ankapalli. The case was convicted by the Sessions Court, Vizagapatam, sentencing the goldsmith mur- derer to be hanged by the neck and acquitting his accomplice. This case was quoted to me by the retired head constable, one named Kella Ramaswa- mi, who charged the case, being then the S. H. O. of the Ankapilli Police Station. A retired Police constable named Avala Polayya, who served for a long time in the Vizianagram town station, quotes another case as occurred in the town of Viziana- gram. The following are the particulars:63 70. Evidence of T. S. KRISTNASAMY CHETTY, Vishnuvite, Pensioned Police Inspec- tor, Trinamalay, South Arcot District. 1. Ever since I received this pamphlet, I have been making enquiries from the consumers living at Trinamalay, and I am sorry I was not able to procure any information whatever, and so I waited hitherto for the Kirthigay festival to meet with sanyasis and others who are habituated to consume the ganja and other intoxicating sub- stances. 3. The hemp plants are spontaneously growing in Javvadu hills and some parts of Darmapuri Taluk, Salem District, to my knowledge. it is abundant, I hear, in Javvadu hills above named. 16. The bhang is not generally prepared in living houses, but they are being prepared by ascetics, parathasees, etc., in Chatrams and Chava- dees, where they generally meet, especially in Southern countries. The bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant. Ganja or charas is also prepared from the wild plants wherever grown. 19. Ganja and charas used not only for smok- ing, but they are used also for medicines. 20. Fakirs, ascetics, bairagis, Muhammadans generally smoke ganja all over India where they happen to go and reside, and it is difficult to state what proportion of the people use this. 24. Fakirs and Muhammadans generally eat and smoke, and the bairagis of Northern country drink bhang. 25. The use of these drugs is on the decrease, as arrack and toddy have become very cheap. 28. Habitual consumers take in average each of these drugs from one to five palams per diem, one palam being worth two annas. 32. There are certain classes of people in Southern India who worship Muni, Karuppan, Veeran, Maruthaveeran, etc., whom they call their family deities, usually offer ganja as offer- ings and then consume. 33. The public at large hate the immoderate consumers of these drugs and have got a low opinion of them. It is not customary to worship the hemp plant among any sects. 39. Smoking of these drugs is less injurious than drinking, as the giddiness produced by smoking is being relieved in a short time, but the giddiness produced by drinking takes a good deal of time for relief owing to the late digestion of the substance that got into one's body. 40. These drugs are being used by Native doctors in the preparation of medicines, and they are not used in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. It is beneficial to some extent. 42. The moderate use of any of these drugs is harmless, as it stimulates one who uses it to some extent at the time. 43. Yes. 44. Immediately it is taken moderately, it stimulates him and thus makes him, to attend to his work briskly. It does refresh him. It does not produce intoxication. It does allay hunger. It does not create appetite. The effect lasts from one to five hours according to the nature of the constitution. It brings on even after-effects. The want of these drugs by con- sumers produces uneasiness on them. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs produces no harm whatever, physically, mentally or morally. 49. Yes; to some extent in my local enquiry. 51. Nil. 53. By taking excessively it does not make a man to commit any crime whatever, as it makes him to fall down with giddiness. I have heard of several cases it brings on temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. No. 55. Criminals in order to further their designs give them for their victims. It does bring on complete temporary giddiness on their victims. 71. Evidence of MR. I. TYRRELL, Superintendent of Central Jail, Rajahnzundry. I have the honour to inform you that it is a matter of regret to me that I cannot throw any light upon such an important subject that would be worth recording. To answer but a few of the different questions would take up much time, and would also require some previous study to answer the questions effectively. It is well-known by jail officials that ganja is highly esteemed by the criminal population. In every jail ganja is found from time to time when searching prisoners, and from my own experience the most hardened offenders are the greatest consumers. I have been employed as a jail official for more than 26 years, and can remember at different times during that period assaults made on jail officials, jail servants and fellow-convicts by prisoners who were at the time, when committing the assaults, under the in fluence of ganja. In this respect the Madras Penitentiary probably heads the list, as the jail has generally some hundreds of habituals in it and many of them would go to extremes to get possession of ganga. Those that could manage to get money from their friends outside would pay highly for a small quantity of ganja, and those without money would give away their food for a very small quantity of this drug. I have known prisoners to chew it as tobacco is chewed; but it was generally smoked rolled up in a leaf from a tree suitable for the purpose. Had observations been recorded at the Penitentiary from 1869 to 1879, some useful information as to its baneful effects upon those using it would have been forth- coming. I should certainly say, from the number of men I have seen under its influence, that the drug stimulates the passions of some men and makes others utterly reckless, caring but little when under its influence what crimes they commit.
264 72. Evidence of MR. E. L. F. CAVENDISH, Superintendent, Central Jail, Vellore. 1. Have been Superintendent of various jails for over, eight years. 2 to 46. No information. 51. Out of 187 habituals in this jail, 28 or 14.9 per cent, admit the use of ganja; the average quantity consumed daily being about 3 pies worth. Some were diffident about giving information; the number really addicted to the use of ganja may safely be put down at more. The average number of convictions against these 28 consumers is 5 including the present sentence. 52 to 53. No information. 54. Twenty-two out of twenty-eight (or 78.9 per cent.) of the habituals say they fortify them- selves with ganja before committing a premedi- tated crime. Extra note.265 aniseed, dry ginger, cocoanut, and at times a little over-ripened plantain is used also. 37. Charas smoking is very rare here; it is said to be used by the richer community. 38. No information. 39. Drinking or eating the hemp plant in any way is injurious to the brain; it soon makes one in- sane. Smoking, although less dangerous, takes time to cut up the constitution, weakening the nervine system. 41. It is not beneficial in its effects. (a) As a food accessory on digestion, nil. (b) At the same time it may give staying- power under exertion or exposure, but at the end it is detrimental to health in general. (c) Not known. Moderate habitual and mode- rate occasional use of the drug are both danger- ous. 42. The moderate use of any of these drugs is far from being harmless. They gradually tell on the whole constitution. 43. Generally inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. For the time while under its influence it is refreshing. It produces intoxication, combined with a peculiar stupidness. Hunger is allayed, and its after-result is that it creates a false appetite. The effect lasts about one hour. Yes, the limbs and nerves become quite weak, and a kind of dull sensation prevails. Yes, the want of it produces a great longing and desire, and great uneasiness prevails. 45. Yes; physically, mentally and morally. It impairs the whole constitution gradually by a regular decline of muscles, and finally emaciation sets in. 46. No information. 51. All fakirs and wanderers from place to place, and those who are habitual gamblers with no permanent mode of living resort to ganja smoking; for want of the drug, whether moderate or excessive, leads to crime. 52 and 53. No information. 54. It is not used to fortify one's self to com- mit premeditated crimes or violence; but when under its influenee at times it leads to crime coupled with timidity. 55. Yes; criminals do at times, to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of the drugs to stupefy them. No; complete stupefaction cannot be induced by this drug without admixtures. 57. No information. 4 to 7 per cent of the previously convicted prisoners now in jail have been accustomed to the use of hemp drugs. 75. Evidence of MR. G. CLONEY, Superintendent of Jail, Tanjore. 1. My information has principally been obtain- ed by coming in contact, while jailor at Berham- pore, etc., with criminals and insanes that were consumers of the various hemp drugs, and partly from observation of pilgrims to the shrine of Jagannath (Puri). Large bodies of these pilgrims from Southern India en route to Puri used to en- camp in the vicinity of the jail. I had opportuni- ties, too, of observing the pilgrims, from North India, to the same shrine. 2. Charas is not generally known or used by the people locally (Tanjore). Flat and round ganja are well known, and the definitions may be accepted. "Chur" or broken ganja is known, locally, as natu ganja, that is, country ganja. 19. Ganja is used (a) for smoking, (b) for eating. It is used as a vegetable curried, with fowl or fat mutton or made up into halwa (electuary). (c) For drinking, it forms one of the ingredients in sherbets. The above are some of the uses to which the consumers put the drug. (b) and (c) perhaps require a little explanation: 266 sumers use a pint of sherbet before each principal meal. It is said that the intoxication is greater and of longer duration than that produced by sim- ply smoking ganja. Baja sherbet267 system is caused, and consequently dysentery, diarrhoea, bronchitis or asthma. In the earlier stage it produces immorality and induces laziness, but in the latter, it puts immorality beyond power, his health being impaired. It deadens the in- tellect and produces insanity. Temporary mania is produced and the symptoms are re-induced by the use of the drug after liberation from restraint. The typical symptoms are neglect of the person, restlessness, timidity, vacant staring expression and want of appetite. Insanes who have no re- corded ganja history readily confess. When spoken to about ganja they at once go through the motions of cleaning and preparing the drug, and seem to derive pleasure in discussing it. 51. Habitual moderate consumers of hemp do not form any large proportion of bad characters. The moderate use of hemp has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any specia character. The present number of re-convicted criminals is 92, and of these 6 are evidently habi- tual moderate consumers, and 1 only an habitual excessive consumer. 52 to 54. No information. 55. I have heard of cases in which criminals, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of these drugs and so stupefy themselves. Invariably dhatura is said to be mixed with ganja in order to give a quicker effect. Complete stupefaction can be induced by the drug alone. 56. (a) and (b) by admixture of tobacco the effects are lessened; by admixture of dhatura the effects are increased. 57. Already answered in body of report. 76. Evidence of MR. R. W. MORGAN, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Ootacamund, Nilgiris. 1. I have been 23 years in the Forest Depart- ment and during that period have mixed with all classes of persons who are in the habit of using ganja, etc., and have seen the plant cultivated and wild in many places. 2. I only know of two products of the hemp plant that are used in Southern India, ganja and bhang. Charas is used by Muhammadans; but 1 know nothing further about it. 3. I have seen hemp growing spontaneously in Kurnool, Malahar, Coimbatore, Nilgiris, Trichino- poly, and Coorg. It used to be at one time abun- dant on the Nilgiris, but does not appear to be so common now. 4. Nil. 5. Wild hemp grows best with a rainfall of 90 inches at an elevation of from 2,000 to 5,000 feet above the sea level and in the very richest soil. It is most commonly found wild and growing vigorously in old cattle kraals and in the neighbourhood of villages in dung heaps, etc. 6. I have seen the wild hemp growing in dense patches of from 30 to 100 square yards and also as solitary bushes. It generally commences to grow in a scattered manner; but after a few years, when the soil has been filled with seeds, it spreads rapidly and forms a dense growth. 7. There is now no cultivation of hemp in the Nilgiris as raiyats and others are under the im- pression that it is forbidden by Government; but a few plants are surreptitiously grown by aborigi- nal tribes (principally Sholagurs) in old cattle kraals in the jungle. I have never seen hemp cultivated for its fibre, as most natives are igno- rant of the fact that the fibre is valuable. There is considerable cultivation of hemp in many of the districts of the presidency. 8. There has been a decrease in the cultivation for the reasons given under 7 in the Nilgiri dis- trict and Wynaad. 9. The method of cultivating Lemp is to scatter the seed broadcast in old cattle kraals. When the plants grow they are thinned out to 5 or 6 feet apart aid allowed to branch. All male plants are pulled up and the flowering tops collected when they become sticky and covered with resin. All large leaves that grow in the inflorescence are removed. 10. No, they do not form special class. Many ganja smokers cultivate the plant themselves and others purchase what they require. 1 have known all classes cultivate hemp; I have seen much hemp cultivated in Tanjore district. 11. Yes. 12. Yes. Coimbatore, Mysore, Malabar. The extent is very small and the cultivation carefully concealed and never attempted near villages, but usually in isolated spots in the forest. The male plant is usually extirpated. The Sholagurs are afraid of police action, hence their care in conceal- ing the cultivation. They believe it to be illegal. 13. I am not aware of any part of the Presi- dency where the hemp plant cannot be culti- vated as it will grow from the sea level to 7,000 feet above it. I have known ganja manufactured in Ootacamund. 14. Yes. All these products are prepared. I cannot say to what extent. 15. I have only seen ganja prepared. The in- florescense of the female plants is collected when resin has fully developed, dried, tied in bundles, and pressed tightly into a bale with cloth round it. In this state it appears to undergo fermenta- tion, as is the case with tobacco. Of this, how- ever, I have no positive knowledge, as I have only been told so by others. When cured it is stored in a dry earthen pot or other vessel, which is kept closed. 16. Yes. As far as I know, both ganja and bhang can be prepared from the wild and culti- vated varieties of hemp wherever grown; but the quality and strength of the manufactured product depends greatly on the soil, elevation, climate, and amount of cultivation bestowed upon it. 17. By all classes. 18. Yes, if the drug is exposed it is subject to mildew and deteriorates. It is usually kept in earthen pots or tin boxes by the retail dealers. 19. Hemp products are used medicinally for smoking and drinking in this presidency. Ganja is used for making subja water. This is made as follows: 268 laghium" is made of jaggery, ganja and various medicines compounded together. This is adminis- tered to invalids and is considered tonic. Ganja is administered to elephants as a tonic mixed with other medicinal substances.. It is also given to cattle: eggs, ganja, and castor oil being mixed to- gether. This mixture is supposed to make cattle robust. Muhammadans sometimes use ganja as an ingredient in curries. 20. All classes smoke ganja, but not many in- dividuals in a class. Sholagurs are much ad- dicted to it, and more than half the tribe smoke it. Bairagis are much given to the habit. Shi- ans smoke ganja to the extent of about 10 per cent. of the population. Rajputs are great ganja smokers. Muhammadans use it to a small extent, though it is forbidden by the Koran. 23. Yes; by Muhammadans principally. 25. I consider that the use of these drugs is on the increase. I have noticed that more persons have contracted the habit, even Rajput school- boys. 28. For a moderate smoker about 3 pies' worth, say 269 77. Evidence of Mr. G. HADFIELD, Deputy Conservator of Forests, South Malabar. 1. My experience with the people of the many districts in the Madras Presidency where I have been employed. 2. No. I know of only two sorts here, ganja, and chadaganja. both the round ganja and broken ganja are known here by the simple name of ganja, and flat ganja by the name of chadaganja. 3. I know of no districts where it grows spon- taneously. 4. By the simple name of ganja. 5. In alluvial soil the plant grows well. It grows well up to 3,000 feet above the level of the sea. 6. I have only seen wild hemp cultivated in the backyards by these addicted to it, where it grows densely. 7.Vide my answer to question 6. It is intend- ed for production of ganja chiefly and for charas also which is called locally majum. 9. It is raised by seed in the nursery, and transplanted when they are about three or four inches high, six feet apart in well-manured pits. 10. There is no special class that takes to the cultivation of ganja. I have seen all nationalities cultivating it more or less. 11. Yes. 12. Yes. Wynaad, Malabar, Tinnevelly, Madura, Tanjore, Trichinopoly, Coimbatore, Kurnool, Goda- vary and Cuddapah. Yes the male plant is extir- pated. 14. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. In big towns they are prepared and sold in bazaars. 15. The following are the preparations that I know of:270 the male plants as they begin to flower. It is so cultivated chiefly for ganja. 8. Owing to a greater demand for ganja from the coast, cultivation as described above is slightly increasing year by year. 9. Answered by paragraph 7. 10. All castes of raiyats grow the plant as de- scribed. supra. 11 and 12. Seed is sometimes collected from the spontaneously grown hemp, which again is from the seed of the cultivated plant. In any case the male plant is cut down. 13. In North Malabar the Wynaad Taluk is best suited for the growth of the plant owing to elevation and soil. The coast Taluks would be unsuitable, but I cannot say that its cultivation there is impossible. 14. Bhang and ganja are synonymous terms in the Wynaad. Charas is not known. The extent cannot be estimated owing to the scattered nature of the cultivation. 15. There is no difference of preparation. (A) For smoking a small quantity of ganja is put into the palm of the hand and washed with water till a greater or less amount of the green colouring matter is removed, and then it is chop- ped up with about an equal quantity more or less of tobacco and smoked in the usual way. (B) For eating a preparation called "Lekhiam" (confection) is made from the following recipe:271 79. Evidence of COLONEL II. S. ELTON, Commandant, 16th_Regiment, Madras Infantry, Bellary. 1. The information has been gathered from amongst the different ranks of the regiment. As a rule, ganja, etc., is not much used in Southern India. I have very little personal knowledge of the subject. 2. Yes. 3. Bundlekhand. Reported in abundance. 4. Ganja, bhang and eharas. All refer to the same plant. 5. Rain necessary, also level ground. 6. Scattered. 8. Not known. 10. No. Same classes as other agricultural culti- vators, 15. (a) Smoking Ganja. Charas. (b) Eating (c) Drinking Bhang 17. All classes. 18. Keeps good for about one year, after which it is liable to deterioration. 19 Yes. 20. All classes. 21. Round ganja. 23. No. 24. All classes. 25. On the decrease in the regiment. 26. All habitual moderate consumers in the regiment. 27. All classes. 28. (a) In weight about four minas, in price about three pies. 29. (a) With ganja-tobacco. With bhang, saut, black pepper, poppy seed, milk, sugar, water, Yes, dhatura is used for greater effect. 30. Generally in company, occasionally alone. Man and women (in Jabalpur many women take it). From manhood to death. Children never take them. 31. Gradually formed and can be broken off. No great tendency for the moderate habit to deve- lop into the excessive. 35. If prohibited, some other stimulant would probably be used. 40. Yes. 41. (a) to (d) No. All classes. Moderate habitual users. 42. Not harmless. Men who consume it get thin, weak, and useless. 43. Yes. 44. Not refreshing. Yes; produces intoxication. 45 Physical, yes; mental, occasionally; Moral, no. Impairs the constitution. Causes dysentery and asthma. Does not impair the moral sense or induce laziness, etc. 80. Evidence of CAPTAIN F. L. JONES, Commandant, 3rd Madras Lancers, Bellary. 10. The Reddi caste are the usual hemp culti- vators. 16. No. It cannot be prepared easily wherever the plant grows. 18. These drugs don't deteriorate as a rule by keeping. But after many years they deteriorate. They are generally kept inside damp and moist cloth. 19. No. Ganja is often saturated with milk and used as a drink. 20. Sanyasis (hermits) and travellers smoke ganja, also low caste people and Bengalis. 21. Fakirs smoke the fiat kind of ganja. 22. Native charas mainly. 23. Yes, sometimes, and by the same class as before mentioned. 26 Ganja, the one most commonly used. But bhang is used on special occasions, such as festivals or dinner occasions. 28. (a) One anna per diem (about). 29. Ordinarily jaggery and ground poppy seeds are mixed with bhang. Dhatura occasionally, the object being to let the drug take greater effect. 30. Children do not consume the drug. 31. It is about on a par with alcohol, but the habit is not difficult to break off. 34. Not so serious as opium. 35. Yes, in Madras. The prohibition would not occasion serious results in Madi as. 43. No. Most natives object somewhat to ganja smokers as neighbours. 53. Yes. 69. The wishes of the people are not usually consulted. 81. Evidence of CAPTAIN C. M. KENNEDY, Commandant, 1st Pioneers, Trichinopoly. 1. Personal observation of the habits, conduct, etc., of men addicted to them. Careful enquiries made from trustworthy native officers who are well acquainted with the effects of these drugs on those who use them. 42. The moderate use of bhang apparently does little harm for some time, but invariably in the long run it impairs the intelligence of those who indulge in it. A consumer cannot do without it, and it is a craving which must be satisfied. 43. As a rule. Charas intoxicates very rapidly. 44. Charas excites and intoxicates very easily and rapidly. Ganja does not excite appetite or allay hunger, nor does charas. Bhing may be said to do so slightly, The want of subsequent grati- fication is severely felt by habitues, and they become useless and incapable of any work.
272 45. (b) Always in the long run. (f) Yes. 46. The habitual use in excess of these drugs produces marked symptoms of mental and physical deterioration very rapidly. 47. The children are as a rule weakly and puny. 49. No; apparently it has the opposite effect, and takes away desire of sexual intercourse. 50. To a greater degree. 51. Those who consume them are generally from a military point of view worthless characters. 52. As above. In a greater degree. 53. Yes; particularly ganja. In nearly every case of murder, by shooting, etc., which have occurred of recent years, the perpetrator has been a known ganja or charas eater. 54. Very probably. Oral evidence. I have named Subadar Major Mahomed Mur- taza Bahadur as a witness. He is the senior Native officer in my regiment, and one of the chief of those whom I have consulted. He is the source of most of the information I have given in my written answers. My answers No. 46 and No 51 are based in part on observation of men in the regiment who. are excessive consumers; but mainly on enquiries from and conversation with Native officers. These answers deal solely with excessive use of these drugs. My answers No. 47 and No. 53 are based wholly on information received from the Native officers. I have had no opportunity of observa- tions such as would justify me in having any opinion of my own regarding Question 47. And I have never had a case such as is described in answer 53 in my regiment. I recall a case of that kind which happened in another regiment at Bangalore. My Subadar Major knows the de- tails. 82. Evidence of SUBADAR MAJOR MAHAMMAD MURTUZA, 1st Madras Pioneers, Trichinopoly. 19. Only used for smoking. 20. Chiefly by fakirs and Bairagis. 21. Flat is preferred for smoking. 22. Native charas is used. 23. No. 24. It is a common beverage among Marvadies and some of the people in Hindustan in hot weather. 25. Ganja use is on the increase, as it is con sidered it possesses digestive and strengthening power. 26 (b) Communities of jogies and fakirs. (c) and (d) Very few. 27. Muhammadan fakirs and Hindu jogies take it for the purpose of forgetting worldly matters. 28. (a) Three or four pies. (b) One or two annas. 29. Tobacco is mixed with ganja for smoking. Dhatura is used to strengthen the effects of ganja. Bhang massala is composed of poppy-seeds, pepper, dry ginger, cucumber seeds, sugar, milk, plan- tains, etc., etc. 30. Chiefly confined to male sex. Hindu pros- titutes also use it, 31. (a) Yes; easily formed. (b) Difficult for habitual consumer to break off. (c) Yes. 32. It is not essential. 33. No worshipping is necessary. 34. Yes; for habitual consumers. 35. (a) No; might be done by degrees. (b) Yes, (c) Only by degrees. (d) Yes. (f) Yes. 37. The effects of charas are more marked than that of ganja or bhang. 38. Round has most effect. 39. Drinking has least effect. 40. Yes; by many native doctors. 41. (a) (b) and (c) To a. certain extent. (d) Keeps warm and removes cold. Used by wandering hermits and who undergo different climates. 42. It would be beneficial if used moderately by those who use it habitually. 43. More or less. 44. Produces intoxication, creates appetite, warms system. Yes, want of subsequent grati- fication produces longing and uneasiness. 45. (a) May produce mental, as it affects the brain. (b) Yes; if insufficient food is taken. (c) Only if used in excess. (e) Impairs the moral sense, induces laziness, etc. (f) If used in excess. 46. See above. 47. It does not appear to. 48. Children are puny. 49. (a) Yes, sometimes. (c) Yes. (d) Yes. 50. See above. 51. Yes. 53. Yes; almost all cases of murder, etc., by shooting have apparently been due to the use of ganja. 54. Yes. 55. (a) and (b) Yes Oral evidence. My home is in Vellore. I have been 27 years in the 1st Pioneers and am now Subadar-Major Bahadur. My replies are based on my regimental experience, also on facts picked up outside the re- giment, in the various places I have served in, and also on hearsay. In my regiment there are now some thirty or
273 forty consumers of ganja. Formerly there were far more. Formerly there was great consumption owing to the cheapness of the drug. Now rum is given to the men on hard work on campaigns at a considerably reduced rate (2½ annas worth for one anna). They thus acquire the habit of drink- ing liquor instead of using ganja. The use of ganja is generally practised in secret. The men do not like the native officers to know about it. But we get information. When his conduct begins to show signs of it (for the use of ganja leads to the deterioration of the sepoy), then the explanation offered is that he has taken to ganja. If his conduct had not begun to de- teriorate, I should not hear anything of it; for he would practise the use in secret. The thirty or forty men to whom I have above referred are men whose conduct is not as good as it was. Apart from bad conduct no intimation would come to me. When I hear of a man being thus careless or bad in his conduct, I send for him and ask him about it. He denies the use as a rule. The rea- son is that a man who neglects his duty or is of bad conduct owing to the use of the drug is liable to be discharged. There is no rule to this effect. But soldiers are bound not to give themselves to intoxicating drugs such as ganja or opium or to liquor in excess. There is no penalty attaching to the moderate use of drugs or liquor. So long as a man takes them in moderation and keeps bold of himself there is no harm. These thirty or forty men to whom 1 have referred are none of them bad enough to be discharged. But all of them show more or less signs of deterioration. They have more or less acquired the habit so as to affect their characters. I do not think there are many moderate consumers in the regiment besides them. Native officers know such matters well. These consumers are not respected in the regiment. The non-consumers look down on and avoid them. They are both_Musalmans and Hindus and also Aghyans (or low caste people). Foreigners are not enlisted in our regiment. I never report to the Commanding Officer until I have clear proof that the man is a consumer. None of these men have been reported; for, though I believe from their conduct that they are con- sumers, I have no clear proof of it, and have never seen any of them smoke. We have defaulters' sheets of men who have been punished in any way. The name of ganja smokers would not be entered in the defaulters' sheets unless they are punished for some offence. If I saw a man smoking ganja I should at once have him arrested and report him to the Command- ing Officer. I have never had to do this in any case since I have held a commission, nor have I ever had occasion in my service to arrest a man for this, I had a case a few months ago, but it was a case of opium. The drug was found in the man's kit. Under the Articles of War there is a strict prohibition against using any kind of in- toxicants. And any man who takes drugs at all is liable to arrest and to dismissal from the, service. There is no order against ganja other than is against liquor; there is a general order against the use of intoxicants, and a man who touches ganja or spirits is liable to disobedience to orders. There is only one man, a Hindu, in my company whom I have had to talk to about such matters. They are dealt with by company officers. I told him that I had heard he smoked. He denied it and took oath of his caste. He is a young man. I told him his carelessness in duty showed him to be a smoker. He again denied it. He has ap- peared in the defaulter's' sheet for neglect of duty. There are two or three such smokers in my com- pany. But I have only spoken to this one; and I have no proof against him. If there is any fight or theft or other such offence and I hear of it, I make an inquiry, calling witnesses, and have the man punished. If I heard an equally definite complaint that a man had smoked ganja, I should take the same course. Such a case has never occurred in my experience. No open smoking has ever occurred. All I know about the thirty or forty men I have mentioned is that I have heard that it is believed that they smoke secretly in their houses. There is no evidence available. Question 51.274 83. Evidence of SURGEON MAJOR-GENERAL W. F. DEFABECK, Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras. Oral evidence. Question 1.275 entries. My "reasonable belief" as to cause was based on reading the papers and seeing whether they showed a probable cause of insanity, and on inquiry from the lunatic. I see the case of Kamil Saheb shows him as having shown no signs of im- provement and as having nothing ascertainable as to history. The case book shows nothing. I must have found out from him, 1 suppose. I must have found that he took ganja. I presume that if a man in his state said he took ganja it would just be as reliable as if he were sane. I know nothing at all about what would be the moderate or immoderate use of the drugs. The admission of the habit was therefore as a rule quite sufficient for my purpose. I have no knowledge whatever of the extent to which the drug is used. There are not, I think, any typical symptoms of hemp drug insanity. I really do not know any typical symptoms. These cases are mostly cases of acute mania. If I had a case of acute mania and the admission of the ganja habit, and other causes were unknown, I should have no hesitation in ascribing the insanity to hemp drugs. Causes are nearly always unknown as a matter of fact. That is, people enter causes readily enough; and ganja is frequently entered. Ganja has a bad name, and when people find a lunatic takes ganja they stick it down. But trustwortly statements as to cause are generally wanting. In cases where I find an alcoholic habit I should assign the in- sanity to alcohol if I could reasonably do so. That is I should do so in the absence of any other cause; for alcohol is a most notable cause of in- sanity. Case No. 11 of the 1892 cases is one which might be ascribed to either ganja or alcohol. In the case of alcohol I should of course discriminate between the moderate and excessive use. In the case of ganja I could not. It is much easier for a European to judge of alcoholism. than of drugs. I therefore feel very little con- fidence in the diagnosis I have made, ascribing these cases to hemp drugs. 85. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR W. G. KING, Acting Sanitary Commissioner, Madras. 1. I have been in medical practice in the Army and Civil Medical Departments of the Madras Presidency for nearly twenty years. 2. 1 believe the term "charas" would not be generally recognized in this presidency. The flower tops alone seem to be employed, and de- coctions made from them are mixed with other substances; where flower tops would be incon- venient, ganja and bhang alone seem applied. 29. The flower tops are usually sold mixed with tobacco for chewing in small packets. 30. It is usually practised in company. A group of men will pass round the special pipe en which with gourak a small quantity of ganja decoction has been mixed. The smoking is on these occasions not carried to an extent to cause more than slight exaltation. In large popula- tions, but few will be found who indulge to an extent to secure the full effects. These resort to ganja dens, where both men and women are found. 31. I think large numbers indulge at intervals without forming the ganja habit. Only the naturally vicious part of the population take to the habit permanently. The old profligate is the most likely victim. 36. The two cases have in practice scarcely any relation to each other. 39. The eating or drinking of any form of the drug necessarily is the more likely method of producing full effects than by smoking. In my opinion there can be no doubt numbers of natives are rendered lunatics by use of the drug, who would. never have become mentally deranged failing the use of this powerful disturbant of the nervous system. 40. Native doctors prescribe it largely as an aphrodisiac, and slightly as an anodyne. 41. (a) No. (b) Yes. But only in the sense that it is a stimulant. The system would suffer for the energy displayed. (c) No. (d) I know nothing good of the drug, when given otherwise than in medicinal doses. 42. No. I believe the moderate use of ganja, if habitual and used otherwise than to gain a specific result therapeutically, to be harmful. 44. The perceptive faculties are excited and perverted. The obedient servant of half an hour before is converted into an impudent, self-assert- ing, and unreasoning rascal. 45. (a) In moderate doses the physique is not impaired, but the perceptive and moral faculties degenerate. (b) and (c) No. (d) In the habitual smoker bronchitis is fre- quent. (e)) Yes; it impairs the moral sense, induces laziness, immorality and debauchery. (f) As to exciting cause, etc., vide answer No. 39. Insanity following use of ganja is, in a larger number of cases than those of ordinary type, curable. Insanity is usually induced by a relapse of the habit. (g) Cases certainly occur where the drug is taken to assuage anxiety, but they are so rare that the effect on the total is not worth taking into consideration. Whilst admitting insanity may induce its use, I think the usual history is that the debauchee, a man deficient in mental control, takes ganja till he becomes insane, as a result of constant and undue excitation of the nervous system. 46. The mental faculties of the man who is addicted to the use of the drug to excess are always impaired, and it becomes rather a question in considering such cases as to what is insanity and what not. The action of the drug in re- lation to insanity I believe simply to be wearing out of that part of the nervous system supplying imaginative faculties by over-excitation, the action being on a par with the induction of more or less complete impotence by over-excitation of the sexual organs. 47. I should think it is never hereditary, and that moderate use does not affect the children of the moderate consumer. 50. It is administered by prostitutes in ex- cessive doses, and its use is a frequent cause of impotence. I have known a case of absolute vol. vi. 2P2
276 impotence of long duration result from excessive excitation following a single administration. 56. In every bazar through all hours of the night majum is sold for the use of prostitutes and their devotees. This is a sweetmeat made with a decoction of the flower tops. In conclusion, I consider restriction of the sale of ganja under conditions similar to those requir- ed for poisonous drugs in Great Britain, would be an unqualified blessing to the country; thus contrasting with action taken against opium, which agitation I believe to be unnecessary and mischievous. 1 consider special measures should be taken to restrain the use of ganja by sepoys, and especially to prevent the young sepoy from acquiring the habit. Oral evidence, Question 1.277 impression, gathered from the fact that my attention has never been arrested by any such change in such an examiation. Question 50.278 black pepper, cinnamon, cardamoms, sugar and milk. 30. Generally in company, confined to male sex. They are given as medicine to children. 40. An extract and powder mixed with many other ingredients are used in dysentery, bronchi- tis and some other diseases. Said to be used to tame elephants and horses. 42. There are at present in this district jail 14 men, out of a population of 180, who admit that they smoke ganja. All are in excellent health. 45. Seven males out of 33 in the Waltair Asy- lum are said to have been ganja smokers. 49. Said to be an aphrodisiac in small doses. Used by bairagis to produce impotence. Oral evidence. Question 1.279 which I specially desired information. Thus, if the entry regarding hereditary history were blank, I should take every opportunity that offered of inquiring into it, because the chance of recovery depends so much on heredity. As a rule, and subject to these exceptions, the entries are copied at once into the general register from the Magistrate's papers. If I found a more probable cause than that assigned by the Magis- trate, I should alter the entry. I do not remem- ber ever altering an entry in this Asylum. But I remember making such an alteration several times in Madras. I remember specially the case of a Eurasian who had hereditary taint in the Madras Asylum. But it is much more difficult to get such information in the case of a native; if any one could get it. I remember getting information from an old woman (mother or grandmother) of the lunatic P. Narasimham, admitted in 1892, that the patient's grandfather was insane. I think it would have been more valuable to have shown that as a case of heredity than of ganja insanity; but I observe that the latter entry has not been altered in the register. The point, of course, is chiefly one of personal interest to me in the treatment of the case. An entry was made on the papers. I omitted to alter the register. At the same time I think that the register should have been altered, as the question of recoveries from certain types is important. I do not think that the entries in the Form C as to cause are reliable. The relatives are not generally able to give valuable information, and the Magistrates who get the inforation are not able to judge what is valuable information. I might illustrate this by saying that it is not un- usual to find that a lunatic who comes in with cause "unknown" or some other cause assigned is an epileptic. Epilepsy is most important as a cause and also in relation to cure. I think also that if a Magistrate hears any mention of ganja the cause goes down as ganja. I do not, therefore. think that Statement VII appended to the annual report can be regarded as at all a satisfactory basis on which to rest any conclusion as to the connection between hemp drugs and insanity. I have not given any replies in my paper to questions 45 and 46 as to the effects of hemp drugs, because I do not know them. I have failed to observe any physical signs in those who use the drags. While in charge of the Madras Asylum, I endeavoured to ascertain typical symptoms of hemp drug insanity, but failed. I have said that I place little reliance on the cause of insanity as assigned by the Magistrate. I should say that the diagnosis of hemp drug insanity in any case must be based solely on cause. By that I mean that without a his- tory of the drug there can be no such diagnosis. I attach specially little weight to the allegation of ganja as a cause in Form C, because there is a popular idea that ganja causes insanity, and if the Magistrate heard of ganja he would probably enter it at once. I should myself have put down ganja as the cause of insanity in any case where I exam. fined the friends, if they merely said the man used ganja and I could get no other cause, as I did not discriminate between the excessive and moderate use. I should go much more carefully into the matter now, since I have, in the course of the present inquiry, learned so much more about the use of the drugs. Question 45.280 person usually takes about 8 grains or a pill about as large as a good-sized pea and gradually swallows it. 16. Bhang is almost invariably prepared by the people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas are difficult to prepare; at least I never knew that any one smoked either of them, home- grown or home prepared. 17. All these and especially ganja are smoked in Bengal by the very lowest of the low. Bhang is sometimes used by the better class people. Majum by a great many well-to-do people for its aphrodisiac properties. 18. They deteriorate by keeping, especially if not kept quite dry. Ganja will keep three years if kept quite dry; but these are never so strong as when new or the current year281 dhatura, not alcohol; but, as I say, this use is it- self exceptional, not frequent. I cannot say how the seed is added. I have myself drunk some bhang with dhatura mixed. I took it on a bet to see the effect, when we saw it prepared by some durwans when I was a student. I did not know what I was doing for some time. I had to go to bed. I remember a sort of dual personality coming over me. I felt myself (I remember, though it is twenty-five or thirty years ago) in an egg. A servant opening the door broke it. I did not notice any change of vision. 1 was about 14 or 15 only, and incapable of observing physiologi- cal symptoms. Question 45.282 (d) It is largely used, I believe, as an aphrodisiac by hakims. 42. From the known medicinal action of the drug I consider that the moderate use of it is beneficial. It calms the nervous system, assuages hunger, is good for spasmodic respiratory diseases, and in all respects acts like tobacco. 44. It satisfies a want felt by him, like taking a good cigar. It calms his nerves and makes him at peace with the world. It stays his hunger, so that he can placidly see his food being cooked for him without wishing to partake of it half raw. 45. (b) Yes; it makes him thin. (c) It lessens his appetite. (d) I believe it cures them. (e) Yes. (f) I do not think a moderate use will pro- duce insanity. In the cases I have met, although the persons were said to be habitual ganja smokers and knew how to prepare the drug, it could not be clearly ascertained whether the habit was the cause of the insanity, or was resorted to to check the brain disturbance that precedes insanity. The insanity is of the maniacal type. One of the early symptoms noted in the case of men suspected and afterwards detected was a pecu- liar bloated appearance of face and general anæmia, with a general dull appearance. The insanity produced is of a temporary character, and the symptoms appear when the drug is used after a period of intermission. A case that came under my notice is that of a convict in the District Jail, Tanjore, who owns to having indulged in the use of ganja for the past nine years. He says he was employed as a shipping lascar, and from seeing others indulge in the practice, began to smoke ganja. He found that it inured him to fatigue and promoted digestion. I cannot ascer- tain if there is any family history of mental aber- ration. He craves for the drug now, but its with- holding does not seem to affect him, except that he is very restless and suffers from insomnia. Another case of a convict warder, who, for no apparent reason, was seized with furious maniacal delirium. He was concerned in a ganja case, and it was supposed he had taken some of it. By care, rest, withdrawal of drug, etc., lie recovered, and did not afterwards exhibit the same symptoms. Some men who have no recorded ganja history do confess to the use of the drug. 46. Already included in 45. 47 and 45. I don't know. 49. I have no information. 50. I do not know. 56. I do not know. 57. I have no knowledge of this. 90. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR JOHN LANCASTER, District Surgeon, North Arcot. 1. I have been in medical practice in South India for twenty years. 19. Ganja is used in other ways besides smok- ing; it is eaten by some, and drunk in the forms of subzi and bojah, and enters into the preparation of an intoxicating confection called majum. It is used in some of the large towns of Southern India. 23. Yes. In some of the large towns of this presidency, chiefly by Muhammadans, fakirs, and sanyasis and wandering mendicants. It is also used in some malarious tracts, as it is popularly supposed to have anti-malarious properties. It is not used to any large extent. 29. Opium, nut vomica, and betel-nut and leaf are occasionally so used; to flavour the mixture and to add to its intoxicating properties. I know of no preparation such as bhang massala, but I believe ginger, pepper, poppy seeds, cinnamon, fennel, milk, and sugar are sometimes added. 30. In company chiefly. It is chiefly confined to the male sex. Prostitutes sometimes use it. No; it is extremely rare, indeed, for children to use any of these drugs. 31. (a) No. (b) It is difficult to shake off the habit when once formed. (c) Yes, there is a tendency to do so. 32. (a) It is customary for fakirs and sanyasis in their annual gatherings and anniversary cele- brations at tombs and festivals in temples to have ganja and tobacco supplied to them by the guar- dians of the tombs and temples. (b) Though the use of these articles is not essential on such occasions, yet it is a custom of long standing. (c) The use is sometimes excessive on these occasions. (d) Yes. There is no religious sanction for the practice, which is condemned by many Muhammadans and Hindus. 36. I consider that the use of alcohol is rapidly spreading, but I have no definite proof that it is taking the place of these drugs. 39. It is said that smoking the drug more readily affects the lungs and brain. Rapid delirium often follows excessive smoking. I have seen two cases of mania (homicidal) following smoking. They came under my immediate observation. 40. Yes. By Muhammadan doctors. Exter- nally it is used as a poultice and ointment for ulcers, in piles, in prolapses ani, and for the ear. Internally in infantile convulsions, in dysmenorrhoea, and in tetanus, in malarious dysentery. As an aphrodisiac it is largely used, but its after-effects are bad, leading to impotence. 41. Yes. (a) As a digestive. Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) As a tonic and sedative. 44. (a) It is a stimulant, and then a sedative. (b), (e) and (d) Yes. (e) It does not as a rule create an appetite. (f) About an hour or two. (g) Yes, headache frequently and constipation. (h) Yes. 45. Vide 46.
283 46. The excessive use does impair the constitu- tion, and has evil effects both moral and mental. There is no doubt about this. It injures the appetite and digestion finally. It causes bron- chitis, asthma, and dysentery. It impairs the moral sense in every way. It has been the exciting cause of insanity (homicidal mania) in two cases under my observation in hospital. There have been also five cases of insanity under my observation in the Central Jail, and the type has been that of mania with homicidal tendencies. The insanity is in many cases temporary, but it may be re- induced by a return to the use of the drug. No doubt of this. The symptoms are violent, and there is a tendency to homicide. Insanes do not usually confess to the use of the drug. I have noticed in several cases that the patients were suffering from old standing disease, chiefly stric- ture. 47. No. 49. (a) and (b) Yes. (c) It is generally used in small doses, and is less injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. It is also accompanied with good food. (d) The use of the drug ends in impotence. 50. The drugs are not used in large or excessive doses as a rule when required for aphrodisiac purposes. Such use would defeat its purpose. 56. The effects of the drug are weakened when taken in moderation by the admixture of opium, betul-nut and nux vomica for personal consumption. Oral evidence. Question 1.281 District Surgeon, and which were sent to the lunatic asylum on my report. The last sentence of my written answer refers to eight patients who came to the Jail Hospital suffer- ing from strictures and fistulas of long standing who were reported to be ganja consumers. They were prisoners. Their being ganja consumers was brought to my notice by their asking for ganja. The connection of ganja with these cases was that the drug had in my opinion been taken by these persons to relieve pain. It could not of course be the cause of stricture or fistula. They were satis- fied with tobacco, and opium. I am not allowed by rule to give ganja in the form in which it is sold in the bazar, and opium is in my opinion a safer drug. I am not allowed to give ganja in any form, but I am allowed to give opium to be eaten, and I gave it in that form. As Medical Officer in charge of the Jail Hospital I am not at liberty to give ganja or tobacco to the patients even as a mode of treatment without the sanction of the Jail Superintendent. I have not prescribed the smok- ing of ganja for tetanus or for any other com- plaint, but have prescribed the tincture and extract of Cannabis. Question 53.285 no alteration of the cause in the asylum register, which, by established practice, is derived from the certificate, Form C, which comes with the patient, and is written up by the Hospital Assistant as described above. The entry in annual statement VII is founded on the entries in the General Re- gister, and may therefore be said to be based on the Magistrate's enquiries. I do not consider my- self responsible for it. Whatever my opinion may be, I am not entitled to alter a statement based on fact with which I am not acquainted. 92. Evidence ofSURGEON-MAJOR K. C. SANJANA, Parsi, District Surgeon, Tinnevelly. 1. I have not had many opportunities of obtain- ing information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs. The answers are framed from information derived from medical subordinates and a native hakim. 2. Yes. These products are respectively own by the names of bhang, chains, and ganja. 3. The hemp plant is grown by some people of this district in their gardens with chillies and brin- jals. 10. They are of the same classes as other agri- cultural cultivators. 19. In this district ganja is chiefly used for smoking. 20. Pilgrims and bairagis who come to this district on pilgrimage, smoke ganja mixed with tobacco. 21. Flat ganja is used. 24. Some Muhammadans eat and drink bhang in the district. 25. The use of ganja has been on the decrease in this district, since the introduction of the license system which has kept up the price of the drugs. 30. Male and female both take it. 31. (a) Habit is easily formed. (b) It is difficult to break off. (c) No. 40. Ganja is prescribed by native doctors in the form of halwa as an aphrodisiac and for insomnia, pain, tetanus, hydrophobia, cholera, diarrh286 is said to be eaten if taken soon after a smoke. The soothing effects last perhaps for half an hour. Very like the effects of a pipe of tobacco, and the longing the same if not more accentuated. 45. (a) to (e) Not apparently so. (f) and (g) No information. 46. See answer to question 50. 47 and 48. Not known. 49. Not known; though it is often stated that excessive use of ganja tends to induce impotence. 50. Excessive habitual use.287 in ganja, to intoxication; they become highly excit- ed, they dance wildly, and jump through fires; and finally become stupefied, and. helplessly drunk. The use of the drug at this time is excessive; it is considered essential to produce the wild excitement and disregard of physical pain that seems necessary for the actors in these orgies. It does not appear to be subsequently injurious or to lead to the formation of the habit, so far as I have seen. 33. High caste Hindus would. (theoretically at least) be against the practice, in accordance with their- tenets of religion, which discountenance the use of stimulants and narcotics; with regard to low caste Hindus, Pariahs, Native Christians, and Muham- madans, there cannot be said to be any public opinion against the moderate use of these drugs in private. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant in this province that I ever heard of. Public opinion is against the use of the drug to this extent, that re- spectable persons would not resort to ganja shops in public streets. 34 and. 35. As is the case with any stimulant or narcotic, so with ganja, it would be for a time a serious privation to one accustomed to the use of this drug to forego it; such an one would, if prohibit- ed its use, probably endeavour to consume it illicitly. It would be very difficult to enforce the pro- hibition, the amount of the drug needed being small and. easily concealed; even in jails, prisoners though constantly under supervision, often manage to get hold of tobacco. The prohibition to a free man using the drug he has been accustomed. to would. undoubtedly give rise to a strong feeling of discon tent in his mind; the feeling of discontent would probably not amount to a political danger in this part of India, as the proportion of consum- ers to non-consum-ers is very small; but I can easily conceive serious and wide-spread discontent following prohibition in parts of the country where a large proportion of the people (and those of excit- able nature and warlike instincts) consume hemp drugs in some form. The ganja consumer, if pro- hibited the use of this drug, would probably have recourse to arrack, toddy, or opium. Many of the present consumers of ganja take it as the cheapest form of intoxicant. 37 to 39. I have not personally come across a case in this district suffering in any way from the effects of hemp drug consumption, nor can I call to mind a case amongst the civil population in any of the 12 districts of Madras presidency in which I have served as Civil Surgeon, though I have seen an occasional case of ganja or bhang intoxication amongst sepoys when " on a spree." I cannot therefore differentiate the effects of the different pre- parations of the drug. 40. I am not aware. 41 (a), (b) and (c) I have heard it stated that it has these qualities, and that it stays the craving of hunger; but I have had no opportunities of verifying such statements, as the proportion using the drug in this province is so small. 42. I think the moderate use of the drug must be harmless, as nobody has ever been brought to my notice (as the Government Medical Officer in charge of the public dispensary and hospital at various stations) who was suffering from the effects of the drug, or whose illness was in any way caused by its use. 43. Apparently so; they are seldom or never brought before Magistrates for breaches of the peace. 44. Pleasurable intoxication, a buoyant, happy, contented feeling; pleasing ideas pass rapidly through the mind; after a time sleep comes on accompanied by pleasing dreams. Pain, if present, is lessened or removed. Sometimes complete anæsthesia supervenes; the effect lasts some hours, but the time varies. The use of the drug is not followed by nausea, headache or constipation as opium is. When taken in smaller quantities, it is said to allay the cravings of hunger if food is not available, and to create appetite if taken in antici- pation of a regular meal. 45. My acquaintance with the use of the drug is too limited to enable me to answer this question. 49 and 50. Cannabis sativa is considered to be an aphrodisiac; if constantly used for this purpose, it would naturally be injurious; all aphrodisiacs are so, as they stimulate the sexual organs to unnaturally frequent action, thus exhausting the system. In this way, the constant use of hemp for this purpose would undoubtedly tend to pro- duce temporary impotence; the evil effects of the excessive use of the drug as an aphrodisiac would. naturally exceed the moderate use. In this parti- cular direction Cannabis would be more injurious than opium or other narcotics. 53. I cannot give in detail of any particular case; but I have always understood that when sepoys " run amok " and discharge their loaded. firearms promiscuously, they do it under the influ- ence of hemp in some form. 54. Cases have occurred in which sepoys in this presidency, meditating revenge on a comrade or an officer, are reported to have fortified themselves with ganja for the contemplated act of violence. 55. (a) I am not aware. (b) It is a narcotic, and as such is followed by sleep and stupor, if given in sufficient quantity. 63. There is only one small shop in this district for the retail sale of ganja and its preparations; it was opened this year (1st April 1893); it seems unobjectionable. There is no wholesale vend of hemp drugs in this district. 68. There are no such shops in this district; the demand is insufficient. 69. I am not aware, The local public have certainly no objection. 95. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR S. C. SARKIES, District Surgeon, Nellore. 1. I have not had extensive opportunities of deriving much information and. experience regard- ing the utility of the drug called Indian hemp. As a medicinal preparation, I have seldom or never used it, as it is a drug which I believe is rarely used by physicians for the treatment of diseases. But I know that in India hemp is commonly and universally consumed by certain natives in good or indifferent health. I have seen large quantities of this drug in the possession of natives of Bengal, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, touring through Madras presidency on pilgrimage. These men are called bairagis, and nearly all of them are addicted to the use of hemp. Being constantly ex- posed to rough and inclement weather, after leaving their homes, they are often constrained by illness to take refuge in hospitals here and there. Ganja and bhang have often been found in their possession.
288 Besides bairagis, I have also found ganja in the possession of ordinary native residents of this town chiefly amongst the poor and low inhabitants. I have also found ganja in the possession of a convict of the district jail here. 2. Yes. 19. Charas is not, I believe, much known or consumed in Madras presidency, and I know no- thing about it, except that it is the resinous exud- ation of the leaves of Indian hemp. Whether ganja is used for eating or not I cannot say exactly, though I may safely assert that it is principally used for smoking. It is grown in this district. 23. I am not aware that bhang is used for smok- ing. If so used, it is used as a substitute for ganja, if this latter drug is not available. 28. I do not know. 29. (a) Ordinarily mixed with coriander, nut- meg, ginger, cardamoms, poppy seeds, aniseed, cloves. (b) Exceptionally mixed with dhatura or nux vomica. 30. (a) I do not know. (b) Principally to the male sex. Women are not entirely free from the habit. I have noticed the habit prevailing more amongst elderly men than amongst the young. (c) I do not know. 31. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. 32. I do not know. 36. No. 37. I do not know. 39. I should say smoking is more injurious. 40. No. 41 (a) Yes, in moderation. (b) Yes, for the time being. (c) No. 42. In moderation the drug does no harm; at least I have not heard of any evil effects follow the moderate use of the drug. 44. It produces intoxication, which may last for an hour or two. It does not create appetite. 45. The habitual use of these drugs tends to impair. constitution, by producing loss of appetite and emaciation, and a constant irritable cough. Though I have not seen any marked cases of lu- nacy arising from the use of ganja, yet I believe that insanity is often due to its use, as may be seen on a reference to the return of any Indian Lunatic Asylum. 47. No. 49. I do not believe the drug is used by prosti- tutes as an aphrodisiac. I believe the drug has the effect of lessening the desire for sexual inter- course. 56 and 57. I do not know. In conclusion, I am of opinion that it is not desirable to suppress the consumption of Indian hemp. It is an indigenous drug and has been used by natives for centuries. It is a cheap drug, and hence it is almost solely used by the very poor and low natives. It is easily obtained and easily carried about from place to place by bairagis and sanyasis in their travels, and to these men the drug is most useful as an intoxicant and sedative, and, I believe, as an antaphrodisiac as well. It is very doubtful whether the moderate use of this drug tends to shorten life or injure the con- stitution. I have seen old men of sixty-five years or more who have been addicted to the drug for nearly half a century and yet have appeared to be in good health and in full possession of their facul- ties. There is no doubt that the return of lunatic asylums go to show that ganja smoking is a cause of lunacy, but then it may be asked whether or not alcohol has the same effect. I certainly think so, and I also think ganja is used in far greater mo- deration by the poor natives in India than alcohol is in. Europe. It seems hardly necessary to draw comparisons between the ill effects produced by the immoderate and habitual use of alcohol on the constitution and those produced by ganja. But I will merely remark that I think alcohol is far more injurious in every way. In Military and European hospitals where in- patients are treated, from one-third to half the total number of admissions may be traced to alcohol or venereal diseases. I mention venereal diseases, because I believe these diseases are very often contracted by persons who are under the influence of drink. 96. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR W. F THOMAS, Acting District Medical and Sanitary Officer, Chingleput. 1. Served in the Central Provinces, India, and in Orissa province, where all three varieties of the hemp plant products are used (smoking and eating and drinking). Bhang and ganja are also used by the native army to some extent, particularly so amongst the Muhammadan section of the army; and in the native army I had opportunities of obtaining some information on the subject. 2. Siddhi, the larger leaves and capsules with- out the stalks. In all other respects the definition may be accepted. Siddhi289 bhang is practised in company. These habits are mainly confined to the male sex, chiefly by those over 30 years of age. In some cases, younger people, and even children, drink a mixture of bhang. Prostitutes also occasionally take bhang for sexual excitement. 31. The habit of smoking ganja is easily formed. This habit is difficult to break off, and there is a tendency for the moderate habit to deve- lop into the excessive. 32. Bhang is made and freely sold in some places during the Kama (Indian Cupid) festival. Some religious men (ascetics) use bhang. It is not essential that such religious men should take bhang. This leads one on to the formation of the habit. 36. Alcohol and bhang are frequently taken together by the habitual consumers of bhang. But alcohol, ipso facto, is not substituted for any of these drugs. 37. The drinking of bhang is more intoxicating, and leads to no manual or mental work. 39. The drinking of bhang is more intoxicating. While smoking is soothing, drinking produces an uncontrollable restlessness, singing, boisterous talk- ing, and fighting; and a regular immoderate in- dulgence is a predisposing cause of insanity. 40. Ganja is so used as a narcotic, diuretic or parturifacient. It is generally prescribed for delirium tremens, various forms of neuralgia and nervous affections. 41. (a) (b) and (c) Of no use. (d) Ganja is primarily stimulant; then it is used as an anodyne, sedative, antispasmodic. It is also used as a narcotic, diuretic, and parturifa- cient. It is a powerful aphrodisiac. 42. The moderate use (in smoking) is not harm- ful. It has a soothing effect. I have known many persons who smoke in moderation none the worse in any way. 44. Ganja produces first a period of excitement or intoxication, followed by sleep and coma; the intoxication often lasting a couple of hours. Native young men, chiefly Muhammadans, use bhang to enjoy pleasant dreams, chiefly of a sensual kind. Bhang is also considered refreshing, and that is the reason why it is chiefly used during the hot weather, while ganja is smoked during the cold or wet weather. It does not allay hunger. It does not create appetite. In moderation, there are no after- effects. The want of such produces longing and uneasiness. 45. (a) No. (b) It weakens the pulmonary action. (c) The stomach is not affected, and the appetite may be increased. (d) A few suffer from dysentery, bronchitis and asthma. (e) No. (f) The moderate use does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. It is a predisposing cause of insanity. I saw two cases of insanity pro- duced by ganja being used in excess. In both cases acute mania was present, and in both it was permanent. 46. Ganja produces loss of appetite and strength, trembling and much mental weakness. The exces- sive use produces moral inertia-a desire not to do any kind of work, mental or moral-and this state gradually leads on to cerebral softening. 47. Yes, it is hereditary. 48. The habitual excessive use has a stronger hereditary tendency. 49. A class of people, called Setts, on the West Coast of India, use all these drugs as an aphro- disiac. All the preparations are well-known aphro- disiacs, and it is so used by prostitutes. This aphrodisiac property induces finally certain special diseases, as locomotor ataxy and sclerosis of the cord. The free use of hemp does produce im- potence. 50. The excessive use of all, or any, of these drugs produces a gradual loss of memory, induces nervous debility, cerebral softening, sclerosis of the spinal cord and brain, locomotor ataxy, and in- sanity. 56. As stated in a previous article, dhatura and cantharides are mixed (a) to produce undue sexual excitement. Nux vomica, dhatura and bhang are introduced into country liquors to produce cerebral excitement and intoxication. A certain class of people administer these admixtures to unprotected women to produce narcotism with a view to sexual indulgence. 57 (a). A tolerance of opium imparts to the sys- tema similar power of resisting the influence of ganja. Haschisch is the name of the plant in a particularly dried state. In some people, even the smell of the leaves, which is strong, is apt to produce intoxi- cation. Oral evidence. Question 1.290 symptoms. Those I have mentioned are, I should say, the characteristics of the hemp drug insanity. I should expect to find impotence as a general rule in cases of the excessive use of the hemp drugs. To the best of my recollection this symptom was absent in the other two cases. The symptoms of hemp drug insanity are those of acute mania, and may arise from causes unconnected with hemp drugs. Impotency is a typical symptom of hemp drug insanity, and I can't mention any other symptom which is typical. In the two cases in which this symptom was not present, I made my diagnosis on history. Besides the three cases men- tioned above, I have had in the course of my service one case of melancholia, and no other cases of insanity. I have not made a special study of in- sanity, and I do not profess to be able to give evidence of special value regarding it. I have not seen cerebral softening in the post mortem examin- ation of a ganja consumer, nor have I had any case of the sort to treat. The opinion I have stated is based on hearsay, not on any case shown or quoted to me. Question 47.291 and mixed up with water or milk, and then taken as a drink and called bhang. 16. (a) Yes. (b). Yes. (c). Know nothing about the wild hemp plant. 17. By all classes. 18. Deteriorate by keeping. They do not quite lose their effect in time. They keep good for one year. Dampness causes deterioration, which may be prevented if the drugs are preserved between layers of straw in a box well closed. 19. Ganja for smoking and drinking throughout the district. 20. All classes. 21. Flat ganja. 22. Not in this district. 23. Not usually in the district. 24. No special class can be noted. Majority drink bhang. 25. Increasing. No special reasons, except on the advice of their companions. 26. About292 98. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR R. PEMBERTON, Civil Surgeon, Cochin. 14. I have made enquiries, and find that ganja and bhang are the only products of the hemp plant in the Cochin State, and is used to a very large extent in British Cochin by the Konkanies. It is principally used in the larger towns in the native Cochin, especially in Muttancherry. 15. Smoking.293 due to ganja. If it had been, I should have reported them. I never reported a man, because I was never certain that his illness was due to ganja. The cause of illness is always entered in the cause book, with a view to judging of a man's qualifica- tion for pension. Ganja was, nevertheless, never entered for the reason I have already stated. My statement regarding insanity caused by ganja is founded on two cases within my own experience. It is only the excessive use which, in my opinion, causes insanity. A ganja smoker usually smokes once or twice a day, and I call that a moderate use. If he indulges to a larger extent, I should call his habit excessive. I cannot give the weight of ganja represented by such moderate use. I call it tem- porary insanity, even though the insanity lasts a few hours only. There is more violence in such cases than is consistent with the state of intoxica- tion. In one of the two cases I have referred to, the insanity lasted only one hour; in the others, three or four hours. In the former case the man had had a previous attack of temporary insanity from the same cause, as I ascertained afterwards. In both these cases I am confident that the insanity was due to the hemp drugs and nothing else. In the case which lasted only an hour the man was brought to me in a state of doubtful sanity to the Detail Hospital, which was in my charge. He was cured in two or three days, but still under ob- servation, when the orderly gave him some ganja. From the effects of smoking this he was attacked with a fit of temporary insanity, in which he stab- bed the orderly. He spoke to me quite rationally a short while afterwards, saying that he had stab- bed the orderly because he would not supply him with a sufficient quantity of ganja. I made en- quiries, which satisfied me that the condition in which the man was when he was first brought to the hospital was due to ganja. This information was given to me by the native officers, who said that he was frequently excited, and that his excite- ment was caused by ganja. He was transported for life by a civil tribunal, the Sessions Judge of North Arcot. The case occurred between 1885 and 1887. The orderly was not killed. The en- quiry I made satisfied me that I had correctly as- certained the cause of his insanity, because he was quiet while under observation at the hospital. He was sent to the hospital, was violent, and therefore kept apart for some days. But he there became so quie a admitted him to the general wars, only telling off an orderly to watch him. I excluded all other causes of insanity. I gave evidence before the Magistrate who came to the hospital to take the wounded man's dying declaration. I was under orders of transfer, and as Dr. Lancaster had taken charge and knew all about the case, he ap- peared in court in the subsequent proceedings. I do not remember deposing to the state of the man's mind. I did depose about the nature of the wounds. I did not enter anything about the hemp drugs in the case book, because I was not certain whether the man was insane or not. I never certified him insane because he was under observation all the time he was in my charge, and I gave over charge of the hospital on the day the offence was com- mitted and left the station the same day. When the offence was committed, the native officers came on the spot and said the man was a ganja smoker and excitable. I also knew that he had been sup- plied with ganja, and he alleged the want of a suffi- cient supply of ganja as the reason for committing the offence, and I was therefore satisfied that his insanity was caused by ganja. I did not enquire about hereditary insanity. I saw him within an hour after the attack, and he was then quite sane. I don't think it was a case of mere rage, because if it had been, I think the fit would have lasted longer. But it is difficult to express the difference between the two things. If there had been no ganja history, I should not have described such a fit as insanity. I cannot say why I should not have done so, except that, apart from the ganja history, there was no proof of insanity. In the second case to which I have referred, it was known that the man had taken ganja just be- fore he committed the crime. It occurred in Burma. I gave evidence, and the man was trans- ported for life. I gave evidence that the man was sane. The case was tried in the Sessions Court in Tounghoo between 1881 and 1883. I gave evi- dence that the man had smoked ganja; that he had injured the two men; and that when I saw him two hours afterwards he was quiet and in his senses. This is the case referred to in answer to question 53. These are the only cases of insanity that have come under my personal observation. 99. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR A. J. STURMER, District and Sanitary Officer, Masulipatam, Kistna District. 1. Enquiring of natives and from employment in the Military and Jail Department, and having had charge of an asylum. 2. Bhang and ganja are the names used chiefly in this presidency. 19. Ganja is used chiefly for smoking; it is also made into a sweetmeat. 29. This is said to be composed of bhang, pepper, milk, poppy, aniseed, cocoanut, plantains, ginger, water, and subza or "ryana" seeds. 30. Generally alone, but a pipe is often passed 'from one to another. Parties are occasionally given for the smoking of ganja. Almost entirely con- fined to the male sex. Majum is given to children for_diarrh294 moral degradation. It lowers the brain power. No; on the contrary, increases the appetite consi- derably. Yes; those who get habituated to its use usually give up work. This is the case in this presidency; in the north all the dooly-bearers take it as far as I know. Yes, it causes acute mania, which is usually temporary first. A person who enters an asylum has to stop the drug, and he begins to improve; when he leaves, he generally reverts to the habit and comes back worse; in time, I think, his brain gets into a state which can never improve. I think it is the exciting cause of insan- ity. Yes; many used to say that they took ganja. There may be isolated cases where this would apply, but in the vast majority it is an easily learn- ed vice, which a person may not be strong-minded enough to refrain from. It is a question whether a drunkard (alcoholic) or a ganja smoker is not a weak-minded person. I look upon both these as men with weak intellects; they know alcohol and ganja are very bad for them, yet they will not give them up. 46. It is difficult to draw the line; moderation passes into excess imperceptibly. Many of my answers apply perhaps more to the excessive use than to the moderate. 47. The son of a ganja smoker, etc., generally is said to take to the drug, but not the daughter. 49. It is said to be a powerful aphrodisiac, but I have had no acquaintance with it under this head. I have often given it to patients who have experi- enced the general symptoms, but never this. A ganja smoker tells me that whilst taking ganja he has no desire for women. Oral evidence. Question 1.295 men smoked ganja, and they were men who did their work indifferently. On the other hand, I found dooly-bearers who had ganja smoke marks on the hands. These men work well, and are hard worked. They said they took whiffs every now and again to keep them up. Yet the im- pression regarding sepoys here is that a man who takes to ganja is lost. It may be because the dooly-bearer takes it to help him to do his work; while the sepoy, though knowing it to be contrary to military order, takes it because he has depraved tendency. I have always understood that a man taking ganja in a regiment is liable to severe punishment. It is so dangerous in a regiment to have a man excited by a drug. I think there is a regulation against all intoxicants read out to recruits on joining. In regard to mania, my remarks are based on my Waltair experience. I cannot say how many hemp drugs cases passed through my hands, i. e., how many there were in which ganja was said to have helped. Only one case was absolutely ascribed to ganja. I think that in his case it was the exciting cause. He was admitted twice. He admitted the use of the drug. The drug causes mania-acute mania. I never noticed any special symptoms. The man is like the ordinary maniac. The mania only differs from that due to other causes in not being so lasting. I have not been in the habit of discriminating between the moderate and excessive use of the drug. In my hemp drug cases I arriv- ed at the cause chiefly through the evidence of friends. Generally one of the first questions one asks is, 296 to its intoxicating effect. Nevertheless, it is very largely used. (c) No. 34. No. 35. It would be difficult to prohibit its use. 36. No. 38. The round kind is more used than the other varieties, owing probably to the fact of its being more powerful in its effects. 39. The use of the hemp plant in any form, except in cases where it is required for medical treatment, is highly injurious. 40. Yes, it is used by some native doctors in diarrh297 four or five hours, and is followed by depression proportionate to the quantity consumed. 45. Once I was called in to see a bairagi, head of a religious endowment. He was a habitual smoker of opium and ganja. He was a ghastly skeleton of bones covered with the skin. As for his mental condition, he was then engaged in litigation. I have no information of his morals. A boy of about fourteen was one night picked up unconscious by the police from the street. The next morning he was found to be a perfect imbecile, unable to articulate any other words than ganja and fire. He could not recollect even his own name. The previous history of the boy was not known to trace his mental condition either to heredity or to ganja, of which he was smelling when first seen. The formation of his head seemed quite natural. There was an intense craving for the drug. There was no information available as to the daily quan- tity used. Probably it was excessive, judging from his condition when first found. 49. Yes. Vide No. 40. 53. Some time ago I had to see a person who had used a preparation of hemp for a week or ten days as a sexual stimulant. He became a melan- choliac with repeated attempts at suicide. In another case the person had used the drug, or rather a preparation of it, for a similar purpose for about a month. While using the drug, his friends observed some strangeness in his manners. Then came a rude mental shock, ending in violent mania with homicidal tendency. The malady gradually assumed a chronic form, carrying off the patient in a couple of years. During his insanity he would frequently talk of the drug, and some- times would ask for it. Oral evidence. 1. I studied at the Madras Medical College, and obtained the certificate of L. M. S. in 1887. I served for three years in the Bellary district and three years in Tanjore. I have had no spe- cial experience of insanity or any special training in that branch of medicine. The cases I refer to were at the dispensary and in private practice, and they are described more in detail in answers 45 and 53. 45. I did not treat the bairagi. I only saw him once, and apart from his own statement that he was an habitual smoker of opium and ganja, I learnt nothing whatever of his history. I cannot therefore judge whether his condition was due to other causes than the habit he confessed to. The only reason for mentioning his case is his emaciation, which may or may not have been due to opium and ganja. The boy of fourteen I sent to the Madras Lu- natic Asylum. The case came to me at Adoni in the Bellary district, when I was in charge of the Municipal dispensary. The Magistrate sent the boy to the lunatic asylum on my re- port. He went direct from Adoni to Madras. I drew up the necessary documents. The case occurred in 1888. I don't remember at the moment what cause I entered in the certificate. 53. The first case in this answer was a patient in my private practice. He had swallowed a dose of patent medicine with the object of committing suicide. I was called in, and was told by his friends that he had been taking a preparation of hemp as an aphrodisiac. I don't know what the preparation was composed of. The patent medicine was one for treating scorpion sting, and quite distinct from the aphrodisiac. The patient had previously attempted to commit sui- cide by throwing himself into a well, I was told he had been out of his mind for three or four days before I was called in. He was under my treat- ment, as well as I remember, for about a fortnight, and recovered completely. 1 treated him for the poison and not for melancholia. He was impotent by his own statement, and had been in that state for four or five years. He was about 30 years of age. He said the preparation of hemp had had no effect, and he had increased the dose be- cause it had proved inefficient. He was talking nonsense when I first attended him. Though he recovered from the poisoning he did not regain full possession of his will till a month after I first attended him. I knew him before he began to take the hemp drug, and his ultimate condition, after he recovered, was the same as that in which I formerly knew him. I made his acquaintance three or four months before he began to take the hemp drugs. He was then living with his fa- mily, consisting of mother, wife, brother and sister. I have not known the suicidal tendency to show itself in persons who supposed themselves impotent. His relations, whose acquaintance I made, were sound in intellect. I do not remem bers enquiring into the history of the patient's family further back than his father, who, I learnt, was a respectable man. I made no other enquiries as to the cause of insanity. The use of the hemp drug was the one fact mentioned to me, and I ac- cepted it. As well as I remember, he had a daugh- ter 6 or 7 years old. I know insanity arises from other causes than ganja, and therefore I think I must have made enquiry whether the insanity was due to other causes than ganja, but the use of the hemp drug was the only fact which made an im- pression upon me. When I said that I made no other enquiry as to the cause of insanity, I meant no other enquiry regarding heredity, The hemp drug could not have been the only fact mentioned to me, but it was the fact which appeared to me to furnish an adequate cause of the insanity. I do not remember now if I made any enquiry into the cause of insanity. As far as I was con- cerned, it was a case of poisoning, and I did not treat the patient for insanity. I knew the mem- bers of the patient's family, and had already learnt that the father was a respectable man. There was therefore no reason for me to enquire about them, and as well as I remember I did not enquire. The person, the subject of the second cas e de- scribed in 53, was brought into Adirampatnam to his brother, a Salt Inspector, whom I had known for one month previously. The man was insane when he was brought in, and I saw him within two or three days of his arrival. During the next month or so I saw him four or five times. He was always in the same condition. The Salt In- spector was then transferred, and took his brother away with him. I heard of his subsequent history. I asked the Salt Inspector the details of the case, and he told me what I have stated in my answer. The hemp preparation was said to be one of the aphrodisiacs commonly prescribed by the native doctors, and I was told that the mental shock was caused by a letter impugning the character of his wife. I don't know how the Salt Inspector got information about the insane's history previous to his arrival at his house. I did not make any enquiry into the cause of insanity beyond asking the Inspector whether the patient was insane from his birth or how, and the inspector told me of his VOL. VI. 2 s
298 having used the drugs for the purpose described and of the mental shock. I never treated the man at all. I never myself heard him talk of the drug. When brought into Adirampatnam he had been insane for a year and living at Tuticorin away from his brother. During that time I had not seen him, nor had his brother, the Inspector, seen him. I do not remember from whom I heard of his death, for I did not keep up any knowledge of him. 102. Evidence of Apothecary G. A. W. VELLONES, Chetambaram, South Arcot. 1. By inquiry, and knowledge of a few hemp eaters and smokers. 2. Locally known as ganja. 3. Not abundant here. A few plants are reared in back-yards of madams and in some private compounds for medicinal use. Grows wild over hilly tracts about Salem. 6. It is reported to grow wild and dense. 7. A few plants in back-yards are cultivated for smoking ganja, but the bulk of the drug for public use is imported. 10. The few people who cultivate it here to a very small extent are ascetics living retired lives in madams. 11. Yes. 14. Yes; for private use, for smoking, and to a very small extent. 16. It can be prepared, though it is not gener- ally done, as it is troublesome to prepare and costly. Charas is not well-known here. 17. Native doctors for medicine, and ascetics for smoking. 18. Deteriorates by keeping. If properly pre- pared, it is said, will keep for a year good. 19. Ganja is used in this town for smoking. It is also taken internally, prepared as a confec- tion with aromatics. 20. The lower classes, and apparently Muham- madans, smoke ganja. 21. Flat. 24. Of the general public, a very small propor- tion drink it. Pandarams, bairagis, etc., for the most part use ganja freely, as bhang is costly. 25. I believe it is on the increase. 26. (a) More than 70 per cent. Under (b), 10 or 15 per cent.; and a very small proportion under (c) and (d). 27. Working classes, wandering classes, and those in low condition. Other well-to-do classes resort to it for its aphrodisiac properties. 28. (a) Quarter to half an anna. (b) Half to one anna. 29. Carminative and honey or jaggery gener- ally. 30. Male sex smoke in company, but eat it in private. Neither females nor children resort to it. 31. Yes; difficult to break off. Not much tendency to develop into excessive, as it at once disagrees. 33. There does not appear to prevail any social or religious custom necessitating the use of the drug here. It is taken for its slightly intoxicating effects. 34. Yes; it would. It acts as a mild stimu- lant and intoxicant, which enables people addicted to it to get on with their work. There is a general indisposition and disinclination for work in case the drug is withheld. 35. Though it may be feasible to prohibit the use of the drug, it is sure to be consumed illicitly, and resort would be had to other intoxicants. 36. The more well-to-do classes resort to alcohol. 37. Ganja only is smoked here, and, in excess, is injurious to health. 39. Smoking is more injurious than the use of purified ganja or opium. 40. Yes; it is used medicinally for human beings as also for cattle. 41. It is reported, and appears, to be beneficial in small doses. Moderate habitual use is referred to. Ganja is locally used. It is reported as digestive and possessing staying-power. The labouring classes and moderate habitual use are referred to. 42. Moderate use beneficial to certain classes. 43. Inoffensive. 44. Slightly intoxicant, with pleasurable feel- ings; rather tends to quiet the individual than excite him. It is said to create appetite. Its effects last two or three hours. Depression follows, and desire for more ganja. 45. (b) Slightly. (c) and (d) No. (e) I think it impairs the moral sense and induces laziness in some. (f) Some cases of insanity are reported as due to the drug. 46. They are very injurious in excess, and produce general breaking-down of the constitu- tion. 47. Hereditary in some cases; acquired by living or mingling with consumers in most cases. 49. It is; by men, not by females. Used thus it is injurious, as it tends to cause dyspepsia. 51. Consumers are generally peaceful men. 53. No. 55. Possible and reported. Stupefaction suffi- cient for purposes of ordinary theft. 57. Ganja-eaters for the past twenty years and more, in moderation, tell me that they are better taking it, and would fall ill without it. 68 There is one shop licensed to sell ganja in the main street of this town. 69 The wishes of the people are not consulted, and there seems to be no necessity for it, as the drug is sold to purchasers, who take it away with them or swallow it, and at once leave the bazaar.
299 103. Evidence of Apothecary N. H. DANIEL, In charge Police Hospital, Koraput, Vizagapatam District. 3. Ganjam district300 104. Evidence of Apothecary MUHAMMAD ASADULLA, Ellore, Godavary District. 1. My information is chiefly from people ad- dicted to the drug. 2. Yes. Everything applies to this province with the exception of the word siddhi, which is unknown in this province. Charas is seldom or never procurable in these parts. 3. It is never known to grow spontaneously. It is extensively cultivated in a village called Daggupadu, a place 32 miles from Guntur, and in a place called Shamshabad in Hyderabad, and in Javadi near Madras. 4. In addition to the names mentioned by Dr. Prain, it is called 'harya tamacu' or green tobacco and also 'aushakani buti' or the drug of the theosophist or psychologist. 5. It is never known to grow wild within these parts. 6. Unknown. 7. Yes. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) For seeds and not for fibre. In some of the villages of the Godavari and Kistua districts. 8. It is on the increase, and on account of a great demand for it the cultivation is also ex- tensive. 9. Dr. Prain's remarks on this respect hold good in this part. 10. They don't form a special class. The majority of the cultivators of this drug are Muham- madans, although Hindus or Cummas also follow this example to some extent. 11 and 12. Not known. 13. (a) More or less common to all districts. Cultivation is restricted by taxation. (b) Red and clay soil appears to be favourable to its growth. (c) Not known. 14. Daggupadu, Shamshabad, Javadi. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. 15. The leaves of ganja are prepared for smok- ing by rubbing a quantity of it in the palm of the left hand about a dozen times, and squeezing out the green colouring matter and juice by mixing it with a little water. This process is said to deprive the ganja of its deleterious effects. The one used for eating and drinking is thus prepared. A quantity of ganja is first boiled and then ground in a mortar with water, and strained through fine muslin. This process is repeated half a dozen times when it is fit for use. This is mixed with treacle or milk which go to constitute respectively majun and bhang of these parts. 16. (a) Yes. (c) Unknown. 17. Chiefly Muhammadans. 18. Ganja deteriorates by keeping. It becomes quite inert if kept for a couple of years. It is destroyed by a worm peculiar to it. Charas does not. It keeps good for a considerably long time. The ordinary method of preservation appears to be to pack it up closely in a bundle, or the popular way is to keep it air-tight in a pot and expose it to the sun now and again. Income (annual) = About R200. Import 50 maunds. Export301 malaria and obesity, for those that give up the habit get ascites and other dropsies. 400 Muham- madans. 200 Hindus. 35. (a) to (c) It would be feasible to prohibit its use in Southern India by preventing its culti- vation and importation. It will be consumed illicitly. (d) Yes. (e) No. (f) No. As other habits are comparatively very expensive and cannot be cheaply taken to. 36. No. 37. Charas is much more intense in its effects. 38. Very nearly the same. 39. Smoking is decidedly more deleterious to health, causing, as it does, great emaciation and desiccation of the system. Drinking and eating are to a certain extent conducive to health and strength if moderation be observed. These latter methods are on the whole said to be tonic in their effects, In drinking and eating the admixtures are very nutritive and luxurious. 40. It is used in these parts as a confection for its aphrodisiac properties by Mussalman native doctors. It is used as a stomachic and gastric sedative in almost all disorders of cattle. 41. (a) to (c) Yes. (d) Not known. No definite proportion can be given. Mussal- mans and Hindus are the chief classes. The majority are habitual moderate users. 42. It is injurious, if habitual, and although in moderation. 43. No. 44. (a) The immediate effect is refreshing and recreative. (c) Yes. (d) Yes. (e) Creates inordinate appetite subsequently. (f) Two hours. (g) Gets up refreshed; after-effects are recrea- tive and invigorating. (h) The want of subsequent gratification produc- es listlessness and disgust for everything and a sense of lethargy and apathy. 45. (a) As far as physique is concerned, it is a decided anti-fat; and with regard to mind it is in the long run permanently perturbed, and permanent mental aberration to a greater or less extent invariably results. It certainly under- mines morality. (b) It causes emaciation if not combated by good nutritive diet. (c) No. (d) Causes bronchitis owing to enervation of the lungs, the air cells being constantly over inflated by the smoke of the drug. It causes excessive or increased secretion of the bronchial sputa. (e) It induces laziness, and by no means debauchery. (f) It does so in course of time. Temporary. Yes the symptoms may be reinduced. The typical symptoms are singing, soliloquy, vocifera- tion, laughing, no idea of dress. Occasionally they do confess to the use of the drugs. (g) No. Cannot give any account. 46. Cannot. 47. Yes. 49. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) No; it is less injurious in this way. (d) Excessive indulgence does result in im- pairing sexual power. 50. Cannot. 51. Only theft on a small scale. 52. Cannot. 53. It produces cowardice on the contrary, and makes one chicken-breasted and hare-hearted. No. 54. No. 55. Yes. But not so much as alcohol. 56. Not known. Not known in these parts. 57. Not known. 58. No improvement can be effected in the shape of excise, as those addicted to this drug are invariably from the lowest rung of the ladder and constitute the scum of society or the dregs of earth. 59. Not expedient, because it may probably lead to other deleterious habits, as opium and dhatura smoking as a dernier ressort. 60. I do not know anything about this. 61. No charas is produced in this province, as far as I know. 62. Not known. Good manure is said to be serviceable for this. 63. The retail vend is expedient, as the users of the drug are usually poor or poverty-stricken. 64. None. 65. Reduction is advisable for reasons already assigned. 66. May be taxed alike, being indiscriminately used. 68. Yes, there are, but the drug is not consum- ed on the premises. The present system works well, otherwise it would not only be a hardship on its consumers, but would in a manner, though indirectly, encourage the use of the drug. 69. No; usually muttams and other public places of endowment are utilized like this. May advantageously be taken into account. 70. As far as my knowledge goes, there are none. Oral evidence. 1. I studied medicine in the Madras Medical College, and got the certificate of Civil Apothecary. I have practised for five years. I was never attached to a Lunatic Asylum, or received any special training in lunacy. 25. The use of the drugs appears to be on the increase among the Muhammadans. The statement is the result of general observation, and not based on statistics. I must admit that the statement is based on limited experience. 34. My experience is gained at Guntur and Ellore. After getting the Commission's questions, I sent for ganja consumers at those places, and questioned them. My statement regarding the beneficial and preventive effects of the drugs is based on their answers, corroborated by experience gained in my practice at the dispensaries. I have also learnt something from books. As regards malaria, I have never known an habitual ganja
302 smoker to suffer from that disease. As regards the other alleged beneficial effects, I have no experience. I have never known a person who has given up the habit, and I am therefore ignorant of the results of deprivation of the drugs. 45. I have no notes of any cases in which the bad effects described in question 45 have resulted from the use of the drugs. I have, however, treated cases of asthma, bronchitis, and the like, which have resulted from prolonged use of the drugs. But I cannot recall any such cases. I have seen a few cases of insanity from the use of the drugs, but cannot recall the details of any of them, as I have taken no notes. I re- member two or three cases that were brought insane to the dispensary, but I don't remember their histories, but from the signs and symptoms of their insanity, and the circumstances of their lives, I was led to believe that their insanity was caused by the use of Indian hemp. The circum- stances to which I refer were their residence in "mattams" and their having about them the necessary equipment for smoking ganja. These circumstances, however, I do not regard as material, the principal reason for my conclusion being the signs and symptoms exhibited by them. The signs were dilatation of the pupils, the peculiar breath characteristic of ganja smoking, hallucina- tions and delusions and illusions, sometimes a peculiar drowsy condition, partial unconsciousness of surroundings, loss of memory, sometimes com- plete and sometimes partial stammering, incohe- rence of speech arising from partial or complete loss of power over the muscles of articulation. I think dilatation of the pupils and the ganja breath are the typical symptoms. I should also put down religious hallucinations and grandiose ideas of self as being typical symptoms. These symptoms may be common to insanity arising from other causes. They are typical when taken with the ganja breath, and in association all together they are diagnostic. In the earlier part of my answer, in which I say that permanent mental aberration invariably results, I meant by mental aberration something short of insanity. In the latter part of my answer I state that insanity, i.e., complete insanity, is generally temporary. I cannot recall any details to substantiate these opinions. They both, as relating to insanity and other diseases, are an undefined impression derived from my general practice. By undermining 'morality' I mean that moral notions are degraded, but not that sensuality is induced. 47. In my opinion the habit is not inborn, and the children are only affected by way of ex- ample. 59. I think ganja is more injurious than opium. I have not seen a man smoking dhatura, but I have seen a case of a man suffering from alleged dhatura-smoking. 65. Reduction is advisable to prevent people taking to more deleterious drugs. The prices of the drugs have been raised in the last few years. If any change is made, it should be in the direc- tion of reduction. 105. Evidence of DR. ARTHUR WELLS, Medical Officer, Chicacole, Ganjam District. 1. In connection with my profession I have come in contact with persons who use preparations of hemp drugs, and with those who are in the habit of preparing them. 2. Yes. (1) Bhang, (2) charas, (3) ganja. 3. Am not aware of any district where it grows spontaneously. 4. Hemp or ganja plant. 5 and 6. Have no knowledge. 7. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) and (d) Yes. Cultivated in back-yards of houses and in fields in some towns and villages that I have visited. 8. Am not aware. 9. Have no knowledge. 10. No. Persons of all classes, as far as I am aware, cultivate hemp for narcotic purposes. 11. Am not aware. 12. Have no knowledge. 13. Am not aware. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. In towns and villages where is a demand for these preparations. 15. Bhang is used for drinking and eating; charas and ganja for smoking. 16. (a) Yes. (b) and (c) I believe so. 17. By all classes, as far as I am aware of. 18. Bhang and ganja are said to deteriorate by keeping, but not charas. Charas might lose its effect after a long time. All these preparations are said to deteriorate by becoming attacked by in- sects. If kept in air-tight or stoppered bottles there is little chance of deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are used by some habitual consumers, even for eating and drinking, by admix- ture with other ingredients. 20 and 21. Have no knowledge. 22. Charas is imported from the North of India, and used. 23. It is reported that bhang is often used by some classes of people for smoking. 24. Have no knowledge. 25. It is reported that the use of ganja and bhang are on the increase. 26 and 27. Have no knowledge. 28. No average can be arrived at. 29. (a) Milk and sugar are ordinarily used; (b) dhatura, mace, nutmeg, etc., are exceptionally used. Milk and sugar are used to make the pre- paration pleasant to eat or drink; dhatura, mace and nutmeg, etc., to increase the intoxicating pro- perties of the drug. A preparation is called bhang massala and is composed of ganja, coriander, carraway, nutmeg, mace, poppy seeds, almonds, rose petals, milk and sugar.
303 30. Not known. The use of these drugs is not confined to the male sex alone. Females and even children are known to consume some prepar- ations, such as halwa, etc. As a rule, adults after middle age become habitually used to these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed. It is difficult to break off. There is every tendency for the moderate user to develop into an excessive user. 32. Among the Rajputs and certain other classes, there appears to be either a social or reli- gious custom of using a liquid preparation with milk and sugar or the halwa during the Holi festi- val. It is supposed to be essential to use this drug on such occasions. Some use it temperately and others excessively. The use of this drug on these occasions often leads to the formation of a habit. 33 and 34. Have no knowledge. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs. The drug will surely be consumed illicitly. There is no doubt that the prohibition would cause serious discontent among the consumers, but it is doubtful if such discontent would amount to a political danger. It is certain that the prohibition will lead to recourse to the use of other narcotic drugs, and even to alcoholic sti- mulants. 36. Have no knowledge. 37. The effects of charas-smoking is stated to be more powerful than the effects of ganja-smoking. 38 and 39. Have no knowledge. 40. A preparation of the hemp plant, called halwa, is used in the treatment of dysentery, chronic cough, colic, etc., by native doctors. These drugs are also used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. It allays hunger, gives staying-power under severe exertion and in alleviating fatigue. Sup- posed to be preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. It is generally used in these in- stances by the lower classes and by moderate habi- tual users. 42. Cannot definitely give an opinion. 43. Yes. 44. Exhilarating. Refreshing. Produces in- toxication, allays hunger, often creates appetite, effect lasts for some hours, after-effects are not marked. Yes, produces longing. 45. (a) Yes. (b) Not definitely known. (c) Cannot definitely state. (d) No; but relieves any of these diseases. (e) Yes. (f) Yes, it deadens the intellect and pro- duces insanity. The insanity is generally of a temporary nature and would be re-induced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. There are no typical symptoms. Not as a rule. (g) I do not think that this question has been sufficiently considered in explaining this connection. Insanity may often tend to indul- gence in the use of hempdrugs in a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. 46. The habitual excessive use of any of these drugs would tend to insanity. 47. It appears to be hereditary. It is reported that the children of the moderate consumer suffer from weak intellect. 48. The same can be said of the habitual excess- ive use. 49. (a) The moderate use of this drug is prac- tised as an aphrodisiac. (c) Not known. (d) Not known. 50. The same can be said of the habitual excessive use of this drug. 51. Yes. Have no knowledge. 52. Same as reply to query 51. 53 and 54. Have no knowledge. 55. I believe so. Yes. 56 and 57. Have no knowledge. 58. No, I am not acquainted 59 to 63. Have no knowledge. 65. Have no knowledge. 68. Yes. If these houses or shops are closed, private clubs would be formed and the drug would even be used in private houses. 69 and 70. Have no knowledge. Oral evidence. 1. My diploma is that of Civil Apothecary. I entered the service in 1884, and have always been in the Civil Department. I have never had any special training or experience in lunacy. I was born in North Arcot, and. am serving in Chi- cacole. 45. My statement that insanity is produced refers to the excessive use of the drugs. 46. When the drug is used in excess it pro- duces insanity in a very short time. The insani- ty is of a temporary character and generally lasts some months. This opinion is based on cases which I have had to observe in my capacity as Civil Medical Officer. I have also had to treat three or four patients suffering from temporary, insanity. In the jail also I have found prisoners who have been addicted to ganja to show symptoms of insanity of a mild type in consequence of their having been suddenly deprived of the drug. These symptoms do not amount to insanity. With the cases sent to me for observation, a report is always furnished which, if the insane is a ganja smoker, generally mentions the fact. Re- latives sometimes give me the information; and sometimes the insanes pray for ganja, refusing to eat until they get it. Sometimes the lunatic tells me of the ganja habit on being questioned. The relatives often come with the insane. I have had four or five cases of insanity of this kind sent to me for observation during my service. I cannot say in how many cases I have derived my in- formation from sources outside the reports. These cases do not remain under observation for more than ten days. I do question the insane while still insane as to the cause of his insanity. I try to get into his confidence, and work round to his liking for alcohol or drugs. To relatives I put questions direct as to the insane's habits. I am not satisfied with the relatives' statement that the insane takes ganja. I seek for corroboration in various ways, both by questioning the man him- self and enquiring of my subordinates if the in- sane asks for ganja. I also enquire about heredi- ty. I enter the cause in Form C, if I am satis- fied that I have discovered it. I make the entry and send the form to the Magistrate. If I had proof of the ganja habit and learnt that there was heredity, I should enter "exact cause unknown." I made that entry in one case, in which the in- sane's father died insane and in which there was a ganja, history. That was about six years ago. I
304 do not remember the man's name. He was sent to the sub-jail at Parlakimidi, where he stayed about a year, and was then transferred to the district jail at Berhampur. As well as I remem- ber,in the case under notice, I made no mention of heredity or the ganja history in any part of Form C. This is one of the four or five cases to which I have referred as cases of insanes addicted to ganja, who have been sent to me for observ- ation. I learnt the effects of the hemp drugs as a student. In practice I have come across cases and referred to books on the subject. I have not discovered any signs to be typical of hemp drug insanity. Physical signs are emaciation, impaired memory, peculiar expression. The men in jail to whom I have referred had these signs. I have been an inspecting officer of sub-jails. I diagnose a case of hemp drug insanity on the information of the relatives and the admission of the insane himself. I have been in the habit of trying to find out the amount of the drug used when en- quiring for causes of insanity. Any thing over quarter anna worth of ganja as a daily allowance I should look upon as excessive use. In my an- swer No. 28 I was unable to give any quantities for moderate and excessive use; but, neverthless, I have given attention to the point before this mo- ment I would not call half a dozen pipes a day excessive use. The number of pipes a day is generally the form in which answers are given to me when 1 enquire about the degree of an insane's habit. The cases which came under my treatment were not, as well as I remember, under my observation for more than three or four days. The complaint in these cases was generally of loss of memory, and after enquiring the history of the patients and examining them, I put them down as insani- ty. In some of the cases I had known the pa- tients before they were brought to me. I remem- ber the details of one of the cases showing most clearly that insanity was solely due to hemp drugs. A man, who was suffering from venereal disease and some chest complications was advised by a native practitioner to take hemp. He ac- cordingly took majum for a week or ten days. The relatives noticed that he was becoming quarrel- some, sleepless and abusive, and called me in to treat him. The case occurred about three years ago. I ordered the patient to discontinue taking majum, after exhibiting bromide for three days the above symptoms disappeared, as I afterwards learnt, in about a week. The man was only under my treatment for about three days. He was in- sane when I saw him. He was an intelligent Brahman of 26 years of age. He was suffering from painful syphilitic nodes. Native practition- ers prescribe opium also in such cases. This man had not been taking opium. I don't remember how much majum he had been taking. His pu- pils were dilated. This sign is not noticed in all cases of hemp drugs I did not notice high tem- perature. I am not prepared to say it was not a case of transient mania. I remember that the native practitioner advised the patient to use majum; but, as far as I know, he gave him no- thing. 106. Evidence of K. JAGANNADHAM NAIDU,* Medical Officer, Parlakimedi, Ganjam District. 1. I consulted several habitual consumers resid- ing at Parlakimedi. For a greater part of my information I am indebted to Sri Sri Padmana- bha Narayan Deo, second prince of Parlakimedi, who is highly interested in this question. 2. Yes. Bhang is locally known as patti, and ganja as kalli. It is the hemp-water (the liquid preparation from ganja referred to elsewhere) that is locally called bhang. 3. The district of Ganjam. But it is not abundant here. 4. Trisuli, bijaya, basava-patri, etc. 6. The growth is ordinarily scattered. 7. The hemp-plant is cultivated in this town for production of ganja and for use as bhang. There is a village named Hansa, within 10 miles from Parlakimedi, which was once noted for the production of the best ganja. The decrease or increase in the area under cul- tivation greatly varies with the decrease or in- crease in the number of cultivators and the free- dom of cultivation. Hitherto people all over the taluka used freely to cultivate the hemp plant, but now cultivation has been confined to certain licensed vendors and consumers. Hence there has been a considerable decrease in the area under cultivation. 9. Method of cultivation:305 hung to a beam with the bottom above under shade. It is kept thus for about four days. It is then exposed in the sun at day-time and to cold at nights for a period of three days. Then the branches are removed off the trunk, placed one over the other, trodden under foot and rolled into small bundles. These bundles are placed on a bed of straw with wooden planks over them. Then heavy weights or stones are put upon the planks, which keep the bundles pressed down. They are thus kept for about three days. After- wards the bundles are taken and separated and exposed in open air. After two minutes or so, they are trodden under foot in order to get rid of the dried leaves. When all the leaves are re- moved, they are exposed to cold in the night. Early in the next morning they are taken and spread again upon straw and pressed down with planks. They are kept in this state one full day. The next morning, the planks are removed and the twigs with flower-tops are separated and sub- jected to gentle shaking, in order to rid off the leaves, if any. Then they are rolled up into bundles, or the agglutinated tops are detached and preserved in earthen vessels. This is how ganja is prepared for smoking. The dried leaves that are thrown down after so many processes of elimination above referred to are used as bhang or patti. After carefully re- moving the stalks, the dried leaves are boiled in water for some time; and the boiled leaves are well squeezed with the hands in order to purge them of all filth and dirt, and then dried in the sun. They are next boiled either in milk or cocoanut-water. The quantity of milk or cocoa- nut-water must be proportionate to the quantity of leaves boiled, so that the milk or the cocoanut- water might he entirely absorbed by the leaves. They are again kept in the hot sun for about three or four days. After they are well dried, they are preserved in earthen vessels for use. This is how bhang or patti is prepared from cultivated hemp-plant for the purpose of drinking. 16. Bhang is prepared by some in their houses and by others in temples. Yes, it can be pre- pared from the hemp-plant, wherever grown. As regards the preparation of ganja from the wild plant, no trial has been made as yet in this taluka. 17. By the licensed vendors and habitual con- sumers. These are generally men of every deno- mination. 18. Ganja and patti do deteriorate by keeping. But they do not quite lose their effect in time. Ganja keeps good for about two years and patti for six months at the most. The causes of deterior- ation are:306 33. The consumption of any of these drugs is regarded with contempt. I cannot positively say that there is any organised public opinion. Yes, the use of any form of the narcotic is general- ly in disrepute. The sentiment is attributed to the fact that the consumption of any of these drugs causes derangement of the brain. No custom of worshipping the plant. 34. To forego the consumption of the drug will be a serious privation, especially to the habi- tual consumers. When the habit is formed and becomes second nature, though compliance does not give pleasure, resistance creates a want or longing. "The very fact that they are custom- ary has as its further result the attachment or clinging of the mind to them, so that their remov- al occasions a painful sense of strangeness and craving." This is the law of habit. 35. No; it would not be feasible. Yes, the drug will be consumed illicitly. Prohibition is sure to cause serious discontent among the con- sumers, though it may not amount to a political danger. In case of prohibition, recourse will be had to alcoholic stimulants and other drugs. 36. Certain cases have come within the range of my observation, in which alcohol has been sub- stituted for ganja. 37. Charas is not smoked here. 38. Only flat ganja is prepared here. 39. The popular belief is that eating is more injurious than drinking, and smoking is more deleterious than either. I cannot assign any specific reason. But this much I can say: in eating or drinking, patti or bhang is generally used, whereas in smoking only ganja is used, and ganja is more inebriating than patti or bhang. 40. Ganja is used by certain native doctors on account of its medicinal qualities. They think that it increases virile powers and checks dysen- tery. 41. (a) to (c) No. Those living in malarial places smoke ganja under the belief that it prevents malarial fever. In my opinion it does not prevent. 42. Very limited use of bhang is harmless. 43. They cause no manner of offence to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effects are: 307 tion, nor the fibre. Said to be cultivated to a considerable extent on the hilly tracts of the district, especially the Javadi hills and Patchai Malai by the Malayalis. Also raised to a small extent, chiefly for private use, down the plains, in gardens. Plant is said to thrive better on elevated tracts. 8. If anything, the cultivation would appear to be increasing. No particular reason is given. 9. I could not obtain reliable information on this point. 10. The hill people that cultivate hemp on a large scale are almost exclusively the Malayalis; but this does not form their only occupation; in fact, there is no special class of hemp cultivators. 11. No; not in this district, as far as I could gather. 13. Cultivation not restricted in this district. No special condition of climate, etc., seems neces- sary for the cultivation; but elevation above sea level is said to be very favourable for the growth. 14. (a) Mostly ganja, in which form only it is sold in the bazars, excluding, of course, other preparations of it by hakims, etc., for general sale. Prepared mostly on the hill tracts men- tioned before, and to a very small extent by private individuals on the plains. (b) Charas gathered to a small extent also on the hills and exported. (c) Bhang not prepared by any body to any extent for sale; but those of the consumers who prefer this particular preparation have to make it themselves, and this number is infinitesimal, I am told. 15. (A) Preparation for smoking is made from ganja, mixed with minced tobacco, in different proportions, according to the fancy of the smoker. It must be noted that ganja is never used by itself for smoking, but invariably with admixture of tobacco308 33. The public opinion on. the habit of ganja- smoking appears to be that it is degrading, and this seems to be the reason why a ganja smoker always has a reluctance to be known as addicted to the habit, and is very unwilling to confess it. Among Muhammadans, the Koran prohibits strictly the use of any intoxicating drug whatever. But among the low Hindus, there seems to be no such religious prohibition. The use of the nar- cotic in question is generally in disrepute, because it makes the user callous to his surroundings, in- different to the welfare of his kith and kin, and even to his personal well-being. Certain sects of the people in Northern India are said to make, on certain occasions, bhang the object of worship. But no such thing exists here. 34. I am told it would be a serious privation to forego the drug accustomed to, as it would pro- duce certainly some evil consequences, such as diarrh309 time considerably enhancing its efficacy as an ap- petizer, narcotic, aphrodisiac, and general excit- ant of spirits. In this district dhatura is never known to be mixed with ganja or bhang before consumption. 57. Only an inveterate habitual smoker here and there is said to eat sometimes the ganja pure, after washing and grinding it fine so as to obtain the full intoxicating effect, and the effect is said to be the production of profound intoxication, last- ing for two, three or four days, during which period hardly any food is taken. 108. Evidence of Hospital Assistant T. RANGANAYA KULU NAIDOO, Rajahmundry, Godavari District. 3. The wild hemp plant grows spontaneously in the Nellore District, and grows abundantly in the village of Kudithipallam of that district. In this district the wild hemp is not grown. 4. Cheelavathy, Balucharan, hill ganja, and Thaggupadu ganja are the different names used here for the Indian hemp plant according to its quality and the place in which it is cultivated. All these names refer to the female plant310 Majum311 cultivation of this plant. No modification is neces- sary. 61. Not produced in this district. 62. It may be controlled. It is feasible. Raise the tax. Cultivation of the plant shall be limited under license. 63. The present system is satisfactory. 64. Yes; if you stop the importation or export- ation of ganja to those parts where it is not cultivated, it will, I think, greatly lessen the number of consumers; if not the number, it will at least lessen the quantity of consumption. 65. The taxation of ganja is reasonable with reference to alcoholic intoxicants. In this district only we have ganja, and the other kinds are not sold, being not procurable; hence I cannot suggest any alteration in the amount of taxation of any of these articles. 66. As there is slight difference in quality between flat and round, the rate of taxation may be slightly reduced to the round kind, as it is little inferior. The broken is very inferior in quality than the other two. The rate of taxation on this preparation may be very much less. Ganja, grown in Thaggupadu in the Kistna dis- trict, is superior in quality than the one culti- vated in Godavery, the tax of which may be slightly raised. 67. No. 68. Yes, there are licensed shops in the town. These should not be within the limits of the town. The public generally view with aversion whenever they see the shops selling intoxicating drugs. These should be out of the limits of the town so as to give less chance of coming in contact with such shops by the rising young generation. 69. No, wishes of the people not consulted. No measures were taken for this purpose, Local public opinion must be consulted. 70. No. Oral evidence. 3. I learnt in my enquiries that the plant grew spontaneously at Kudithipallam. Nellore is not my district. My informants were military pen- sioners. Some of them were inhabitants of the Nellore district. I made enquiries of bairagis also and the licensed vendor of the hemp drugs, and a sweetmeat-maker. I did not ascertain that the hemp plant grew spontaneously elsewhere than at Kudithipallam. 39. By eating I mean the eating of the leaves and flowering tops of ganja. The drug was not eaten in my presence, but consumers told me that they used to eat it. Smokers of the drug would not eat the drug on the same day that they smoked it, nor vice versa. The number of eaters is very small, perhaps only 5 per cent. of the number of smokers. I had previously heard that the drug was eaten, but the information I have given in my paper was collected in my enquiry. 45. Native physicians do prescribe the drug in cases of mental disorder. They come and con- sult me on the subject, and that is the way in which I come to learn this. The drug is used in the form of halwa or majum. They consult me to get my opinion as to the drug being safe or dangerous. I think the drug does give relief in these cases on account of its soporific quality. I am not aware if the drug is used in asylum practice. 109. Evidence of Hospital Assistant M. IYASWAMY PILLAY, Saint Thomas' Mount, Madras. 1. During my service in the Madras Subordi- nate Medical Department, extending upwards to a period of nineteen years, I had visited several stations, both in the presidency and in the Central Provinces, where I had the opportunity of observ- ing personally, besides obtaining the information regarding the use of the hemp plant, which is somewhat commonly used in the latter provinces. 2. The various definitions used to the several kinds of the hemp plant are applicable to one and all the districts I had visited, and they are known as bhang, charas, ganja, respectively; but in this district ganja is the only hemp plant that is being used by the people. 3. I have not known any place where the hemp plant grows spontaneously, and it would never grow unless the seeds are planted. 4. None. 5. The hemp plants will grow in soils other than 'black cotton' requiring an ordinary rain- fall. Winter season and elevated place will greatly assist the production. 6. They are sown densely at the commence- ment, and then transplanted here and there. 7. None. 8. Not known. 9. The ground is first tilled and the seeds are sown. When it grows to a height of a foot or so it is transplanted, After a period of six months, when it is fully grown, it is cut and dried in the sun and shade alternately for a period of seven days, and then it is closely packed and allowed to remain for another week more, and afterwards transferred into the bags. 10. The persons who cultivate hemp plant are of the agricultural classes and nobody else. 12 to 14. Not known. 15. The only variety of hemp plant that is met with in the bazaars of this district is ganja, which comes from up-country and which the people use for smoking, eating and drinking. 16. Though bhang is not prepared in the houses of this district, but I had known several instances, while serving in the Central Provinces, where the people prepared bhang in their houses from both the ganja and bhang plants. 17. Agricultural classes. 18. These drugs can be kept without deterior- ation for about six months or so, provided they do not come in contact with water or other fluid substances, and if deterioration sets in at all, they do not lose much of their activity. Dampness and keeping for a length of time favour deterior- ation. To prevent it, it is necessary to expose them in the sun occasionally. 19. The witness only knows about the use of ganja, to which alone I shall confine my remarks. It is not only used for smoking purposes, but also for eating and drinking, irrespective of places.
312 20. To a population of nearly 3,500 in the station I am serving, there are about 25 persons who are actually habituated to the use of ganja. The proportion then comes at the rate of 5/7 to 100, which is a very small figure indeed. In the prov- ince of Bengal I believe the proportion will be higher, in consequence of the drug being exten- sively used by all classes, irrespective of places they resort to. 21. Both the varieties are used for smoking, without distinction of any locality. 22. Not known. 23. In the absence of ganja, persons smoke bhang irrespective of any class. 24. Not known. Applicable to the Bengal presidency. 25. Considering the high prices of liquor, the labouring classes, after their return home quite fatigued after a hard day's work, help themselves with a smoke of ganja, hence there must be of necessity an increase of persons in the consump- tion of these drugs. 26. Taking my station with a population of nearly 3,500 as an example, the following are the figures by the respective consumers:313 44. The persons grow fine with muscular development, and are more active than they used to be. It is also refreshing, and produces intoxi- cation. It does allay hunger for a time; but it nevertheless creates after a time a voracious appe- tite. The effects last only for a few hours. It has no after-effects, and, if there were to be any at all, there may he slight dizziness and headache. Subsequent gratification is not necessary. 45. It does not produce any of the symptoms mentioned by persons who use in moderate habitual quantity. 46. The excessive use of the drug would be sure to originate such of the diseases mentioned in the question in a severe or in a less type. Insanity is another form of disease which the use of this drug might produce, either temporarily or permanently. The symptoms may bere-induced by its use after liberation from restraint, and in such cases the disease would be in an aggravated form. Some of the people who are thus subjected to insanity confess to their having used the drug. I have known a person in whom there was deficient self- control through weakened intellect brought on by the excessive indulgence of the drug. 47 and 48. No. 49. It is practised as an aphrodisiac; also used as such by the prostitutes. In moderate doses it can be used both as an aphrodisiac and narcotic. Does not produce impotence. 50. Just the reverse of things mentioned in 49 happens when used in excessive quantity. 51. No bad characters among habitual moderate consumers as far I am aware, and crimes do not occur by moderate indulgence. 52. Reverse of things mentioned in 51 happens if used. in excess, and leads to commit crimes with- out distinction. 53. Excessive indulgence of the drugs some- times incite to actions of an unpleasant character, almost amounting to crimes, more especially of a violent character. 1 knew a case some years ago in which it led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Not that I am aware of, though I had been serving in four central and district jails in the Madras presidency. 55. Criminals do administer this drug without any addition to stupefy persons, more especially children, to further their objects. 56. The effects of the drugs, if used in modera- tion or in excess, modified by the admixture of other substances, are one and the same. I have not known instances where dhatura is used for per- sonal consumption or for administration to others. 57. None. 58. I do not know the exact excise administra- tion in this country, and whatever it may be, I think the present system appears to work well. 59. No improvement is necessary. 60. Ganja is not produced in this district. 61. Not produced here. 62. Not grown here. 63. No objections. 64. No. 65. The present taxation is quite reasonable, and does not call for any alterations. 66. Does not require different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja, either for the Bengal variety or for any produced in the other localities. 67. No. 68. There are no houses or shops in the station where I am; but in most of the large towns in the district there are licensed shops. In some stations where I had served before I have seen some houses to which the consumers of ganja used to frequent to gratify their wishes, and such houses were regarded by the people as most contemptible and degrading. 69. I am not aware of this subject fully; but what I think is that the opinion of the public needs no consultation regarding the opening of a shop in any locality. 70. Not known. Oral evidence. 1. I have the certificate of Hospital Assist- ant from the Madras Medical College (1874) I have been in the service since 1874, serving in various parts, both attached to regiments and (since 1883) in civil employ. 39. By "consumption" I mean phthisis. I have seen some cases of people going into con- sumption from the use of ganja. I did not ascertain in these cases whether a bacillus was absent or present. 46. I say that insanity might be produced, because I have not seen any cases. By "deficient self-control" in this answer I mean that the man could not restrain himself and keep to moderation, in the use of the drug. 53. The case of temporary homicidal frenzy refer- red to occurred ten years ago. The man was a Hindu of the Pillay or shepherd caste, who used to eat the ganja in the raw state314 110. Evidence of Hospital Assistant M. V. RAMANUGULU NAIDU, Peddapur, Godavari District. 1. Being aware that the drugs used by men professing to practise Yogam, I had to make enquiries regarding its quality and vitality. 2. As far as I have known, and from what I have heard, there does not seem to be difference in the shape. 3. I have seen ganja not anywhere grown spontaneously, and it is, as a rule, reared in gardens, specially of Muhammadan community. It is reared in the districts of Madura, Kurnool, and Cuddapah, where there are Muhammadans to a great extent; and I have heard of its being grown in the presidency of Bengal. 4. It is grown in the rainy and dewy seasons. It is specially seen flowering from the latter part of December up to March or April. Red soil is the best field for its growth. 6. Scattered. 7. A cultivation to some extent for (a) and (d). 10. No; they are as other cultivators. 11. It is. 12. I have seen nowhere hemp cultivation spe- cially for ganja in places I have had occasion to go. People used to rear them generally in small quantity in their gardens. 13. No. 14. Ganja to some extent and bhang to a little are made. 15. For drinking, they mix plantains, sugar, milk, and juice of the flowering tops of the ganja. For smoking the simple drug is used, and the people eat for intoxication. 16. (a) Not in houses generally. (b) Yes. 17. The Rajputs, the Muhammadans, and the Bengalis, and some other lower orders of people in the south. 18. Yes, they deteriorate by keeping. Yes; they lose their effects in one week. If kept air- tight, deterioration may be prevented. 19. For smoking. 20. Generally by lower orders, and specially by those who profess to practise Yogam. 23 and 24. By Muhammadans. 27. It is not used by men in high society, except in rare cases. It is practised more by labouring classes. 29. Dhatura is never used. 30. As a rule, mothers give ganja to children as a medicine to cure indigestion. Bhang and ganja are used more in company of two or three than in solitude. 31. When once taken into practice, it is diffi- cult to discontinue. No; there is no such tendency. 33. Ganja smokers in certain cases worship the plant. 35. It is never consumed illicitly. It can be easily prohibited. 41. A moderate use of it is beneficial as a foo accessory or digestive. 47. It is not hereditary. 41(c). It is more injurious. 68. No. 69. Yes. 70. No. 111. Evidence of Hospital Assistant CHINNY SREENIVASA RAU, Prapanna Komity, L. F. Hospital, Bobbili Vizagapatam District. 1. My father was a native doctor. I have learnt native Pharmacop315 13. It is cultivated in some of the villages of the taluka. Dry soil is said to be good for its cultivation. It can be cultivated in almost all parts of the taluka. 14. (a) Ganja. (1) Bobbili and old Bobbili, (2) Paltair, (3) Seethanagram, (4) Gollapalli, (5) Mettavalsa, (6) Terlam, (7) adjacent hills. To a small extent for the use of consumers and for preparing ganja con- fections. 15. The hill produce is considered to be the strongest. Ganja only used in smoking, eating, and drinking. Some poor people drink a pre- paration called bhang made with the leaves. Both the hill and country ganja is used for the above purposes. 16. Bhang is prepared by some in their houses. It can be prepared from the cultivated plant. 17. By Muhammadans, Kurakuli people, Telagas, and hill people. 18. Bhang is said to lose its effects after a year, while ganja keeps its properties for some two years when preserved with care. When not cared, they both deteriorate soon. Prevention of dete- rioration is practised by exposing the drugs to sunlight once a week, and packing them in arica grass and gunny bags. Deterioration is said to occur from moisture and formation of germs. 19. Charas is unknown in these parts. Ganja is used for smoking, eating, and drinking in various ways and as an ingredient in external ap- plications. It is smoked either plain or with some quantity of tobacco. It is eaten in five ways: (1) Compound con- fections with roasted ganja in ghee; (2) com- pound confections with cow's milk extract of ganja; (3) plain ganja rubbed and made into balls; (4) boil ganja in cow's milk and prepare ghee from the cream; this ghee is eaten mixed with sugar or in sweetmeats; (5) it is chewed and swallowed pure. Drinking three ways: (1) By mixing ganja in water with spices and sugar; (2) by mixing ganja alone in water; (3) by mixing ganja in milk with spices and sugar. 20. About 316 Brahmins use for (a) and (d); Muhammadans for (d) and other classes for (b) and (d). Mod- erate habitual use for first few years and moderate occasional use. 42. It is injurious. Gradual perversion of physical and mental energy ensues. 43. Not offensive. 44. Excitement stage. Not refreshing. It produces intoxication. The effects of the drug last for eight to twelve hours. After stimulation, sleep is produced. It does not produce any long- ing or uneasiness afterwards. 45. A habitual consumer generally exceeds mo- deration. Their moral sense, physical and mental energies, though preserved for some years, will be perverted after a time. It weakens the constitu- tion. It does not seem to produce loss of appetite. Induces laziness and habits of immorality and debauchery. Whether in moderation or excess, it is practised by men who are in want of self-con- trolling powers. As insanity is not produced in all the consumers, I think there must be some pre- disposing cause in the nervous system of hemp insanes. 46. It deadens the intellect. Produces both permanent and temporary insanity. The follow- ing shows the types of insanity under my observa- tion: Out of 5 Brahmins, 1 died, 2 recovered, and 2 remaining; out of 3 Telagas, 1 died, 1 recovered, and 1 remaining; out of 1 Kapu, 1 remaining; out of 2 Velamas, 2 remaining. The Brahmins who recovered have resumed the use, but not yet acquired a relapse. They admit that they were using the drug, but not attribute the evil to their habit. Habitual excessive use is undoubtedly injurious to health. It produces, be- sides the evils from moderate use, anæmia, piles, somnambulism, and emaciation. 47. In some the use of ganja and bhang is hereditary. Children of moderate consumers are not affected. 48. The result is the same as above. 49. Yes; practised as an aphrodisiac. It is used by prostitutes. The evil effects are the same for whatever purpose it is used. Never produces impotence in young. Habitual excessive use produces impotency in advanced age in many, i.e., from 50 years upwards. Some consumers eat the drug for aphrodisiac properties, but the nar- cotic effects soon putting them into sleep enjoy their expectations in dreams. 50. It is practised in large doses as an aphrodisiac in the habitual consumers, i.e., to prolong the re- tention of semen in sexual intercourse. Large doses are used by prostitutes when they get more visitors in a day. Large doses are always at- tended with hallucinations and delusions. There are cases in which the consumers of large doses having been suspected by their relatives that they are possessed were beaten black and blue to drive off the evil spirit flow the consumers. Inhalation of chilly smoke is practised, nearly suffocating the man with irritating gas. These consumers, for fear of exposing, themselves as ganja-eaters, patient- ly bear the tortures under the intoxication of the drug. 51. The habitual consumers, whether in modera- tion or excessive in use, are generally debauch- ees and thieves. The former is due to aphrodisiac properties, and the latter for the want of money to meet the expenses of their favourite drug. 53. I have not heard or seen any case of homicide. 55. Complete stupefaction can be induced by the administration of some of the preparations of ganja, and also by ganja alone. 56. The effects of hemp vary according to the substances mixed with it. Certain confections prepared by native doctors contain dhatura, opium, certain resins, almonds, walnut, musk, spices, ghee, honey, sugar and some roots; and in some metallic oxides and compounds are mixed, such as oxides of iron, copper, silver, and gold. One of the noted consumers of the confection of ganja prepares yearly 4 maunds of the confection for his self use. Those who eat pure ganja, one tola twice a day, told me that they cannot eat this gentleman's confection more than the size of a hazel nut. It is made with all the roots that can be found in the world from poisonous to inert, with most of the native metallic preparations, with all spices and with drugs procurable in bazaars. This gentleman eats it twice a day, balls of the size of a large lime. 57. Ganja is in the form generally eaten and drunk. The effects are all the same, whether smoked or eaten. Habitual smokers attribute the evil effects to eating and the eaters to smoking. 61. Charas is not produced, and it is unknown to the public here. 62. No separate cultivation for bhang. 66. Sellers of ganja and confections are to be separately taxed. The latter sale fetches more profit. 67. The present method of taxing ganja is not felt by the consumers. 68. There are no licensed shops or houses for the sale of this drug. 69. The opinion of the public would be as good and necessary as for opening houses and shops for other intoxicants. Oral evidence. 1. I am a Hospital Assistant, and passed out of the Madras Medical College in 1871. From 1871 to 1875 I was in the Maharaja's employ. Since then I have been employed by the Local Board. I have not had any special experience in the treatment of insanity. 25. I have been observing ganja smokers and ganja eaters in Bobilli and the surrounding villages, and have noticed some increase of the habit. 46. I have had cases of insanity under my treat- ment in Bobilli, both at the dispensary and in my private practice. Of the eleven cases I have mentioned, nine belong to Bobilli and one to a village near Vizianagram. There are 14,000 people in Bobilli. The Bobilli cases were cases of insanity lasting for years, and not of a tempora- ry kind. 1 am sure that I treated two cases from outside Bobilli, and five of the cases which occur- red in Bobilli itself. I did not know the patients from outside Bobilli before they became insane. I knew three of the five Bobilli patients before they became insane. I have been seventeen years in Bobilli. I do not think that hemp by itself produces insanity: there must be some predisposing cause. I do not remember any predisposing cause in the cases I have mentioned, and I have kept no notes. I see so many consumers of ganja who do not become insane that I think some predis- posing cause is necessary to produce that result. Many Brahmin pandits, consumers of the drugs, are acquaintances of mine, and they are all in full
317 possession of their senses. These pandits are as a rule moderate consumers, but some of them go to excess. I see more of moderate con- sumers than I do of excessive consumers. The number of the latter with whom I am brought in contact is small. Though my experience of excessive consumers is comparatively limit- ed, still I have seen enough to say that I do not think excessive consumption of the hemp drugs can cause insanity without a predisposing cause. My opinion is based on my observation of excessive consumers who have not suffered in their intellect, the number of whom is larger than that of the excessive consumers who have become insane. The reason why I do not refer to the cases I have mentioned of excessive con- sumers, who have become insane as furnishing the basis of my opinion, is that I have no notes of the enquiries which I made in their cases, and am not therefore prepared with their histories. I think all of these cases must have had a predisposing cause, but I cannot remember. 112. Evidence of Hospital Assistant P. NARRAINSWAMY TELEGA, Parvatipur Vizagapatam District. 1. The opportunities have been limited. A few cases came under my observation while resident in Salur. 2. The products of the hemp plant are known in this province as (1) ganja, (2) bhangu or bhang. The former is smoked with tobacco, while the latter is a preparation of hemp leaves with spices, sugar, etc., and is either eaten or mixed with water and drunk. 7. (a) Yes; a few of those who are in the habit of using the drug grow it in small quantities on available portions of their compounds. (b) Vide (a) supra. 14. (a) and (b). Prepared by those who use them to the extent required for their personal use, as far as my knowledge extends. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the people in their houses. 17. In my experience people of all classes use it. 19. Ganja is used for smoking and preparation of bhang. 20. As far as my knowledge goes, people of all classes smoke it, The proportion is very small. 21. Flat ganja. 29. Ordinarily tobacco is mixed for smoking, for what reason I cannot say. Those who use it have stated to me that the admixture at tobacco improves the taste of the smoke and prevents cough. 30. As far as my knowledge goes, the drugs are consumed in company. The consumption is mainly confined to the male sex, but to no parti- cular time of life. It is unusual for children to consume any of them. 31. The habit is easily acquired and difficult to break off. There is a tendency in the case of both bhang and ganja for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 34. It would not be a serious privation to any class of consumers to forego the consumption of any of these drugs. My reason for this opinion is that I have known men, who have been habitual consumers and who have found their way into prison, not to suffer anything beyond a craving for a few days, after which the feeling passed off and the men's health in no way suffered. I am unable to give any numbers of each class. 40. Ganja is used in the practice of native doctors in the form of pills mixed with spices and sugar and usually called "laham." It is ad- ministered in cases of dysentery and diarrh318 Mahals, but it is not so much useful as that culti319 is taken. The abovementioned two preparations are made of ganja in cases where leaves are unavailable or when strong intoxication is required. In all these preparations (B) and (C), sugar, mace, nutmeg, and milk are invariably added with the object that these things promote intoxication. 16. Bhang is generally prepared in the house. It can be prepared from the cultivated hemp plant, whether male or female. As for wild hemp, I know nothing. 17. The preparations of hemp are generally made by sweetmeat-makers as majinum; by native doctors as modaka, madanakameswara, and meenaketanam; by the richest classes of people as ghee; by ordinary people as water or milk bhang. 18. They do deteriorate by keeping. They lose their effect after a certain time. Ganja with ordinary care may keep good for three years and bhang (leaves) for one year, and for charas I do not know. The causes of deterioration are that the resinous matter dries up; that it is eaten away by insects; that the united flowering tops are separated and consequently fall down. In order to prevent deterioration it should be well rolled, covered with straw and rags, and kept in such a place where there is no access of sun and air. 19. Ganja is not only used for smoking, but also used in the preparations of majinum, moda- kam, madanakameswara, meenaketanam, and rarely as bhang, when leaves are not available or when strong intoxication is required. It is generally used throughout the district. I know not about charas. 20. Almost all clases of people, except Euro- peans, Eurasians, Khonds, and Sarvaras, smoke ganja, specially classes that are prohibited from drinking liquor. Generally throughout the dis- trict, I believe 10 per cent. of the population smoke ganja. 21. In this subdivision only flat ganja is in use. 22. I do not know. 23. When ganja is not procurable, bhang leaves are very rarely used for smoking; but the intoxi- cation thereby produced being very slight it is not cared for. 24. Of the population of this district, Euro- peans, Eurasians, Khonds, and Savaras excepted, more than 15 per cent. eat and drink bhang in its different preparations, as stated above in answer No. 15 (C). 25. The uses of several different preparations, stated in answer No 15 (B) and (C) are on the decrease, considering the proportionate increase of the population at the present day. The main reason which I can assign is the advanced civilis- ation which drags towards different spirituous liquors and the reformed societies. 26. Seventy per cent. of the consumers fall under (a), 15 per cent. under (b), 5 per cent. under (c), and 10 per cent under (d). 27. Almost all the classes of people, except the classes mentioned in answers Nos. 20 and 24, indulge in ganja and bhang under the following circumstances: The primary object of smoking ganja is to concentrate the mind (on religious points), and the secondary objects are in order320 may cause to a certain extent in the North-West- ern Provinces and Punjab The prohibition may probably be followed by recourse to alcoholic sti- mulants by the rich who could afford and to other drugs by the poor who could not afford alcoholic stimulants. 36. Yes; there is reason to think that alcohol is now to a certain extent substituted for these drugs. The causes which I assign are advanced civilization, reformed societies, and the idea that ganja is a great depression and makes a man dull and lazy. 37. As I do not know about charas, I am un- ble to answer this. 38. Flat ganja is only used in this part of the district, so I am unable to state the different effects. 39. Smoking ganja is more injurious to health than eating or drinking in its different prepara- tions, as it directly passes through the air passages and irritates them. But smoking by huka or gudgudi is preferable to dry smoking by chillum [vide 15 (A.)], as in former cases, the smoke is somewhat purified by the water kept in them. 40. Ganja and bhang are widely used in medi- cines by the native doctors for eating and drink- ing purposes, but not for smoking. I do not know about charas. Ganja is scarcely used in cattle diseases. 41. Ganja and bhang, if recommended by doc- tors (native), in combination with other drugs in moderate doses, and taken occasionally for short periods, have some benefit in their uses. (a) Both as a food accessory and an aphrodisiac. (b) Bhang alone gives staying-power under severe exposure to sun and alleviates fatigue. (c) Smoking ganja is believed as a febrifuge or preventive to malaria in unhealthy tracts, which I cannot believe, and, if at all so, it is for a new con- sumer and for a short period, till he is accustomed to it, when it will be more injurious. (d) Drinking bhang cools and strengthens the system in hot seasons. Almost all the classes, except those that are mentioned in answer Nos. 20 and 24, use the drug for the above purposes, and about 20 per cent. use so. The above answers refer to both moderate habi- tual use and moderate occasional use of the drug. I know not about charas. 42. Moderate occasional use of eating and drink- ing ganja and bhang under medical advise with the admixture of the other medicinal drugs in pro- per doses in their different preparations (vide an- swers Nos. 15 (B) and (C), is harmless, because they are widely used to cure diseases and to im- prove health by doctors of different races. I know not about charas. 43. All sorts of consumers are offensive to their neighbours. But it is not so when recom- mended by doctors and taken as stated in the pre- vious answer. 44. The immediate effects of moderate use of smoking ganja on a habitual consumer are slight intoxication, refreshment, allaying hunger, aiding slightly the digestive process, and keeping the bowels slightly free, but it does not create appetite; and these symptoms are temporary, lasting about an hour or two. The immediate after-effects are321 ordinary man, and the symptoms better developed in him in spite of his getting relief from the disease. I am of opinion that insanity may not neces- sarily tend to indulge in the use of the drug to one, though he is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. I am not aquainted with any such case; but I have seen many insanes of weak intellect not using the drug. 46. Smoking and eating ganja and drinking bhang in excess, whether habitual or not, certainly produce noxious effects physically, mentally and morally. They do impair the constitution, injure digestion, and cause loss of appetite. They may cause chronic bronchitis, asthma, and other dis- eases of respiratory system, nervous disorders, chronic gastritis, etc. Smoking ganja exces- sively certainly brings on in a short time con- sumption, dysentery, etc.; whereas drinking bhang and eating ganja, in my opinion, are not causes for dysentery. As for charas, I do not know. 47. The use of these drugs is not at all a here- ditary one. 48. None. 49. Moderate use of ganja and bhang is gen- erally practised as aphrodisaic, and so used by many prostitutes. As aphrodisiac, it is more injurious to health than as a narcotic. The reasons are that when ganja and bhang are used for their aphrodisiac properties they do not act so well as they do in the commencement, for, after a certain time, the person becomes habituated to it, and increased doses are therefore required day by day, which is no doubt injurious; and also by using the drugs as aphrodisiac, it will at once cause the person great exhaustion and depress the nervine powers to a great extent by their abuse. The use of ganja and bhang as aphrodisiac may bring on impotency, as there are all possibilities in them for having a tendency to their excessive use. 50. Excessive use of ganja and bhang, though used sometimes as aphrodisiac by prostitutes, will at once bring on several complicated diseases (such as diseases of respiratory, nervous and di- gestive systems, palpitation and valvular diseases of heart, dysentery, etc.) It is more injurious to health and makes impotent by using it for a short period. 51 and 52. I do not know. 53. Excessive indulgence in smoking ganja or drinking bhang may incite unpremeditated crime. I know a man once drunk an overdose of bhang and fell into a well. I cannot say whether it was intentional or accidental. I think that it also leads to permanent frenzy, though he may have temporary relief. I know that a man (some three years ago) who indulged excessively in smoking ganja for less than a year, became mad. Once he entered into a European gentleman322 impairs the body; mentally: affects the sense. No morality towards those who take these drugs. 49. It is considered to be an aphrodisiac. 51. Yes; the crimes that they commit have not come to my notice. 53. Excessive indulgence of these drugs, no doubt, produces unpremeditated crimes. No cases occurred during my life. 54. Yes. 55. Criminals often partake these drugs in or- der to increase their designs and stupefy them- selves. Complete stupefaction can be induced without the aid of any other drugs. 115. Evidence of Hospital Assistant C. M. APPATHORAI MUDALIAR, Vellala, Chair- man, Union Panchayat, Hindupur, Anantapur District. 1. As an Hospital Assistant, I know the pro- duction and the effects of this drug named hemp. 2. This is styled only by name ganja or bhang leaves in this part of the country. 3. I do not know; but I have seen a few plants in this district. 4. It is known as ganja. Yes; it refers to the same plant. 5. I do not know. 6. Very scattered. 7. (a) Yes. (b) to (d) No. 8. No cultivation of this plant in this district. 9 to 12, I do not know. 13. Yes; it is restricted in this district. 14 to 18. No. 19. Here it is known as ganja, and it is used for smoking. 20. Muhammadans and Boyas. 21. Not known. 22. Native. 23. Yes; it is used in these localities by a few Boyas and Muhammadans. 24. A few of the above-named classes eat bhang. 25. It is on the decrease in these localities owing to the want of the drug, the sale of which is prohibited unless licensed. 26. Very few. 27. Mainly Boyas and Muhammadans take this only for intoxication. 28. Not known. 29. Equal parts of tobacco and ganja are mixed for smoking. For eating a confection is prepared. The fol- lowing ore the ingredients:323 Oral evidence. 1.324 know. No special condition of soil is required. Rainy season is said to be the proper season for the sowing of its seeds. Fall of dew over these plants is considered very favourable for their growth and the growth of resinous principle in them. 14. Yes. (a) Ganja is common. (b) Charas is hardly known in this part of the country. (c) Bhang is also common, but to a less extent than ganja. Ganja and bhang are universally known in the districts I travelled325 cessive consumers to forego the consumption of the drug to any shortest length of time. 35. (a) No. (b) Yes. (c) I am ignorant of any means. (d) and (e) Yes, it would occasion serious dis- content, leading, in my humble opinion, to a political daner. (f) Yes, only in a very few cases; for I find in my experience that many that have recourse to the drug loathe the idea of taking spirituous liquors. Muhammadans use the drug (ganja) with apparent sanction of their religious au- thority; but they cannot, without subjecting them- selves to ostracising influences of their caste or religion, use intoxicating liquors (alcohol). 36. I have not seen such instances, but on the contrary found people substituting the hemp drug for alcoholic stimulants, for reason of cheapness of the former: this is mostly among Hindus. 37. l know nothing of charas and so can't draw comparison between the effects of ganja smoking and charas smoking. 38. I don't know. 39. Smoking ganja is less injurious than drink- ing bhang or eating the drug. This can be best explained by the simple practical fact that tobacco, smoked in the form of cigars, is less intoxicating and less poisonous, if it is at all a poison, than when eaten. 40. Ganja, the tops of the plant, is made use of in medicinal preparations by native doctors. Also it is used in the treatment of cattle diseases, espe- cially as parturifacient. Uses of the drug as understood by native physicians and its preparations. Purification of the drug326 43. Yes. 44. He feels slightly intoxicated or exhilarated in spirits and refreshed also. He finds his appetite for food increased. The effects last two hours at the most. No after-effects of any evil description are observed in habitual moderate ganja smoker, who of course feels uneasy for the want of the drug at his next usual time, though he can, with some difficulty, forego the consumption to a length of time, 45. Of habitual moderate ganja-smokers and habitual moderate bhang-drinkers. (a) No. (b) No. (c) No. (d) A kind of hoarse cough is found in ganja- smokers. (e) It does not impair the moral sense, but pro- duces laziness. (f) Occasional excessive consumers327 117. Evidence of Hospital Assistant D. RAJENDRUM, Calicut. Oral evidence. 1. I am Hospital Assistant of the first class with twenty-five years' service. I have been four years Resident Hospital Assistant in the Calicut Asylum and gave over charge on the 19th December 1893. 45. When a patient is received into the asylum, my procedure has been first to look into the warrant and. papers with him and make entries in the General Register. If I find any omission in the certificate I write to the Magistrate who sent the man or to the Civil Surgeon (as the case may be) bringing it to his notice and asking him to furnish the required information. I mean such omissions as the "cause of insanity" or any other particular in Form C. This is in accordance with the Madras Surgeon General's Circular No. 12, dated. 28th September 1891, which emphasises "the extreme importance of making every endea- vour to obtain a full and correct history of each case with special reference to cause and previous occupation." In illustration of this, I put in the papers in the case of Neerati Moosan, in whose case the "cause" was not shown. I therefore wrote to the Civil Surgeon of Telicherry. He wrote to the Joint Magistrate requesting him "to ask the police to furnish information as to cause of insanity at an early date." The Joint Magistrate sent the papers to the Acting Inspector of Police. He reported. "Sir, I humbly beg to state that Neerati Mayan, the uncle of the lunatic, and others state that religious study brought about the disorderly state of mind of the lunatic. I too find on inquiry the same to be correct." This was sent on to the Asylum Superintendent in original; and I duly entered "Religion" as the "cause." I only apply in this way to the Civil Surgeon in reference to "cause." In all other matters I apply direct to the Magistrate who sent the lunatic. When a lunatic is received, I immediately fill in all the entries in the "General Register" from the papers in my own hand. Column 10, which shows "cause," is at once filled up if there is any entry as regards cause in the papers. If the cause is shown as "unknown" in the papers, I enter the word "unknown" and make inquiry from the Civil Surgeon. But I would not do this if there were friends with the patient who could tell me the cause. If there are friends, I ask them what was the cause. If they give me a reasonably satisfactory cause, I enter it at once. I put them leading questions,328 118. Evidence of Hospital Assistant S. ARUNANUNTHUM, Vizagapatam. Oral evidence. I am Resident Hospital Assistant of the Lunatic Asylum at Vizagapatam. I have been in the ser- vice twelve years, and have been nearly two years in my present post. The procedure in this asylum is that when a lunatic is received I look through the papers and show the writer the Form C which con- tains the points that have to be entered in the co- lumns of the General Register. The writer then fills in these columns, and I am responsible that the entries are correctly made. I look over the entries he has made. Indeed, since the beginning of 1893 I have made the entries in the register with my own hand. The Superintendent does not compare the register entries with the entries in Form C. I am responsible that this work is correctly done. If anything is found deficient, especially in regard to the occupation of the lunatic and the cause of insanity, I bring the matter to the notice of the Superintendent, so that he may write to the Magis- trate for the information. This is in accordance with printed orders of the Surgeon-General. The Magistrate replies; and entry is made in the re- gister accordingly. Whatever cause is shown in Form C, or afterwards communicated by the Ma- gistrate in reply to our enquiry, is entered in col- umn 11 of the General Register. If the Magis- trate does not give and cannot ascertain the cause, but says it is unknown, an entry to that effect is made. I then keep the matter before me, and try, when friends come, or by examination of the lunatic when that is possible, to find out the cause, for Government is very anxious to have the cause ascertained in all cases and makes notices of censure in the annual printed report when the cause is not ascertained in the majority of cases. Before en- tering a cause thus ascertained by me, I would tell the Superintendent. As a rule I also keep the friends for the Superintendent to see. As a rule, we would never enter any cause without first writing to the Magistrate. But in the case of Thottaya, one of the admissions for 1893, the Superintendent has authorised my enter- ing the cause as ganja smoking, because the patient himself says he is addicted to ganja. He does not say his insanity is due to ganja, but he cannot give any cause. He is not quite sane. He was not asked how much ganja he took. We could not await information from the Magistrate, as the annual report was being prepared. In the case of Pasupuleti, admitted in 1892, the cause was entered as "ganja eating alva," without any further inquiry, because the entry of "moral" by the Civil Surgeon of Rajahmundry was clearly a misconception. He did not enter the particular kind of moral cause. I took the cause therefore from the entry under "Evidence of Insanity"* in Form C. In this same Form C it is entered that it is unknown whether the in- sanity is hereditary or not. But the mother, who visited the patient in the year 1892, told me his grandfather was insane. I then entered this on the papers, and told the Superintendent. But I made no entry in the register, for I could not alter the entry already made there. 119. Evidence of MIRZA DAVOOD BEG, Pensioned Hospital Assistant, Trichinopoly. 3. It grows in Jawadi's hills, Salem district, spontaneously. 4. It is known by the name of ganja only in this district, and is applicable to the same plant. 5. Wild hemp generally grows in temperate climate, black soil, rainfall and elevated spots. 6. The ordinary growth of wild hemp is gener- ally scattered. 7. There is no cultivation of hemp plant in this district. 8. There has been no increase or decrease of area for its cultivation in this part. 9. The seeds are scattered first in a cultivated land in groups, and then transplant them. 10. The persons who cultivate hemp are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 11. Ganja is always obtained from cultivating the seeds of wild hemp. 12. Wild hemp is not cultivated anywhere this side for the production of ganja. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant is not restricted at all in this district; even the people do not like to cultivate it without license, and I think hilly tracts will be preferable for such, as Putchav Malay. 14. None of the products of the hemp plant is prepared in this district. 15. The three varieties of hemp, such as ganja, charas and bhang, with their definitions as given in Dr. Prain's report of 21st June 1893, are quite correct, and accepted in this district. 16. Yes, bhang is prepared by the people at their quarters from the dried product of the hemp, when it is required, and not at the place of growth. Ganja and charas are prepared only from the wild plant where it is produced. 17. Any class of hilly tribe who are accustomed to prepare it. 18. Ganja and charas can be kept up for a year, but not the bhang, which is to be consumed with- in two hours; exposure to open air loses its effect. 19. Ganja and charas used only for smoking and the latter more in up-countries than in this part, as it is not obtainable here. 20. Ganja is smoked by the debauched natives of this part, and charas by Chinese and Sikhs, being rather valuable. 21. Flat ganja only is used here, and sometimes chur or bruised powder. 22. Natives use charas prepared in North-West Provinces. 23. Bhang is used only for drinking purposes; it is like an infusion mixed with milk, sugar and some aromatics. Some of the Musalmans, Hindus and Rajputs of Madras, Vellore and Arcot, etc., use it in a limited manner. 24. The above-mentioned class of people, only * This entry is, "His condition appeared to me at first mainly due to the abuse of ganja, an enforced abstinence from which greatly improved his state and left him calm and coherent. At the close of the time of observation, however, he again became excited and noisy, this alternating with periods of sullen silence and others of foolishness. The disease is evidently recurrent."
329 to a certain extent, eat the bhang reduced into a soft pulp, or drink it in a liquid state like syrup. 25. As usual, the use of ganja is more than charas and bhang, as it is less expensive than the two. 26. Habitual moderate consumers of ganja if 10, the excessive consumers will be 15 or 20, and that of bhang very little in comparison to the above, as in 20 of the excessive consumers of ganja there will be two or three of bhang, being the expensive one. 27. Only the above debauched class of natives are addicted to these by the effect of bad society. 28. The average allowance and cost of ganja of each moderate consumer will be one tola or three pies, and that of the excessive consumer two tolas or six pies, and of the bhang require one anna four pies. 29. The different classes of consumers do not like to mix any ingredients with these drugs, and no one uses dhatura in this part. Bhang massala is not prepared or sold here. 30. Only one drug of ganja is consumed either in solitude or in company, not more than three an- nas weight a time, and is confined to the male sex; and it is not consumed by children. 31. The habit of consuming the said drug of ganja is easily formed by bad company, and it is difficult to break off, and there is every tendency to develop the moderate habit into the excessive one. 32. There is no such custom for using such drugs, or any religious order to this effect, and is likely to lead to the formation of the habit, and otherwise injuries. 33. The use of each of these three drugs generally contempted by all, as it leads to negligence, idleness and irregularity, and the same is applicable to all narcotics. As for worshipping the hemp plant is not known. 34. Certainly it will be a serious matter of the consumers when they do not use it, as they are generally restless and not inclined to work; and the number of ganja consumers probably will amount to 200 and that of bhang 20. 35. The use of these drugs cannot be prohibited, and it may be used sometimes illicitly. I think its prohibition is a difficult matter, and it will produce great inconvenience among the consumers, and not likely to amount to a political danger, or to follow any alcoholic stimulants or any other drugs. 36. Alcohol cannot be substituted for any of these drugs. 37. The effects of charas smoking are far stronger than that of the ganja smoking, which is mild. 38. Among the three different preparations of ganja, the round one acts more powerfully than the other two. 39. The smoking of the three preparations of the hemp plant is less injurious than drinking or eating, as in the former a small quantity is con- sumed, whereas in eating or drinking a large quan- tity, and its effect is lasted upwards of three hours. 40. Native doctors use this drug in cases of old dysentery, and not for cattle. 41. The moderate use of ganja, bhang or charas will be beneficial only to consumers (a), it gives them a digestive power; (b), it alleviates fatigue; (c) it acts as a prophylactic measure for some time in malarious tract. No one uses it for the above purposes, but the consumers. I refer to the moderate habitual use. 42. The moderate use of these drugs, though may not be beneficial, is quite harmless to them, as they are quite accustomed to it, and likely to in- crease the quantity. 43. Moderate consumers are quite inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effects of these drugs when moderately used are to increase the pleasure and appetite for about three hours in bhang, and about half an hour in ganja, and no other uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use never produces any bad effects, such as impairing the constitution or loss of appetite, or causing any dysentery, bronchitis, asthma, or any impairment of the moral sense or immorality and insanity; and they confer generally its value than its injuries. 46. The habitual excessive use of these drugs stupefies the consumer, and he suffers the same as a man under the influence of alcohol, by rigidity of muscles, insensibility, etc., which lasts sometimes for several hours. 47. The habitual moderate use of these drugs is not a hereditary habit, and is not affecting to the children of moderate consumers. 48. The habitual excessive use of these drugs probably may be a hereditary one in a small degree in some only. 49. The moderate use of any of these drugs is not practised as an aphrodisiac at all, and is not used by prostitutes whatever, and the use of hemp never tends to produce impotence. 50. The same as above. 51. Bad characters, habitual moderate consumers are not in large proportion addicted to these drugs, and they have not any connection with crimes. 52. The excessive use of these drugs likely to bring some crimes of trifling nature. 53. The excessive use of these drugs is likely to incite some violence, and is not led to any tem- porary homicidal frenzy, as far as I know. 54. These drugs are not used by criminals to fortify themselves in committing any crimes, etc. 55. The criminals never use these drugs to fur- ther their designs, and stupefaction can be com- pleted without any admixture. 56. The preparations of hemp are used only to act on the brain a little, and is not preferred to have any admixtures, and I am aware that they do not add dhatura for their use. 57. Ganja and charas330 64. I got no objection for the import, export and transport of these drugs. 65. I think the taxation of these drugs, alcoho- lic liquors and other intoxications is reasonable. 66. One rate of tax for different kinds of ganja will be sufficient. 67. The present system may be continued. 68. The houses and shops are licensed for the sale of these drugs everywhere. 69. Nothing has been consulted with any body for opening a shop except the convenience of the people. 70. No importation of hemp drugs whatever from Native States, and the duty is regularly paid on these drugs, and there is nothing untaxed drugs here. N.B.331 Dr. Ainslie says that the flower of dhatura and the powder of nux-vomica are used; at any rate, not here. This is used by adults only. Majum is sometimes given to children to put them to sleep, the composition being slightly dif- ferent, the ingredients being Ashtagram sugar (very superior) 15 times the hemp leaf, nutmeg, and ginger. The dose is the size of a tamarind seed. 30. It is taken in solitude as well as in company. Here smoking may be said to be confined to the adults of the male sex. 31. Yes, by association with ganja consumers the habit is easily formed. But it is difficult and in most cases impossible to break it off. I know a case of a Muhammadan who, desiring to break off the habit of eating a bhang electuary known as purnathi and smoking ganja, took to drinking ar- rack, and finds to-day that in addition to the ganja habit which has not left him he has contracted the habit of drink too. There is a tendency in the case of the moderate habit to develop into excess. 33. Public opinion is strong against the con- sumption of the drug in either of the forms known here. Intoxicants are as a rule at a discount in the estimation of the Hindus; and the bad effects it manifests in the habitual consumers is enough to account for the ill-esteem in which they (con- sumers) are held. 40. Ganja is valued both by vaidyans (Hindu physicians) and hakims. A preparation of it, called Vindadi, which is non-intoxicant and differ- ent from punathi (described elsewhere), is given in small grains as a tonic and astringent in cases of diarrh332 17. Preparation of ganja from the hemp drug is made by Capus, Hindus, Muhammadans, Pariahs, Chuklers and others. 19. Ganja is used for smoking. There are also several uses of it in medicine and for medicinal purposes. 20. Ganja is smoked by sanyasis or bairagis and fakirs or dervishes (almost without exception). A very few non-fakirs among Muhammadans and some Hindus, Rajputs, Mahrattas, Malas, etc., also smoke ganja; sanyasis smoke in matts and fakirs in makans and wherever they happen to be. Others smoke in their own houses. 21. Flat, round and chur ganja are considered equally preferable for smoking. 24. Only a very small proportion of the people eat or drink, bhang. 25. The use of ganja is neither on the increase nor on the decrease. 26. Nearly 70 per cent. of the whole number of ganja consumers are habitual moderate con- sumers. Twenty per cent. may be habitual excessive consumers. Five per cent, occasional moderate con- sumers, and five per cent, occasional excessive con- sumers. 27. Habitual moderate consumers and habitual excessive consumers are mainly sanyasis and fakirs. The other classes of consumers are taken from the common people who occasionally associate- ing with habitual consumers are induced to smoke or voluntarily smoke ganja. 28. Ganja smoking costs the habitual moderate consumer approximately one anna, and the habi- tual excessive consumer two annas or so per diem. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja by that class of consumers which wishes to increase the intoxication of the drug. I do not know if dhatura is so used. I know the preparation " bhang massala," which is sold for the purpose of being mixed with ganja. Its ingredients are: (1) anise- seeds, (2) poppy seeds, (3) melon seeds, (4) dry ginger, (5) cow's milk, (6) milk taken from the cocoanut kernel, (7) sugar. Bhang massala is used on account of its good taste, strengthening power, and the quality of improving the appetite. 30. Consumption of ganja is generally practiced in company and by a very few people in solitude, In this district it is mainly confined to the male sex. I have not seen children smoke ganja. 31. The habit of consuming ganja is easily formed. It is not very difficult to break the habit off. The moderate habit may develop into the excessive, but it is not a necessary tendency of the drug. 33. The consumption of ganja is regarded a mean practice. With fakirs and sanyasis the practice is not at all thought of. It may be said that there is a social public opinion on the practice, but none religious. The hemp plant is never worshipped. by any sect of the people here. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of ganja or bhang, especially the former. I can devise no means or suggest any measures for enforc- ing the prohibition of the use. The prohibition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers. In my opinion such discontent may probably amount to a political danger. The prohibition, if at all carried out, would never be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimul- ants. I have some reasons to assign for saying that the prohibition would occasion serious discontent which may develop into a political danger. They are333 40. Native Doctors sometimes prescribe the use of ganja on account of its medicinal qualities along with other medicinal substances. Spleen and liver diseases are generally treated with the use of ganja. The abdomen sometimes becomes enlarged and ganja is used. I do not know if any of the drugs is used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of ganja or bhang is beneficial in its effects, (a) as a food accessory or digestive, (b) as giving staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, or to alleviate fatigue, (c) as a preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. Several native sepoys who are tossed about from one place to another use ganja for smoking to prevent fevers, etc. A small minority of the people consume bhang or ganja for diges- tion of food. On several occasions I have prescribed the use of ganja as a means of digesting food and with other medicines preventing malarious fevers, asthma, abdominal irregularities of some kind. 43. They are inoffensive and very polite and homely with their neighbours, enjoying good chit chat, etc. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja on habitual consumers is refreshing provided the consumer also takes good meals. It does produce intoxication which appears to be a very pleasing one. It does not allay hunger. It creates appetite. The effect lasts for nearly 30 minutes or so. To the moderate consumer the want of subsequent gratification does not produce much longing or uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja or bhang does not produce any noxious effects, physical, mental or moral. It does not much impair the consti- tution, provided the moderate consumer also takes moderately good meals, or if the habitual moderate consumer does not indulge in sexual intercourse much, or if he does not marry at all or does not give himself up to debauchery, etc. This is the case with sanyasis and fakirs. It does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. On the other hand, ganja smoking is beneficial to asthma. Native doctors prescribe ganja with other medicines for preventing asthma, neuralgia, coughs, etc. Moral sense is not impaired, and debauchery is not in- duced by the moderate use. It causes laziness for a time, as is the case with other intoxications, It does not deaden the intellect, nor does it pro- duce insanity. In short, the moderate use of ganja is not harmful in any way to the consumer. 46. The excessive use of ganja brings on all or some of the noxious effects pointed out in question 45. It may impair the constitution, cause dysen- tery, etc., and also deaden the intellect or produce insanity. 47. The habitual moderate use of ganja or bhang does not appear to be a hereditary habit, nor does it affect the children of the moderate con- sumer in the majority of the cases. In very rare cases it may affect the children. (Here it depends on the degree of pleasure the consumer takes and his disposition as to its acceptance.) 48. The habitual excessive use of ganja may affect the children of the excessive consumer in several cases, Questions No. 47 and No. 48 are answered from my natural experience of medicine, which teaches me that at the time of a man's sexual intercourse the high pitch of disposition which he then possesses on account of any intoxi- cation, or pleasurable luxury which he indulges in, may probably affect the issue. But that it is a hereditary habit is not my strong opinion. This acceptance or non-acceptance of the pleasur- able sensation introduced into a man by the con- sumption of any of the said drugs depends entirely on temper and disposition of the consumers, which disposition is bestowed by God or nature with great power of acceptance in some, and that of re- sistance in others. 49. The moderate use of any of the drugs, espe- cially ganja, is sometimes practised as an aphro- disiac. It does increase the potent power of a man if used in admixture with other medicines which doctors may prescribe. But ganja by itself is not a substance which would remove impotency or increase the potency of a man. I do not know if it is ever used by prostitutes. 50. Excessive use of hemp without the admix- ture of other medicines may in course of time tend to produce impotence. 51. No large proportion of bad characters are moderate consumers of ganja or bhang. On the contrary, the moderate consumers are always poor and quiet people. It has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. I have not known of any such connection between moderate use and crime during my twelve years' experience as an Honorary Magistrate, Cuddapah. 52. The excessive consumers of ganja, who may be calculated at only 20 per cent. and less of the whole number of consumers, may very occasionally commit some crime, But I had no opportunity to know of such cases. 53. I have not known of cases in which exces- sive indulgence in any of the drugs incited to un- premeditated crime. 58. There was no excise formerly in respect of the hemp drug. The modern system works well. But the duty on ganja is considered to be heavy. 67. Having regard to the ultimate incidence of the tax on the consumer of ganja, I object to the present taxation. I recommend a decrease in tax- ing. 122. Evidence* of SAIYID MAHMUD alias HAKEEM NHANNAY MIAN, Medical Prac- titioner, Cuddapah. 1. I have obtained a knowledge of the Indian hemp plant from the following sources:334 grow spontaneously and are they produced from the female plant is, that the male plant of ganja is not used at all. All the male trees are uprooted and thrown away in the fourth month after seeds have been sown. If seeds are sown in a field measuring one acre, then it is usually the case that only half an acre of the field produces the male plants, and half an acre the female plants. The distinction between a male and female plant is this, i.e., the male plants bear no buds and a peculiar kind of flowers blossom in the fourth month after the plantation, and that a white substance resembling flour comes out of a male plant if shaken. I have witnessed this myself by shaking it. But before the period of four months no distinction could be made. If the male tree is not rooted out, the female plant owing to its proximity with the male assumes a similar condition and cones- quently it is also uprooted. The bud of the plant is called ganja. The capsules and leaves which fall down from the plant are called bhang. The resin- ous exudation of the hemp plant collected during the dew season is called charas. The buds of the hemp plant are of three shapes, viz., (1) circular, (2) twisted, and (3) flat. Ganja is known by different names, such as (1)dagoparr, (2) bhusamparr, (3) shamsabadi, (4) mulki, (5) javaji and (6) almori. The hemp plant cultivated in the Cuddapah taluka is called mulki or country ganja, and it is circular in shape, and the other above-named ganjas were imported into Cuddapah from the neighbouring districts, but now according to the present ruling none can import it except the contractor. 3. Ganja is extensively cultivated in different parts of Cuddapah and Kurnul districts. 7. Ganja is cultivated in Cuddapah. Ganja is cultivated. Bhang is grown. It has seeds. Ganja has been cultivated in qasba of Kumar- palli to an extent of about 200 checks, a check being equivalent to two maunds. 8. Formerly 1,200 checks of ganja were culti- vated in the qasba of Kumarpalli of the Cuddapah taluka, which is situated at a distance of 10 miles from the town, but this year the outturn of the plant will approach to nearly 200 checks, a check being equivalent to two maunds. In these days ganja is much less cultivated than formerly, for the reason that Government has prohibited the purchase and sale of ganja by any person excepting the contractor, and consequently no person could purchase the hemp openly from the cultivator, nor could any cultivator sell it. Last year the con- tractor at this place purchased ganja at the rate of Rs. 5 per check from the cultivators, and sold it at his own price to its consumers. During this week I have been to the contractor's shop with a view to examine his dealings personally, when I found that flat ganja mixed with stalks which is known as javaji ganja or almori ganja was being sold at the rate of 24 tolas, i.e., a seer for rupee, and flat ganja without stalks was being sold at one anna for every half anna weight, which is a little more than a rupee's weight. The consumers of bhang bitterly complain about flat ganja for the reason that it causes dysentery and cough, etc., and does injury in different ways. The circular country ganja is better liked than the other kind of ganjas by the ganja consumers in Cuddapah and other places. They assert that the country ganja of Kumarpalli, etc., does not produce much heat and does less injury. It should now be noticed that the contractor purchases the plant at a very low rate and sells it at an exorbitant price. If the cultivators do not sell the ganja to the con- tractor at the price offered by him and take every precaution to preserve it carefully, a change takes place after a year in its colour and intoxicating effect, which decreases its value. A rupee's worth of ganja will have to be given to the contractor only for 4 or 5 annas. Therefore it is my convic- tion that gradually raiyats will give up the cultiva- tion of ganja which is attended with much trouble and loss of money and honour, and will have re- course to other cultivation which is more useful and beneficial to them. 10. The cultivators of hemp carry on other cul- tivations also, and they do not form a special class of raiyats. 11. In this country wild ganja seeds are not sown as a practice, but if any person wishes to do so, he may. 13. The cultivators may, if they desire, plant gardens of ganja anywhere (but not as wet and dry cultivation). 14. Ganja is cultivated in the suburbs of our town. Ganja is grown. Charas is not produced. Bhang is produced. 16. Ganja, charas, bhang could be obtained from a naturally-grown-up tree either in a populated place or in a desert. 17. It is prepared by peasants, of whatever caste they may be. 18. Both ganja and bhang become damaged if preserved for a long time, i.e., their shape under- goes a change and their intoxicating power is dimi- nished and taste is lost. They may, with difficulty, be preserved in a good condition for one year by being exposed to the heat of the sun and open air. 19. The use of ganja is not restricted to smoking purposes only. It is used in two different ways: (1) It is smoked; (2) it is taken as a dietetic article. Ganja is smoked in different ways, viz.:335 pepper, 1½ dirham of dry ginger, one tola of aniseed, 1½ tolas of the kernel of musk-melon seeds, 1½ tola of white poppy seeds, one tola, of sweet basil seeds, 3 dirhams of almond's kernel, ½ a tola of rose buds, milk measuring half a seer, and such a quantity of jaggery, sugar or sugarcandy. is mixed with them as would suit taste. Some per- sons put two tolas of washed bhang instead of 2½ dirhams of ganja.) (2) The second preparation is called lurgi. It is composed of certain ingredients (viz., ganja one tola, three tolas of coriander plant, one tola of garlic, one tola of common salt, curd measuring about one seer). All these ingredients are seasoned with little ghee and clove. (3) The third preparation is called boja. This is prepared from the admixture of certain ingre- dients (i.e., a handful of ganja, wet or dry roots of paddy, wet or dry roots of maize, dry or wet roots of bhuin durleys336 Medical Officer should explain to him the sever al evil results that emanate from its use, and if possible give him sound advice, and thus by degrees reduce the quantity, so that he may who'ly give up his habit. It is hoped that by the adop- tion of such measures, beginners who make use of ganja privately and who are not void of shame would voluntarily give up their habit. (4) No contractor should be permitted to supply any person with ganja, charas or bhang who does not produce such a certificate from a Government Medical Officer. But these drugs (ganja, bhang and charas) may be sold to native Medical practi- tioners without the certificate. (5) Severe control should be exercised over the contractor in order that he may not sell the above drugs surreptitiously. To the best of my knowledge and researches, I am of opinion that alcohol, etc., cannot be safely used as a substitute for ganja, charas or bhang. Answers connected with Chapter VI. Charas.337 Oral evidence. 1. I was not educated in any Government College. nor have I taken any English degree in medicine. I have been practising for 20 years. 3. I have seen the hemp plant cultivated in the Cuddapah district. It was in the kasba of Kama- varpalli, The fields probably amounted to 10 acres. There were three or four fields. This is 10 miles from Cuddapah, and I specially went to inspect the fields after getting the Com- mission's questions. A month or two before get- ting the Commission's questions, I saw two or three fields of hemp on the way from Cuddapah to Vehem- palli. They were in the lands of Vehempalli. I cannot say what the area was. There appeared not to be more there than in Kamavarpelli. I have not seen the crop in Kurnool, but I have heard that it exists, and feel sure that the information was correct. 32. Muhammadans do consume the hemp drug although it is contrary to precepts of their reli- gion. I have no doubt the drug is distributed at places where fakirs meet, because some fakirs consume the drug in defiance of their religion. It is impossible that a mowlvie should distribute the drug. All intoxicants are forbidden in the Koran, though hemp is not specially mentioned. 45. Insanity only results from the excessive use of the drug. I know the Hindu I have men- tioned was an habitual excessive smoker of ganja. The Muhammadans were also habitual excessive consumers, sometimes smoking and sometimes drinking the drug. I don't know if the Hindu was sent to an asylum or not. I saw him in Hydera- bad. He was attended by S. T. Window, a European medical man who was formerly master in the medical school. I did not attend him, nor was he under my observation. The hospital is next door to my brother's house where I was living, and I saw the Hindu there from time to time during a month. I have no doubt it was a ganja case from the infor- mation given me by the dresser and compounders of the hospital. One of the Muhammadans I saw in Hyderabad, the other in Cuddapah. The Hy- derabad man, named Amir Ali, was living in the same street as myself. I did not treat him. The people who consorted with him said that he was a ganja smoker. Of course I did not see him taking ganja, but I saw him when he was mad. I did not treat the Cuddapah man. He was a disciple of some members of my family. I heard from his relations that he had the ganja habit, and I have seen him smoking ganja. He would re- main insane for periods of 10 to 30 days, and then get better; but in the intervals he was never in full possession of his senses. He has been in this state for the last 12 years. I can't say how many of these attacks he has had. He did not drink liquor; he could not afford it. None of his family was insane. I know them all. I heard that before he became mad he used to indulge in sexual excess. He has never been violent, or he would have been sent to an asylum. He has all the marks of insanity, except that he is not violent. He still takes ganja. I frequently see him as I go about visiting my patients. I have conversed with him and his father frequently. His age is about 35 or 36. He is continuosly idiotic; but he is not always in a complete state of insanity. 123. Evidence* of SINGITAPU VENKATA RAO, Brahmin, Madahwa, Native Physician and Inamdar, Coconada, Godavari District. 1. The information I now give of the properties, etc., of ganja, etc., has been got from Sastras (medical books). 3. I do not know of any district in which ganja grows spontaneously. It is grown abundantly in Daggupadu in the Kistna district. I do not know in what other districts it is grown abundantly. 14. Ganja is not prepared by any one, and bhang is prepared. It is not prepared by any one parti- cular individual in any particular locality. It is prepared by every one who desires to excite or stimulate pleasure. 16. Bhang can be prepared generally by people in their houses. The ganja plant grown on red soil or in wild tracts is used for preparing bhang; but the plant grown on loose soil is not useful for the purpose. Charas is unknown in this country. It is believed to be grown in cold countries. The hemp plant grown on hard soil is used for preparing both ganja and charas. 19. Ganja and charas are used not only for smoking, but they are mixed in medicines like other drugs. Diseases arising from phlegm and vatam (cold) and hard breathing, etc., are cured. It strengthens the nerves and gives appetite. It is is used in medicines in all countries. If the juice of the ganja leaves he rubbed on the eyelids, eye diseases are cured. Piles are also cured by this. 20. All classes of people smoke ganja. The proportion of the ganja-smoking population is 16 to 1. Charas is unknown here. It is extensively used in cold climates. 24. All classes of people drink bhang rarely for the purpose of exciting pleasure; but is not exten- sively used. It appears that three or four in every thousand people drink it. The people of the north- ern countries use it. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the de- crease since their price has risen. 28. The average cost per diem of these drugs for one man is from one to three pies. 32. The use of this is not prohibited by social or religious customs. 33. The consumption of ganja, etc., is not looked down upon, as it does not produce as much intoxi- cation as arrack, and. make a man senseless; nor is its consumption prohibited. The ganja plant is not worshipped in this country. 39. Ganja is not either drunk or eaten here, but only smoked. So I cannot say whether smoking is a less injurious form of its consumption than drink- ing. 40. In medical books it is said that these drugs may be used as medicines. A treatise called Guna- patam treats of its properties. I do not know whether this is used for cattle diseases or not. 41. The moderate use of ganja is beneficial inasmuch as it cures diseases. 43. Moderate consumers are not offensive to their neighbours. 44. The moderate use of ganja cures dyspepsia, and diseases arising from phlegm and vatam (cold). It is refreshing. It creates appetite, and if eaten when hungry, it allays hunger and fatigue. I * Translation. vol. vi. 2 z
338 produces very little intoxication, but it does not make a man senseless. The effect lasts for one jam or three hours. It produces thoughts and makes the mind steady; want of subsequent grati- fication produces longing as well as a little un- easiness. 45. The moderate use of this does not produce noxious effects, physical, mental or moral. 49. This is used mixed with other articles as an aphrodisiac. 51. Bad characters are not habitual consumers. 53. The excessive indulgence in any of these does not incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or other- wise. It does not make the consumer like to injure others. 54 and 55. No. 124.Evidence of I. PONNUSAWMI PILLAI, Private Practitioner, Pothawar, Salem, District. 1. I beg to submit very humbly the explanation regarding the hemp plants, etc., which are as follows: 3. The hemp plants are abundantly cultivated and grow itself in Jewatho hills, Cunjumalai hills, Shevaroy hills, and Kollimalay mountains in the district of Salem. 14. Ganja, charas and bhang are mostly Pre- pared in every town and village within the district of Salem. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses who are accustomed to it, and it is prepared from the hemp plant wherever it is grown; and even ganja and charas are also prepared from the wild plant wherever it is grown. 19. It is used for smoking and also mixed (in Sageon) with different substances by native doctors for different diseases according to the Indian medical books of ancient authors. It is used in almost all parts of India. 20. Sanyasis, bairagis, and other inhabitants who are accustomed to it throughout the whole district, especicially in northern parts of India, and, I submit, 1/32of the portion of people are in the habit of using the above drugs throughout India. 24. Especially Musalmans, sanyasis, pilgrims, bairagis, and others who live with their families in different castes eat and drink bhang, etc. 25. The use of ganja, charas and bhang are gradually increasing day by day. The people are much more accustomed to the practice of using them, because some people think it healthy and comfortable to their bodily strength, and others consider that the use of ganja and bhang, etc., will help them to place their whole thoughts on the Supreme Being without any temptation to menial acts. 28. The persons, who are accustomed to eat and smoke ganja and other drugs, generally smoke and eat 339 125. Evidence of ABDUL KARIM SAHIB, Native Physician, Namakkal, Salem District. 1. From observations and from personal ex- perience in making lagiums, etc., out of the drug for the last 10 or 12 years. 3. In parts of Namakkal taluka the plant is seldom cultivated in one or two fields. In Kalar- gari, Meedalapatty, and Sehamppapatty villages the plants are so cultivated. 14. Ganja only to a small extent. 16, As far as I know, preparations of charas or bhang is not made anywhere here. Ganja can be so prepared. 19. Ganja is used for smoking. Laginms, such as matharakameswari, massthanachenthamoni, thathupusti, are made out of it. The leaves of the plant with other medicinal drugs are applied for headache. 20. Hill tribes and bairagis. Two per cent. of the population of Kusba Namakkal would smoke ganja. 28. For smoking purposes, 1 pie for a day. Ganja is mixed with tobacoo and smoked. For the consumption of 15 days, 1 pie worth of ganja is enough when used as a lagium with other drugs. 32. Karuppannan, Kali, Mathuraiviran, and Malai Kavalan Swami are said to accept ganja as offerings in the shape of lagiums. 33. (a) It is generally considered to be a vicious practice. (c) No. 39. Smoking is more injurious than eating ganja in the shape of lagiums. In the preparation of lagium other cooling substances are included, and hence it is less injurious. On the other hand, it is conducive to health. Smoking is more in- jurious, because the smoke gets into and affects the lungs, and makes the man thin and wiry. 40. Yes; prescribed by native quacks. Yes; they are used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Yes; medicially when taken in lagiums. 43. Yes; it would even make a brave man a coward. 44. Excitement, intoxication followed by sleep, commonly not refreshing, creates appetite, very nearly six hours. After-effect is weakness. Gener- ally ganja eaters take ganja just before their meals. 45. No doubt it produces noxious effects. I know of about 15 men who have become wiry, day by day. In the long run they were subject- ed to bronchitis, and their eyes became dark gra- dually. The heat in them increases as well. They were under my treatment until they re- covered. 49. Yes. 51. Ganja eaters do not undertake to commit any actionable wrongs, as far as I know. 53. The indulgence to any degree would not in the least induce the consumer to commit any crime. I do not know if this has ever led to homicidal frenzy. 54. No. 55. I have not heard of any such case. 126. Evidence of H. RUNGAPPA, Medical Practitioner, Vishram Baugh, Madras. The present system of administration puts res- triction only on the sale of the hemp drugs. The result is their cheapness, which is one chief in- ducement for their free use by the lower classes mostly. The objections are the following: 340 meaning milk in Hindustani, is its constant ingre- dient, although the beverage is prepared in more ways than one. Ramarasam is the Dravidian synonym for the same. Muhammadans, bairagis (pandarams or ascetics), Maharatta Sudras, Guj- arati Sudras and Pariahs are the class mostly addicted to the hemp drugs. Rarely the middle and upper classes of Hindus use them on gala days. The districts in which the drugs are most extensively used are341 separate. I visited the shops in the evening about 5 or 5-30 P. M. I went on four different days. I saw no violent or unseemly behaviour. I saw some women there. I think they were also accustomed to the habit, but did not see them smoking. I believe they were prostitutes. From there noisy talking, I thought they were using drugs in some other form. 127. Evidence of the RAJA OF RAMNAD,* Madura District. 1. None. 3. In none, so far as I know. 7. I know of none. 19. The dried leaves of the plant are used in making a confection or electuary along with sugar and other ingredients, of which I am unable to give particulars. 20. I know of no classes of people, except tra- vellers from Northern India, who smoke this drug. 24. Some among the labouring classes eat it in the form I have mentioned in my answer to Ques- tion 19; it is also employed as medicine, and when so employed forms one of a number of ingredients of which the medicine is made. In either case, the number of persons by whom and the extent to which it is used is very limited. 26. I should say that all who consume this drug are occasional moderate consumers. I have not sufficient knowledge of the drug to distin- guish the different forms of it. 30. So far as I know, the eating of bhang or ganja (whatever that may exactly be), is no charac- teristic feature of convivial or other gatherings, and it is confined mainly to the male sex. 31. I am not aware of any case in which the moderate developed into excessive habit. 32. I am not aware of any custom, social or religious, with which the consumption of the drug is associated. 33. I think that the habitual use of this drug is generally in disrepute for the simple reason that it is apt to induce inebriation. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion by any sect of the people. 35. Where the use is habitual, which however is, so far as I know, very rarely the case in this country, the feasibility of its prohibition is open to question. It might he consumed illicitly, and it may not be possible to enforce the prohibition except by recourse to extreme measures. I do not think, however, that the prohibition would occasion serious discontent. A political danger it most assuredly would not amount to. It is quite possible though that the prohibition may be fol- lowed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. I do not know any specific instances, but I think it probable for the reason that alcohol more readily induces inebriation, and is more readily procurable in this country. 40. I think that in the case of particular complaints, as insomnia generally and chronic diarrh342 33. Almost all the people say that smoking ganja is a bad habit. It is socially used by the mendicants only. But there is no rule that the polite and the religious men should use it. I can- not say much about it. On the whole it is in- jurious, as it spoils the brain and disturbs the calmness of the mind, It often deviates a man from the right path. He will become quite mad if he cannot get it in its proper time. He will feel much disgust without it, and will be roused to a spirit of robbery. It spoils the reputation of a man. Nobody of any sect has at any time worshipped the hemp plant. 39. Smoking is more injurious than drinking and eating, for it weakens the strength and causes dry cough in the consumer. 40. Native doctors mix these drugs with other materials as a remedy for the following diseases: colic, diarrh343 130. Evidence of TIMMARAZU VENKATA SIVA RAO., Brahmin, Landed Proprietor and Chairman, Municipal Council, Chicacole, Ganjam District. 1. As a landed proprietor, I very often come in contact with many persons who use hemp drug preparations and many native doctors and others who make such preparations. 3. I have knowledge of no district where the hemp plant grows spontaneously. 14. On my enquiry I have come to know that only ganja and bhang are prepared in this country. As far as my knowledge is concerned, they are, to a great extent, prepared in big towns. From this I do not mean to deny totally the preparations in small towns and villages. 16. (a) Yes. (b) and (c) I believe so. 19. They are used not only for smoking but also for eating and drinking. Ganja mixed with with sugar, milk, and such spices as cardamoms, nutmegs, etc., is used for drinking. There is a pre- paration called "halwa," of which the chief ingre- dient is ganja, not to speak of several native medicines, of whose component parts ganja is one. The halwa and the native medicines being eatables, ganja is said to be used for eating also. 20. I do not see that smoking of ganja is confined to particular class or classes of people, as I understand that all clases of people generally smoke it. On rough calculation I can say that not less than five per cent. smoke ganja. 24. As regards classes of people, vide my answer to Question 20. 25. I should think it is on the increase, inas- much as I find now greater number of bhang- drinkers almost in every town, of which I have some knowledge, than ten years ago. 28. I do not think that habitual moderate con- sumer can consume more than a tola a day of the drugs, which, I am told, will not cost more than one anna. But there is a separate class of people called bairagis who are said to devote a major portion of their life in wandering over the country, and who, it appears, consume two tolas, or a little more than that, a day in smoking. 32. It has almost become a social custom in several big towns that bhang is prepared and distributed, along with other preparations, among the guests, on important occasions at dinners. There is a class called Rajputs, or popularly called Bondilis. They observe annually a festival named Holi. It is reported that it is a custom among them to use halwa or bhang during that festival. 33. It is generally regarded with contempt. Yes; the public opinion is that the practice is bad. There is a popular opinion that the use of any form of narcotic acts against the intellectual powers of a person; hence it is generally in dis- repute. I am not aware of any custom of worship- ping the hemp plant. 39. No; on the other hand, smoking is said to be more injurious. As the effect of the smoking does not last long and the smoker is incapable to resist frequent temptations, he is apt to smoke more frequently than a drinker or eater drinks or eats. These admittedly being drugs of an intoxi- cating nature, the more frequent the use of them is the more intoxicated the user is. Hence smoking is said to be more injurious. 40. ( a ) Yes. ( b ) I have no knowledge. 41. I do not think so. 42. I cannot definitely say. 43. I cannot say that they are entirely so. 44. Produces drowsiness or half consciousness; refreshing; produces intoxication; allays hun- ger; creates appetite. The length, of time in which the effect lasts, varies according to the nature of preparation of drugs. I have no know- ledge of after-effects. Yes; it does produce long- ing and uneasiness. 45. Yes; I believe it does produce noxious effects physically, it weakens the constitution mentally, and it interferes with the brain. 49. Yes. 51. Yes. These drugs being productive of intoxication, the user is not unlikely to have recourse to any crime in general under the influence of the drugs, especially as the use of these drugs has more connection with gambling and theft, to which the consumers have general recourse with the view of getting money for purchasing these drugs, inasmuch as the consumers are in not less then 75 cases out of 100 vagabonds, notorious bad charac- ters, and bairagis, who spend their life in rambling over the country depending on others for their expenses. 53. Yes. I am not aware. 131. Evidence of C. MUTHU KUMARASWAMI MUDELLIAR, Zamindar, Chunampet, Chingleput District. 1. There are some of my tenants who are habi- tual smokers; and pilgrims, generally bairagis, from the north, on their way to and from Ramas- waram, halt in good numbers here. Most of these either smoke or drink ganja. Conversation with them and observation into their habits enable me to say something about the subject on hand. 3. I have not known any. 14. None to speak of. 16. Bhang, as is understood here, is a compound of ganja leaves jaggery and pepper. Such bhang is prepared by individuals, for their own private use, with ganja leaves procured from the market. People this side have no knowledge of preparing ganja from the hemp plant direct. 19. Charas is not known here. Ganja leaf is the only article purchased from bazaars. The people here either smoke it, or make a compound of it with pepper and jaggery, or with pure jaggery only, and take it internally. This ganja leaf, as obtained from bazaars, is also used for medicinal purposes, such as puranathy. 20. This is not a commonly used drug here. The few that use here belong to the flesh-eating lower classes. The medicants, who impose on the superstitious public with the garb of an ascetic, take to this habit of smoking. This habit of smoking is invariably found among the Hindu- stani bairagis or pilgrims from the north. Since the use of ganja is not prevalent to any
344 very appreciable extent in any particular locality or with any particular class, and the use itself is rare with the standing population here, it is not possible to connect the use of it to any special locality or class. 24. Vide answer to Question 20 supra. 25. The use of ganja is certainly on the decrease. The prohibition, by an Act of Govern- ment, to trade in it without a license, eventually put a stop to its being sold here by the village bazaar men, who thought, and still think, it not worth the trouble to procure a license to vend ganja in a place where it is not generally wanted by the surrounding resident inhabitants. Before the intervention of this license, I know every bazaar man had some quantity of ganja in his bazaar along with other articles of consumption. I also know that every bairagi from the north and every medicant sanyasi was being supplied by my elders with ganja in addition to the customary ration given him; and that this practice of doling out ganja stopped with the scarcity of the articles in the local bazaars, consequent on the apathy of the bazaar men here to take out licenses, as required by the Act. Further, the use of these drugs, unless accom- panied with good nourishing food, is productive of consumption and general debility, which unfits one for any useful pursuit. This evil effect over the system has deterred some of the habitual consumers of the working class here, who have to make their living from daily earned wages only, from continuing its use. I infer, therefore, that the growing poverty of the country has something to do with the decrease in its use. 28. The average allowance to habitual moderate consumers ranges from half a pollum to one pollum per diem, costing between half and one anna per head. At any rate, it need not exceed two rupees per mensem per head. 32. I am not aware of any custom, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of these drugs. 33. Hindu religion, I think with very good reason, is quite averse to the use of any drink or drug that will bring about an abnormal state in the mind of a man. Addiction to the use of these is included among the five greatest sins345 laws of society, into the right path, or even remon- strate with them for their unlawful conduct. Fur- ther, they themselves don't care about the laws of society as far as decency and caste prejudices are concerned. I am therefore of impression that they lose all idea of morality, and don't feel the moral responsibility which one ought to have towards society. 49. It is, as in the case of puranthy lagyam. 51. The use of this drug here is not so very common as to draw any such conclusions. 54. I have not heard of any such case here. 56. I am not able to answer this. 59. The effects of ganja and opium is not much felt here. It is the toddy and country arrack that is the chief cause of all poverty and crime. If the Government should really have the elevation of the lower classes, such as Paryahs, at heart, they should with a strong hand prevent the use of these cheap liquors by them. The Government need not be afraid of it. This drink is not a necessity here, but it is an immoral luxury. The climatic conditions don't require it. The abolition of this, and the extension of primary education following in its trail, will, I am certain, elevate them to an inconceivably better position in an incredibly short time, It is not the want of means of subsistence that makes the Paryah the degraded creature he is; but it is this tempting cheap drink near at hand that drains all he has, and leaves him the miserable wretch that he now is. Government may modify the Darkhast rules in any manner they like; and the executives may, in conjunction with those rules, adopt means to deprive the mirasidar of his other property besides to enrich the Paryah. All this will only be the additional means given to an unrighteous and intellectually degraded class to proceed in their iniquitous course with more facility than before. If the missionaries who justly raised the cry against the present degrade i condition of the lower classes, especially Paryahs, suggested first the prohibition of this drink as the chief remedy against the continuance, if not the furtherance, of this degradation, and then based their elevation on (I) education, and (2) facilities to acquire lands for cultivation, the intelligent rural population would have given them credit for sincere philanthro- pic effort. Since not a word was said by them about this pernicious habit of drinking, where the missionaries themselves seldom set a good example, their present agitation to elevate the lower classes is viewed very much with sus- picion; for such facilities to acquire lands, in the absence of an effectual check to their usual work, will, without giving them the benefit sought for, only tend to facilitate the work of the local missionaries, who have to show a good out- turn of their work to the mission that pay them in the shape of more evangelisation; inasmuch as it is a patent fact that it is more the hopes of material help held out to them rather than real conviction in Christianity that brings converts from the lower classes, especially Paryahs, who are admitted by the missionaries themselves as a class intellectually low at present. Since the cause of all the misery here is the cheap drink of toddy and arrack within an easy reach of the lower classes, I earnestly request that steps may be taken, as early as practicable, to pro- hibit the use of this drink as effectually as possible, and save the lower classes from their present miser- able state. Since the absence of one form of in- toxicating drink or drug will only incite people to the adoption of another unrestricted one, I think the use of all sorts of intoxicating drink or drug ought to be strictly prohibited by law, except in cases of maladies, where the doctors can find no other means of relieving the patient. 132. Evidence of M. ETHERAGULU PILLAY, Land-owner, Bezwada, Kistna District. 1. I have been a resident of the Kistna district for the last 26 years, and as I am myself a land- owner, I possess general information of the pro- ducts of this district. 2. To the best of my information, no narcotic drugs are obtained from hemp plant in this dis- trict. Dr. Prain's report, I presume, applies to Northern India very probably. The stem of the hemp plant here is converted into fibre, and the leaves are use as cattle fodder. 3. The hemp plant is cultivated throughout the Kistna district generally, but it grows luxuriously in the part of the district lying south of Bezwada. 4. Janapanaroo and Gogunaroo. They are two kinds, as shown above. 5. Hot climate. Black cotton-soil. Rains, average quantity. Elevation unknown. 6. Dense in some parts. 7. (a) to (c) No. (d) Yes. Hemp is cultivated extensively in parts of the district, more especially south of Bezwada. 8. The area of hemp cultivation is on the in- crease owing to demands for the fibre. 9. No special method is adopted. The ground is ploughed up, as is done for other dry crop seeds. 10. Tile hemp is not cultivated for narcotic properties. The agricultural cultivators grow hemp also. 11 and 12. I do not know. 13. See my answer to Question 2. 14. No. 15. No kind of narcotic drugs are prepared from hemp. 17. See answer to Question 15. 19. Ganja is prepared from plant specially grown for that purpose. Ganja is used for smok- ing, and also forms an ingredient in the prepara- tion of bhang, which is drunk. Charas, which is a very strong narcotic drug, is used for smok- ing. Ganja is prevalent in these parts, but cha- ras is unknown here. 20. The lower classes, especially Muhammadans, smoke ganja. The percentage, as compared with the population of a given place, is very small. 21. Round kind is used in these parts. 22. Charas unknown here. 23. No. 24. See answer to Question 20. 25. On the increase. 29. Bhang is prepared with the following vol. vi. 3 A
346 ingredients: poppy seeds, dry ginger, pepper, milk, rose buds, cucumber seeds. Dhatura unknown. The above ingredients are used to make the drink palatable. Some of the ingredients possess medicinal properties. 30. Ganja is smoked largely, and there are ganja smoking dens in different parts of the town, where the smokers meet and smoke in company. Male sex, middle and old aged people. No; children do not consume any of these drugs. 31. Yes, by association. Not easily. Yes; there is such a tendency. 32. Religion prohibits the use of such drugs. 33. With disgust and contempt. None. It is in disrepute. It demoralizes poople and under- mines their health. Do not know. 34. Yes, because these people are so devoted, and the habit becomes a second nature. They almost go mad and become helpless if they are deprived of it. It is difficult to give even an ap- proximate proportion, but the Muhammadan class predominates. By Muhammadans I mean the poverty-stricken people. 35. (a) Not easily. (b) Yes. (c) I am unable to suggest any method. (d) Yes. (e) No. (f) The people who use these drugs are, as a rule, the poorest classes of people. They would have recouse to alcohol but for its costliness. They are sure to indulge in other drugs if within their means to purchase. 36. There is reason to suppose that alcohol is substituted for the drugs by those who can afford to buy it. Perhaps the better wages which is now earned is the cause, and the enormous in- crease in the importation of alcoholic stimulants, which, I think, is a proof. Note.347 2nd348 (h) The want of subsequent gratification pro- duces uneasiness of mind and the swelling of the belly. 45. (a) No. (b) Yes. It reduces the body and makes him weak. (c) It causes injury to the digestive powers of some and loss of appetite to others. (d) It causes asthma and bronchitis. (e) It does not impair the moral sense, induces laziness, and does not create habits of immorality or debauchery. (f) No. (g) No. None. 46. The excessive use of these drugs causes great intoxication, and deprives him of any worldy know- ledge. 47. It is not a hereditary habit among ordinary people, but hereditary among the sanyasis and fakirs. No; it does not affect the children of the moderate consumers. 48. The habitual excessive consumer has no family or anything, and consequently no hereditary habits. 49. (a) No. (b) Yes; it produces impotence. 50. The same as in No. 48. 51. He becomes a coward, and does not commit crimes. He may go a-begging for the means to get the gauja when in want of means. 52. No crimes are connected with the excessive use of these drugs individually, but when they assemble in large numbers, they fall upon each other and thus commit crime. 53. Yes. A collection of the ganja consumers put together may lead to temporary frenzy. 54. No. 55. Yes. They can induce them, giving them the drugs mixed with other things. It completely stupefies without any admixture whatever. 56. (b) The effects of hemp are increased by admixing dhatura for personal consumption only, and not for administration to others. 57. I have no experience of the effects produced by eating or drinking charas and ganja. 58. The present system of excise administra- tion in regard to hemp drugs is working well. 60. They are sufficiently controlled. 61. No charas is produced here. 62. No. 63. I have no objection to the present system of wholesale vend of ganja. If retail vend is brought to action, it increases the revenue. 64. No objections to the existing regulations. I suggest that if licenses should be given for culti- vating these plants, it is advantageous, both to the improvement and downfall of the use of the drugs. 65. In my opinion a little increase in the tax- ation of ganja, etc., would be reasonable and pro- portionate. 66. No; the rate of taxation should be the same for all kinds of ganja, for, if it is different, people will have greater recourse to the one taxed less. 67. No objection to the present method of taxing ganja, etc. 68. There are shops licensed for the sale of these drugs. It is better that licenses should be given for shops for the preparation of the drugs where they may be consumed on the premises. 69. The wishes of the people are consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. The leading men of the place are collected and their opinion taken before it is opened. Yes; public opinion should be Considered. 70. No. 135. Evidence of SAGI RAMA SASTRY, Brahmin, Inamdar and Native Doctor, Rajahmundry, Godavari District. 1. Being versed in native medicinal science and being myself a native doctor, I have occasion to know something about ganja. 3. I know only of the ganja that is sold in the bazars here. I do not know in what districts the drug is cultivated. It is sown only in back-yards of this district. 4. I know of two names: (1) leaf ganja (daliga- podum), used for preparing bhang, and (2) kalli, flowering tops of ganja, used for smoking. 16, Bhang is prepared only in houses. 19. It is used also in medicines. It is used in pre- paring halwas. It is used for curing diarrhæa and dysentery. It is the complement of certain native tonics used for stengthening the sexual system. 20. I know only that gosains and bairagis smoke the drug, and not respectable men. 24. Men of all castes drink bhang. The propor- tion is 25 per cent. 25. The use of ganja has largely increased of late, the reasons being (1) desire to get intoxicat- ed, and (2) ignorance and foolishness. 28. Each man consumes from ¼ tola to 1 tola in accordance with his bodily strength and habit. Gosains smoke from 1 tola to 2 tolas in a day. 29. Dhatura is used to increase intoxication. 30. It is largely done in solitude in this part of the country. Men not of a respectable character use it in public company. Only males of all ages use it. Children do not use it. 31. (a) and (b) Yes. (c) Certainly. 32. Generally speaking this habit is fostered in solitude, and continued in lonely paces, and not publicly made use of. I do not know whether gosains connect the use of this drug with any religious principle. 33. It is very much despised. In these parts it is held in very low estimation, both in a social and religous point of view. I have never known of the ganja plant being held in veneration. 34. Yes, beause they feel very uneasy without it. 35. (a) (b). Yes. (1),349 40. We never know of its use by itself, but as a component in certain medicines. I do not know whether it is used for treatment of cattle diseases. 41. By a moderate use of the drug, the con- sumer feels pleasant and gets rid of cough, if he has any. 42. Yes, beneficial, used moderately. Even by intemperate use, no positive harm seems to be caused. 43. Yes. 44. It intoxicates him and takes away weari- ness, promotes appetite. I think the intoxication lasts for about 6 hours. It brings on constipation. It weakens a man and increases bile. It produces longing. 45. It will act as poison if in the habitual use of it intemperance is reached. On heated constitutions it has the effect of weakening. On flabby constitutions it has a good effect. It dulls intelligence. The use of it retards the desire for sexual intercourse. It impairs the constitution by making the man lean. Increases digestion, removes dysentery and cough. It does not impair the moral sense. It induces laziness. By very intemperate use insanity is likely to come on. 47. No. 49. It promotes sexual strength by its being used in halwas. By smoking hemp too much, impotence will ensue. 51. Yes; no connection at all, the consumers being as a rule timid. 53. It does not at all excite. I do not know of any case, but it seems to lead to such an effect. 54 and 55. No. 136. Evidence of MR. W. A. SYMONDS, Agent and Manager to the Lessees of Sivaganga Zamindari, Madura District. 36. I have little doubt of it. The cause is the increased facility of supply, which has created demand. It is difficult to conjecture the precise nature of the proof demanded. Exact statistics, if they can be got, may furnish it, provided the facts underlying the figures are not obscured either by careless or too astute handling of the latter. By the abkari system, liquor has been brought to the doors of numbers who had before to traverse not inconsiderable distances for it, and this has been accomplished by the multiplication of shops which were formerly few and far between. Those who can believe that the admitted increase in abkari revenue has been accompanied by a decrease of consumption would believe anything. The plain truth is that the Government raises revenue to provide for luxuries, such as its prolonged annual residence at Ootacamund, and not merely to meet necessary expenses in governing the Madras Pre- sidency, throughout which the number of drunkards who reel about the public roads of an evening has increased, and is increasing. 44. I have seen habitual consumers out of health and miserably depressed when the supply was suddenly cut off. I refer to prisoners in jails under my charge. I was the Superintendent of one Central Prison and another for twenty years. 53. I have known the mildest prisoners commit aggravated assaults on their fellow-prisoners and on prison officers when under the influence of these drugs, and I believe that my experience in this respect will be confirmed by every Superintendent of a large central jail of any considerable experi- ence. Oral Evidence. 1. I was in Government employ for more than 30 years in this presidency. My present post is not under Government. My service is closed, and I am drawing pension. 36. My answer does imply that the consump- tion of the hemp drug is on the decrease, and pre- sumably, therefore, the cultivation and manufac- ture also. But I have no direct evidence of this. It is only deduced from the increase of alcohol con- sumption. 41. My answer is only based upon personal knowledge. I learnt from the doctors that the persons I refer to were ganja consumers. Once a week the Superintendent of the jail and Medical Officer hold a joint inspection, and it was on these occasions probably that the doctors mentioned the fact. Prisoners never dreamed of asking me for ganja, as it is a prohibited article. They did some- times ask the dressers and the Medical Officer; but I am certain that a medical recommendation for ganja never was made. Such recommendations have been made for tobacco. What I have recorded of the effects of deprivation relates principally to opium; but I remember that the hemp drugs were also mentioned in that connection, though much less frequently than opium. 45. I should say that ganja was unquestionably doing more harm than alcohol or opium, and that opium was the least harmful of the three. By ganja, I mean the flowering head of the plant either smoked or eaten. I should think it was more harmful than opium-smoking; but I limited my written answers to three of the Commission's questions, because I thought they contained the only points on which I was qualified. to speak. I have no special knowledge of the subject, except such as could be picked up by a Superintendent of a jail. 53. I can recollect assaults of the kind having been committed; but I cannot give the number of the cases that occurred. They occurred in every jail of which I have been in charge. The ganja must have been smuggled into the jail. I cannot remember the details of any single case as regards name, year, or date. The punishment registers probably mention ganja in some of these cases. In many cases, doubtless, punishment was awarded without the drug having been mentioned at all. I was never in charge of the Vellore Jail. In the cases in which these assaults could be with certainty attributed to ganja, the man's breath would smell of it, or ganja might be found on his person, or witnesses or jail officials might have seen him smoking. Prisoners might undoubtedly break out and commit violent assaults without being under the influence of narcotics.
350 137. Evidence of MR. M. MALLAYYA, Manager, Kasim Kota Zamindari, Vizagapatam District. Oral evidence. 1. I am manager of the Kasim Kota zamindari estate. I have been managing for ten years, as the minor's father is my brother. I am forty years old. My caste is Brahman. I know the whole of this district and the Agency. This is the only district of which I have special know- ledge. The hemp plant grows wild in the Agency, but not the plain tracts. It is to be found near the houses and in the jungles too. Near the houses the plants are sown by the people, I should say. In my own village of Kasim Kota the plant grows in a number of compounds 351 worms by exposure to air and light after six months. 20. The lower order of Mahrattas and Panda- ram-Parathasus smoke ganja of either sort (above given). The proportion of people using ganja is very insignificant and may not exceed 1 in 5,000. 21. Chur is used for smoking mixed with equal quantity of tobacco. Both are well washed and then used for smoking. 22. Both native and foreign ganja. Ganja is imported from Dharmapuri (Salem district) into this district. 23. Yes; in fact both bhang and ganja are used in smoking by the classes above named. 25. No increase or decrease to any appreciable extent. 28. (a) Half an anna weight of ganja, worth about six pies. (b) One anna weight, and worth from 9 to 12 pies. 29. See under 15. 30. The purnathi above specified is consumed in solitude. Ganja is smoked generally in com- pany, and it is confined to the wale sex. Even old people continue to use the drug. Children do not consume the drug. 32. No such social or religious custom prevails in this province. 33. The custom is regarded as degrading, and the user of ganja is not respected. The use is in disrepute, because the users lose their self-control, and become offensive to neighbours. There is no custom of worshipping the plant in this province. 35. The discontent cannot amount to a political danger. The prohibition may lead to the use of other intoxicating drugs or spirits. 38. Flat and chur only are used here, but no difference in effect is ascribed to them. 40. Native doctors sometimes prescribe the use of ganja preparation called purnathi-lakiam (see query 15) for those suffering from dyspepsia, dysentery, liver complaints, stomach ache and general debility. 43. The uses of purnathi confection are not offensive, but those using ganja always select secluded places. 58. It is working well in this province. 60. The production and use is so very small that it is better to leave matters as they are. 139. Evidence of BONDILI MOTIRAM, Cultivator, Cocanada, Godavari District. 1. I was formerly a medicine-maker, and so I can give information about the ganja plant and leaf. 2. Ganja does not grow spontaneously, except in wild tracts to a very limited extent, and in Kabul, Nepal and Punjab. It grows abun352 140. Evidence of LANKA KRISTNIENGAR, Vaishnava Brahmin, Chairman, Munici- pal Council, Srirangam, Trichinopoly District. 1. I have given my answers from information got by me from persons who eat or smoke hemp drugs, and from native doctors. 3. I have not heard that hemp plant grows spontaneously in this district. It appears that it is imported from northern countries. I have seen a few ganja plants grown and reared up in Muhammadan mosques, and in flower gardens. 14. (a) Ganja is the dried flowering portion of the plant from which the gum or resin has not been removed. (b) Charas is the resin or the gum removed from the leaves, stems and flowers. (c) Bhang is the larger leaves and the covers of the seed or capsules. All these are prepared in Trichinopoly and in Srirangam. 16. I am told that bhang is prepared with ganja, pepper and jaggery, in houses and sold in bazars in small balls, which the people buy and eat. 19. I have seen ganja used for smoking, but not the charas. 20. I have seen chiefly the bairagis who travel about the countries on pilgrimages from the north, and the religious mendicants, and also Muhammadans as a class smoke ganja freely and frequently, but not the charas. 24. I know and have personally seen a Smartha Brahmin (Sivite) eat ganja and a bairagi drink ganja prepared as follows: 353 generally by bairagis, mendicants, and the poorer classes. 24. Bhang is more generally smoked than eaten or drunk. I believe that all consumers of ganja resort occasionally to bhang. 25. Opinions differ. I believe it is a fact that where good liquor (toddy or arrack) is obtainable, the consumption of ganja, etc., declines. 28. I am told the moderate consumer can satisfy his desires for about half an anna. 32. I am aware of none. 33. Public opinion is opposed to the consump- tion of these drugs, as even the moderate consumer is liable to indulge to excess. 39. I am unable to say; opinions are divided on this subject. 40. Yes; all the drugs are used in some form as medicines by all native doctors, They are used externally, in cattle diseases, sometimes. 41. Yes, ganja; as regards the others I cannot say. 42. It is generally recognized that the mode- rate use of these drugs is sometimes beneficial, and generally harmless. The danger is of smoking or eating to excess. The moderate use of these drugs is considered a prophylactic against malarial fevers, and other diseases incidental to life in the Indian jungles. 43. Yes. 44. Slight intoxication, the spirits are raised, and the general tone more animated. It is refresh- ing, and though for the moment it allays hunger, it afterwards increases the appetite. How long the effect lasts depends much on the quantity taken, and the constitution of the consumer. Say a couple of hours generally. It is followed by a feeling of drowsiness, 45. Not in any instance that has come under my notice. 49. Yes; I am told there are two or three pre- parations from these drugs, prescribed for that purpose by those who pretend to know. Note.354 32. A. person smoking ganja generally hands the pipe over to those happening to be about him, provided they are accustomed to smoke it. By bairagis, sanyasis and fakirs, ganja is smoked generally with a view to facilitate concentration of mind for divine contemplation. Labouring classes use it to find relief and kill fatigue. Beyond these there are no more customs here. 33. The consumption of ganja is looked down upon as a bad habit, except in the case of bairagis, sanyasis, and other religious ascetics. The hemp plant is not worshipped in these parts. The drinking of bhang is not generally in disrepute like ganja. 34. To those much addicted to use, such as fakirs, bairagis and sanyasis, it would be a serious privation to forego consumption of the drug. 35. As the number of consumers is compar- atively very small here, the use of ganja may be prohibited by making its cultivation, preparation or possession penal; but even then there may be illicit consumption, at least to some extent. The prohibition may cause some discontent, but such discontent may not amount to political danger. The prohibition may be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 36. No; because this is cheaper than alcohol. 37. As already stated above, charas is not in use here. 38. Only the flat ganja is in use in these parts. 39. Smoking is said to be more harmful, because it affects the lungs. 40. Yes; but to a small extent. A paste of ganja is applied to sores. It seems to serve the purpose of carbolic acid. The tongues of cattle refusing to eat are rubbed over with powder made of ganja, saffron and salt. Ganja mixed with grain and pounded gives strength to cattle, and is believed to keep them in good condition. 41. Moderate use of ganja is believed to pro- mote digestion in the beginning, to alleviate fatigue and to prevent diseases likely to arise by use of different waters. It is the moderate habitual use that is referred to here. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of the drug on the habitual consumer is refresh- ing, and allays hunger. The effect is said to last from one to six hours. Want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness in the habitual consumer. 45. Habitual moderate use of the drug is said not to produce any serious bad effects, physical, mental or moral, on the whole; but, compared to toddy, they say its effect in the long run cannot be said to be altogether good. 46. Habitual excessive use of the drug is said to produce bad effects, such as attenuation of body, forgetfulness, laziness, and impotence, and even insanity sometimes. 47 and 48. No. 49. Yes; When mixed with opium, etc., and used in the form of electuaries, ganja increases venereal desire. Moderate use of ganja is not supposed to produce impotence, although it slight- ly affects it. 51. No; it has no connection whatever with crime like alcohol. On the other hand, it has the reputation of making people quiet and timid. 53 to 55. No. 56 and 57. Not known. 58. There are two ganja shops in Adoni, and the right of selling ganja in them is sold for R180 in 1893-94. The low amount fetched is manifestly due to the fact that people grow the plant here and there for their own use without any restriction. 59. There would no doubt be increase in the revenue under this head if restriction be placed on people growing the plant and its growth made penal. 60. Ganja is not being regularly sown and cultivated in these parts in fields; but a few plants are being here and there put in by people accustomed to its use either in the yards of their houses or by the edges of their fields. There is at present no restriction or control on cultivation of the latter kind. 61. Chants is not being produced here. 63 and 64. 1 see no objection. 65. The taxation of ganja is reasonable. There is no separate taxation on bhang or charas here. Charas is not in use here, and bhang to be drunk is made from dry leaves picked from flat ganja. 66. There is only one kind of ganja (flat) in use here. 67 to 69. No. 70. The person who has purchased the right of selling ganja imports ganja into Adoni mainly from the Kistna and Kurnool districts. No cases of smuggling have come to notice; but there may be smuggling to a small extent at least by people using ganja grown in their yards, etc. It must be admitted that untaxed drug is also in use. 143. Evidence of E. SUBRAMANA IYER, Brahmin, Chairman, Municipal Council, Con- jevaram, Chingleput District. 2. It is not grown in the Conjevaram Muni- cipality Chingleput district. 3 to 6. I have no knowledge of such places. 7. None in this town. 8 to 17. None. 18. I learn that the drug begins to lose its inherent quality when kept a month or so. It loses its quality gradually. It may be kept good for about six months with ordinary care. Evapor- ation causes its deterioration, but it may be kept safe for some time by wrapping it up in a wax- cloth and preserving it in a close case. 19. Ganja and charas are not only used for smoking, but also for the following purposes: 355 22. It is not imported here. 23. Bhang is also used for smoking. The use is not confined to any particular locality or to any particular class here. It is freely made use of by the Bairagi pilgrims. 42. It is both eaten and drunk by the few people that make use of the drug here. 25. It is on the increase now. 26. The few consumers in these parts are rather habitual moderate consumers. 27. The use is not restricted to any class. People make use of it more on account of its dead- ening effects on bodily ailments. It deprives them of the feelings of pain, keeps their spirits up while they are in a languid state. 28. It is one anna per day. 29. It is generally mixed here with an equal quantity of tobacco. Dhatura is not used here. Tobacco is mixed with it to season the effects of bhang. Bhang massala is also sold here. Its ingredients are not so well known. 30. Very few people practise it in solitude. It is generally confined to the male sex. It is not confined to any time of life. If once practised, the consumer is constrained to use it till the end of his life. It is not usual to make use of it with children, but they are sometimes mixed with country medicines in case of dysentery, etc. 31. It is easily formed. It is difficult to break it off afterwards. There is a little tendency for the habit to become excessive. 32. The use is not encouraged by any social or religious customs. It is not considered to be essen- tial in any way; but, on the other hand, it is deprecated by the society in general and forbidden by religion. 33. Vide answer above. There is no plant to be worshipped here; but it is generally used as sacrifices to some of the minor Hindu deities. 34. Yes; no doubt it will be a serious privation to them, which may result in serious diseases. 35. It may not be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs with the excessive consumers. There may be attempt to consume it illicitly. It may create discontent among some of the con- sumers, but not to such an extent as to apprehend any political danger. Alcoholic stimulants and other drugs are not considered to be good substi- tutes for the drugs in question. Consumers can in no way be satisfied with these in place of those drugs. 36. No; people do not change their drugs for liquors on account of the comparatively high price of the latter. 37. There is a difference between the effects of the two; but the former, which is very valuable, is not imported to this part of the country. 39. Smoking is less injurious than eating and drinking the drugs, as smoking is less intoxicating than the latter two. 40. The drug is also prescribed by the native doctors on account of its medicinal quality. 41. (a) It is used as a digestive thing. (b) It cannot support a man under severe exposure. (c) and (d) No. 42. No doubt it is harmful, though moderately used. It weakens the constitution by absorbing the blood in the system. 43. They are more or less unconscious, and hence inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. It is refreshing to a little extent. It also produces a little intoxication. It cannot allay hunger. It creates appetite in an hour and a half in the utmost. The consumer gets languid after that time. 45. Physically the man gets weaker when not properly nourished. Mentally he gets absent- minded; morally he becomes useless. It does impair. It injures the digestion and causes loss of appetite in the long run. It causes dysentery, bronchitis or asthma when not properly nourished. It does so. No doubt it deadens the intellect, but does not lead to insanity. 47 and 48. No. 49 and 50. Both the moderate and the excessive use of the drug may tend to produce impotence ultimately. 53. It does not incite to such crime, violent or otherwise. 54. No. 60 and 61. It is not produced in this town. 68. There is only one shop licensed for the sale of ganja. 144. Evidence of RUNGO SRINIVASA RAO, Brahmin, Chairman, Union Panchayat, Madakasira, Anantpur District. 1. Local knowledge. 3. I know not much of any district. 14. (a) ganja, (c) bhang. Madakasira taluka. Moderate. 16. (a) Yes. (b) Not known. (c) Not known in these parts. 19. Yes. They are also mixed with spices, made into pills, and taken every morning and evening. 20. Fakirs and Boyas, etc., lower class. In places where no other intoxicating drugs are available. 24. Vide reply to Question 20. 25. It is increasing. Some are under the im- pression that they will be relieved of the pains in the joints, etc., if they take this. 28. One tola, 6 pies. 32. Not known. 33. The practice is held as bad. Many object to take this. Not known. None worship in these parts. 39. Not known. 40. To a certain extent by native doctors. Not known. 41. Yes. It depends upon the nature of the constitution. 42. Vide reply to Question 41. 43. Yes. vol. vi. 3 B 2
356 44 (b) It is refreshing. (c )and (d ).Yes. (e )It creates appetite. (f)Three hours. (g )Yes. Headache and uneasiness of mind. (h) Yes. 45. It affects both physically and mentally. 49. Not known. 51. To a certain extent. Not known. 53. Not known. 54. No. 55. Not known. Yes. 145. Evidence of the REV. H. J.GOFFIN,*Missionary, Kadiri, Cuddapah District. 1. Have lived in South India 15 years. A ganja shop is within half a mile of my door. 2. The only two names by which the article is known here (Kadiri) are bangi-aku or bangi-leaf and ganja. The small twigs with leaves and flowers are sold in small bundles by the growers to the shopkeeper, who strips off the flowers and suitable leaves for sale as ganja. The terms flat, round, and broken are not in use. 3. Nowhere. 7. Yes, as above described. Particulars can be obtained from Government office. 8. Some increase probably due to the action of Government in licensing the sale of it. Taxing the article puts a higher price on it, and makes it more worth while to grow it. 10. No special class. The ordinary raiyat puts a few seeds into his garden, and so makes a few rupees extra. 17. The ganja of the district is not prepared by any special class, though perhaps Muhammadans chiefly do it. Any one may set up the shop by taking out the license. 19. In Kadiri, ganja is used for smoking only. 20. No particular class of ganja smokers can be designated, except that they are mostly of the poor and lower classes. Fakirs or religious men- dicants also are much addicted to its use. 21 See Question No. 2. 25. Slightly on the increase. See Question 8. 29. The only ordinary mixture with ganja is a little tobacco, and this is used because the ganja is damp with the water which has been employed to prepare it for smoking, and the tobacco helps to dry it. 30. There is very little solitude about a Hindu's practice of anything. He smokes his ganja any- where and at any time. Its use by children and females is unknown. Generally speaking, the middle-aged and old use it most. 31. I think the habit of smoking ganja may be easily contracted, and broken off without much difficulty. Of course, it is the tendency of the use of all such narcotics to become excessive. 32. None. The religious mendicants, who use it largely, do so probably (1) because they are a lazy, bad class of men; (2) because it helps them to bear the hard-hips of their peculiar kind of life; and (3) because the half-crazy, imbecile demeanour it produces is not unfavourably regarded by the people. 33. It is generally looked down upon as disre- putable for the reason that its effects are bad. There is no worship of the plant amongst the people here. 34. No doubt excessive consumers would feel the deprivation very much, but they form an in- significant fraction of the people. 35. Quite feasible. No doubt the drug would be consumed illicitly, and no doubt also the prohi- bition would be followed by a slight increase of alcoholic stimulants; and specially of opium. I do not think there would be any danger politically in prohibiting its use, but its enforcement would be difficult. 36. No. 41. Doctors should be able to say. 43. Yes. Some who practise the habit say that they do so in preference to taking alcoholic sti- mulants, because the latter makes them noisy and quarrelsome, whereas the ganja only has the effect of making them dreamily contented with every- thing. 44. A slight intoxication, during which the ills of life, hunger included, are forgotten. The after- effects are, of course, lassitude and weakness, and the desire to renew the indulgence is considerable. It is said, however, that after a short time of dyspeptic trouble, the desire passes away, and the habit may be broken off without great difficulty. 45. Most certainly the effects are injurious in every way, more especially, I think, mentally. The digestion becomes impaired and the body more Most certainly the effects are injurious in or less emaciated, but its ill effects are chiefly seen in the peculiar imbecility which it produces357 146. Evidence of the REV. J, DESIGACHART, Missionary, Society for the Propaga- tion of the Gospel, Badvel, Cuddapah District. 1. I have enquired from the planters and eaters of hemp drug. 1 lived several years in Burma, and Arakan and in Badvel for the last two years among Muhammadans who are habituated to this vice. 2. Female hemp plant is only known in this province as ganja or bhang plant. 3. Hemp plant is generally grown in the Kurnool District and in Hyderabad and the Mysore Dominion. 4. It is known here only as ganja or bhang leaves. 5. Black cotton-soil, and red soil, which con- tains more of fatty soil. 6. It is dense in the Kurnool District and scattered in the Cuddapah District. 7. Yes. (a) and (d) Yes. In Cumbum Taluka chiefly, and in Chagalmurry and Jammala Maduga Falukas. 8. There would have been more increase, had it not been for the restriction of the abkari rules. 9. The ground. is well tilled and manured, and then seed is sown, and a heap of straw is covered over the seeds, so that the moist may continue till the plant springs up, 10. No, they do not form a special class. Yes. 11. Yes. 12. Yes. Under the pasture of black hills in the Kurnool and a part of the Cuddapah District. No, the male plant is not extirpated. 13. Yes, in all districts. The cultivation is common where the majority of the people are Muhammadans. Yes; black cotton soil. Rain- fall is extreme in Ceded Districts. Here hemp plant is spontaneously grown. 14. Ganja is prepared in different ways. Some use it in the shape of balls or cakes after mixing spices very richly Some prepare it in the shape of liquid, adding spices and sweet things, chiefly jaggery. It is also prepared in the shape of sticky stuff, hot and sweet mixed together. It is used also in the shape of powder. 16. Generally in houses, and chiefly in secluded places where lazy Muhammadans assemble for idle talk. 17. Generally by Muhammadans. 18. No. If kept closed, lasts very long; and the more it becomes older the more it becomes stronger and intoxicating. If kept carelessly, it looses its effects and becomes deteriorated. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking, but is also usually taken internally in the shape of pills easily swallowable. 20. Muhammadans chiefly and Sudras, of lower order s, i.e., lazy men. 21. Round ganja is preferred for smoking. 23. Bhang also is used for smoking in pipes. They smoke till they get quite stupefied, say about 15 minutes. 24. Majority of Muhammadans of Southern India and some class of Bairagis in the North- Western Provinces and Calcutta eat bhang. 25. It is on the increase. 26. (a) 3. (c) 1. 27. Hard-working class of people, labourers, boatmen, and jutka-drivers Those who can- not afford to spend money on liquors are compelled to go in for these. Smoking these drugs induces more intoxication than valuable liquors. 28. To induce intoxication majum is generally used. Two marble sizes are quite enough, which costs only two pies each. Purnathi is another kind of preparation. Three pies worth is quite enough to induce intoxication. Majum with a very small proportion of bhang is used medi- cinally. 29. Ghee and sugar. No, I do not know of any bhang massala. 30. It is mainly confined to the male sex. No, children are not given these stuffs for fear of being poisoned, except when it is very carefully pre- pared by experienced physicians. 31. It is very easy to contract these habits It is very difficult to break off these habits when one is addicted to it. 32. There is neither social nor religious custom in consuming these drugs. Such customs are considered to be of a vely mean sort that a man could acquire. It is injurious to the health. One that is addicted to these habits loses appetite, virtue, colour of the body, and his face gradually turns quite pale. 33. Regarded by all classes to be a very mean and bad habit. Such men's company is avoided. both publicly and privately. During the mouth of August, the hilly tribes worship the hemp plant. 34. Muhammadans predominate, Hindus are next. 35. Even if proper steps are taken, it may not be feasible. Though there is a strict law prohibit- ing the cultivation of hemp plant, yet there are breaches. The prohibition may cause serious discontent among the consumers, and won't amount to any political danger. 36. Alcohol can't be substituted. 38. All have similar effects. 39. Smoking is certainly less injurious than consumption. In smoking pure plant made into a size of a cake balled, but in drinking and eating different ingredients are mixed which lessen the power of the stuff. 40. Native doctors prescribe purnathi for dysen- tery, indigestion, and diabetes, and it is occasion- ally given for restlessness to children in a very small quantity to give them good rest. When purnathi is taken in a. very small quantity, it is, I am of opinion, very efficacious. 42. Certainly it is not at all beneficial. 43. Quiet and inoffensive. 44. The immediate effect is that it gives them rest and pleasure and satisfies hunger. It is refreshing indeed. It does produce a very little intoxication. It can't be the real intoxication in its proper sense. It does not create appetite. The effect lasts not more than an hour or two. Subsequent want is very greatly felt without it. One that uses the drug behaves worse than a mad man.
358 45. (a) Yes, physically, mentally, and morally too. (b) Yes. (c) Does not interfere. (d) No. (e) After reaction sets in, it must induce. (f)It does deaden the intellect. Produces a mild formild of insanity. (g) I can't say. 47. Not at all a hereditary habit, but does affect children's health. As far as my experience goes, I can confidently testify that the children of such men are generally very weak and sickly. 49. By enquiry I understand that prostitutes do indulge in these habits. 51. Yes; the proportion is very large. 53. They do commit very violent crimes. 55. Yes. 58. As there is no authority prohibiting pos- session and transport without permission, the excise system or administration does not work well, and there is no probability of improvement also, and the people have ample opportunity to dispose them off. 60. The cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant is not at all under anv control. I would strongly propose such a control is quite necessary. Requires thorough modification. 62. Though there be a strict law prohibiting the production of hemp plant, I do not think it will be possible to prevent the production. Though not publicly but secretly people would plant. 63. If possible, I would advocate total abolition. 64. Now the existing Government rules do not prohibit the possession of ganja or any other drugs by any body. Any body can manufacture and keep any quantity in stock. There must be a special law prohibiting the manufacture by all, and only men who possess a license should be allowed to manufacture. Any one can transport it without any trouble, and generally the manu- facturers sell at their own quarters without license. There must be a definite law bearing on the subject. 65. The present tax is not at all reasonable. 66. Yes, certainly there should be different rates of taxation. 68. There are shops only in two places in this taluka, but no sale, as the drugs could be had at a lower rate at the manufacturers'. These shops sustain great losses. 69. No, the wishes of the people are not con- sulted. To consult the local public not necessary. N.B.359 5 years of age. My opinion that excessive smokers do not have children is based on hearsay. 53. The answer is based only upon hearsay, not personal experience. 65. I understand the present tax is very small; but I don't know exactly what it is. The tax is not high enough. 68. By manufacturers, I mean anybody and everybody who chooses to grow the plant. In my note comparing ganja and opium, I refer to the eating of opium and not the smoking of it. I do not know anything about the smoking of opium. My remark about the harmlessness of opium smoking is not based on experience I know some opium eaters, and they are not so mischievous as ganja smokers. The ganja smokers 1 have des- cribed are idlers, it is true; but they are mischievous also, in that people are afraid to pass them at night. Idlers of any sort might be offensive; but the idleness of these men results from their habit of ganja smoking. 147. Evidence of the REV. W. ROBINSON, Missionary, London Missionary Sobriety, Salem. 1. I have seen ganja smokers at intervals in the last 16 years. 3. In Salem, on the Yelagiri hills, and the Javadis. These hills are in the Tripatore Taluka, and this ganja is considered the best. I have seen the plant growing wild in many parts of the district. It is abundant. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared by the people themselves. 16. Ganja in the rough state is sold in the bazar, The people prepare it for consumption themselves. Ganja, can be, and is, prepared from the wild plant. Coolies on coffee estates grow it and prepare it. 19. Ganja is used in the way described below:360 society, they ill-treated and abused him, throwing his cooking pots and other property out of his house. He showed no resentment or temper at this. He seemed to be utterly indifferent about it. This was what first drew my special attention to the hemp drugs. I could not understand his for- get fulness of our instruction and his extraordinary indifference. On enquiry I learnt he was in the habit of taking legiam, i.e., either majum or pura- nathi. Legiam is defined in the Tamil Dictionary as first licking, second lambative, third an electuary. There are three kinds of legiam, an opium legiam, a ganja legiam, and an opium-cum-ganja legiam. I cannot say which of these three the above men- tioned bairagi used to take, My impression is that he would take all three. He was not a ganja smoker. I have seen five persons who are lunatics, though not dangerous, wandering about. in Salem who have been pointed out to me as object lessons in the abuse of ganja smoking. I have not seen them smoke myself. There are five other persons whom I have myself seen smoking ganja and whom I knew well. Two of them I cannot now trace, as they left the district. The third, a Muham- madan, died some years ago. I believe the other two are in the district, but I have not seen them for the last two years. I had known them before for various periods, in some cases up to ten years. The effects of the ganja habit upon them were redness of eyes, a drawn expression of face, and a sleepy and sometimes angry look. The habit appears to me to be an extremely ruinous one. I regarded the above five men as ruined. They were incapable of any continuity of thought. My experience of the effects of ganja smoking is based on my observa- tion of these five men. One was a Muhammadan, one a bairagi; the other three belonged to the inferior castes. The last three had evidently been discarded by their caste-fellows on account of their vile habit, and they could not or would not tell their own caste. They had no occupation. The Muhammadan was in charge of a rest-house or chatram. Without calling them " wrecks," I can say that all five were entirely disabled from conducting the ordi- nary business of life. I cannot say how long they had been smoking or how much they were in the habit of smoking. These are the only cases of ganja smoking with which I am personally acquainted. I do not know whether these men took spirits, but think not, because they were habitually quiet. I do not think they took opium, because they could not have afforded it. 3. I have seen the plant growing wild on the boundaries of fields. I have seen it growing in such places in the hedges, and on manure heaps near houses. I don't know that it grows in the jungles. On the boundaries of fields and manure heaps it may have been planted. In the only cases with which I am acquainted, except one to be hereafter mentioned, it was planted by horse-keepers, servants of Europeans. I have heard it is grown behind native houses, but I have not seen it. I was once walking with an old Tamil man in Sankaridrug, and he plucked the plant from waste land along the side of the road. It is of the growth in the hedgerows that I speak principally in my answer to question 3. At Sankaridrug there may have been a sparsely scattered growth over several acres. I saw the plant on the Shevaroy hills also; once in a garden when it was growing very abundantly, having spread from a plant experimentally cultivated by Dr. Short, who had botanical tastes; once on manure heaps on the estate of a planter; and I heard of it also, as being cultivated in the cooly lines of another planter. I cannot say to what extent it was growing in the last place, but I was told there was a good deal of it. It was growing thickly in Dr. Short's garden on an area about as big as this room, but I heard it was growing abundantly on other parts of the garden which forms part of an estate of 140 acres. It is two or three years since I was first able to identify the plant. I am singularly deficient in the power of differentiating plants, but the smell of the hemp plant is well known to me. 32. he equivalent of the word "devils " is " Thushtar devaigal" which means evil deities who require to be appeased. The whole of my written answer to this question is based on hearsay and reading. 33. The passage containing the mention of ganja and opium in the work of Pathamanjali is taken from a Tamil version of the Sanskrit, for the correctness of which I will not vouch. 42. The cases mentioned in this answer I had known for years. I visited time men during their last illnesses, and then ascertained that they had been in time habit of taking ganja in "legiam." The legiam may have been of any one of the three kinds described under question 1. I made persis- tent efforts to discover what the drug used had really been, but failed. Previous to the last illness, there was nothing specially noticeable in the ap- pearance or manner of any of them except extreme irritability in one man, who was 65 years old. This man could keep nothing on his stomach. He had been a drunkard. The other two did not drink. I give these cases as instances of the fatal effects of long continued but extremely moderate use of the drug. I used the word " cumulative," because a native friend of mine who practises the Tamil system of medicine, on my expressing surprise at the sudden collapse of these men used a Tamil expression, of which the literal translation is " because he has taken it for many years that medicine inside in plenty too much." This man is well educated in Tamil literature, but knows nothing of English medicine, He pointed out to me that death was the result of the continued use of the drug, and the above expression is his explana- tion of the way in which the result came about; but I am not in a position to say whether he was right or wrong. In one case it was a relation living in the house, and in the other cases it was neighbours and relations living outside who gave me the information that the men had been taking legiam. 43 and 44. The pill referred to in these answers is the legiam. 45. The man referred to in this answer is one of the five lunatics mentioned in my first answer. I know nothing of the case myself. It was pointed out to me as a case of lunacy resulting from ganja. The second part of answer 45 refers to cases which I have seen in the course of my travels in the district of persons who had the symptoms described. I have asked about them and been told that they were ganja smokers. 51. One of the cases, on which my answer that ganja drives people to violence is based, occurred about ten years ago. A man shot his neighbours, and was tried, and, I believe, executed for it. People said that the deed was committed under the excitement of ganja. I have heard people quarrelling, and been informed that they were
361 under the influence of ganja and liquor. The violent people are generally those who take both ganja and liquor. 59. I think the control of the hemp drugs is part of a very much larger question, viz., the restriction by Government of all poisonous drugs in the Indian bazars. I think Government ought to prohibit the use of ganja except for medicinal purposes. I think ganja is very much worse than alcohol, because the five men whom I have mentioned above presented a much worse appearance the morning after a bout of smoking ganja than the drinker does after indulgence in his liquor. 148. Evidence of the REV. W. H. CAMPBELL, Missionary, London Missionary Society, Cuddapah. 1. I have lived in the Cuddapah District for nine years and have spent the greater part of my time in going from village to village visiting and teaching the people. I have come into personal contact with all classes of society, and have not only seen a good deal of the effects of the hemp drugs, but have made very careful inquiries about them of consumers and of others. 2. Yes. The name bhang is commonly applied to all the various productions of the hemp plant by the Telugu people. Muhammadans distin- guish between ganja and bhang, but only a few of them know the word charas, as the drug is not commonly used here. The ganja produced and used in this district is broken ganja, and it is spoken of simply as ganja or bhang. Flat ganja is sometimes imported, but it is not, so far as I have been able to ascertain, distinguished by any special name. 3. I can only speak of the Cuddapah District. I have never met with the wild plant here, nor, though I have made special inquiries, have I ever heard of its occurrence. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated in almost every part of this district for the production of ganja. Charas is not produced in the district, and, al- though bhang is sometimes used, the plant cannot be said to be grown for its production. The plant is never grown here for the sake of the fibre or seeds. The cultivation for the production of ganja is pretty extensive. In addition to the growth for sale, the plant is grown for private use in almost every village. Consumers rear a few plants in a garden or back yard, and gather and preserve the ganja for themselves. 8. I cannot give a direct answer, but refer to question 25 where I shall deal with the consump- tion of ganja. 9. Hemp is grown in gardens watered by irri- gation from channels or wells. It is a five months' crop. As the plants begin to flower a careful inspection is made and all the male flowers are destroyed. When the female plants are in full flower, the leaves are removed and the stems with the flowering tops are cut, tied in bundles and taken to market. 10. In this district hemp is cultivated by all classes. 13. In this district the cultivation of hemp is unrestricted. I have found the plant in almost every part of the district, but it grows best in the higher ground. It can be cultivated anywhere in the district. 14. Ganja, is prepared in large quantities in this district, but production of charas is unknown. In the few cases in which charas is known and used, it is specially procured from Madras. Bhang can hardly be said to be produced, as it is rarely used and is not commonly sold. 15. After the flower heads have been separated from the stem, they are carefully and repeatedly washed until the water comes away without any discolouration. The heads are then crushed to- gether and sold in this broken state. The flat ganja is not produced here. (b) For eating ganja is mixed with treacle and sold in mass. When used in curry the ordinary broken ganja is used. (c) For drinking the ordinary ganja is made into a powder. 16. Where bhang is used it is prepared by the people in their own houses. 17. There is no particular class concerned in the preparation of the drug. It is prepared either by cultivators or by consumers. 18. Ganja does not deteriorate by keeping. The people say it will keep for any length of time, if preserved from damp. If damp attacks it, it becomes mouldy and loses its strength. As there is a very considerable illicit sale of ganja, Gov- ernment statistics will hardly show the real extent of the trade. 19. Ganja is used for eating and drinking as well as for smoking. (1) It is powdered, mixed with water, and drunk. (2) It is mixed with treacle (jaggery) and eaten. This is common among the Kshatriyas and other higher classes, who would not like to be seen smoking the drug. (3) It is put into curry, especially brain curry. This is common at funeral ceremonies amongst various Sudra castes. (4) It is pounded and pressed into meat, es- pecially such pieces as the heart or liver, and the whole is roasted and eaten. Though smok- ing is the principal form of consumption, devotees of the drug like to use it in every pos- sible way. 20. Ganja is used not in one locality, but gen- erally throughout the district. It is, I think, more freely used in the black-cotton soil talukas than in any other part. It is very largely used by Muhammadans. All classes of Sudras, agri- cultural and artisan, use it; so do the low classes, such as Waddes, Mala and Madigas. Its use is almost universal among the wandering classes, such as fakirs and beggars. 21. Chur or broken ganja is the kind commonly used. The flat ganja is imported, but the people prefer the other. Some smokers say that the flat is too heating. 22. Charas is not sold here. What is used is procured from Madras by consumers. vol. vi. 3c
362 23. Bhang is occasionally used for smoking by the poorer classes on account of its cheapness. They can generally get it for nothing, but only resort to it when they have no money to buy ganja. 24. If bhang is eaten or drunk, it is only in very rare and exceptional cases. 25. All the older people state that the use of ganja is on the increase. They say that this is due to the restrictions on the production and sale of alcohol. Formerly the private distillation of arrack from the bark of the babul tree was very common, and in consequence liquor could be pro- cured at a very small cost. Now that the price of alcoholic liquors has risen so largely, very many, it is said, are abandoning alcohol for the cheaper drug. A man can get drunk for quarter to half an anna, if he uses ganja; it will cost him ten times as much if he resorts to alcoholic liquors. 26. I could hardly answer decidedly, but I should think the following proportion about right, so far as this district is concerned: 363 are restive and refuse to permit themselves to be milked, ganja is sometimes given to stupefy them in order that they may become accustomed to being milked. 41. The use of hemp drugs is always pernicious. It is not a food-accessory or a digestive, but on the contrary injures the digestive organs by inter- fering with their natural healthy action. It undoubtedly prevents hunger and fatigue being felt at the time, but at the expense of a very severe reaction. A moderate consumer of ganja is not capable of the same fatigue and endurance as a non-consumer of the same physique. I have never heard of ganja keeping off fever. Here ganja smokers are at least as liable to malarial fever as any others. 42. I consider the moderate use of these drugs to be distinctly harmful. There is in the first place an almost inevitable tendency toward excess in all who use the drug. Use creates appetite, and habitual use necessitates a gradual increase in the amount of the drug used in order to produce satisfaction. In the second place, the action of the drugs is in itself injurious to the digestive and nervous systems, and through these to the intellectual and moral nature of the consumer. 43. As a rule moderate smokers are inoffensive to their neighbours, but they are generally regard- ed as untrustworthy. No one would think of trust- ing a ganja smoker or of accepting his word on any matter of importance. 44. The habitual consumer certainly feels re- freshed and invigorated by the moderate use of the drug. Until he uses it he feels restless and un- comfortable, and the idea of exertion of any kind is distasteful to him. When he has had his smoke be feels at rest and is ready to begin his work. A small quantity of the drug will not produce intoxi- cation in a habitual consumer, and consequently such a one is always tempted to indulge to ex- cess in order to experience the pleasant effects of intoxication. Habitual consumers as a rule use the drug three times a day as they say they cannot remain longer without it. The effect may thus be supposed to last about three hours when the after- effects begin; and when these become distinctly dis- tressing, the man must again resort to the drug. The after-effects are very distinct. They are exces- sive lassitude and an accompanying irritability, headache and giddiness, and an uneasy gnawing sensation in the stomach. If the drug is not speed- ily resorted to, the symptoms become very much more pronounced. 45. The use of ganja certainly injures the digestive organs and causes a lack of appetite. Many smokers have told me that they didn't care whether they got their food or not if only they could get their supply of ganja. A young man named Philip, a teacher in a school under my charge, had his constitution completely ruined by indulging in ganja smoking for about a month or six weeks. His digestion was destroyed and some time he had no appetite and felt repulsion at the sight of food. After he had been given strong purgatives, this to a great extent disappeared. When I saw the young man. which was about a fortnight after his illness commenced he was very weak and trembled and started from time to time. He seemed unable to look steadily at an object for any time and could not answer my questions intelligently. His mind was permanently affected and he has never since been able to do any work. So far as I could find out he had not used the drug for more than six weeks and had never gone to any great excess. The moderate use of the drug certainly impairs the moral sense and makes a man lazy and useless. When the people speak of a man as " a ganja man," they mean a lazy, good-for-nothing fellow who cannot be trusted. I know a great many ganja smokers, and I believe hardly one of them is capable of distinguishing between truth and falsehood in the narration of an occurrence. As a rule ganja smokers work spasmodically and fitfully and are incapable of prolonged exertion. I have not met any cases of persons who have taken to hemp to obtain relief from brain disease, nor of insanity disposing people to indulge in these drugs. 46. There can be no question of the effect of the habitual excessive use of ganja, I have met with a considerable number of persons who have become insane through such use. In about half of those the insanity was of the dull idiotic type, in half of the active excitable type. One man Shantayya, a village servant, and elder in the Christian congregation in the village of Anamala- gutti, some five years ago began to use ganja in large quantities. Before that he had been a hard- working honest man, but in a few months his character became entirely changed. He stopped work, began to indulge in petty thefts, and before long was put in gaol for attempted arson. His mind has been permanently affected, and he is now wandering from place to place an excitable mad- man, begging and stealing in order to get a supply of the drug. 47. Not to my knowledge. 49. I do not know of this use. The use of hemp certainly tends to produce impotence. Consum- ers admit this and lament it bitterly. " That's the plague of it, " they have told me. In questioning people on this, I have not distinguished between the moderate and excessive use, but some of those who admitted the fact were moderate consumers. 51. Most of the lazy disreputable characters in the villages used ganja. The ganja habit, by making a man unfit for regular work and weakening his moral sense, cer- tainly helps to increase crime. 59. The cultivation must be dealt with, not the sale, if Government wishes to lessen the evils connected with the use of these drugs. Under the present system consumers can freely cultivate for private use. They can also purchase the drug without difficulty at the gardens or even in un- licensed shops. Ganja can easily be concealed, and its illicit sale is consequently hard to detect. 60. The hemp drugs are in no way useful or beneficial. Their action is decidedly injurious, and the effects of their use are wholly bad. I am strongly in favour of the total prohibition of the cultivation of the plant and the production and sale of the drug. I believe such a measure would command the assent of the great majority of the people. The small quantities of the drug needed for strictly medical purposes might be pro- duced in Government gardens and sold under care- ful restrictions as, say, arsenic is sold in England. 62. See No. 60. 63. All these drugs are dangerous poisons and ought to be sold as such posions are sold in England. 65. The taxation of ganja is certainly not reason- able in reference to. alcohol, as the less danger- ous and less hurtful alcohol is made very much more costly than the wholly injurious. ganja. As vol. vi. 3 c 2
364 I have said before, it costs ten times as much to get drunk on alcohol as on ganja. 68. I believe not in this district. 69. No, I do not see the use of consulting local public opinion on such a question. Though public opinion is decidedly against the use of the hemp drugs, it is doubtful if the majority of the people would take the trouble to express any opi- nion on the subject, while consumers of the drugs would certainly try to show that opinion was in favour of opening such shops. If the drugs are bad and are doing distinct harm, it is a matter of very small consequence whether the people of a certain locality wish or do not wish to have them prohibited. 70. There is a very general use of untaxed ganja. It can be purchased in unlicensed shops in many villages and in almost every garden where it is grown and it is very largely grown and produced for private use. Oral evidence. 1. The whole of my residence in India has been spent in the Cuddapah district. We have about 10,000 Christians in the Cuddapah district, all Pariahs, except about 5, and the hemp drugs have Often come up in discipline cases. Cases of insanity and grave breach of discipline have occurred among the Christians. I did not make the hemp drugs a special study; but I have had. to enquire about them in connection with the cases referred to above. I have made special enquiries since getting the Commission's questions. I have had two years' training in medicine, and have had to deal with cases of disease brought on by indulgence in the drugs. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated in three or four places in fields, but I have not seen such cultiva- tion. I have seen the plants mixed with other cultivation, such as chillies. I have never seen more than 200 plants together. I have seen it growing in backyards and gardens in many places. The plant cannot be mistaken when once recog- nised. This kind of cultivation prevails in the whole district; but I have observed it to a less extent in the sub-division in the south-west of the district, where I have not travelled so much as in other parts. The plant grows about 5 feet high. 15. I have not seen the crop prepared; but growers who were also consumers have described the process to me. Two Muhammadans in Cudda- pah and others were my informants. The process I have described may not be quite accurate. The word " used " might be substituted for " sold," and the meaning will then be clear. 24. In this answer I have spoken of bhang as distinguished from ganja in the technical senses used in the Commission's questions. The use of ganja for eating and drinking is described under question 19. Majum has not come under my personal observation; but I have heard that a good many of the higher classes use it. 28. I speak of the Madras seer. I don't know precisely how much it is in English weight. 35. There are eight licensed shops in the whole district. Consumers have told me that it is sold in gardens, and on one occasion I pointed out an illicit sop to a preventive officer who came to me begging for information. I have frequently been told of unlicensed shops where the drug can be purchased. The preventive officer asked me, because the Col- lector had blamed him for neglect of duty in conse- quence of my having reported the existence of unlicensed shops. This was the only case in which I gave definite information, and then I only named the bazar where the shop was to be found. I have never had the name of such a shopkeeper reported to me. 45. Philip was a Pariah Christian. I learnt from himself and the villagers whom he taught that he only used the drug moderately. He did not drink to my knowledge. He was of good character before he took to the hemp, but some- what lazy. He was not of strong constitution. I did not know any member of his family, except a brother and an uncle, who were strong, and. the former of whom was of good character. I used to visit the village, 50 miles from Cud- dapah, where the men worked, three times a year. On one occasion he neglected to come up to one of our centres for his pay; and when I was travelling near the village a short time afterwards, the villagers brought him to me. There are three or four habitual moderate consumers in the same village. They are Pariahs and Christians, and I know them personally. They taught him the use of the drugs. One of them is at present in jail for house-breaking, and I am not certain that another is not also in prison. They are men of bad charac- ter, and I have cut them off from the congregation. They drink liquor at times, as almost all the low classes do. It was from the testimony of the neighbours that I came to the conclusion that lie had indulged very moderately. I dismissed him from the congregation. He was a fairly well educated lad of 25. I have no doubt that I have diagnosed the ease correctly as due to hemp drugs. All my knowledge of his character was gathered from the information of the villagers, the reports of our evangelist, and the state of his school. I could get no evidence of his having been addicted to the habit before. He lived in a quarter of the village which is inhabited by Pariah Christians. The man was never reported to me before he was brought to me by the villagers as having gone mad. I enquired the cause and found it was ganja. That is the first question I should ask in any case of insanity. If answered. in the affirmative, I should conclude that the insanity was in all proba- bility due to ganja. Before arriving at this conclu- sion, I should make other enquiries as to the man's family, as to his other habits, and as to the time he had been using the drug. If I got information of heredity as well as the ganja habit, I should pro- bably conclude there had been a predisposition, which had been brought on by the ganja. The man always looked poor, weak, and underfed, and that is why I believed it possible that the habit should have brought him to insanity in so short a time. I knew his uncle and. brother alone of the family. I probably enquired about his father, but I can't be certain. I have not heard of him for about a year; but I believe he is now supported by his brother. The man became useless four years ago, and is still in a semi-idiotic state, unable to do any work and inclined to wander about. This is the only case in which I attribute insanity to the moderate use. So far as I have seen, ganja consumers are inclined to do things by fits and starts. We have no dooly-bearers in any district, and I know of no class who smoke ganja as a class and work like other people. There are, however, individuals who, consume the drugs in moderation and work steadily. 46. I have made careful enquiry regarding these cases of insanity. I could name some 14 men, who, as far as I could ascertain, have become insane from the excessive use of ganja. If I set myself down
365 to do it, I could name many more. I can only recall at this moment four cases of insanity brought on by other causes than ganja. With effort I could recall more. No doubt I have been thinking about ganja lately, and the cases due to that cause are therefore more present to my mind; but I don't think I could possibly recall more than six or seven cases into which I have enquired, which were due to other causes than ganja. Five of the 10 ganja cases, which include the two mentioned in my paper, occurred among Christians, and into these I made careful enquiry; in the other five cases I simply asked the neighbours generally. I have not treated any of these eases medically. In two cases the insanes came to my notice as being violent; two others were middle-aged, and their insanity was rather of the idiotic type. They were pointed out to me as wise men, perhaps in jest. Having ascertained the ganja habit, I proceeded to make further enquiry as to other causes of insanity in the cases of the Native Christians and in some of the other cases also. The enquiries I made were whether the insane was all right before he took to the ganja habit, and how long he had used the drug. I cannot remember having made enquiry about heredity in any case. So far as my memory goes, I made enquiry regarding heredity in one case. Heredity would be only one predisposing cause. I do not think I ascertained the absence of other exciting causes in a strictly medical sense; but I have enquired of the man and his friends, if anything had happened to him to unhinge his mind. The reason why I made enquiry into other causes besides ganja is that I was anxious to ascer- tain if the drug was so harmful as it was generally supposed to be. I am a total abstainer, and we have a temperance association in our mission to which I belong. 149. Evidence of the REV. S. J. LONG, Missionary, Coimbatore. 1. I have recently made careful enquiries from ganja cultivators in their gardens, sellers in their shops, and consumers in chattrams and elsewhere. Out of the nine shops opened for 1893-94 in this district (Coimbatore), I have visited four with a permit from the Collector. I have visited about a score of smokers and have conversed, in some cases on more than one occasion, with ten of them. I have done so with the direct intention of getting evidence for the Commission. 2. The parts and productions of the hemp plant sold in this district are, as far as I could tell, the flowering heads of the female plant either separate (a), and unbroken (b), broken (c), or as dust, or else pressed together in cakes about one-third inch thick. These cakes are called javathu. There are also three or four electuaries made from similar flowering heads. Although I cannot speak certainly, I think the sale of the leaves of the male plant is not usual here. It may be the leaves are mixed up with the flowering heads, but the several specimens I brought all seemed to me to be 'heads' in one or other of the conditions which I have mentioned. There is no charas for sale in any shop I visited. The name was unknown; also the names siddhi, subji, patti and chug were practically unknown, The following names are in use in this district:366 (5) Tathupushti (6) Kulk-kanthupathami (7) Bilvathi. Nos. 1 and 3 were said to be the same by one seller, and No. 7 to be much the same. Nos. 3 and 7 were said to be the same by another seller. Nos. 4 and 5 said to be the same and not very intoxicating and with some 160 ingredients. No. 6 not very intoxicating and is used by respectable men. Nos. 4 and 5 as their names imply are to increase or strengthen seminal secretions. Legiam seems to be a common name for all these electuaries367 31. The habit of smoking is easily formed and difficult to leave. A respectable young man (a Mudeliar), who had given way to the habit, told me that for a month he was ill after giving it up. He fell sick, had pain in stomach, bowels were irregular, sleep and appetite were bad. He has given up the habit for a year past, but still has a craving if he sees others smoke. He took to smoking a small cheroot called pidi, in order to break off the habit of ganja smoking; ganja smokers deprived of the pipe become weak and helpless. One man said he could not give it up, and if he was unable to get ganja in one town he would go to another. The practice of smoking invariably leads to excess. The Mudeliar referred to said emphatically smokers smoke in order to get in- toxicated, ganja is a cheap and hence a popular intoxicant. 33. The smoking of ganja and the eating of majium, etc., are considered bad. Undoubtedly this is the general opinion in this district. The reason is that the custom of using these things weakens the consumer physically and morally. One man, I spoke to, said that if he had a friend enslaved to ganja consumption he would recommend him to take spirits and so substitute that habit as less serious. The Mudeliar referred to in answer 31 was regarded by his friends as falling into a de- praved state, and so he regarded himself and left the habit. Two smokers, when asked, told me they would be glad to give up the habit. Both said they would not persuade others to adopt it. One man said: " my boy may perhaps follow my example, or he may take me as a warning "; others admitted the habit was bad, but they said how could they give it up. If they had plenty of food they might, but they could not work; they would get pain in their backs by working. Others, to whom I spoke (a sugarcane grower's son and a salt- maker), said it was against their caste customs to smoke, and that the habit was bad. I asked some smokers: " will you get other young men to smoke ?" They at once replied: " we would not ruin others (mattavargalai kedukka mattom)." I did not at all suggest the idea of ruin. Winslow's Tamil Dictionary gives ganjagottri as meaning " a worthless person" (gottri lit. = a young calf). The fact that the sellers of ganja do not use it goes to shew that the use is bad. They and other respect- able men were somewhat indignant at my asking if they used ganja. I have not heard that the hemp plant is worship- ped, but it seems that ganja powder is burned as a sort of incense before certain idols It is said to be offered to Mathurai veeran, Karu-annasami Mun- niappan, Karuparayan Aiyasswami and a swami at Palni. It is also offered in the form of ganja roti (= ganja bread) which is made in the houses, taken to the temple and eaten. This is said to be offered by pilgrims to the swami at Palni. A gnani named Corakkar is said to have used ganja and to have given his name to the plant (viz., Corakkar Kar- mulikkai). The power of extinguishing sensual and wordly desire is attributed to the plant when smoked. It enables the smoker to concentrate his thought for meditation. Appendix 3 contains a piece of poetry on the use of ganja taken from " Kudyer Sinthu." The book treats of the use of toddy, tobacco and ganja368 This work mentions ganja as entering into recipes for,369 mentioned, especially the Mudeliar, whom I regard- ed as a specially useful witness, as he had once practised and had given up the use of the drug. If I were satisfied that there were moderate smokers, my opinion would alter. But I have not met them. I think that the habit is here regarded with contempt, and that therefore moderate use is not admitted readily. This may explain my not coming on these smokers. This man certainly spoke of smoking only for intoxication; and the words he used and the whole tenor of his remarks showed that he meant more than mere exhilara- tion. 33. I have myself the opinion that alcohol is decidedly less injurious than ganja smoking. I think the effects of ganja are more rapid. In some respects alcohol is more injurious, as making men pugnacious and so on. But from the fact that these smokers whom I met were young men, and from the general drift of their statements, I judged that the excessive use of ganja killed people off more quickly than that of alcohol. At the same time the excessive use of alcohol has come to my notice, though not to a great extent, in my ex- perience, while that of ganja has not. I think this is due to my presiding over Native churches. Christians sometimes fall into the use of alcohol, and not, so far as I know, into the use of ganja. I am also Secretary of a Temperance Association which takes note of intoxicating drugs as well as of liquor, but these drugs have not forced them- selves on my notice. I have little time for work outside of my own duty. Because I think the hemp drug more dangerous, the physical effects so injurious, and the habit so difficult to leave off, I also think that ganja calls for more restriction than alcohol at the hands of the Government. But what I say is founded on a brief and very limited inquiry. It is only as judging from this very limited experience that I make the above state- ment as to the comparative effects of alcohol and ganja. I may say that I have never seen a mem- ber of the Native church drunk, but I know some take liquor and we disapprove of this, whether in moderation or excess. Coimbatore is not a drunken place. I have seen little of drunkenness among the people generally; only a few cases of really drunk people. I have never seen or had pointed out to me a social wreck from ganja or a man intoxicated from the use of the drug. 35. I found that most of these smokers used opium and took spirits as well. As mentioned in answer 29, one man mentioned dhatura; but as I have said I could ascertain nothing definite about that. I know nothing of it. The use of dhatura was generally denied indignantly. I believe the consumers would, if ganja were restricted, go to opium or alcohol; and as my limited inquiry seems to me to show that ganja is worse than alcohol, I think that (as far as alcohol is concerned) this would be a chance for the better. I do not know whether opium or hemp drugs are worse. 39. My statements regarding the aphrodisiac effects of the drugs are based only on the remarks of the smokers referred to in answer 1 and on the books referred to in answer 40. The statements regarding the non-aggressive character of ganja smokers are however based on my experience of the appearance and behaviour of the smokers I met and talked to. 150. Evidence of the REV. W. V. HIGGINS,* Missionary, Parlakimedi, Ganjam District. 7. (a) to (c) Yes. (d) No. In nearly every village where there is a popula- tion of 1,000 or more. 8. The cultivation is constantly increasing on account of the increasing demand of the article. Now cultivators are constantly taking up the busi- ness. 9. The plant grows for four or five years and then dies. After five or six months the leaves will be used, that is, five or six months after sowing the seed. The plant requires little or no care in cultivation. 10. There is no special class. But any farmer is likely to cultivate the plant. Besides this, many who are not farmers will have small garden plots of this plant for their own use. 11. We do not know. 13. It can be cultivated anywhere, and is culti- vated everywhere in these parts. 14. It is cultivated for all three of these pro- ducts. 15. (A) Ganja is smoked. The dried leaves are mixed with tobacco (frequently), and the two are rubbed on the palm of the hand. Then water is poured on, and the stuff is put in a pipe for smok- ing. (B) Charas is eaten, never smoked or drunk. The flowering tops are rubbed upon a stone and then are mixed with spices, sugar, etc., and are made into cakes for eating. (C) Bhang is the form used for drinking. After rolling the flowering tops, the stuff is mixed with milk and sugar and is drunk. 16. Yes, anybody can prepare the bhang in his house. We do not know anything of the wild plant, or very little. 17. By all classes. 18. Yes, it deteriorates by keeping. If carefully kept, it will hold its power for one year. After the leaves are dried, they will wrap straw or palm leaves about the plants, and keep from the air as far as possible so that it may not deteriorate. 19. The ganja is used only for smoking, but the charas is used both for smoking and for mak- ing cakes to eat. 20. All classes use both the ganja and charas. But bhang is expensive, and the former classes do not use it so much. 21. The broken (chur) is the form most used for smoking in these parts. 22. Native charas. 23. Never. 24. The rich or well-to-do use the bhang for drinking purposes. The Uriya people, especially Brahmins, use the bhang. 25. On the increase. It is due to the increase of the habit. 26. About two-thirds of those who use the drug are habitual excessive consumers. 27. Those engaged in study of religious books and mendicants. 28. (a) Ganja, ¼ anna. (a) Charas, ¼ anna. (a) Bhang, 1 anna. (b) 370 29. Generally tobacco is mixed with the ganja, and spices, sugar, and milk are mixed with the charas and bhang. These are mixed with the drug either to make it cool or palatable. Bhang massala is a mixture of many kinds of spices and is sold to be mixed with bhang. 30. Most of the smoking and drinking seems to be done in solitude, but there are public places of resort where the drugs are consumed in company. The drugs are used here only by men of middle age. But the habit is frequently begun early in life. The lungs must be strong to stand the drug. 31. It is easily formed and given up with diffi- culty, and the tendency is to increase the habit. Consumers often say they can easily give it up, but I think they are too sanguine. 32. It is a religious habit, and is formed for the purpose of steadying the mind for religious medi- tation. 33. Respectable people among the Hindus say that the habit is a bad one and dangerous. Con- sumers generally will not at first admit that they use the drug. 34. To moderate consumers there may not be much privation, but to excessive users much priva- tion will be experienced. I am told that when a man stops using the drug, he becomes intensely anxious for it, and after obtaining it devours it ravenously. 35. The consumers would be troubled, but probably no riot would occur. They would probably use other drugs too if available. 40. They often advise the smoking of ganja for medicinal purposes as a cure of various troubles. 42. The use of all these drugs as a habit is certainly harmful. We have known of cases in which men have lost their reason entirely by using the drug. 44. It intoxicates. It does not refresh or allay hunger, but it makes one insensible to hunger. Sometimes persons will go without food for several days when taking the drug. Smokers generally use the drug twice a day. The especial effect lasts for about half a day. After the immediate effect is over, the consumer is weak and often has to lie down. Yes; after using the drug there is longing for it again. 45. Yes; little harm physically, mentally, and morally is apparent. We know of two cases in one street (one a Government peon and the other a constable). They have both become insane from the use of ganja. They are mere skeletons and imbeciles. Their insanity is permanent. They used it moderately at first, but now use it very ex- cessively. It produces bronchial trouble in some cases. 49. We hear that it is so used. 51. The users of ganja are not really considered as respectable people by the best members of Hindu society. 53. We know of a Brahmin who, while intoxi- cated with bhang, beat his child terribly. When he became sober, he cried bitterly with his wife because of what he had done, and he confessed that he did it while intoxicated. 60. We think that the hemp plant should not be allowed to be cultivated, except by those licensed by Government to grow it for medicinal purposes, if it be so required. 68. We know that there are places here where the drug is consumed by those who attend the place, and yet we do not know whether they are licensed to keep such an establishment or not. One man of whom we know is allowed to sell the drug. He is licensed to do so. Certainly the houses or shops where the drugs are consumed should be closed up, and. licenses granted only to those who are proper authorities for selling medicinal poi- sons. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted at all, as far as we know. 151. Evidence of the REV. A. MARGÖSCHIS, Medical Missionary, S. P. G., Nazareth, Tinnevelly District. 1. I have lived alone amongst the natives for 18 years, and have been in medical charge of a hospital and dispensary all the time. 2. The dry flowering tips and twigs can be ob- tained. 6. Not dense in Tinnevelly, but it grows sparse- ly. 7. Yes. Native vydians grow it for use in their treatment of patients. 8. Not that I am aware of. There is not much demand for it. 10. No special caste, but native doctors chiefly grow the plant. 12. Yes. To a very slight extent, a few plants are sometimes cultivated in a garden amongst other plants. 14. Yes. Your definitions under Chapters 1 and 2 are mixed and confusing. The wild and cultiva- ted plant can be obtained as (a) resin, (b) dry leaves and twigs, (c) a confection. 15. See above, 14. 17. By native doctors. 18. Yes. It quite loses its effects in time. If carefully preserved from damp and exposed to the air it will keep for months. 19. There is very little, if any, smoking in this district. 23. See 19. 25. There are no signs of its being on the in- crease. 26. See 27. 27. Nearly all native doctors are moderate habitual consumers, and they prescribe it to their patients, who are therefore occasional moderate consumers. 40. Yes. 41. (b) Yes. (d) It is good in nervous and spasmodic dis- eases, chronic rheumatism, neuralgia, asthma, diarrh371 44. (b)Yes. (c)Not in small quantities. (d) Yes. (e) Very considerably. ( f)According to the quantity taken it varies. (g)No. (h)Only in habitual consumers. 45. (a)No. (b) No. (c) No. It increases the appetite. (d) No. It relieves all these diseases. (e) Not in moderate doses. (g) I have met only one insane who became so, it was alleged, from the excessive use of the drug. He took it in order to put himself in a position to br/>study magic and witchcraft. He was suffering from all the symptoms of acute mania. 47 No. 53. See 45. 55. Yes. 58. It is working well and requires no altera- tion. 60. Cultivation of the hemp plant for the pro- duction of bhang should not be controlled more than at present. 63. The vend of these preparations is extremely limited in this district. No special legislation different to that now in force is at all necessary. 68. No. 152. Evidence of the REV. JOHN S. CHANDLER, Missionary. Madura. 1. Conversations with natives and other mis- sionaries. 2. The distinctions between bhang, charas, and ganja are not common here. Not known, so far as I have inquired. Bhang and ganja are used in- terchangeably. Four kinds of ganja are men- tioned372 (e) No. (f) Very probably. 36. Yes; there is some reason, but not very much. The fact that the drinkers of alcohol are increasing, whereas those that use ganja do not seem to increase, but rather to decrease. 39. Smoking is said to be less injurious, be- cause those who smoke do not commit such excesses as those that drink. 40. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 41. (a) No. (b) Yes. (c) No. (d) No. Nearly all use it more or less for staying power. 42. I consider it harmful, because of the effect on those who use it, taking away their appetite, causing redness of eyes, general debility, and such difficulties as asthma. 43. They are not offensive. 44. (a) It produces intoxication. (e) It prevents hunger. (f) Three or four hours. (h) Weakness follows and a longing for it. 45. (a) It exaggerates effects referred to under 44. (d) Yes. (e) It does (f) It does. 49. (a) It is used. (b) Prostitutes do use it. (d) It is supposed to. 51. I suppose that it is used with alcohol for crime, but have no specific information. 153. Evidence of the REV. H. F. LAFLAMME, Canadian Baptist Mission, Yellamanchili, Vizagapatam. 1. The evidence given below represents inform- ation gathered from the following:373 against it. But since then it has been resumed, and one may see some plants even in the police lines. If this is the case here, the increase is due to lax police supervision. From Cocanada the informant says that the people formerly purchased it at the shops; but finding the seeds of the flower grow when dropped, they now grow all they need in the backyards. 9. One of my preachers, who lived many years in Samalkota, tells me that an old man there culti- vated the plant for sale, He cut out all the males, allowed the females to ripen in flower, cut them, and stacked them under a weight much as tobacco is pressed. When sufficiently cured, did them up in bundles and sold or used them. The leaves, it seems, were shaken off, and only the flower adhered to the stalk. 10. About Bobbili the gardener caste grow it. In every monastery belonging to the religious mendicants it is grown, but, being illicit, there is no class who cultivate it specially. 14. (a) Ganja is prepared privately, and in a few cases for illicit traffic, but only by drying. When the devotees or mendicants meet their disciples at little village temples, they extract a pipe full of the flowers from their pouch, wet and squeeze them, repeating the operation some four times, and final- ly pressing it in a cloth till the juice seems pretty thoroughly pressed out and the leaves well macer- ated; then adding from one-third to half its bulk of tobacco they fill the pipe and light it. (c) Bhang is simply the dried leaf mixed with several ingredients, such as milk and spices. These preparations extend to a limited degree throughout the whole area mentioned, but confined to the larger towns, say above 5,000. They are for the most part private. 15. Ganjai for smoking as above. A preparation is made by baking the leaves, boiling them in ghee, and adding sugar in suffi- cient quantities to make a solid compound much A preparation is made by baking the leaves, like a sweetmeat. This is eaten. The name given it is maju. 16. Bhang is not used generally in the houses. Only one place is known in which it is so prepared, and that is Vizianagram, and there by a limited number only. 18. The ganja does not keep well for more than a year and a half. However the keeping quality possibly depends on the preparation, and my in- formation is not sufficient to state more. 19. Ganja is used generally only for smoking. The seeds are sometimes chewed. Charas is used for smoking, if used at all. When the consumer lacks a pipe, he makes the tobacco and ganja into a cigar with a green leaf and smokes it; or if he lacks time or inclination to do this, he will sometimes mix the ganja with a paste and chew it as they chew tobacco. 20. (1) The classes who smoke ganja.374 of bhang is used than ganja. One of them affirms that even coolies earning only two annas a day take it. Information about bhang seems difficult to secure, even though the habit may be widespread. It may be owing to the fact that it is usually taken privately and as a rule by office men and Government clerks and employés, whereas ganja is smoked openly in the village temple and by poorer men whose lives are more open to observa- tion. However, from my general information, I should suppose that where one uses bhang two use ganja. 25. Very little of the ganja used seems to be purchased through the stores lincensed by Govern- ment to sell. It is generally grown by the con- sumers themselves, and the general conviction seems to be that the consumption of bhang and ganja is on the increase. One very intelligent native gentleman gave it out as his opinion that where two used them pre- viously three do at present. To trace the cause of this increase is rather difficult; but I venture the following explana- tions:(1) The religious medicants carry it with them wherever they go, and invite all to smoke ganja from their pipe. Many do and form the habit. (2) A shameful habit, once formed, demands some excuse, and the habitual consumers give it out that the drug is good for coughs, asthma, consumption, etc., and recommend it to others. (3) In the earlier stages a little satisfies, but later more is required to produce the desired effect, and so the consumption extends. (4) It produces an intoxication which drowns care and tends to long periods of self-forgetfulness. Some, therefore, are induced to use it at times of great mental dis- tress. (5) There is a popular superstition that the use of ganja counteracts the bad effect sup- posed to be produced by the water of a strange well; and as the introduction of new means of communication, an extended Government service, etc., conduce to much more travel and change of water amongst certain classes of the people, the habit is extending. (6) Pensioned sepoys are said to be addicted to ganja to a noticeable extent. If so, the growing number of such veterans, who are usually men of some little influence in the small villages to which they return because of their dis- tant travels and extended knowledge, may account for somewhat of the increase. (7) These bad habits have a peculiar fructifying power in the hearts of men, and will flourish when good habits would die out but for careful cultivation. 26. As the hemp drugs habit is considered more or less disgraceful, none but actual consu- mers, or men who daily associate with them, could answer this rather large question; and while one might be able and willing to answer it truthfully for his street or village, no one could give inform- ation sufficiently general in its scope to be of much service in making such a discrimination as is required by the question. Speaking very generally, I should conclude that the majority are habitual moderate consu- mers. Very few who contract the habit ever seem to abandon it, and yet just as few seem to indulge in an excessive habitual use of the drug. On the occasion of the visit of a celebrated sanyasi to a village, his presence in the temple, smoking every night occasions an excessive indul- gence in those who associate with him, but they seem to relapse into their ordinary habit after his stay of a few weeks or a month is over. The tendency is to an excessive use, and one man of wide experience and close and careful ob- servation states that very few who commence with moderate quantities are satisfied, but gradually increase the daily amount. However, the distinc- tion between the four classes mentioned in the question when defined by the natives whom I have asked does not appear to be very perspicuous. 27. (1) The religious ascetics use it (ganja), because they are enabled by it to overcome desire and thus attain that holy state in which the soul is filled with all reverence to the Deity. Shrewd observers say that they certainly lose all desire, for many of them smoke to the sacrifice of food, sense, reverence, health, strength, and everything that goes to make up manhood. (2) The disciples of these men smoke because their masters smoke, drawn to it by the seductiveness of the drug, in some cases to drown care. (3) The Muhamma- dans I surmise to be more familiar with it than other classes of the people, because the drug as used seems to have been introduced from north India, possibly being carried down in the Muham- madan invasion. There is historical evidence that the drug was used commonly in the Muhammadan armies. (4) That the water of strange wells conduces to fever and sickness in the user is a widespread belief amongst the people. To counteract the supposed ill effects of this water, travellers or newly arrived residents in a place who may suffer from ill health resort to all sorts of reputed cures. Amongst these stands ganja. Soldiers, police, and men whose habits are more or less nomadic use ganja to a more marked extent than other classes of the people, and for the reason stated above. (5) Then ganja has a reputation amongst its de- votees of curing coughs, asthma, etc. A few are induced to adopt the habit by this consideration. (6)Card-playing parties and gambling dens are places at which the habit is practised and fostered. As for bhang: (1) amongst those whose habit of life is sedentary, and whose work requires long continued mental application, some are said to be addicted to the habit. (2) The pundits, who ape the fashions of Benares, the great reli- gious centre of all India, are said to use it to a limited extent. 28. As very little of the drug ganja which is used is purchased,; the great bulk of that used being grown by the consumers themselves, this question does not meet with many replies. What to one man is moderation is excess to another. Habitual moderate consumers who pur- chase the drug may spend from half to 2 annas a day. Excessive consumers, 2 to 6 annas; but I have no means to indicate by actual weight how much that signifies. There is a popular comedy acted by companies of strolling players in which a king is represented as sitting upon his throne, and, being harassed by the affairs of state, summons a chief peon, whom he orders to at once secure, regardless of cost, a drug which will produce immediate intoxication. The peon returns shortly with a lighted pipe, which he hands to the king. After smoking it, with very evident satisfaction, for a short time, the king, losing all consciousness, subsides into a deep sleep. During this interval the peon, who seems to be the clown of the comedy, amuses the audience with some very entertaining antics about the august presence of the monarch, and finishes by imitating His Excellency's imperious summons,
157 call for the intoxicant, his satisfaction in securing it, and fin ally the smoking. In a few minutes he sub sides into a deep sleep. After some time the king is represented as resuming consciousness and becoming very angry at the position and condition of the peon, whom he at once attempts to rouse. He is not successful. When the peon finally comes to the king, who is immensely pleased with the drug, asks the peon how much the potent medicine cost. The peon answers, mentioning the smallest current copper coin. The king, who had expected to hear some large sum named, is quite annoyed to think that so cheap a weed should so easily intoxicate him, and with the customary exclamation of disgust " Chi, chi, po, po," sum- marily dismisses the peon amidst roars of laughter from the audience. Ganja has the reputation amongst the people of being one of the most powerful intoxicants known, so that much of it is not required to produce excess. 29. With ganja, tobacco; with bhang, cow's or cocoanut milk, pepper, ginger, aniseed, sugar, cloves, cinnamon, nutmegs. Only one case is reported where the bhang was mixed with dhatura to intensify its intoxicating effects. But of that case more later. One man reported cases in Rangoon and these districts where the consumers mix poppy seeds with a paste made from the leaves of the hemp plant and chew the compound much as they do tobacco. These were exceptional cases. 30. (a) Ganja is smoked in company as a rule, the pipe passing from mouth to mouth like the pipe of peace amongst North American Indians. Excessive consumers smoke at all times and use the drug mixed with tobacco, the same as others use tobacco, Bhang is generally taken in solitude. (b) Ganja mostly confined to males from 15 years up. A class of women called matagulu, who correspond to the bairagulu, are said to use it. They live a homeless, wandering life. (c) Ganja.376 opium, there would be no recourse to them for that reason; and as no other drugs are so used, it is quite probable the practice would die out. 36. The uniform conviction is that the use of alcohol is growing to an alarming extent, and though not taking the place of hemp drugs, it is doing incalculably more mischief in these districts. The informants all agree that the use of any of these drugs in any quantity is dangerous and bad. They are not concerned with differences in degree of injuriousness. 39. However, ganja-smoking is regarded as more injurious than bhang-drinking, as the ad- mixture of milk with the latter is said to counteract its ill effects. Whereas some say that the drinking of the preparation of any one of the different parts of the drug is more injurious than the smoking. 40. Most native doctors are familiar with its use medicinally, and prescribe it in a mixture called madanakaveshvaramu to convalescent patients as a tonic. What the compound is I have been unable to discover, but am told that it is very ex- pensive, very seldom used, but seems to be effec- tive. 41. All regard ganja as useless in any of the ways mentioned in this paragraph, and regard the statements of the consumers as mere excuses to continue the use of a habit generally regarded as degrading. A few seem to be under the impres- sion that bhang taken after a meal will enable a student to continue mental exertion hours toge- ther377 that their valor would be put to this issue. Each prepared himself with an intoxicating dose of bhang, and the quarrel ended in the frantic at- tempt which has been noticed." The writer adds in a foot-note that bhang is the leaf of the Canna- bis sativa. The other instance is by the same writer, Vol. 3, pages 237-238, one of the editions published about 1812 or 1817, to be found in the library of the Bowring institute in Bangalore. The incident referred to occurred at the siege of Seringapatam, February 10th, 1892. He writes as follows: 378 69. It all depends upon what that local opinion is. Under the present form of government local opinion is not consulted, and even if it were con- sidered and were inimical, it is questionable if there were a prospect of a large revenue but that the shop would be opened. I question whether the Government could devise any means, except by the secret ballot of securing a general untram- elled public expression, and amongst a people so largely illiterate as these are, that method would be impracticable. 70. The large percentage of drugs used are untaxed, and they are used by the classes indi- cated in previous paragraphs. Further paper put in by the REV. MR. LAFLAMME. In looking over a little medical work entitled "Bazaar Medicines and Common Medical Plants of India" (1883), by E. J. Waring, C.I.E., M.D., Surgeon-Major, retired, Editor of the Pharma- cop379 out is based upon (1) the fact that prohibition of intoxicating liquors has been largely effective in America where it has been tried, and (2) that the native character being amenable to authority, the people of the country, if once convinced that Gov- ernment desired to put an end to the traffic, would co-operate with it, and (3) I believe the general sense of the people is opposed to the use of the drugs. In the part of India with which I am acquainted the hemp plant does not grow wild so far as I have been able to ascertain. Of course, prohibition of the traffic implies prohibition of cultivation. How far this would be practicable in other parts of India I am not prepared to say. Question 41.380 charas for smoking; but others say that it is opium that is mingled with the Acacia leaf juice and eaten. 3. None known to me. 4. One only hereabout381 155. Evidence of the REV. J. HEINRICHS, Missionary, Vinukunda, Kistna District. 1. Opportunities for obtaining information on this subject have been few. I base my remarks on the general knowledge I have concerning this matter, which is supplemented by that of others who are better informed than I. 2. Ganja as known in the Kistna district con- sists of dried flowering tops of hemp plants which have become coated with a muddy looking matter in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely. This is the only article generally used in this part of the country. Subji or patti is applied to the dried leaves of the hemp plant. Their use is not known here. Charas means the muddish matter which is removed from the trees. When the hemp trees are full grown and ripe, they naturally become coated with resinous matter. Men dressed with garments made of skin will walk about closely in the midst of the trees, so that the resinous matter may thereby touch the garments. This gum is then scratched from the garments and will be sold for consumption. This is called charas. It is smoked and is said to have contain- ed more intoxication than any of the articles naturally obtained from the hemp plant. The practice of either manufacturing charas or smoking the same is not at all known here. This kind of consumption is said to be applicable to Bombay Presidency and other northern countries higher up. Bhang is not an article which can be naturally obtained from the hemp plant; but it is an admix- ture of dried flowering tops of the plant and some other products independent of the hemp plant. It is a liquid. It is not known that this prepara- tion is also made of dried leaves of the plant; but it is presumed that as these leaves have less intoxi- cating power than the tops, this mode of prepar- ing bhang is as well practised by occasional con- sumers. Round and flat ganja are not known here. The only kind of ganja ever known in these parts is the flowering tops of the plant separated from the twigs and leaves. This is otherwise called "broken ganja" (gunja in Hindustani or ganjai in Telugu). 3, 4, 5, and 6. These questions pertain to the wild hemp plant, which is not grown in this district. 7. Yes to a limited extent in back yards and chilly gardens throughout the district. This con- sumption, however, is restricted to home consump- tion. To a larger extent the plant is cultivated in Daggupad, Pasupad, Vunkalupad, and some other villages in the Bapatla taluq. As far as this district is concerned, the cultiva- tion is intended for the production of (1) ganja and (2) seeds. The extent of land cultivated with the plant cannot be ascertained. 8. I do not know. 9. Where there is large cultivation of the hemp plant, the raiyats in the first instance rake seed- beds and water them till the seedlings are grown nearly half a yard high. They then uproot the seedlings and transplant them in land thoroughly ploughed up and manured for the purpose. The transplantation will be by furrows nearly one yard apart. After transplantation no mechanical water- ings are necessary for the growth of the crop, but one of two rains will suffice. The above process is not, however, strictly observed where scattered trees are grown. Generally the seed-beds of the plant are raised in the month of August and transplantation in the mouth of September, and the crop will be ready for cut by the end of January or so. 10. No. They are the same as other agricul- tural cultivators. 11. No. 12. No wild hemp here, as far as I know. 13. The ganja plant is customarily cultivated in the abovenamed villages of the Bapatla taluq of this district. No special soil is, I think, neces- sary for the cultivation of the crop. Regada or clay or mixed regada will do for its growth. It can therefore be grown in all the dry taluqs of this district. 14. Generally speaking, ganja is prepared from the hemp plant, but bhang is very rarely prepared from it. Charas is not at all known here. There is no actual cultivation in these taluqs, viz., Sattanapath, Narsaraopetta, Vinukonda, and Puluand. And the actual extent to which the crop is cultivated in Bapatla cannot be ascer- tained. 15. No wild hemp here. The remarks recorded below pertain to the cultivated plant, which is known here as mulki or country hemp. (A). Ganja.382 qualities for one year, but in the second year they lose their effect to a large extent, while in the third year they would be utterly useless. No means can prevent deterioration. 19. Charas is used only for smoking, but ganja for both purposes, smoking and eating as stated against question 15. 20. The use of ganja is not restricted to a parti- cular class of people. The waddis or well-diggers use it perhaps more freely than any other class. Men of comparatively low moral status indulge in its use. Charas is not known here. 21. Only country ganja or charas is used in this district. Flat or round ganja is not known here. 22. No charas here. 23. Bhang is a liquid and cannot be smoked. 24. Bhang drinkers are very few in this dis- trict. 25. As far as my experience goes, the use of ganja seems to be on its decrease. Before the introduction of the ganja monopoly people were allowed to sell and possess the drug freely, and it was a sort of encouragement for them to in- dulge in ganja-smoking. But now, as depart- mental restrictions increased, the use of the drug decreased. Moreover, the drug is not procurable in every village as in former days, inasmuch as shops are allowed only in selected villages of much importance. It is said that most of the occasional consumers of the rural villages have given up the practice of ganja smoking, as diffi- culty was experienced in procuring the drug from distant villages where shops exist. After the introduction of the monopoly the drug is sold at a considerably higher rate than in former days. Hence the decrease. 26. Most of the consumers are habitual smokers of ganja. 27. See answer to question No. 20. 28. For ganja383 48. I believe the evil effects to be proportion- ate to the use of the drug. 49. See answer against question No. 45. I do not know about prostitutes using this drug. 50. See against question 45. 51 to 54. See answer against question No. 45. 55. I do not know. 56. No information. 58 to 61. Unacquainted. 62. Yes, it could and should be controlled, and I believe it feasible. The best way is prohibi- tive, except for medicinal purposes. 63. The same objection as to the sale of opium, liquor, and any other poison. Government license first, then prohibition. 61. I know of no regulations. 156. Evidence of the REV. I. C. ARCHIBALD,* Missionary Chicacole. Although I have had some nine years of resi- dence in the country, the bulk of the questions I am unable to answer. I have known several cases of persons who have gone crazy through the use of ganja and bhang. A few days ago a young man was brought before P. A. Collector Partridge in a demented state. He believed fully the statement of the mother to the effect that her son had lost his mind through the use of bhang. When in Tekkali, a town about 33 miles dis- tant, in July I saw a man made crazy in the same way. He had been a fine-looking fellow, of considerable property. Last month, when in Calingapatam, I learned on the best of authority of a case of a man who had gone mad through the same cause, but after keeping the stuff from him for a few months he had to a large extent recovered. I know personally of two cases in this town of persons effected by these drugs in the same way. One was, years ago, a peon of our Mission School; the other is an old pensioned sepoy. I deprecate the use of these drugs because of their injurious effects upon mind and body. I think their sale and use should be prohibited. In these parts their consumption is not very extensive as yet, but it is on the increase. 157. Evidence of the REV. S. C. SCHAIBLE, Missionary, Moolky, South Canara. 1. The informations given below I partly ac- quired directly as an itinerating missionary during the visits I made now and then from house to house in the villages in the neighbourhood of Karkul and Moolky, and partly indirectly through some of our Christians who were once or are still accustomed to the use of bhang, and further on through the teachers of the Middle School. I am the manager of it. I beg leave to pass by some subjects which may be better explained by others. 2. Bhang is the vernacular name known to and used by all people here for Cannabis sativa; and it is the only narcotic plant of the kind grown here. The name is applied even to the gluten got by washing and squeezing the anthers of it. Ganja is the name used for the same plant, chiefly by Hindustani-speaking people. Siddia pattre is the third name applied to the same plant, but known only to the educated classes and bhangi users. 'Bhangi unde' is the name given to small round cakes prepared from a mixture of gluten of bhangi and other condiments. Majun is the name given to small flat cakes prepared from a mixture of bhangi and some other things. Subji is a kind of drink made from bhangi and other accompaniments. Charas is, as a few say, used to denote small pills of yellowish gluten got from the plant while growing. It is, however, not prepared in this part of the district, nor is it used by many. The Natives enumerate three sorts of bhang grown here. The first has a reddish stern, large and plenty of seeds, but has only a little of anthers and filaments. The second has a blackish stem, small, but only a few seeds and anthers and filament more than the first. By this they mean, it appears, the female plant. The third is the male plant differing from the first and the second only in having flowers and is consequently de- stroyed. There is also foreign bhangi used, of which they name three different sorts as: (a) having a very small anther, (b) having big round anthers, and is said to be worse and more dangerous than the first; (c) Churki (machine) of bhangi or Wynaad bhangi. 3, 7, 14. It does not grow wild here and it is grown only to a very limited extent. As much as has come to my knowledge, some four or five people in every village will grow from 25 to 500 plants. From these plants they prepare the above men- tioned four different sorts, viz., bhangi, subji, majun and charas. The plant is never grown to the sole end for obtaining fibre and seed. (See, however, No. 40). 16. After the plant is cut, it must not be kept in the sun but under shade, i.e., under the roof. 19. Charas is said to be used for smoking purposes. It, however, cannot be smoked, but with a mixture of tobacco and bhangi. Charas is brought here by some for private use from Bombay. 20. It appears that a small proportion of every class and caste, from the Brahmin down to the Pariah, is using ganja for smoking. * Invited to attend at a sitting of the Commission for oral examination but failed to appear.
384 24. Bhangi is everywhere smoked, eaten and drunk, but only in the houses of the users. 25. The bhangi users are of opinion that there is an increase in smoking, eating and drinking. 28. To smokers it may cost (a) from 3 pies to 1 anna. To eaters (a) 6 pies, (b) 6 pies; To drinkers (a) 6 pies, (b) Re. 1-0-0. 32. No such custom in this district has come to my knowledge. Only once, some people at Moolky (actors in the Hindu theatre) are said to have worshipped the bhangi huka with tom tom and music. 33. Every consumer readily admits that it is a bad habit, which sentiment has found an expres- sion in a common saying about the consumption of bhangi, which translated runs thus:395 159. Evidence of the REV. M. THOMAS, Missionary, London Mission, Vizagapatam. Oral evidence. Question 1.386 could see387 161. Evidence of the VERY REV. A. CHELVUM, Roman Catholic Diocese, Vizagapatam. Oral evidence. Question 1.388 together and smoked in the pipe called chillum. (B) eating389 5. They say black cotton soil and islands formed in the rivers. 7. (a) Vadapalli, Koovur, and their adjoining villages, and some villages in our district. 10. They are of the same classes as other agri- cultural cultivators. 13. There is no restriction. 14. There is preparation of charas. 15. Ganja is prepared for smoking in the following manner:390 ments or social reformers should explain to the people the real effects of the drug. 65. Taxation, as heavy as possible, is reason- able and necessary with reference to (a) and (b), for that will clearly show that the Government does not encourage any such drug or any other spirit, but at the same time does not wish to wound the feelings of its subjects by prohibiting them or countenancing any use of such drugs by freeing them from taxation or putting any indirect res- trictions upon them. It would be the best and most healthy policy of the Government to impose the heaviest possible tax on the most consumed kind of the drug. If ganja is most consumed in a special locality, there the tax should be heavy. Where there is no great consumption, there may be moderate taxation. Anyhow, there should be taxation, heavy or low, in all localities. 67. I shall not object even if the consumer be taxed more than at present. 68. There is a shop in our town. I have no- thing to say against it. The shopkeeper does not induce anybody. 69. It is good that the local opinion be sought and the smoking rooms be kept as open and public as possible. The shop in our town ought to be more public and more opens to public view. 164. Evidence of K. VEMATASOOBIAH, Veishya, Trader and Pleader, District Munsiff's Court, Cuddapah. 1. A shareholder of mine had taken the ganja farm of this taluk three years ago. The facts brought to my notice then, and my own observa- tions when I had been to Gendicota, in the Jam- malamadugu taluk, occasionally to my relation's house, and my enquiries of persons who actually use the drug, have enabled me to answer some of the questions. 2. These definitions cannot be accepted for this district. Two varieties are sold in this district, called nur ganja and mathy ganja, the former being male and the latter female. Female ganja is not however grown, so far as my knowledge goes, in this district, but is imported from Bez- wada, Kurnool, and other districts. This is also known by the name kasy (graft) ganja. 7. (a) Yes. (c) Yes. In villages of Jummalamadugu and Cuddapah taluks; but not to a very great extent. 8. There has been some decrease in the area under cultivation, the sole reason being that the produce, which is not very considerable, to be exported does not sell at a profitable rate locally. 9. The cultivation of the plant generally re- sembles raggi cultivation. 10. The same classes as other agricultural cul- tivators. 11. Not so far as my information goes. 13. The cultivation does not seem to have been restricted. The plant cannot be cultivated in saltish (chowdu) soils. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in this dis- trict from hemp plant to some extent. 15. I know nothing of the wild plant. From the cultivated plant (A) the flowering tops (known as kully locally) are rubbed in the hand with water till the green colour is removed and then mixed with tobacco. This is the preparation used for smoking. (B) After undergoing the process for removing the green colour, it is mixed with pepper and dry ginger and made into balls. There is another preparation called majum for eating. Leaves or kullies are boiled in water, fried in a pan, and reduced to powder. This powder is mixed with jaggery syrup and made into balls. (C) The kullies and leaves are boiled in water and washed till the green colour is removed; then grounded with poppy seeds, pepper, and dry ginger, mixed with sugar and some plantains by some people and filtered. The essence is mixed with milk and used for drinking. This is what is called bhang. If however only pepper and dry ginger are used, the preparation is called subji. 16. Yes; it is prepared in houses. 17. By Musalmans in this district, but some vagabonds, called bairagis, seem to make the pre- parations and use them. 18. Yes; it is said the preparations lose their effect if kept for some time. Bhang can be kept in good order for half an hour and ganja for quarter of an hour. But majum, mentioned in 15th question, can be kept for a number of days. 19. Refer to the answer to the 15th question. My answers refer only to Cuddapah district. 20. In this district Musalmans smoke ganja. 21. In this district round or chur ganja, called baluchur, is preferred for smoking. 24. In this district only Musalmans mostly eat or drink ganja or bhang. 27. Their habits are dilatory. 28. (a) One pie each time, i.e., quarter of an anna a day. (b) Six times the cost. 30. A number of idlers consume more in com- pany than in solitude. It is generally confined to the adult male sex generally above sixteen years of age. 31. One addicted to it will not, I have observed, break it off. 33. From the fact that people addicted to the use of the drug are ashamed to confess it, it is deducible that they look upon it as no virtue, and from my own observation of the consumers I have been able to gather that people have recourse to the drug as a luxury. 35. It is necessary to see that people do not take to this drug; but ordinary prohibition may induce the consumer to illicit means. Besides the people in this district, who, I believe, are harmless, I have had occasion to observe many irresponsible and responsible persons in the North-Western Provinces are addicted to the use of the drug, and it has to be considered if the prohibition is likely to occasion serious discontent amongst them. I believe there is no room for an inference that the prohibition is necessarily followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants, etc. 39. It is said that smoking is more injurious than eating, which is, however, more injurious than drinking on account of the admixtures.
391 40. By Muhammadan and Hindu doctors it is prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities. 43. Yes; they are harmless. 45. (e) I think, yes. (f) I have had some servants who smoked the drug, and from my experience of them I believe it deadens the intellect. 68. There are licensed shops for the sale of the leaf and flower tops; but they are not consumed there, as they have no license for the preparations, which can only be done by the consumer. I am of opinion that there should be no shops for the sale of the prepared drug, as it is likely that a number of idlers will be collected there to con- sume the preparations. 69. There is some enquiry made before a shop is opened in any locality, and it is absolutely necessary that public opinion ought to be con- sidered. 165. Evidence of GANJAM VENCATARATNAM, Brahmin, 1st Grade Pleader, Coconada, Godavery District. 1. I am a Pleader of 13 years' standing. Since I have been asked to give evidence in this matter, I have paid some attention to the subject and made certain enquiries from persons likely to give me information, and the results of my en- quiries are embodied in my answers. But I must add that I have no special knowledge of the subject. 2. The definition "ganja" herein given may be accepted as applicable to the drug, locally known as "ganjai plant," raised in or imported into this district. The term "charas" is un- known here. 3. I don't know of any district in which it is grown spontaneously. But the plant is grown to a very limited extent for purposes of consumption in the Kistna and Godavery districts, as far as my information goes. 4. The only name by which it is known in these parts is "ganjai drug." What is produced in the hill tracts goes by the name of "manyapu ganjai," and what is raised in the plains is called "dhesavali ganjai." 5 and 6. Cannot answer. 7. There is nothing like cultivation of the hemp plant in this district to which my remarks apply. It is however grown here and there for purposes of consumption, generally by Musalmans, in their back yards. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared from the female ganjai plant, either raised in this district or imported from other places. But this obtains here only to a very small extent. 15. There appears to be no distinction between the methods of preparation of the cultivated and the wild plant. The methods of preparation for smoking, eating, and drinking are not uniform and differ in certain respects. 16. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. 17. By fakirs and ascetics known as bairagis, by certain Musalmans, and by some lower classes of Hindus, especially by the class of people known as Bondhilis. 18. It keeps good for three years, and loses its effect and gradually deteriorates after that period, apparently from the same causes as tobacco de- teriorates in time. But the plant produced in the hill tracts is said to deteriorate more rapidly, that is, in less than a year after its production. 19. Ganjai is used not only for smoking, but also bhang, majum, and halwa are prepared there- from with the mixture of certain substances. Bhang is used for drinking, and majum and halwa are eaten. 20. Almost all the bairagis, a few Musalmans, Bondhilis, and Sudras smoke ganjai or use its mixture in this district. The better classes of Hindus or Musalmans are free from this practice, and the people who resort to it form a miscroscopic minority, not even 1 per cent, of the population. 21. The three kinds of ganja appear to be in use in these parts. Round ganja is said to be preferred for smoking purposes. 23. I am not aware of its being used for smoking. 24. Vide my answer to question 20. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is said to be on the decrease since the Government placed re- strictions on the cultivation of the plant. The value of the drug in the bazaar is now almost doubled. 27. Bairagis are the only class of people that use the drug, and they believe in its efficacy to lessen sexual desire. Others get into the habit, in the majority of cases, by their association with bairagis, and some of them believe also in its medicinal properties. Their habits of life are not active, and society looks upon them as unsteady characters. 29. Pepper, "maratimoggalu," cloves, and other kinds of spices are the ordinary ingredients form- ing the mixture. Dhatura is also used in some cases. The object of these admixtures is to in- crease the intoxicating effects of the drug to a greater or less degree. 30. The consumption of the drug is generally practised in solitude. It is entirely confined to the male sex. Once a person gets into the habit, it is difficult for him to give it up at any time of life, and it becomes a life-long habit. It is un- usual for children to make use of any of these drugs. 31. It is only weak-minded people who associate themselves with bairagis that generally fall into this habit in these parts. There may be no diffi- culty in breaking it off; but, if we appeal to experience, we find that confirmed users seldom withdraw from the practice. There might be no such tendency in the drug itself; but the habit, though moderate in the beginning, may lead to excess in course of time. 32. No such customs are prevalent in these parts. 33. Public opinion here condemns the practice, though not to that extent as the use of alcohol or other intoxicating spirits is condemned. If any- body belonging to these parts who goes to Benares or other places in the north and stops there for any length of time should contract the habit, he tries to give it up as soon as he returns to the country, being afraid of public opinion.
392 There is no custom of worshipping the plant here. 34. I do not think that it would be a serious privation to any class of consumers, excepting perhaps the bairagis, to give up the habit. 35. I do not think it necessary or expedient to prohibit the use of these drugs in these parts, as the use thereof obtains only to a very small extent, and as public opinion acts as a sufficient deterrent. Practical difficulties also arise in enforcing the rule of prohibition, and such a stringent measure is likely to lead to illicit con- sumption, and may be followed also by recourse to alcoholic stimulants and the like. I do not believe, however, that it would lead to any serious discontent amounting to political danger; but, if such measures are to be adopted, I would strongly suggest that the Agency tracts may be entirely excluded from their operation. 36. No. 39. It seems to me that smoking ganja must be less injurious than drinking or eating its admix- ture, especially the admixture of dhatura, inas- much as the substitutes forming the mixture have the tendency to intensify the intoxicating effects of the drug. 40. Yes; it is prescribed as a medicine in cases of dysentery. I am not aware of its being used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of ganja is believed in some quarters as tending to increase the powers of digestion and prevent disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. All classes of people treated by native doctors occasionally use the medicines pre- pared from these drugs. 43. Yes. 44. It produces intoxication and creates appetite. The want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 45. It impairs the constitution, lessens sexual desire, deadens the intellect, and produces also insanity in some cases, though they are few and far between. 46. I have heard of a ease where the excessive use of the drug for a period of five or six years has brought about insanity. 47. No. 49. No. The use of the drug has a tendency to produce impotence. 51. No; it has nothing to do with crime. 53, 54 and 55. No. 56. Effects will be increased. Dhatura is also mixed in a few instances, and its effects are very strong. 166. Evidence of VISWANADHAM GURAVAIAH SASTRI, Brahmin, Pleader and District and Taluk Board Member, Chicacole. 1. I meet those that are accustomed to the use of ganja and bhang. 14. Ganja and Bhang are prepared in this district, specially in Uriya parts. 16. Yes. Bhang is prepared in houses. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking. 20. Ganja is smoked by Uriya bairagis and other constant travellers. Charas is used in smoking by Muhammadans in all places. 24. Bhang is drunk by all classes in all places, to a great extent. Eating less prevalent. 25. The use is increasing. The recognition of the Government of the sale of those drugs in open markets is, in my opinion, the sole cause of the increase. 33. The use of ganja and bhang is regarded as a habit. In societies, men of these habits are not generally allowed. In the view of religion it is objectionable, for it affects the nervous and mus- cular system of the body. 39. Smoking seems less injurious. 40. Native doctors use ganja in preparing certain medicines, called halwas, for curing indi- gestion, sleeplessness, and impotency. 42. It is not harmless. 43. Yes. 44. (a) Drowsiness. (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) No. (e) Yes. (f) For a few hours. (g) Yes; sleeplessness, debility, and loss of memory are the results. (h) Yes. 45. (a) Yes. 51. (a) Yes. (b) When the consumers exhaust their purse, they would have recourse to stealing. 53. Yes. No; I do not know. 55. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. 167. Evidence of B. CHATTERJEA, Brahmin, Pleader, District Court, Ganjam, and Chairman, Berhampore Municipality. 1. I have been over various parts of India, and have been in this district off and on for 13 years. I have known personally many persons who smoke ganja and charas and drink and eat bhang. 3. In the Ganjam district the hemp plant grows spontaneously on the hills in abundance and in a limited quantity in the plains. 14. Ganja and charas are prepared to a great extent in the Segoli district on the frontiers of Nepal and Behar. Ganja is also prepared largely in Sultanpur. 16. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes.
393 19. Mainly, so far as I have known, for smok- ing. Ganja is sometimes mixed with bhang and drunk to intensify the intoxicating power of the mixture. 20. Almost all classes, and notoriously religious mendicants (bairagis) and professional singers, smoke ganja. Ganja is smoked all over India, but I have not seen any use of charas in the Madras Pre- sidency. Ganja and charas are used extensively in the North-Western Provinces and the Punjab. 24. Within my experience, eating and drinking bhang are common in the North-Western Prov- inces and the Punjab. In the Puri district in Orissa drinking bhang is a confirmed habit with many people. In Ganjam the habit is rare. 25. On the decrease to some extent, since the lower classes who mostly use these intoxicants have taken to the habit of drinking liquor. 28. The average cost of ganja and charas would be about two annas and that of bhang half an anna. 32. In Bengal there is the religious custom of drinking bhang on the Vijaya Dasami (Dasara) day. Saivas offer ganja to their deity and smoke it afterwards. 33. In respectable society the use of ganja and charas is looked upon with some degree of aver- sion. This is owing to bad temper caused by ganja and to a notion that the smoke of ganja scares away the goddess of fortune. 40. Ganja and bhang are used by many native doctors in the preparation of sweet boluses for improving appetite. Bhang is prescribed by some for dyspepsia. 41. In the case of those who live by hard physical labour, the use of ganja and charas refreshes the system. Bhang acts only as an appetiser, and is more or less harmless. 43. Yes, so far as I know. 44. Ganja and charas are refreshing. All these produce intoxication. Ganja and charas allay hunger. Bhang creates appetite. The effect of bhang lasts for not less than 12 hours, that of ganja and charas from 2 to 3 hours. There are no after-effects. The want of subsequent grati- fication produces a longing, but no marked uneasiness. 45. In strong constitutions noxious effects are not markedly perceptible as in weak constitutions. Bhang creates indolence and slightly dulls the intellect and moral sensibility. Ganja acts injuriously on the nervous system, inflames the temper, and weakens the sense of moral responsibility. I know a relation of mine who from the most dutiful and obedient of sons came to be self-willed, wayward and disobedient, and not amenable to any control, all through the moderate use of ganja. Charas does not injuriously affect the temper, but has in other respects almost the same effect as ganja. 49. Yes; bhang is so used. 51. Yes, of bhang. 53. Yes; I know of a case which came for trial before the Sessions Court of Ganjam. The mur- derer was an immoderate smoker of ganja, and in a moment of temporary homicidal frenzy com- mitted one murder and threatened to commit more when he was apprehended by the police. 54. Yes, by bad characters who lend their services for hire in the North-Western Provinces. 55. Yes; bhang is administered to intended victims, and the dhatura is mixed to induce com- plete stupefaction. 168. Evidence of P. C. ANUNTHACHARLU, Brahmin, Chairman, Municipal Council, and Government Pleader, Bellary. 1. I have had no special opportunities of obtain- ing information on the subject. I have observed the growth of hemp plant in some places, and have noticed the effect of ganja on people who have habitually used it. 2. The word charas is not known in this part of the country. Sidhi, bhang, and sabji are used to denote the dry leaves of the hemp plant. This definition of ganja may be accepted for this part of the country. Sabji is also known by the name of Ram Ras. Flat ganja is manufactured in Madras and the southern districts, and not in the ceded districts to any very great extent. Round ganja is manufactured in the Bellary district. The definition is wide enough for this district. 3. Hemp plant does not grow spontaneously in abundance in this district. It grows spontaneous- ly on the Nullamalah hills in the Kurnool district, but not in abundance. It grows also on Bhana Buddin hills in Mysore territory. 4. It is known by the names of ganja plant and bhang plant. 5. I cannot answer this question. I know that dew has good effect on its growth. Black soil is well suited to its growth. 6. Only scattered in the places mentioned above. 7. Hemp plant is cultivated to a very small extent in the Bellary district. It grows in black soil. It is a nine months' crop (Moongari crop). The flower top becomes ripe in the sixth month. It is grown in sugarcane and brinjal gardens in some parts of this district. 8. No considerable or appreciable increase or decrease. 9. Much water is not necessary. Generally rain water is sufficient. 10. No. They are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators in this district. In Dag- gupadu and other villages in the Kistna district, there are, I understand, special classes who culti- vate this. 13. Ordinary rainfall is sufficient. It is culti- vated in black soil. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Not made. The leaves are used for making sabji. 15. Wild plant is not much used in this part VOL. VI. 3 G
394 of the country. The flower top of cultivated plant after being squeezed is smoked with tobacco. Majum is made from the flower top. This is eaten. Panakum is made for drinking. This is rather expensive and rarely made. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by people in their houses and very rarely in shops. 17. No particular classes. Generally by the lower classes of Hindus and Musalmans. 18. Ganja keeps well for one year. It becomes useless after two years. 20. Charas not known here. Bairagis smoke very largely. Boyas, Kurubhas, Musalmans, and some other lower orders make ganja. Brahmins and other higher classes rarely smoke ganja in this district. 21. Round ganja is used in this part of the country. 22. Charas not known, not used. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. There is very little intoxication, if any. It is imported here from Gujrat and other places. 25. There appears to be a larger sale, and there- fore the use is on the increase. 26. Ganja is smoked very often in the day in the same way as snuff is used. 27. Lower orders of Hindus generally and all classes of Musalmans. Higher orders of Hindus also sometimes use it. It is sometimes used in the beginning as medicine to facilitate digestion, to check diarrh395 169. Evidence of V. SIVA YOGI, Brahmin, 1st Grade Pleader and Municipal Chairman, Vellore. 1. Such opportunities as have been afforded during the course of my frequent journey in my professional capacity as Pleader. 2. Yes; the names as defined here. 3. I am not aware of any district in which it grows spontaneously; but it is cultivated at the foot of the hills called the Malayalam hills in Vellore taluk, as also in the Chittaldroog, Mysore province, and on the Nilgiris. 4. The plant itself is known by a single name, ganja tree; but the Arabic name is aseesh, and preparations from it are known by several names. 5. I am unable to give the special conditions to the growth of the wild hemp besides those given below. It is generally cultivated during the dewy season, Cold climate is necessary and a red soil. 6. The growth is ordinarily scattered, but when dense the plants are transplanted. 7. (a) Yes; in the Malayalam hills of the Vellore taluk to a great extent. 8. Cannot say. 9. The land is tilled, manured, and seeds sown like dhall (grain). 10. A special class known as the Malyalees cul- tivate it. They live apart from others on the hills. 11. I am not in a position to say so, but it is quite probable that they will gather seeds from the wild hemp. The Malyalees generally secure seeds during harvest time. 12. In the Malayalam tract of. Vellore taluk the people generally cultivate the wild hemp for the production of ganja to a large extent. The male plant is not generally extirpated, but a small number of the female is. 13. The cultivation is not restricted. It has been for a very long time cultivated in the Malaya- lam tract; and I am not in a position to state why it has been cultivated in that tract alone. Probably because it is indigenous. 14. Yes. (a) Ganja and (b) charas are prepared in the Polur taluk of this district to a large ex- tent, and (e) bhang in the Vellore taluk to a small extent for daily consumption. 15. Method of preparation from (a) the culti- vated plant: As soon as the plant grows to a certain height, they nip the heads to prevent it growing much higher, when it begins to spread. After the flower tops are sufficiently ripe, the plants are cut and stripped of the leaves, of tops and flowers, which are put in a date-leaf basket and trodden under foot. They then cover these with palmyra leaves, and place large stones over them for a period of about 15 days, so that the agglutinated flower tops assume a flattened shape. This is called flat ganja, which is afterwards sold. (A) For smoking.396 29. Vide answer to question 15, Chapter III. Dhatura is not used as an admixture. 30. It is practised to a large extent in company rather than in solitude. It is mainly confined to the male sex during middle age. It is not usual for children to consume these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed and difficult to break off. There is a tendency in these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. It is said that the Koran (a religious book) prohibits the consumption of these drugs. Even the Hindu Shastras regard the use of intoxicating drugs as sinful. The consumption of these drugs is not recommended either socially or religiously. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is generally regarded with disrepute, socially and religiously. It is due to a natural tendency to look with abhorrence on all things evil and ruinous. There is no custom, as far as I am aware, of wor- shipping the hemp plant. 37. The effects of charas smoking are different from ganja smoking, being much stronger owing to the active narcotic principle. 38. Cannot say. 39. The drinking and eating of bhang is less injurious than the smoking of ganja or charas, because the active principle of the former loses much of its effects in the course of preparation, whereas ganja and charas are smoked in its raw state. 40. It is never prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by any school of native doctors, as far as I know. They are never used in the treatment of cattle disease. 43. Moderate consumers also are quarrelsome to their neighbours. 53. The excessive indulgence sometimes lead to violent actions. 54. Criminals are said to use these drugs to fortify themselves to commit premeditated offen- ces. 68. Ganja is sold in a shop in the municipal market and a shop in the commissariat bazaar. These two shops are licensed. 69. People are not generally consulted as to the opening of shops; but I think it is better that they should be consulted beforehand. 170. Evidence of C. SRINIVAS RAO, Brahmin, Government Pleader, and Chair- man, Municipal Council, Cuddalore. 1. I have the opportunity of discussing with a physician dealing with the drugs. 3. I have no information as to the spontaneous growth in this district. 4. It is not abundant in the district. They are generally known as ganja. 9. The seeds taken out of flat ganja sown in a few back yards a few years ago. 10. A few physicians were growing a few plants formerly. They appear to have disconti- nued since a few years. 11. See No. 9. 16. I am not aware of bhang preparation in this district. 19. Ganja is said to be used very rarely for smoking. Flat ganja appears to be used in medicines for cholera and dysentery. I know that ganja being used for preparation of certain electuary for treat- ing cholera cases in equal qualities with ten more drugs. Sugar and lime juice after purifying the flat ganja leaves. Flat ganja is used for making pills, along with pepper and other drugs, for the benefit of labouring classes in certain localities. 21. Chiefly flat ganja by those who rarely use it. 24. In the divisions of Bombay and Bengal Presidencies. 28. A few coolies may buy the pills for one or two pies, rarely once in a week or a fortnight. 29. I am not aware of dhatura being mixed with ganja in the district. 30. I don't think children in the district ever consume the drug. 32. In this part of the district the use of the drug is considered injurious, and appears to have been generally hated by a majority of the civilised classes. 33. No such custom in the district, as far as I am aware of. 34. I don't think so. 35. No political danger as far as this district goes. 36. I have no reason to think. 40. They are prescribed, A tola weight of flat ganja well purified, added to the following drugs of each one tola weight and prepared as stated below, has been found to be effectual in dysentery and cholera cases. I have tried the medicine in many cases and found it to be successful. The articles are397 171. Evidence of V. SRINIVASA RAO, Brahmin, Pleader, District Munsiff's Court, Tirukoilur, South Arcot. 1. I had opportunities of seeing certain persons that habitually smoke ganja, and the information herein given is gathered from them. 3. In the district of South Arcot it is grown spontaneously in Jadaya Gounden, Kurambu Gounden, and Javadi Hills. 14. Ganja and bhang. 16. Bhang is prepared in houses by habitual consumers to a small extent. 19. Ganja is used for smoking, and also a sort of beverage is prepared from the juice of leaf, mixing with it sugar. 20. Among Hindus a set of wandering mendi- cants, called pardesis, and bairagis, smoke ganja. Some Hindus of the higher class secretly use, and certain people of the Sudra class also smoke. The Rajput class also use it. Among Muhammadans, the fakirs smoke ganja. In the southern districts of the Presidency of Madras it is less used than the northern districts and upper India. 25. The use is on the decrease. It is looked down by society. 28. One anna worth. 32. In Hindu traditional books it is said that sages who practised yogam were in the habit of using it. The pardesis, who imitate those sages, have borrowed the custom. 33. The consumption is considered to be in breach of social laws. The consumers are looked upon with contempt. The public opinion is wholly against its use. This sentiment is due to its in- toxicating effects. The object of consumption among well-to-do classes is not on account of medicinal properties but to give undue strength to satisfy certain desires. 39. Smoking is less injurious, as it does not ex- cite the system as much as eating, nor it spoils constitution as eating, even if an overdose is taken. 40. School of native doctors, such as Agastia, Bogar and others, have prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities to be admixtured in the preparation of medicine. 41. Moderate use invigorates the body. 42. Moderate use, if habitually practised and assimilated, will not be injurious. Moderate use does not produce any baneful effects. It does not produce exhaustion. It gives energy and capacity to bear fatigue and hard work. 43. Yes. 44. It gives strength to the body and vigour. At the beginning a little stupefaction is produced, which gradually disappears as the use becomes habitual. It also creates appetite after its in- fluence is over, which generally lasts for an hour or two. 172. Evidence of MANCHALLER JAGANNADHAM, Brahmin, Pleader, Bapathla, Ristna District. 1. I have come in contact with the ganja con- tractors and cultivators in the course of my pro- fession as a Pleader. I have also had occasion to associate with the wandering bairagis. 3. In Daggupad, Kistna district, and in Bhadra Chalan forests. In Daggupad it is not spon- taneous, but it is cultivated abundantly. 14. (a) Ganja is prepared. (c) Bhang is also prepared. (a) and (c) Generally throughout the dis- trict. 16. Bhang is not prepared generally in their houses. Ganja may be prepared from the wild plant. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking to my knowledge. 20. Wandering bairagis smoke ganja as a rule. Beyond this, it cannot be laid clown as a general rule that any particular class of people smoke ganja. 38. The average allowance to a habitual con- sumer of ganja is half anna weight; but a certain smoker told me that he could smoke 30 tolas weight of ganja in a day if he had the means to do so. 33. Bairagis regard the use of ganja as en- abling them to fix their mind upon the Divine Principle in their process of (Samadhi) concentra- tion of mind upon the Eternal Principle. This plant is therefore known as yoga patri in the common language of bairagis. Ganja smoking is in disrepute because habitual consumers are known to be drowsy. Ganja smokers are pro- verbially lazy. 40. (a) Telugu people use ganja plant in the treat- ment of dysentery along with other ingredients and in certain electuaries intended for improving the general tone of the body. (b) Ganja leaf (not dried) is given to cows and buffaloes which withhold milk. It then gives milk. It is not used for any cattle diseases this part of the country to my knowledge. 41. Yes; it may be beneficial too. I know in- stances in which patients are cured of cough by the smoking of ganja. 43. No. 44. Moderate use does not produce intoxication. It is said to be refreshing, to allay hunger, and at the same time to create appetite. I know people who have not asked for food for hours together after smoking. Yes; it produces uneasiness. know consumers who could not get ganja for a day having been restless. They had to give up that habit gradually. 49. Bhang is used as an aphrodisiac. 51. Crime has little or no connection with the smoking of ganja or bhang. Most violent crimes have wine or woman at the bottom, Country liquor plays a prominent part in the commission of violent crimes. 53. I know of no case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy.
398 173. Evidence of P. KESAVA PILLAI, Karnam, Pleader, and Honorary Secretary of the Gooty People's Association. 1. Local enquiries made at Gooty. 2. The definitions accepted. Both charas and bhang are not used here. They call plants with seeds male, and with only flowers female. They do not use female plants; and they remove them as soon as they can distinguish male from female. Flat ganja is known here as mandham, and the round gaja as mulki. 7. It is limited to a few backyards and com- pounds and sometimes in vegetable gardens. 8. The cultivation does not increase. 9. It is watered till it becomes fit for use. 10. Muhammadan fakirs as a rule. And, if cultivators, if any grow it, they do it for medicinal purposes and for giving it to bairagis. 13. It is cultivated here and there in small patches. It is not restricted to any portions in the district. 14. (a) Ganja, yes. (b) Charas, no. (c) Bhang, no. It is for the use of the manufacturer and his associates. 15. It is for smoking only. 16. Bhang is not known here. 18. It is valued up to a year. Bats have a great relish for it, as parrots covet it while grow- ing in the fields. 19. Ganja is used for smoking during the summer; round ganja is used for drinking also. After making it a paste, mix with water, and strain it; and this is mixed with sugar and some spices, and then taken as a cooling and stupefying draught. 20. Muhammadans, Chetty balijas, fishermen, males, madigas and linga balijas. In Gooty, Pamidi Urnakondah and Guntakul, the majority of the ganja users live. In almost every village one or two may be found. 21. Now they get round ganja for smoking. Flat ganja cannot be had. Round ganja is im- ported in preference to the other for the reason that there is very little demand for the latter. 22. No charas is understood here. 23. Bhang is unknown. 25, The smoking is on the increase. It is by association with ganja smoker who by his appa- rent liberality and profuse praise of its virtues induce lazy loungers to begin to smoke. It is dead cheap. They can gratify their desire for getting intoxicated with a few puffs of ganja smoke when they cannot afford the luxury of drinking spirituous liquors and toddy. There are some ganja smokers who do not drink. It does not supersede drinking gradually. 26. Consumers are all habitually moderate. We do not hear of habitual excessive consumers. Unlike opium smokers, ganja smokers can occa- sionally smoke and give it up. 27. Vide remarks against question 20. Lazy habits of people who resort to places where fakirs and such people lounge. 28. Three to six pies for both morning and evening for habitual moderate consumers; and 1 to 2 pies for a beginner. 29. Tobacco is mixed with it to give it a better flavour and neutralize its bad effects. No dhatura here. 30. As a rule, they smoke in company. Only males use it; children do not smoke it. 31. They can break off the habit without diffi- culty. They say that there would be no harm to their constitutions. Bairagis may feel it diffi- cult to break off the habit. 32. It is not associated with any social or re- ligious custom. Almost all the bairagis use it, and passionately like it for the reason that it is an effective preventive against fevers as well as the effects of cold and of drinking all sorts of water in their wanderings. 33. (a) In these parts the consumers are held in contempt, and a ganja smoker himself would not proclaim his habit, and feels it a disgrace to be known as a ganja smoker; but this remark is not applicable to fakirs and lowest classes of people. (b) The public sentiment against it is due to the feeling that a ganja smoker is known to be a lazy and never-well-to-do fellow, and has little credit. No doubt a ganja smoker is a better member of society than a drunkard; neverthe- less, he is not considered to be a morally sensitive being. (c) No custom of worshiping the plant exists anywhere here. 34. Except to bairagis and fakirs, and perhaps to fishermen, the rest would not feel it as a great privation. Bairagis are wanderers and often they have spare clothing. They think it a great preventive against the effects of climate, etc. It also warms them up; therefore some cultivators make it a point to cultivate ganja, and consider it merito- rious to make doles of ganja leaves to the bairagis. Fishermen, but only very few, to warm themselves after their labour in water. Fakirs to while away their time. 35. It is feasible here. There will not be any political danger; but the bairagis and fakirs who wander from place to place have to be reckoned with, in case it is prohibited every where and not allowed to be imported. Yes, the consumers, at least the majority of them, will take to the worse habit of drinking liquors. 36. I don't think that the drug to any extent is substituted by liquor or vice versa. In spite of their cost, toddy and liquor are drunk largely, and the number of their consumers are on the increase. 40. (a) Yes. (b) It is used for cattle disease. 41. (a) Yes, by the consumers. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. 42. It is believed that it makes the ganja smoker stupid and idiotic. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect is stupefying the intellect on a beginner. Bairagis say that it allays hunger to some extent, and that it is also refreshing. Want of subsequent gratification will produce longing for it as much as a habitual tobacco smoker feels for tobacco.
399 45. Bairagis being unmarried as a class, their constitutions are not undermined. Others, unless their nourishment is good, gradually suffer. Lung diseases occur after a long use. It does impair or blunt moral sense and induce laziness, but not immorality of the kind of debauchery. It does deaden the intellect and produce insanity, but such instances are rare. Insanity is observed when it is excessively used, without corresponding nourishment. I beard of one or two insane men in the Gooty sub-jail. Kamsala Ramama, of Putloor, became insane, they say, by smoking ganja excessively. 47. No. 49. No; it is not used by prostitutes. The use of hemp tends to produce impotence. 51. No; unlike toddy and liquor or arrack, moderate use of ganja has no connection with crime. 53. No instances are known. 54. No; it unfits a man by making him dull and stupid. 55. Not in these parts. 57. Ganja is drunk. They say it is refreshing in the summer. 58. The consumers are generally beggars and poor people. I don't think that it will do any good by raising the taxation a little higher. After all it is not so bad as toddy and liquor which is simply ruining the people, and that in increasing numbers. 60. Cultivation is very limited. The cultiva- tors may be made to take a license for the pur- pose. It will check its increase. 63. The licensed shops ought to be limited to a few centres in a district. Indiscriminate licenses to sell everywhere tend to increase the consump- tion. It is too tempting to lazy people to resist the fancy to try it, and then acquire the habit. If it is to be obtained with some trouble from a distant place, many a consumer, who has taken to it for the mere pleasure of it, will give it up. Those that grow the plant will be few, and will not daily part with it even for the sake of com- pany. 67. Vide my remarks against 58. 68. They are sold in licensed shops. No smok- ing on the premises. Nothing bad is heard since the sellers are not themselves consumers. 69. No; people of a place are of no account in selecting places or granting licenses. It is neces- sary that people should be given an option in the matter. If local option is given, it will prevent many an evil arising from opening shops selling intoxicating drugs or liquids. Oral evidence. Question 1.400 19. Ganja is likewise used to increase the in- toxicating power of toddy, and also in the pre- paration of medicines: such as poornathi, dhathu- pushti, lahiam, magin, ganja-ghee, and ganja- chatni. 20. Andis, bairagis, jogis, and fakirs smoke in particular; also vagabonds in places where such characters generally meet. 28. One pie per diem401 rioration is exposure and natural effect of time upon things. No special preventive measures can be taken except preservation without exposure to damp air and sun. 19. See answer under section 15 supra. 20. Ganja is generally smoked by workmen, poor people who require intoxication, by fakirs, and the sadhus of Northern India; in this province the ganja smokers are generally low class people. 21. Those who want good intoxication smoke mulki ganja, and those who look to their health smoke mandam ganja. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase; generally poor people, the lazy of them, find amuse- ment in it. They assemble generally on the street verandahs: the habit is communicated gradually to those near them. The working classes take to it as a cheap luxury. The use of ganja by one tempts the neighbour and the inducement is rather great. 26. (a) ¾. (b) ¼. (c) Nil. (d) Nil. 27. Moderate consumers are generally well-to- do people and are of some respectability; secondly, they are workmen, doing coolie work; thirdly, they are vagabonds and stray fellows with no other work except killing time in idle talk; these last are generally mean folks. (1) Class in the above use ganja as a luxury with a view to be able to eat and drink well and sumptuously. (2) Class use it as a recreation and to enjoy sound sleep during nights. (3) Class use it as a fashion of the day among idlers, of the excessive consumers, the fakirs, etc., use ganja to enable them to concentrate steadily their mind on God and to secure one- pointedness of the mind. 28. To smoke ganja it costs a man one pie or two for a dose. Moderate consumers may be said to have 2 or 3 doses a day. 29. Bhang massala consists of several ingre- dients, such as poppy seeds, spices, milk, etc. 30. When a man smokes ganja, he usually hands the chillum to the one next to him. They smoke or drink in company. Smoking in solitude is rare. Females and children also smoke ganja, but not to a large extent in this presidency. 31. (a) The habit is easily formed. (b) The man habituated to the use of ganja will feel very uneasy for about ten days or so if be breaks off. Afterwards he may turn all right. (c) The moderate consumer will not like to smoke excessively unless he changes his mode of life to that of an idle, sedentary habit, in which case there is more probability. 32. The use of ganja by the Brahmins of this presidency is prohibited by religion. The other respectable castes follow suit in holding the same view. 33. Ganja smokers in this province are looked upon as people whose words cannot be relied upon; the use of any form of the narcotic is generally in disrepute, because intoxication blinds the reason of man, his brain is muddled; and under its influence the man evolves endless fancy, mental pictures, and indulges in them to the detri- ment of his duty in the world as man. 34. To them, of course, it is a privation, rather of a serious nature too. It is very likely that such enforced abstinence may affect the health of some of the habitual consumers, who are mentally very weak; but this can be remedied in the natural way by lapse of time. Anyhow the con- sumer is sure to feel a shock and labour under it for about ten days at least. 35. Unless the cultivation of the hemp plant, which is now promiscuously done, be stopped, it is not feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. The prohibition will eventually produce serious discontent, but this feeling will die away in course of time. There can be no political danger from such a step. Ganja consumers will not take to other intoxi- cants, as the latter are more costly than ganja. The fact that as much intoxication as from four annas worth of liquor could be got from one pie worth of ganja, stories foremost to all, and this is how even poor people also afford to use ganja freely. Perhaps after ganja toddy may be liked by these people, as it is only cheap intoxicating beverage available next to ganja. 36. No; I do not think alcohol is substituted for any of these drugs. 37. I do not know. 38. Mandam ganja does not impair health. Mulki ganja is more intoxicating than either of the other two. Javaji ganja is ordinary in its effects. 39. Smoking ganja is mere injurious than eating or drinking. The sharpness of its nature is softened when mixed with ghee or milk, whereas in smoking the ganja is used in a raw state and thus produces more heat in the body. 40. Ganja is used in medicine; but no medical man prescribes the use of ganja regularly in a habitual manner. Ganja is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) Ganja consumers taste food well, eat much and can digest all that. (b) To some extent it is beneficial in al- leviating fatigue. (c) Decidedly it is a preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. There can be no occasional use of ganja, whether moderate or otherwise. If at all a man uses it, be would be a habitual consumer; as a new man cannot withstand its intoxicating effects. 42. I do not think it is quite harmless. It renders a man unfit to some extent for worldly purposes of active life. The habituated man generally runs mad after it if he could not get it in time. 43. They are inoffensive. 44. It is refreshing in a slight manner, pro- duces intoxication; it does not allay hunger, but the man is insensible of the appetite, being biliously giddy. Yet the man can take in a large quantity of food if offered. The effect may last for nearly six hours. 45 and 46. It impairs the constitution if proper nourishment is wanting. It does not injure digestion directly. It causes dysentery, costiveness: invariably brings on asthma. It induces laziness generally; but steadiness in the work in hand or taken up at the time 47. It is so for the most part in Northern India. vol vi. 3 H
402 48. Not necessarily hereditary. 49. The habitual use of ganja tends to im- potence in the long run. 50. The stage of impotence is reached earlier. 51. A large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of ganja. The use of ganja does not result in the commission of crime. 52. A large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of ganja. The use of ganja does not result in the commission of crime. 53. No; I know of no such cases. 54. Ganja mixed with some other drugs or intoxicants is, I think, so used and not mere ganja. 55. Any new man taking ganja, if induced to sleep, can enjoy it soundly, when any crime can possibly be committed, such as robbery. Raw ganja, with or without admixture, stupefies man if taken in, but not by mere smoking. The stupe- faction by ganja is not complete. 56. I do not know. 57. See answer under 55. 58. It is capable of improvement. 59 and 60. The cultivation of hemp must be restricted; any man wishing to cultivate must obtain the permission of Government to do so, mentioning the area of laud so cultivated, so that there may be a public record of such lands and their extent, and all possible information con- nected with it for ready reference; this will put a stop to the promiscuous growing of hemp in gardens and backyards also. The ganja harvest must also be conducted under Government super- vision to ascertain the quantity produced in the country. 62. The cultivation of hemp plant for the production of bhang should be controlled. This would be feasible. By raising the tax and keeping severe supervision of the Government in the cultivation of the hemp plant. 63. My objection to the system of retail vend is that all poor people who are lazy vagabonds and who are in the habit of smoking ganja, etc., can get the thing to satisfy their pernicious habit for a pie or for two pies, so, that they may use it for one day, but if it is to be a wholesale vend, then there will be an indirect check on the free use of these. 65. The taxation is reasonable. 68. There are shops licensed for the sale of ganja. I have nothing special to say on these. 69. It is a matter of formality that is gone through of consulting the neighbours before the shop is opened. Public opinion ought to be con- sidered before opening such shops. 70. I have heard that ganja is imported from Native States by travellers occasionally and also by merchants. I think duty is really paid by the merchants. 176. Evidence of CHODISETTY VENKATARATNUM, Merchant, Coconada, Godavari District. 1. I had this information by consulting several experienced native physicians and well-known consumers of these hemp drugs. 2. Out of these three narcotic articles which are obtained from hemp, only two are in use in these parts of the country, viz., ganja and bhang. The female hemp plant is far superior to the male one. This plant is generally cultivated in the plains. Charas is not generally known to the people of Southern India, and it is in common use in Northern India. Ganja, consisting of the dried flowering tops of cultivated female hemp plants which have become coated with resin is generally known by the name of kally. Flat ganja is in common use in these parts of the country. Round ganja and broken ganja are not known to this part. Only two varieties of the hemp drugs, viz., ganja and bhang, may be accepted to our province. 3. Spontaneous growth of these hemp plants is generally to be seen in the hilly tracts of Northern Circars. It is abundant, especially in the district of Ganjam. 4. It is generally known by the name of ganja. It exactly refers to the same plant. 5. It is necessary to the growth of the wild hemp that the climate should be cold. The fall of the rain and snow must be very frequent. The soil must be fertile. Elevation is not so very essential for its growth. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily scattered. If the growth is dense, it is scarce that the plant bears the flowering-tops coated with resin, which is the essential part of this plant. 7. The districts of Kristna and Ganjam have cultivation of this plant to a certain extent. The seeds are not used in preparing bhang. These seeds are used for medicine. 8. As far as the knowledge of my information goes, I see neither increase nor decrease in the area under such cultivation. 9. The soil is manured before the seeds are sown. These little plants, after they have grown to the height of six inches, are taken away and transplanted in a different manured soil, at a distance of three or four feet from each other, either singly or doubly. 10. They do not form a special class. They are of the same classes as other agricultural culti- vators. 11. No such restriction is necessary. 12. The hilly tracts of Northern Circars have this practice in general. In all cases where the cultivation of this plant is made, the male plant is extirpated with no exceptions. 13. The cultivation of this hemp plant is restricted to the districts of Kristna, Ganjam, and Vizag. It is restricted to these districts, because there are people acquainted with this cultivation in those parts. The cultivation of this plant would be impossible to the parts where the soil is fruitless. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in our province or in our part to some extent. Charas is not at all known to our part. 15. There is no difference between the prepara- tion of the cultivated and wild plant. Ganja is used for smoking. The process of preparation for smoking is this:403 washed away with water five or six times, and the seeds, if any, will be removed and then dried for a little while. It will then be put in a pipe and burnt with a little fire over it, and the smoke produced by the combustion will be taken into. 16. Bhang can be prepared by the people in their houses, who are accustomed to drink it. The process of preparing bhang is this:404 in alleviating fatigue and as a preventive of dis- ease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. I refer to moderate occasional use of it. 42. These drugs, when taken moderately; prove beneficial and do no harm. 43. Of course they are inoffensive. 44. Moderate use of these drugs would give relief to those who walk long distances, and who are tired on account of excessive work. It no doubt creates a free, jovial and unshaken state of mind for meditation. It is refreshing. It does not produce intoxication. When it is mixed with sugar, etc., it allays hunger temporarily. When the drug alone is taken, it creates appetite. Its effect lasts for about three hours. There will be no after-effects. It does not produce any longing or uneasiness. 45. (a) No, nothing of that sort. (b) No. (c) No. (d) There will be a sort of remedy for the dis- eases questioned. (e) No. It further creates activity in the man. (f) Never. (g) It will not give relief to persons suffering from mental anxiety or insanity. 46. When it becomes perfectly agreeable to the constitution, it does no harm, whatever quantity is taken. It is quite plain to say that no one comes forward to use the drug when it does not agree with his constitution. It does not create as much temptation as alcohol for beginners. This is as harmless as tobacco. 47. No. 48. It requires no discussion. 49. Moderate use of these drugs practised as an aphrodisiac, when strong and substantial food is taken. The excessive use of this hemp produces impotence if substantial food is wanting. 50. No doubt it creates gradually impotence, when it is excessively taken without sufficient food. 51. None, on account of this drug. 52. The same question is well discussed in answering some of the previous questions. 53. No. 54. No. This drug does not bereave a man of his senses. 55. When this drug is alone taken, and when it is prepared properly, it will not do any one any sort of harm when it is taken moderately. 56. No harm when taken moderately. It does some harm when taken excessively, and when it is not agreeable to the constitution. When it is mixed with dhatura, it produces bad results. 57. Yes, these are largely taken in cold climates. 58. The present system of excise administra- tion is working well and requires no improvement. 60. This plant can well be cultivated wherever strong soil is found. 61. Charas is not cultivated in these parts. 62. No modification is necessary. 63. The sale can be managed in any way. 65. I suggest that imposition of heavy taxes is necessary, especially on alcohol, to put down this malpractice, which has turned thousands of people as drunkards. 66. We know nothing about it. 67. I have no objections. 68. No. 177. Evidence of KOMMIREDDI NARASINGA Row NAYUDU GARU, Merchant, Coconada. 1. Having had opportunities of seeing some people who smoke ganja and with some knowledge of native medicine, I answer the following ques- tions:405 manner under the influence of this drug like that of liquor. 43. They are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. Not refreshing. Produces a little intoxi- cation, and creates appetite when it is mixed in the halva, which is prepared with at least 20 or 30 other drugs. The ganja mixed in it is a twenti- eth part the highest. 45. No. 49. No. 51. No connection of its use in any crime. It generally produces timidness. 53, 54 and 55. No. 178. Evidence of MIRZA MEHDY ISPAHANI, Merchant, Madras. 1. My residence in Bombay and Egypt, and travels to Sind and Turkey has given me opportu- nities of coming in contact with people who habi- tually or casually used this drug in its several forms. 2. The definitions are correct. All these prepar- ations are of course from the female tree. 3. In the North Arcot district, Vellore taluk. A large quantity is imported from there to Madras. It is abundant in the Salem district on the Jawad hills. 5. It grows on hills of about 300 feet above the sea level and is generally cultivated in dry lands. 6. The growth is generally scattered. 10. No, they are of the same class of ordinary people as other cultivators. 12. The wild hemp is sometimes cultivated for producing ganja in Cuddapah and Salem districts. The male plant is generally extirpated. 13. The cultivation is not restricted and is common to all the districts, but it would not thrive well in the low lands along the Carnatic Coast. 14. All of these three classes are prepared, but I am unable to give an idea of their extent, which I fancy must be large. 15. I do not think there is much difference between the cultivated and wild plant in prepara- tion. The dried leaf, called ganja, is saturated in water, the seeds, if any, taken out and then the water is squeezed out of it, and after mixing it with tobacco, either in equal parts or one-third ganja and two- thirds tobacco, it is smoked. The usual quantity is from one-eighth to one-half tola of ganja each time. In India it is generally smoked in small bowls. The vaidians prescribe its smoking as an antidote to malarious persons. 16. Bhang can be prepared by any one at any place as long as the leaves of either the wild or cultivated plant is procurable. Bhang is prepared in several forms. Pills, syrup, and confection pills are prepared with the dried green leaves, together with anisum or craiva fruit, with the addition of a small quantity of salt. Syrup is made juicy with poppy seeds, almonds, saffron, and refined sugar in sufficient quantities. To make the syrup the leaves are ground in a mortar in the shape of a pulp and then mixed confection: salep anacardiceac pesta- eia, almonds, poppy seeds, hazel nuts, nutmegs, and sugar, The Tamil name is poornadi lagum, Arabic name majum, Uarak-el-Khiyal. Ganja and charas can also be prepared anywhere and by any- body. There is some trouble in preparing charas 17. It can be prepared by any one and mostly by Hindus. It is a custom in all important Hindu temples to allow a certain quantity of ganja and tobacco to travellers, mendicants, and gosains. The Hindus of Gujarat give it as charity, as the ganja plant is sacred amongst them. 18. Ganja keeps well for two years and more. It gets stronger with age. Charas and bhang can- not be kept longer than a year. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smok- ing. 24. I cannot give any proportion, but what I know is that the use is amongst every class of people more or less. 25. I do not know. 27. It is mostly used by hard-working people and fakirs to relieve them from the fatigue. 28. It is worth Rs. 2 ½ per weesa of 120 tolas, and I think a quarter of a tola is sufficient for each bowl, which will cost one and a half chittak 2 pies each time, one can smoke as often as he likes, same as tobacco. 31. The habit is very easily formed, and when once accustomed, it is very difficult to break off, and develops into an excess. 32. The plant is considered sacred and worship- ped by Gohaies, but I do not know whether the use of it is religiously necessary. Gosains and bairagis in general use it, and sometimes it is given in some places to them as charities. 34. I do think that it will be a privation to those who are accustomed to its use, specially hard-working people, as it relieves them of their mental and bodily fatigues. 35. I do not think it is proper or feasible to prohibit the use, as the consumers may fall upon another drug or alcocholic stimulant, which may be more expensive or dangerous; and as it is mostly used by native soldiers, the probibition may lead to a great discontent. 38. I do not think there is any difference, as they are one and the same thing; the difference in shape, I think, is occasioned from different modes of packing. 39. I think the smoking is less injurious as it only gives a slight effect to the brain, whilst by eating, the body as well as the brain is affected. 40. They say that its use protects them from bad weather, and also used in treatment of cattle dis- ease. 41. It is beneficial. It does alleviate fatigue. It does prevent disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. 42. Yes; I do consider that the moderate use of these drugs are harmless. 43. I have not heard of any offence being done to any one by a moderate consumer. 55. I hear of an oil, called bhang oil, used by criminals to stupefy their victims in order to further their designs, but I do not think that the drug itself can be given in such a quantity to produce that effect. 62. I do not think that the cultivation can be controlled, as it can be grown everywhere. I hear that people grow it in their private gardens in flower pots and use the leaves.
406 179. Evidence of NALUM BHIMARAUZ VYSYIA, Merchant, Berhampore, Ganjam District. 1. My answers are purely based on information obtained from habitual consumers and physicians. 3. Bavudu, Somlapur, and Ghumsoor taluks. In Tikkapally it is abundant. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in this coun- try, and charas in Cuttack and Bengal presi- dency. Ganja is a flower-like substance of the plant; bhang is made of the leaves and ganja itself, with an admixture of milk or water together with sugar for drinking purposes. Charas is the gum extracted from the plant, i.e., the essence. Bhang is used to a great extent in the subdivision towns, such as Kassibugga, Parlakimedi, and Kotta Agraharam, etc. Ganja is used for smoking, generally by all religious beggars or gosains in monasteries, and by people in places adjacent to hills, and to a small extent by lower class people in other towns. 16. Bhang is prepared by the people in their houses and temples, from the leaves of the plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas can only be prepared from the plants in the fields where they are grown, but not in other places. 19. Charas is used only for smoking; whereas ganja, besides for smoking, is also used as an in- gredient in medicines to stop diarrh407 22. Charas is not known here. It belongs to the north country. 23. It is not used for smoking. 24. It is not eaten, as it is always used in the form of liquor. 25. It has decreased probably, because the price of spirituous liquors has decreased, and the people are therefore able to drink liquor instead of using their drugs. 30. Women are said to eat it at Puri in Orissa, but they do not do so in this district; children do not eat it. 31. The remarks that apply to liquor apply also to these drugs. It must depend on the individual constitution. 33. It is considered derogatory. It is rather an insult to insinuate that a man eats ganja. The butter decoction is offered to the god Hanuman. 36. Yes. Liquor is cheap. 40. No. 41. Ganja is used in pills as a febrifuge in mala- rious and unhealthy tracts. 43. No. 58. As far as I am acquainted with the ad- ministration of these drugs, the abkari law apply- ing to liquor applies to them also. I do not know of any method deserving to take the place of the present law. Control is exercised under sections 6, 7 and 8 of Act 1 of 1886, over the import, export and transport of the drug and such pre- parations as are made from Cannabis sativa (see definition). Section 12 restricts the cultivation to licensees, and sections 55, 56 and 57 provide the penalties for violation of these rules. In order to restrict the use of these drugs, a minimum price such as is imposed on liquor might be imposed on them. 181. Evidence of MR. D. MANECKJI, Parsi, Merchant and Contractor, Calicut. 14. It is grown in Wynaad to a small extent. 15. The blossom of the plant is called ganja, and the leaves are bhang. In smoking, only the blossoms are used. Eating408 (g) I know and have seen parties quite insane who used to smoke ganja. 47 and 48. No. 49. Do not know. 51. I have not experienced any crimes in con- nection with the use of these drugs as it is seen in people with alcoholic stimulants. 52.Nothing. 53, 54 and 55. I do not know. 56. To stupefy an habitual user of hemp drugs dhatura is given admixed with this drug. 57. I have not experienced any. Oral evidence. Question 1.409 in Vizianagram. I have made no direct inquiries in villages, but I do not believe there is injuiry in the interior, for the village officials tell me the custom of using the drug has been hardly ever noticed there. Question 59.410 28. Ganja and bhang411 2. Charas is a sort of gum taken from ganja which is used for smoking; it is not manufactured in this country. It is manufactured in Central India. After the ganja is cut it is packed in gunny bags, when it is trodden slightly to make the bag contain more. The ganja grown in Vizagapatam district is in the form of a tuft. 3. In Nellore, Kistna and Vizagapatam districts this is grown, and spontaneously in regar clay lands, hill tracts. At Daggupadu, about 100 can- dies are raised. In the Vizagapatam district, Vaddadi and Madugob are the chief places. In the Nellore district, Kudithipalem. 4. Chilavati (stuff in the form of tufts), is so manufactured, being pressed into a cake. Manu- factured in the Vizagapatam district. Country grown ganja. Powder taken from this is said to be bhang, and it is used for making ganja or bhang. They are all from the same species of plant. 5. Land fit for dry cultivation. Black soil (clay) suits well. It is generally grown in winter. Rains damage it. Does not grow on saltish ground. I cannot say anything about the growth of the wild hemp. 6. I cannot say. 8. There is no cultivation of this hemp in the Godavari district as in the other three districts. After the system of selling the right of sale has been introduced, the cultivation has decreased. 9. First, beds are formed and seedlings raised and transplanted, leaving half or one-third yard space between the plants. The transplantation goes on generally in the month of October. After the tree commences to throw out resin, rain spoils the crop. Generally in February and March the ganja is cut. The male trees are removed. Only the female trees are retained. Generally the male is distinguished from the female, because the former bears flower. 10. There is no distinct class of persons who cultivate hemp plant. Classes as other agri- cultural cultivators generally cultivate this. 11. The seed. taken from the ganja originally sold are sown. 13. The cultivation does not seem restricted. It can be raised anywhere. Black regar clay produces the best sort. In the latter part of the rainy season seedlings are sown, and early in winter it is transplanted. Saltish land does not at all suit this hemp. 14. In the Godavari and Kistna ganja only is manufactured, but not charas or bhang. 15.People here very seldom eat, some drink bhang. Many smoke. 16. People prepare bhang in their houses. In this part of the country the juice of ganja mixed with milk and sugar is said to be bhang, which is drunk occasionally by northern India people who have become residents here. During the Holi- festival it is much used. 17. All classes that are in need of it without distinction of caste. 18. By keeping long these drugs no doubt deteriorate. It becomes useless after 1½ years. It loses its effect in time. Up to one year it retains its strength. As the resin diminishes the stuff deteriorates. There are no means to preserve its efficiency after one year. 20. Fakirs, gosains, bairagis and jogis use much. Military people use a little. Weavers use much. No particular class uses this. Coolies also some- times use it. Ten per cent. of the populace in towns use this. Daggupadu stuff is used for smok- ing. 21. Ganja (round) is preferred for smoking. Charas is used largely in Hindustan and Central and Northern India, Ganja (flat) is used in the Vizagapatam district, in Nellore district, and in Madras. 22. Charas is not used at all in this district. 23. Bhang is not used at all in this district for smoking. 24. Marwaris, Rajputs (Bondilis), Bengalees, and also Hindustani Muhammadans drink bhang. During the festival, in honour of Khama (Man- matha or Cupid) they all drink. These people are generally to be found in Tars, where there is much commerce. 25. The use of ganja is now on the decrease. Since the introduction of the renting system for the sale of ganja the drug is sparingly used. 26. Ganja412 tains its effect for one year, after which it deterio- rates. 19. Ganja, besides being smoked, is also eaten and drunk, as answered in 15 (B) and (C) 20. In southern districts, about 5 per cent. of the population are addicted to the use of ganja, chiefly wandering mendicants and bairagis. 21. Flat ganja is the only kind which is sold in these parts. 25. The use of ganja is apparently not on the increase. This may be owing to the increasing use of Europe and country liquors. 26. Of the 5 per cent. addicted to the use of ganja, as stated in answer 20, the proportion of consumers under heads (a), (b), (c) and (d) seems to be equally distributed. 27. This practice seems to be chiefly addicted to wandering mendicants owing to the fatigue and other hardships to which their wandering life ex- poses them. The practice seems to be more common in these parts among the Muhammadans than among Tamilians. 29. Tobacco is generally mixed with ganja and smoked, the object of admixture being pungent taste given by the tobacco. Dhatura is not so used in these parts. I have not heard of the preparation called bhang massala. 31. The habit is easily formed, as smoking and drinking are, and also, like those practices, diffi- cult to break off after using some time. The moderate use generally develops into the excessive. 32. To the best of my knowledge, the use of ganja is not connected with any customs, social or religious; but I believe the plant is looked upon with some reverence by a few Hindu priests. 33. (a) Those addicted to the practice of con- suming ganja in any of its forms are generally looked down upon by respectable people. (c) The hemp plant is not generally wor- shipped. 34. Naturally it must be felt as a privatio to all those who resort to the use of these nar- cotics. 35. If this practice be prohibited by law, it would probably result in illicit consumption. The prohibition would certainly cause dissatisfaction; but, if proper precautionary means are taken, no danger may be apprehended. The prohibition would, as a matter of course, be followed by recourse to some other form of stimulants. 36. Those, who can afford it, might prefer alco- holic stimulant to the use of ganja. As the latter is cheaper than the former, there is no reason to think that the use of ganja would become entirely superseded by the use of alcoholic stimulants. 39. The effects of smoking ganja are worn out sooner than effects produced by its absorption in any other form. 40. Ganja seems to be prescribed as a medicine, but apparently not to a great extent. I have not known of its being administered to cattle. 41. The use of ganja is popularly supposed to assist digestion, and it is also for its power to alleviate fatigue by mendicants, who are always travelling from one place to another. 43. Moderate consumers are not offensive to their neighbours. 44. Immediate effect is intoxication, and it probably stimulates hunger. 45. The moderate use of ganja, if not produc- tive of any good, does not produce much ill effects. 47. The habitual moderate use of ganja does not appear to be a hereditary habit. 49. The moderate use of ganja is popularly believed to be aphrodisiacal. Prostitutes use it for this purpose. An artificial excitement of pas- sion must be productive of injurious effects. Some preparations of ganja are used for pro- ducing impotence. 53. I am not aware of any such instance. 54. Ganja is used for this purpose. 55. Ganja is sometimes made into a kind of sweetmeat for kidnapping children. 188. Evidence of MULAGULA KONDIAH, Goldsmith, Rajahmundry. 3. It is not cultivated much in this part of the country. It is only grown here and there in com- pounds. 4. In this country it is known by the only name of ganja. 5. In cold climates it grows luxuriantly. Dur- ing winter it is grown. 6. Growth of wild hemp would not be ordi- narily dense. It would be scattered. Only in places frequented by gosains this is found. 7. No; except in compounds, only ganja is grown. 14. Only ganja is prepared of plants grown in compounds. 18. It deteriorates when it gets wet, and, if kept more than a year, it loses its power gradually by time. Loses its properties after one year. If charas is mixed and kept, it keeps for two or three years. 19. Ganja is used much for smoking. Juice of ganja mixed with sugar, milk, with addition of spices, is used as beverage for cooling the system413 to develop into excessive if the moderate habit is not carefully observed. 32. Some people accustom themselves to it by associating with people who use it. Gosains and fakirs use it for religious purposes. By devotees its use is considered essential. Sup- presses sexual inclinations. 33. The devotees worship this plant. 34. The habitual consumers suffer from dragging pains of legs and sleeplessness for want of the drug. 35. The prohibition of cultivation of this drug creates discontent among consumers. The prohi- bition may be followed by recourse to stimulants, alcoholic or other. 37. I know only of ganja. Bhang and charas are not procurable here. 38. I know only of round and flat ganja. Round ganja is uncured and flat ganja is cured stuff. Round ganja would not be as healthy as flat ganja. 39. In cold climates ganja is eaten raw. Some eat ganja for the sake of more intoxication than what is caused by smoking. Smoking is less in- jurious. 40. (a) It is also used as medicine for dysen- tery, or temporary relief for cough. (b) I do not know that it. is used for cattle diseases. 41. If moderately used, it serves as a medicine to remove effects of bad and different waters. (a) Gives good appetite and assists digestion. (b) Alleviates fatigue; removes water from blood. (c) It serves as a preventive of malarious fevers, etc. (d) Various sorts of preparation of ganja is used for native medicines, called Lahams, hal- was. After a man becomes a jogi all classes use it. Several family men use it occasionally. Women use it frequently. Fakirs and bairagis use it fre- quently. 42. It is only beneficial for devotees if used moderately. Moderate use is harmless. 43. Moderate consumers do not have much in- clination for sexual intercourse, and their passions would subside, so they would never be offensive to the neighbours. 44. Intoxication is produced immediately after its use by habitual consumers. It concentrates his mind, keeps it steady and undeviating. It is re- freshing. It produces moderate intoxication. It promotes appetite. The effect lasts for three hours. The man becomes quiet and free from passions. Want of subsequent gratification pro- duces longing. It may also produce bad effects such as diabetes, etc., if it is given up by moderate' habitual consumers. 45. Habitual moderate consumers of ganja do not turn weak as long as they eat well a sufficient quantity of ghee and sweets made of ghee. It produces bad effects on the mental qualifications of men of business. They become slow and quiet in thinking powers. Those who use ganja in moder- ate doses become morally good characters. If sufficient ghee and strong food is not taken, it impairs constitution. Immoderate use also pro- duces bad effects. If immoderately used it creates dry cough, but not asthma. It does not impair moral sense. It induces laziness, but not immorality or debauchery. If immoderately used, it no doubt deadens in- tellect and sometimes it produces insanity, some- times temporary and sometimes permanent. The bad effects of ganja can in some cases be cured by administering lime-juce, honey and water. If raw ganja with seeds is used, it may be- come poisonous. 47. This does not create hereditary habit, nor does it in any way affect their children. 48. Habitual excessive use may produce various bad effects414 3. About forty years ago wild ganja plants were abundant on the Shevaroys. I saw them there; but I do not know whether they are to be found there now. Since then I have not seen abundant spontaneous growth anywhere else. 4. The plant is known in these parts by one name only, viz., ganja plant. 5. It grows well in alluvial and black soils. All that is wanted is good manure. Elevation is necessary for spontaneous growth. 6. The growth of the wild hemp was observed by me to be both dense and scattered. It was for the major part scattered. 7. There is a little of the ganja plant cultivation in my district of Salem. They are all for the production of ganja alone. One-fourth of the houses of Salem have on an average half a dozen ganja plants in each back-yard. The same number of plants can be found in at least 2 per cent. of the fields in the villages of Salem, Ather and Nama- kal taluks. 8. Hitherto cultivation of the ganja plant was very rare. But it has now considerably increased, since more people resort to its uses now than before. 9. The seeds are sown at first and the small plants are then transplanted. Sheep dung and fowls' dung are its chief manure. Much depends on the prunings and proppings to produce good ganja. 10. Except the Brahmins, Komutties, and Piere- sinites, almost all other people cultivate it. The cultivation is not restricted to a particular class. 11. Yes. 12. We don't distinguish between wild ganja and domesticated ganja. What you call hemp are called ganja. I have heard of immense cultivation of ganja on the Javadi hills in North Arcot district. Everywhere the male plant is done away with. 13. None here restricts the cultivation of ganja. I do not know of any district where it is restricted. No special conditions are necessary for the culti- vation of ganja. Of course a high level helps the growth. It can be grown anywhere if one knows the methods. 14. Charas and bhang are new names to me, and I know not what they are. Ganja is the only natural product here known of, though we make matti lahiam and poornathi from it. 15. (A) Ganja is had naturally from the flow- ering tops of the plant. All that is required to make it useful is to look to the ripe time, pluck it out, and put it under weight and dry it. This is used in this state for smoking. (B) Ganja is fried, powdered, and mixed only with jaggery and ghi and then eaten. It is also boiled, and the juice mixed with sugar, ghi, and several other ingredients is called poornathi. This is also eaten. (C) It is not drunk here in any way. 16. All ganja, matti lahiam and poornathi are generally prepared by the people in their houses. These can be prepared both from the wild and domesticated plants wherever they may be grown. 17. I can mention no particular class. 18. Ganja can be kept for a year. It certainly deteriorates by being kept. Matti lahiam and poornathi can last for no more than a fortnight. As I know ganja alone, I shall hereafter speak of that only. 19. Ganja in its ordinary and raw state is used for smoking only. If made into matti lahiam and poornathi it can be eaten. 21. Flat ganja alone is used in these parts. 25. The use of ganja has considerably increased during the last one decade. I am now 60 years old. While I was 35 there was not even a fourth of the present use. The spread of the use is entirely due to bad example. 26. (a) and (b) Of the consumers of ganja in any form, there will be only 15 per cent, who are habitual excessive consumers, the rest being habi- tual moderate consumers. (c) There are no occasional consumers at all. Once they get to the habit, people can never shake it off. 27. These consumers are mostly taken from the artizan, weaving and other labouring classes. It is the muscular exhaustion and pain caused by hard and incessant labour that leads people to this sort of intoxication. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers require between one and three pies ganja a day. (b) Excessive consumers can take no more than one anna ganja a day. 29. (a) Tobacco is ordinarly and always used mixed with ganja while smoking. With tobacco there will be no intoxication in smoking ganja. To be eaten as matti lahiam, only jaggery and ghi are mixed with fried and powdered ganja. (b) To be eaten as poornathi, which is excep- tional, some mix fig seeds, banion seeds, nutmegi, cloves, etc., numbering 68 kinds, including ghi and jaggery. I know not what bhang massala is' 30. Smoking ganja is always invariably prac- tised in company. Ganja eating is generally practised in solitude. Ganja smoking and eating are generally confined to the male sex. But there are a few women also who, I know, do both with ganja. In its poornathi form it is given to chil- dren to cure them of mantham or indigestion occasionally, but never daily. 31. The habit is easily formed within a week's time. It is afterwards difficult to break it off, though a resolute mind can do so with much difficulty. The habit very naturally and unobserv- edly leads to excess. 32. Ganja is considered by the people as a sacred sacrifice to Idumban, karuppan, Veeraba- dran, Maruda Veeran, Muniappan, and such other devil deities. Sacrifice of ganja is essential in worshipping the above deities. Small quantities would do sacrifices like these; generally bring about the habit. Gifts of ganja to pardesis or sanyasis is consi- dered to be a great piece of charity. Several people have built public places for the purpose. 33. Ganja smoking and eating are universally looked down upon by the people. Those who consume it certainly suffer a social degradation. The habits are held in disrepute, because they result in mean habits on the part of the consumer. The ganja plant is not worshipped. It is only ganja that is offered as a sacrifice to the deities. 34. It will be a great hardship to the habi- tual consumers to forego the consumption. But absolute prevention will not bring about insanity or death. For two or three months the consumers will and can think of nothing else. Then it will be all right. 35. It will be impossible, in my opinion, to prohibit the use of ganja. In some way or other,
415 it will be consumed by the people; for who can say in what corner of his field the consumer culti- vates it. It must be impossible to enforce prohi- tion. The consumers would feel discontented; but they would not have recourse to violent ac- tions. The consumers of ganja are specially too timid to do any such thing. The prohibition will lead people to take themselves to other intoxi- cants. 36. No reason to think so. Well-to-do people scarcely take themselves to ganja, but prefer liquor. It is only the poor that resort to the cheap intoxicant of ganja, and so these don't substitute liquor for ganja. 39. Smoking ganja is less injurious than eating it. Eating produces (mind that it is never eaten in the raw state, but only in the form of lahiam and poornathi) head giddiness, and excess some- times brings death to the consumer. 40. Ganja is said by native doctors to be a medicinal drug. It is extensively used as such. 41. (a) Ganja consuming can be of benefit only temporarily, the effects ceasing as soon as con- sumption ceases. (b) Smoking gives, though temporarily, such staying-power as is referred to and alleviates pain (pain not being felt only so long as the intoxication exists). (c) Smoking (eating is useless) in malarious tracts is an efficient preventive of disease. (d) Eating brings the man down to senselessness immediately. Smoking keeps the man cheerful, wise, and in a state of alacrity. It is only the working classes that make these uses of ganja. I refer here to habitual consumers. 42. I cannot say that any use of the drug is quite harmless. It gives some temporary relief no doubt. But ultimately it weakens the constitu- tion, and actually dries it up. 43. Moderate smokers are quite inoffensive to their neighbours. Eaters do mischief very rarely. Generally they are all timid. 44. Eating is out of question here, as it pro- duces giddiness. Smoking refreshes, intoxicates allays hunger, creates appetite. The effect lasts for four hours at the utmost. It has no after-effects. Want of subsequent gratification certainly produces a longing for it. 45. (a) and (b) The consumer looks like one suffering from consumption. The flesh is reduced, and the man becomes thin. (c) No loss of appetite is produced. (d) Smoking does not generally produce the disease, but only rarely eating invariably does. (e) Smokers are always brisk. Eaters become gradually very lazy. (f) Smoking does not, but eating does deaden the intellect; but insanity is extremely rare. I have simply heard of one or two cases of insanity. Such insanes go and ask for ganja from any body. But I know nothing more of this kind of in- sanity. 47 and 48. It is not a hereditary habit. It does not affect children. 49. I do not know all these. But I have heard that this drug in whatever shape cannot materially help prostitutes. It temporarily helps the de- bauchee, but ultimately lessens his manly facul- ties. 51 and 52. Crime and consumption of ganja are far from each other. Consumers of this drug in any shape are specially timid, and do not resort to acts of violence. 53 and 54. No. 55. Ganja is generally used by the non-con- sumers of it to induce stupefaction for the perpe- tration of crime. Complete stupefaction can be brought about in less than an hour with the help of this drug and its admixture. 56. Admixtures soften the intoxicating power of and deprives the ganja of its poisonous effects. 190. Evidence of MALLAPPA, Reddy, Guntakal. 1. I have made enquiries of persons using the drugs, and I have heard much of these matters. 3. The plant grows in this village in gardens and black soil fields. 14. Charas and bhang are not prepared here, but only ganja. 16. No bhang here. Ganja can be prepared at any place. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking. 20. All classes smoke ganja. About 10 per cent, use this. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase. 28. About three tolas per diem is the average, and the cost is nearly one anna. 33. There is no weight attached to the sayings of a man smoking ganja. He is not regarded as an honourable member of society. The plant is not worshipped by any people. 39. Smoking is less injurious than eating or drinking. 40. Ganja is prescribed by some Native doctors for men for strength, and for cattle for some diseases, such as want of desire to milk, etc. 41. No. 42. The use of any of these drugs is not harm- less. 43. They are inoffensive, and on the other hand, cannot defend themselves against any aggressors. 44. The man's reasons are blunted, and he is not capable of right thinking. The drugs do not refresh anybody. They produce intoxication. They increase hunger and appetite. The effect lasts one or two hours. They are dull in senses. Want of subseqent gratification produces longing for more. 45. The habitual use of these drugs degrade a man physically, mentally and morally. 51. Bad characters are not habitual users of these drugs. 53 and 54. No. 55. Criminals use these drugs to stupefy their victims, and rob them of their property. The drugs are mixed with sweets and then administered to the victims.
416 191. Evidence of SAMDASU BAVAJI, Brahmin, Priest in the Matt of Sri Jagannadha Swamy, Rajahmundry. 3. Malwa and Indore are places where much is cultivated. 4. Charas is a sort of juice taken out from ganja trees by covering a cloth on it and taking out the resin. Ganja is the head containing some unopened flower and small leaves. Bhang is another sort yielding flowers. These two are of the same species, but they are said to be male and female trees, the latter yield- ing the stuff called ganja. 5. Northern country where the climate is tem- perate this thrives well. 6. In the jungles of Northern India this hemp is found ordinarily dense, but in scattered places. 11. The ganja found in jungle is quite different from that found in villages. 14. No cultivation in this part of the country. 15. I know of no people eating ganja. They smoke. They drink a preparation called bhang (made of ganja leaves, juice, sugar and milk, pepper, sounf). 16. Family men (Marwadis, Guzratis) make a sort of beverage called bhang, and drink it during festival days. A preparation of ganja is mixed in lehams and balwas. 18. It lasts until one year and afterwards loses its properties gradually. 19. Ganja and charas both used for smoking. 20. Gosains, jogis, bairagis, fakirs, labourers, weavers and even family men without distinction of caste use it. It is smoked. 21. Ganja manufactured in Bengal is good for smoking; round ganja produces more heat than flat one. 22. Charas is procurable in the Northern India where snow is much. 23. Bhang also is used for smoking. It is much used in Northern India. 24. All classes use it. Very few of the people use it. 25. Increased. Formerly through fear people did not use much; now as freedom increases, the bad habits also are increasing. 26. I cannot give particulars. 27. Gosains, fakirs and sadhus smoke ganja. Family men are prohibited from using it now. Several bad characters are also using. Some fa- mily men also are using it. 28. Habitual moderate consumers use one or two tolas per day. Habitual excessive consumers use three or four tolas per diem. 29. In this country ganja is ordinarily mixed with plain tobacco. Sadhus mix tobacco and also (nablie) aconite and snake poison also. Those who live on Hima- layas generally so use to keep themselves warm. I do not know dhatura being mixed. Those who suffer from asthma and severe cough smoke dhatura separately. In bhang massala the following articles are mixed:417 In respect of habitual consumers, no doubt, longing and uneasiness is produced if they cannot get it again. 45. (a) Moderate use does not produce any bad effects, either physical, mental or moral, provided the consumers eat nourishing food, such as curd, milk, ghee, sugar, &c. (e) It does not produce laziness or immoral habits. (f) If no nourishing food is taken, the vital powers of a man are destroyed. If excessively consumed, it no doubt affects the system and may turn men lunatics or affect lungs. 47. The use of this drug can never produce hereditary habits. 49. Moderate use of this drug may serve as an aphrodisiac in case of men who eat rich and nourishing food, because in such cases it does not affect the vital powers. 51. Bad characters also consume this drug, but I cannot give any further particulars. 53. Excessive indulgence in these drugs may incite to unpremeditated crime or violence. 56. Even moderate use produces bad effects on persons sitting in one place. It produces no bad effect on persons who travel and frequent mala- rious places. 192. Evidence of BALDEVDAS, Brahmin, Priest of Hanuman Math, Rajah- mundry. 1. Being a bavajee I have been in the habit of taking ganjayi for penitential purposes and am therefore acquainted with its qualities. 3. It is extensively cultivated in the village of Daggupadu, Kistna district. Neither of the other two (charas and bhang) are to be found there. I saw this growing in the forests of Par- lakimedy. 4. All the varieties of ganja are one and the same and belong to but one kind of plant. It (the hemp plant) contains certain resinous matter. That from which bhang is got simply flowers and dies away, but does not form a resinous coating. This is what is called the male hemp. Charas is not to be found in these parts. It can be got in Northern Hindustan. It (charas) is the name given to the resinous coating of the hemp plant. 5. Its growth is spontaneous. Wherever it is sown, or its seed happens to fall, it begins to grow. It begins to grow during the middle part of the rainy season and crops by the end of the winter. In this country people grow some one or two plants in their back-yards, and this, too, is rare. 6. Even the wild hemp does not grow spontane- ously unless the seed is sown. 7. In this country people cultivate the hemp plant for the preparation of ganjayi. Charas and bhang are not prepared in these parts. In North- ern Hindustan it is extensively cultivated, and charas and bhang are prepared to a large extent by the people of those parts. 8. Formerly ganjayi was used by sanyasis and hairagis alone, but now each and everybody who has a liking for it is in the habit of using it. Hence its cultivation also is comparatively en- hanced. 10. No. Every one who wants it, to whichever caste he may belong, cultivates it. 11. I have never seen the seeds of the wild hemp sown in the plain parts. Those which generally bear the flowered tops, i.e., more appro- priately the male plants, are taken off or extir- pated. The wild hemp is extensively cultivated in Daggupadu, Kistna district, and also in Cut- tack and Juggernauth. 14. In these parts only ganja is procurable. 15. I do not know the mode of its (ganja) pre- paration. I use this for smoking purposes and also for the preparation of bhang. 16. Yes, bhang is generally prepared in our houses. 18. Yes. They do deteriorate. If they are of the best quality, they keep good with ordinary care for two years. They gradually lose their effect by the lapse of time. If they contain the resinous matter as well, they remain for a longer period without losing their effect. Exposure to air is one of the principal causes of deterioration. 19. People commonly use ganja for smoking purposes and for the preparation of halvas. Charas is not procurable in these parts. It can be got in Northern Hindustan, where it, as well, is used for smoking purposes. 20. Bairagis, sanyasis, fakirs, labourers and men of loose character use this. Nearly a fourth part of the population are in the habit of consum- ing it. People of colder climes use it more freely and to a greater extent. 21. Round ganjayi is preferred, and charas is the best suited for smoking purposes. Chur is not procurable in these parts. 24. Marwadis, Guzaratis, people of Malwa. Kathiawar, etc., use bhang to a large extent. They mix it with milk, sugar, and spices, etc., and consume it for intoxicating purposes. 25. Every man is at liberty to use it. For- merly gentlemen were not in the habit of using it. Now-a-days there is no restriction in its use hence consumption has increased. 26. (a) Many. (b) Not many. (c) Some. 27. Everyone who has a liking for it, irrespect- ive of either class or caste, use it. 28. Habitual moderate consumer uses it at the rate of one tola every week, which costs him 4 pies, whereas the (b) class of people consume some two or three tolas every week. 29. Tobacco is one of the ingredients. Ganja alone, without the admixture of any ingredients, is never used for smoking purposes. If so used, it produces cough. People who use it with the admixture of dhatura are very rare. 30. Bairagis, gosains, sanyasis, etc., use it publicly and in company; also ordinary gentle- men consume it privately. It is confined to the male sex only. The female sex use it very rarely. 31. (a) It can be very easily acquired. (b)When once a person is habituated it is diffi- cult for him to break it off. (c) There is such a tendency. vol. vi. 3 K
418 32. To keep their minds steady in philosophical devotion and penitential purposes, men use it. Some think it necessary for religious thoughts. Those who consume it for religious purpose use it moderately. But the rest become intemperate and use it excessively. It becomes a habit, and, taken to excess, it is injurious to health. It is generally in disrepute, though not so with baira- gis and fakirs. 34. No. It would be well to stop it, though it would be somewhat difficult to the habitual consumers. 35. (Vide remarks above, i.e., against 34.) It does never amount to a political danger, and does not contain serious discontent. 39. The use of ganja for smoking purposes heats the body, raises its temperature, and, if taken to excess, results in the loss of semen. If taken with milk and sugar, it invigorates the person and strengthens the constitution. 40. Some of the native doctors use it for medi- cinal purposes. It is commonly mixed with salt and turmeric, and is given as a preventive for cattle diseases. 41. Yes. It has all the beneficial effects herein specified. 42. If used moderately it has some beneficial effects; but if taken in excess, it does injure the health. 43. Yes. 44. Its immediate effect is the production of heat and intoxication. It alleviates fatigue and creates appetite. It subsides anger. Want of subsequent gratification produces some longing in the person; but does not harm him or make him suffer in any other way. 45. To some it does; but if it suits the con- stitution and becomes a habit with the consumer it does not impair the health. If the consumer takes in milk, sugar, ghee, curd, etc., it strength- ens him; but if not, i.e., if he is not a man of good living, it weakens and thins the person. It does not injure the digestion, nor does it cause loss of appetite. It does not induce laziness, nor does it produce habits of immorality or debau- chery, except in a very few cases. It may pro- duce insanity if taken to excess. Oral evidence. Question 1.419 rungam, Rameswaram, Cuddapah, and Shimoga district, etc. 24. The same as abovementioned eat and drink bhang. First of all, they rub ganja with pepper and mix it with water, and this solution is called bhang in Deccan; but charas is called bhang in Northern India. Those who have much heat in their bodies drink bhang, and those who are of cold nature smoke it. 25. The use is increasing and it is owing to the increase in population. Every day those who are fond of it are increasing. 28. Any man can get well intoxicated by spending a quarter of an anna in each. 32. They use this according to their custom and it is no religious observance at all. 33. It is regarded with contempt. Neither the social observers nor the religious ones allow the use of this. They regard the use of this as con- temptuous, because they see that all who use this leave their wives and relatives without support and go away with the fakirs. There is no sect that worships these plants. 39. There is more injury caused in smoking it than in eating or drinking. In smoking it there is much injury caused, because it changes the fea- tures of the face, and the smokers become indolent and sick, and therefore they take to begging. Everything, whatever it may be, is digested by him. By walking a great distance he does not feel tired. Cold does not catch him, even al- though he may go to cold countries. The climate and water of every place suits him. 40. The native doctors prescribe it as medicine for some diseases. They give this even to cattle for some of their diseases. 41. Moderate use of it will not be beneficial. 42. There is no harm or disadvantage, because its effects are brought into play when it is taken habitually. 43. They are inoffensive to neighbours, and they don't injure any one. 44. As soon as it is taken it brings on idleness; it refreshes; it intoxicates; it creates appetite. The appetite lasts as long as he smokes it again. When he does not take it, anger comes on him and also idleness, and he feels a headache. 45. By eating it he becomes stout, and by smoking it he becomes feeble. It brings on mental injuries when it is taken without being washed; but no injury is caused when it is taken after washing. 51. Bad characters do not use this. It has no connection with any crime. 53. Excessive indulgence does not incite to unpremeditated crime. No, we are not acquainted with any such case. 54. No, they do not use this for committing any crime or any act of violence. 55. No, they do not do so. Go. 4, of India Central Printing Office.Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. VOL. VI. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM CENTRAL PROVINCES AND MADRAS TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. a graphic appears here CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894. Price Two Rupees Eight Annas.
