MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS, BY MOHIDEEN SHERIFF KHAN BAHADUR
m. 63. d. 91. e. IP/25/MB.3
MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS.
MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS. BY MOHIDEEN SHERIFF KHAN BAHADUR, Graduate of the Madras Medical College; Retired Honorary Surgeon, Madras Medical Department. PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE MADRAS GOVERNMENT, AT THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE MADRAS WORKING COMMITTEE, CALCUTTA INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION, 1883-84. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74907536.tif] VOLUME I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74907536.tif] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1891.
PREFACE. BEING appointed as a member of the Madras Working Com- mittee, Calcutta International Exhibition, 1883-84, I was very anxious to make myself as useful as possible, and there- fore applied for permission to send in a collection of indi- genous drugs from this Presidency to the Exhibition. The acceptance of this offer was accompanied with a kind grant of Rs. 200 from Calcutta, as a pecuniary assistance to my undertaking. The drugs I forwarded were nearly one thou- sand (954), and this work was originally intended to be their Descriptive Catalogue. At the kind recommendation of the above Committee, the Madras Government, with their usual benevolence and liberality, ordered the publication of the Catalogue at their own cost, and I was accordingly directed to get the work printed at the Government Press. The following is the G.O. on the subject:vi PREFACE. No. 282, C.E. True copy forwarded to Dr. Mohideen Sheriff for information. GOVT. CENTRAL MUSEUM, 24th March 1884. (Signed) G. BIDIE, Brig.-Surgeon, Vice-President and Secretary, Madras Committee, Calcutta International Exhibition, 1883. When a portion of this book was printed, I was advised to alter the designation of the Catalogue into that of Materia Medica of Madras, and received the following orders with a copy of a despatch from the Government of India: PREFACE. vii No. 586. (MEMORANDUM.) Forwarded to Honorary Surgeon Mohideen Sheriff Khan Bahadur, for favour of compliance. The copies should be forwarded to this office for transmission to Government. (By order.) FORT ST. GEORGE, 2nd Feb. 1888. (Signed) C. M. THOMPSON, Surgeon, Secy., Surgeon-Genl. with, Govt. of Madras. In obedience to the above orders 16 forms of this Materia Medica were forwarded to Calcutta (in triplicate) through the office of the head of my department, and soon after this the book came to a stand-still, owing to my retirement from the service, as I shall explain presently. As the medicinal properties of the drugs mentioned in this book are solely from my own experience and knowledge, and not gleaned or borrowed from any other work, English or Native, the greatest thing I was in need of in writing it, was the trial of those drugs in various diseases. I was amply supplied with this need by my being attached to the Tri- plicane Dispensary, where I had every morning to prescribe for about 100 out-patients, and was thus enabled to select some cases every day for trial. This was the chief resource I depended upon in writing a book of this nature, and its deprivation in consequence of my retirement from the service on the 7th July 1889 is very deplorable and a death-blow to my undertaking. The delay of six or seven years in writing this book might appear to be great or unusual at first sight, but it is not really so when we consider that it is chiefly based upon actual trials of drugs, as I have just explained. In the first place, the physiological actions and therapeutic uses of medi- cines being the most important and essential points in a Materia Medica, I did not, as a rule, express my opinion on those properties before I had previously employed the drugs for a long time or on a sufficiently large number of patients; secondly, all the diseases in which it is desirable to try drugs do not occur always, nor whenever we want them, but we must wait with patience and seize the opportunity of their occurrence to carry out the trial of that drug. Beside, the nature of some diseases is such that I was unable to form any
viii PREFACE. opinion as to the efficacy or otherwise of the drugs tried in them until the trial of each was continued for a few years, at least. Epilepsy and Hysteria are examples of such diseases, whose fits do not always occur frequently, but generally at the long intervals of months and years. Another circumstance which added to this delay was my own health, which was somewhat impaired after I commenced to write this work, and I was laid up twice with paralysis during its progress. It is true that my retirement from the service leaves more time at my disposal than before, but it will be clear from the nature of this work that I have been in much greater need of patients for trial of drugs than mere time for writing it. Being thus unable to go on further with this Materia Medica, it is certainly very painful to me to see the work, in the preparation of which I worked so hard for several years and spared no time or money, and which was also expected to be a permanent monument of my professional labours and researches, terminated so abruptly and abortively. There is, however, no other alternative, and it is quite beyond my power to attempt to complete it. I brought these unavoidable circumstances to the notice of Dr. W. F. deFabeck, the present Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras, with a request to be permitted to publish the pages already printed, which are about one- third of the book, as its first volume. At his kind recom- mendation, the Government have graciously pleased to grant my wishes and issue the necessary orders to the Superin- tendent of the Government Press for the publication of Volume I of the Materia Medica of Madras (vide G.O., No. 194, dated 10th March 1891). With a view to make this book correspond as much as possible with the PharmacopPREFACE. ix or for anything else connected with them, in any other part of the work. Of the drugs included in this work, those that are distin- guished by an asterisk (*) are official in the Pharmacopax PREFACE. In conclusion I beg to state that I shall ever feel grateful to the Government of Madras for their generosity in ordering the publication of this work at their own cost, and am very thankful to the Madras Working Committee, Calcutta Inter- national Exhibition, 1883-84, for their kind recommendation to the above effect. I owe my best thanks to Dr. G. Bidie, M.B. and C.I.E., the late Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras, for his kindness in many respects. The fact of his being the Vice-President and Secretary to the above Committee, in addition to his charge of the Government Central Museum in Madras, was greatly to my own advantage, and it was through his kindness I had an access not only to all the books in the Museum, but also to every article necessary for packing and despatching my collection of drugs to Calcutta. I am also much indebted to Dr. W. F. deFabeck, the present Surgeon- General with the Government of Madras, for his kindness in recommending the publication of this volume to Government. I am very thankful to Mr. W. F. Dique and T. Abboy Naidoo, the Curator and the Herbarium-keeper, respectively, in the Government Central Museum, for their kind assistance in packing and despatching the above collection. I must express my thanks again to Abboy Naidoo for his kind and great assistance in preparing almost all the indices in this book. It now remains for me to say that I am very thankful to the Superintendent and other officers of the Government Press, who were always kind and willing, and did all in their power to expedite the work, though its progress was often disturbed. MOHIDEEN SHERIFF KHAN BAHADUR. MADRAS, January 1891. NOTE. Owing to the death of Dr. Mohideen Sheriff on the 21st February 1891, the Government of Madras has accepted with pleasure the offer of Mr. David Hooper, Government Quinologist, Ootacamund, to edit and complete the Materia Medica of Madras (G.O., No. 371, dated 9th May 1891, Public Department).
CONTENTS. PAGE PREFACE V VEGETABLE KINGDOM 1 INDEX OFMATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS. VEGETABLE KINGDOM. RANUNCULACEÆ. *Aconitum ferox, Wall. 1, 2, 3 and 4. Habitat.2 MATERIA. MEDICA root. Giddiness, headache and dryness or uneasiness in the throat are the first symptoms of the bad or poisonous effect of this root, and from idiosyncrasy some patients are apt to feel them in pretty small doses. Whenever they are felt in the smallest degree, the drug should be stopped at once for a day or two, and if it is necessary to use it again after that period, it should be done only in half of its previous dose. European Drugs, for which, it may be substituted.3 OF MADRAS. a therapeutic agent. It is, however, much cheaper and more common than all other varieties. A few years ago I took the white variety of Bachnádg myself in small quantities, and found that its internal use is not attended with more danger than that of the European aconite root (Aconitum Napellus). Since that period I have employed it very extensively in my practice, and do not hesitate in saying that it is one of the most useful medicines in India. Its beneficial influence over diabetes is very remarkable, the immoderate flow of urine beginning to diminish from the very day of its use with a proportionate decrease in the saccharine matter. Its control over spermatorrh4 MATERIA MEDICA and cuts easily. It is brown internally, and, as its name implies, is slightly but distinctly sweet instead of' bitter. The sweetness makes no difference in the tingling and other sensations, which are so pecu- liar to all aconite roots. With regard to the smaller kind of aconite roots, they are those whose length is invariably below one inch and a half. They may be sub-divided into the poisonous and non-poisonous varieties. The poi- sonous are distinguished by the acridity and tingling sensation of their taste, and still retain the name of BOF MADRAS. 5 of these is the white variety (No. 5); the second, the black variety (No. 6); and the third, the culindrical (No. 7). The white variety or Atís is a tuberous root, conical, or ovoid with a tapering point towards the lower; from 1 to 2 inches in length, about the same in circum- ference at its base and upper end; from 10 to 50 grains in weight; grey or of a pale ash-color externally with more and less white scars of root- lets on the surface, and white internally; and inodorous with a pure bitter taste and without the least acridity and sweetness. The roots in the black variety are brown or deep-brown externally, and quite white internally, and the only difference between this and the other varieties is its external color. The black or Kálí-rajje-turkí is a very rare variety and not found in any of the bazaars of Southern India at present. Though I had obtained it twice before from Bombay some years ago, yet failed to get it on the present occasion. The roots representing this variety in my Collection are from Calcutta, and are not a good specimen of it, being paler than they generally are. The cylindrical variety is long, thin and cylindrical with little or no point at either end, and differs only in shape from the white. The cylindrical is not a separate variety in my opinion, but is sometimes sold as such in Madras under the Dukhni name of Lambí-rajje-turkí. All the varieties of Atís agree with each other in five characters, which are invariable, namely, the whiteness of the substance internally, the pure bitter taste without the least acridity or sweetness, and the formation of a fari- naceous nature. The combination of these five characters is a very good and sure criterion for distinguishing the Atís and its varieties from all kinds of aconite and other roots which many bear a resemblance to them. The white or common variety is a very useful antiperiodic and anti- pyretic; but to ensure its best effects it is required to be administered in its fulì medicinal doses, which are, according to my own experience, from one to two drachms. It is quite safe up to two drachms and a half. In smaller doses (twenty to forty grains) it is a good tonic, but its action as an antiperiodic is very feeble. Although Vajje turkí, Atiradayam and Atí-rasa are the correct vernacular names of this drug, they are also applied wrongly in the bazaars of Southern India to another cheaper root, and the latter is consequently often confounded with the former. The confusion is avoided if the words viláyatí, shímai and símá (each of which means foreign), are added to the above synonyms. as is the case under the head of "Synonyms" in this article. The thin cylindrical roots known in the bazaars as Nattuati-radayam or country atis are derived from Cryptocorine spiralis and a species of Lagenandra, plants belonging to the natural order Aroideæ, 6 MATERIA MEDICA Price.OF MADRAS. 7 on the Himalayas and in the localities where Aconitum ferox and other species of Aconitum are found, it may be much cheaper and more easily procurable in Northern Hindústan; but it is extremely dear and scarce in Southern India. In fact, the real drug is seldom or never found in Madras, and what is occasionally offered for sale here as Jadvár are some false or artificial roots, kept in oil under the pretence of preserving them from decay and insects. The fraud, however, is easily exposed, the false roots being generally more or less smooth and shining, and quite devoid of the natural shrivelled and shrunken appearance of the true Jadvár. The Native medical works speak of four or five varieties of this drug; but I have seen only two, which are as follows:8 MATERTA MEDICA The volatile oil obtained from this fruit forms the Oil of Anise of commerce, which is an important drug; but I have used the fruit itself in powder in many ordinary cases of dyspepsia and debility with pretty good results. It is generally imported to Madras from Calcutta. Michelia Champaca, Linn. 12 and 13. Habitat.OF MADRAS. 9 repeatedly in the same way as other stimulants are under similar circumstances. Although M. Champaca is met with in many places of Southern India, it is very scarce in some localities. Madras is an example of the latter, and there are not more than two or three plants in the whole of this city. The dry flowers, however, are common and abundant in the bazaar, as already mentioned. MENISPERMACEÆ. *Anamirta cocculus, W. et A. 14. Habitat.10 MATERIA MEDICA Tel. Of the watery extractOF MADRAS. 11 the roots of T. cordifolia, and greenish-white or greenish-brown, if from the stems. It occurs in powder or loose and flat cake-like pieces. It is prepared easily by cutting the fresh stem into small pieces, which are bruised in a stone or wooden mortar and soaked in water from six to twelve hours. The mass is then rubbed, squeezed and separated from the fluid by straining the latter through cloth. The fluid being evapo- rated to dryness in the sun, the residue is the satte-giló. The last process is generally repeated several times with a view to make the drug whiter; but such repetitions, in my opinion, are not only un- necessary, but detrimental to its effects. The thicker the gul-bél or its root is, the better for the preparation of satte-giló; and the plant is known to attain sometimes the thickness of a man's arm. A transverse section of the stem and root shows the wood to consist of a very porous tissue, traversed by conspicuous medullary rays, with or without con- centric zones. The specimens of the satte-giló in my Collection (Nos. 17 and 18) are genuine, being prepared by myself for the Calcutta International Exhibition; the former from the stems, and the latter from the roots. Flückiger has found the alkaloid berberine and a glucoside to be the sources of the bitterness. 12 MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS. 13 about a few years ago, they were long and branching, tortuous or serpentine, but were cut afterwards into small pieces. The bark is brown or greyish-brown, wrinkled longitudinally and crossed trans- versely by annular elevations; interior woody, porous, and yellowish- white. The root breaks with a coarse fibrous fracture, and a transverse section of it exhibits more or less concentric rings and medullary rays. The taste is bitter. The plant was first noticed growing in Madras by T. Abboy Naidoo, Herbarium Keeper under Dr. G. Bidie, M.B.& C.I.E., in the Government Central Museum. BERBERIDEÆ. *Berberis aristata, DC. (B. tinctoria, Lesch). 22 and 23. Habitat.14 MATERIA MEDICA speak of its therapeutic uses more fully here than under the heading "Therapeutic Uses."OF MADRAS. 15 Local Sources.16 MATERIA MEDICA Synonyms.OF MADRAS. 17 Synonyms.18 MATERIA MEDICA Physiological Actions, Therapeutic Uses, Preparations, Doses and European Drugs for which they may be substituted.OF MADRAS. 19 carried on on a very large scale in many parts of Central and Northern India. Parts Used.20 MATERIA MEDICA it either checks or relieves the fits of asthma, hysteria, catalepsy and epilepsy. No other plan of treatment is so useful as this method in alleviating the excruciating pain or agony of such diseases as the impac- tion of calculi in the ureter or biliary ducts, or cancer of the stomach, breast or uterus. During the last few years I have succeeded in curing or completely relieving some cases of the former affection (im- paction) by the injection of morphia within 10 to 20 minutes; whereas before that period, I was unable to do the same for a day or two, or, at least, for many hours, by other plans of treatment. This injection is also a very good and speedy hypnotic, and it therefore produces sleep for some hours (occasionally for more than a day), and successfully the pain in a host of painful and irritative disorders, including fractures and other injuries. Some patients, particularly the Europeans, prefer the injection to all sleeping draughts by the mouth, The dose of morphine I have generally used in this injection is ¼ of a grain, and only on a few occasions have I increased it to 1/3. The solution of morphia which is generally adopted by the profession for subcutane- ous use is the one described in the British PharmacopOF MADRAS. 21 hollow needles, &c.) are sold in many druggists' shops and are very cheap at present. The manner of using the hypodermic injection is pretty easy, namely, fix a sharp hollow needle to the syringe, which should be filled up pre- viously with the solution; pinch up a small fold of the skin, under which pass the needle into the cellular tissues (not muscles); and now press down the piston slowly. As atropine and morphine are very dear medicines, their employ- ment subecutaneously is very important in an economic point of view, in addition to the great and invaluable use we derive from them in our prac- tice, as already explained. Whether these drugs are injected over or near the painful or affected part, or on a spot far away from it, there is no difference between their effects, and the result is the same in both cases. Therefore, in selecting a spot for hypodermic injection, we must only pay attention to the structure, &c., of the spot, without the least regard to the distance between that spot and the painful or affected part. The parts which are very safe, convenient and generally selected for hypoder- mic injection are the outer side of the arms, thighs and legs; and next to these are the abdomen, back and shoulders. The parts which should always be avoided are those where some large or pretty large veins, arteries and nerves are known to exist, such as the popliteal space, the bend of the elbow, groin, arm-pit, and the inner side of the arms, thighs and legs; the temple, neck, chest and scalp should also be avoided as they are occasionally known to be unsafe and dangerous places for the oper- ation. The following are a few more precautions:22 MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS. 23 asthma, from ten to fifteen minims, three or four times in the twenty- four hours. Of the decoction, from two to three ounces, three times a day. European Drugs for which they may be substituted.24 MATERIA MEDICA FUMARIACEÆ. OF MADRAS. 25 Therapeutic Uses.26 MATERIA MEDICA Local Sources.OF MADRAS. 27 muslin, but reddish white if not strained, owing to the presence of the red particles of the cuticle of the seeds. The cuticle itself being soft and mucilaginous, there is no need for its separation by straining the mucilage. The decoction of the seeds is thus prepared: 28 MATERIA MEDICA Eng. Múlí, Hind., Duk. and Beng. Mullángi, Tam. Mullangi, Tel. Moulá, Burm. Fujl, Arab. Turb, Pers. Local Sources.OF MADRAS. 29 Physiological Actions.30 MATERIA MEDICA barkOF MADRAS. 31 Parts Used.32 MATERIA MEDICA distinguishing them from each other if due attention is paid to the following botanical distinctions: OF MADRAS. 33 European Drugs for which they may be substituted.34 MATERIA MEDICA which may, for the sake of convenience, be called the compound decoction of V. odorata. This decoction is very useful in relieving the febrile excitement and other symptoms of pyrexia in obstinate and long-stand- ing cases of continued, remittent, typhoid and typhus fevers. I have cured by this decoction two very obstinate and long-standing cases of typhoid fever, after the failure of all the European medicines generally in use. In one of them, the patient, a Hindu male about 35 years old, was suffering from the disease for more than 25 days before he came under my treatment, and then was getting worse gradually with a temperature permanently between 104° and 105° in the evening for about a fortnight more, when I began the use of the decoction as the last resource. On the second evening after its use, there was a distinct change for the better, the skin being moist with a fall of temperature by one decree for the first time, and in about 10 or 12 days more the patient was perfectly free from fever. During the employment of the decoction no other medicine was used, except a few doses of Dover's powder, which were necessary on one or two occasions to check diarrhOF MADRAS. 35 The bowels are generally free under the use of this decoction, but if they are not so, or become costive in the course of treatment, the quantity of the liquorice root, rose-buds and raisins may be doubled or increased to such an extent as to produce the desired effect. On the other hand, if there is any looseness or diarrh36 MATERIA MEDICA Physiological Actions.OF MADRAS. 37 this oil in leprosy the patient may be kept on a good and nourishing diet, but is prohibited from taking the following articles: 38 MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS. 39 Local Sources.40 MATERIA MEDICA Pappu-kúra-vittulu, Pedda-pávila,-kúra-vittulu, Goddupávili-kúra-vit- tulu, Tel. Baró-loniyá-bíj, Beng. Tukhme-khurfah, Pers. Bazrul- baqlatul-humqá, Arab. Of the leaves or the whole plantOF MADRAS. 41 Ocimum basilicum and O. album, each grs. xv; and dry starch of Triticum satixum 3ss. Rub all the ingredients well in a mortar with two ounces of water and strain the liquid through cloth. Add to this draught four or five fluid drachms of the Syrup of Pomegranate (Punica granatum) and give to the patient four or five times in the twenty-four hours. The syrup of the sour pomegranate is the best, but in the absence of the syrup of both the sour and sweet pomegranate, the juice of either of them will do. If the seeds of Cucurbita Pepo are not readily procurable, they may be substituted by those of Lagenaria xulgaris, which, like all other ingredients in the prescription are very abundant in the bazaar. In some slight cases of dysentery and mucous diarrh42 MATERIA MEDICA Synonyms.OF MADRAS. 43 their names here are the small and young excrescences picked out from the galls of T. gallica. The sample of the galls of T. articulata in my Collection of Drugs at Calcutta (No. 78) is genuine, but very old, it being bought in Arabia about 15 years ago. No. 79 is a doubtful variety of the same drug from Hyderabad. Price.44 MATERIA MEDICA European Drugs for which it may be substituted.OF MADRAS. 45 This is one of the reasons of my treating the Mysore gamboge separ- ately under the head of G. pictoria as a variety of G. Morella. * Garcinia Indica, Chois. (G. purpurea, Roxb.) 82. Habitat.46 MATERIA MEDICA the former (phthisis pulmonalis), its action is something like that of cod liver oil, of which it is a pretty good and very cheap and pleasant substitute; and, in the latter (dysentery) it is of great service in reliev- ing tormina and tenesmus when employed as an adjuvant to other medicines. The fruit is used as an acid ingredient in curries. It is freed from seeds, sliced and dried in the sun. As a medicine, antiscorbutic pro- perties are attributed to it. OF MADRAS. 47 The latter is roundish, pale yellow or reddish yellow, and bitterish in taste. The fixed oil extracted from the seeds of C. inophyllum is pale and greenish-yellow with an odour of Tonquin beans if the seeds are such as those generally sold in the bazaar, a greater portion of which are small and young; but greenish brown, thicker and more viscid with a smell like that of an old and rancid ghee, if they are large and well matured. The oil is bitter in both cases. The oil of C. inophyllum is one of the few drugs which had been omitted by mistake from my Collection of Drugs, when its first portion was forwarded in haste to the Calcutta International Exhibition in 1883. It, however, deserves to be noticed here in a special manner from its great usefulness when administered internally. Although there is nothing in the sensible properties of this oil to indicate a poisonous character, yet, as far as my knowledge extends, it has never been administered internally in this or any other country. Having satisfied myself by personal use that it is neither detrimental to life nor deleterious to health up to certain quantity, I employed it in my practice and found it to be a very valuable drug. It acts as a specific on the mucous membrane of the genito-urinary organs, and its control, therefore, over gonorrh48 MATERIA MEDICA Preparation.OF MADRAS, 49 DIPTEROCARPEÆ. * Dipterocarpus turbinatus, G50 MATERIAL MEDICA gleet, and in all forms of psoriasis, including lepra-vulgaris. In gonorrhOF MADRAS. 51 52 MATE RIA MEDICA Parts Used.OF MADRAS. 53 operations, as the tying of an artery for aneurism, &c. It should always be kept ready in hospitals in the form of wadding for the above purposes. The cotton is also a very useful, cheap, and convenient article for preparing pads for splints, &c. The cotton seeds are round, dark-brown and about the size of black pepper. If examined soon after the removal of the cotton, they are clothed with greyish down. Their kernel is greenish, albuminous and slightly sweet in taste. I have used the following prescription of these seeds in several cases of gonorrh54 MATE RIA MEDICA The seeds of the red variety of H. Sabdariffa are identical with those of the white or greenish white variety of the same plant in their physical and medical properties; but I sent the former only (No. 102) to the Calcutta International Exhibition, because my experience was confined to them when my Collection of Drugs was despatched in 1883. I have, however, used the seeds of the white variety also in my practice since that period, and found them to be identical in every respect as just mentioned. OF MADRAS. 55 Doses.56 MATERIA MEDICA Physiological Actions.OF MADRAS. 57 Local Sources.58 MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS. 59 Local Sources.60 MATERIA MEDICA ké-dandíyán, Hind. Gule-Khairó-ké-pattón-ké-dandíyan, Duk. Of the seedsOF MADRAS. 61 the tap-root of the young plant62 MATERIA MEDICA Emetic-nut (Randia dumetorum), in powder, one drachm and four grains. Mix the ingredients thoroughly, pass the compound powder through a fine sieve, and finally rub it lightly in a mortar. Of the seedsOF MADRAS. 63 the Pharmacographia Indica has the following interesting note: 64 MATERIA MEDICA in their length from one to three quarters of an inch, and in their thickness from one to two lines; and are five-angled or roundish, and conical or tapering. They are brown or dark-brown when old, and grey when new; odorless and slightly aromatic in taste. As young as they are they contain minute black seeds, and are distinctly five- celled. The stalks of these fruits are about the same length as the latter (one to three quarters of an inch), but somewhat less in thick- ness, paler in color, rough and often knotty or bent in the centre. The above fruits, with their stalks attached to them, particularly when fresh, bear a great resemblance to flower-buds; hence the word moggu or bud. The meaning of the word maráti is not correctly known. The dry young fruits of Eriodendron anfractuosum are sometimes sold in the bazaar under the same name (maráti-moggu) and used for the purpose of adulteration and substitution of those of B. malabaricum. Although the similarity between the fruits of both plants is very great, yet the difference between their stalks, which are almost always attached to them, is so distinct that they can be very easily distinguished from each other. The fruit stalk of the former is round, about the thickness of a pin, and two or three times longer than the fruit; and therefore contrasts a great deal with that of the latter, which is described, in the preceding paragraph. The fruits of E. anfractuosum are always round without any ridge near the hilum, and somewhat larger and darker in color than those of B. malabaricum. The cotton of B. malabaricum is of a reddish hue when new, hence the English designation "the red cotton plant." In some native and other medical works two useful and common bazaar drugs, viz., the Suféd or white Múslí and the Káli or black Músli are erroneously considered to be the produce of B. malabaricum. Both are supposed to be the roots of this plant, the only difference being that the former is produced before, and the latter after, it begins to flower. I have repeatedly dried and examined not only the roots but also the rootlets of this tree, both before and after it was in flower, but never found them to bear the smallest resemblance to any of the varieties of white or black Músli. The Suféd-músli of Calcutta, Bombay, Hyderabad, and almost all other parts of India, is the root of Asparagus adscendens, and of Madras and a few other places in South India, that of A, sarmentosus. Curculigo orchioides is the source of the Káli-músli of the Madras Presidency and many other localities, and Aneilema tuberosa that of the drug known under the same name in some other parts of India. There is, however, another variety of Músli, which, as far as my knowledge extends, is not sold in any bazaar, but mentioned in many Persian and other medical works. This is the tap-root of the young plant of B. malabaricum, and correctly spoken of as Múslá, Múslá-simal, or Músli-sémbal in Dr. George Watt's Dictionary of the Economic Products of India, Vol. I, p. 491, in contra- distinction to suféd and káli múslies of the bazaar. The Sémal-múslí is, like the tap-root of many other young plants, tapering, and varies a great deal in its size according to the age of the plant from which it is taken. If the age of B. malabaricum is two years (which is the longest period allowed for selecting the root), the tap-root is generally about the size of a long radish, and if only below six months, it is from 4 to 7 inches long and about the thickness of a finger. Fifteen to twenty-one months is about the best period for
OF MADRAS. 65 selecting the tap-root according to my own experience. When fresh, it is tuberous and cuts easily; grey, reddish-brown or brown exter- nally, and white internally; taste mucilaginous; smell none. When dry, the root is much shrivelled, shrunken and wrinkled longitudinally; the epidermis is reddish-brown, brown or slightly ash-colored, and generally loose and peels off easily; beneath the epidermis the root is reddish brown, but white or pale-white internally; odorless and taste- less. The dry root is not easily powdered, but the dry slices of the fresh root are reduced to a fine powder without difficulty. There is no drug in India which enjoys a greater reputation as an aphrodisiac and tonic in native medical works than the tap-root of the young plant of B. malabaricum. There is no doubt that it is one of the useful drugs in this country, but the exaggeration of its good effects in some of the above works is so great that it is quite ridiculous and not worth mentioning here. I have recently given a trial to this drug in my practice, and found it to be a good demulcent tonic and slightly aphrodisiac, but nothing beyond it. I may also state that even the good influence, which it does exert occasionally on the genital organs, is neither certain nor uniform. The great practical objection to the use of the Sémal-músli is that it is neither sold in the bazaar, nor procurable always in any garden or field. Besides, there is no medical property in it, which, according to my own experience, is not possessed with in equal degree, if not more, by the dry young fruits and bark of B. malabaricum. In fact, the Maráti-moggu is not only the cheapest and most abundant, but also the best and most useful of all the parts of the above plant which are used as medicines. The young fruits seem to possess some soothing or special action on the mucous membrane of the genito-urinary tract, and have therefore proved them- selves more useful than Parcira Brava in some of the diseases in which the latter is indicated. The bark, root-bark and roots of B. malabaricum contain a resinous substance, but the bark of the stem is much superior in this respect, and therefore preferable for the preparation of extract and decoction. The bark of the stem or trunk varies much in appearance accord- ing to the age and size of the plant from which it is taken. That from the trunk of a well grown up tree after it begins to blossom is externally brown, rough, scaly and often covered with some short and blunt prickles; and internally reddish-brown. It is quite odorless and possesses no particular taste. The root bark is covered with a thin and ash-colored epidermis, and is deep or reddish-grey internally. It is also devoid of taste and smell. The extract of B. malabaricum prepared in the manner described under the head of "Preparations," is dark in color and slightly saltish in taste, and odorless. The resemblance it bears to Mócharas is so great that if it is made to dry in any of the forms of the latter, it will certainly pass for it; but it does not keep dry permanently unless preserved in a stoppered bottle. It gets soft and moist as often as it is dried either by exposure to the sun or on the sand or water-bath. Its deliquescence and saline taste depend upon the large quantity of salt it contains. 1
66 MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS. 67 Anai-puli, Pappara-puli, Púri-puli, Símai-puli, Tam. Síma- chinta- pandu, Tel. Góraka-ámlí, Mah. Gorak-amlí, Guz. Bíla-magi-si, Bur. Hujéd, Habhabú, Arab. Of the bark68 MATERIA BIEDICA The thick and very hard pericarp of the fruit is quite inert and does not possess any medicinal property, as is supposed by some native medical practitioners. OF MADRAS. 69 Synonyms.70 MATERIA MEDICA "Examined under the microscope by polarized light, cacao butter is seen to consist of minute crystals. It is dissolved by 20 parts of boiling absolute alcohol, but on cooling separates to such an extent that the liquid retains not more than 1 per cent. in solution. The fat separated after refrigeration is found to have lost most of its chocolate flavor. "Cocoa butter in small fragments is slowly dissolved by double its weight of benzol in the cold (10° C.), but by keeping partially separates in crystalline warts." OF MADRAS. 71 Remarks.72 MATERIA MEDICA Doses.OF MADRAS. 73 pound) and only procurable in European druggists' shops in Madras; while, on the other hand, the linseeds are very cheap (As. 2 per pound) and found abundantly in every bazaar. The dearness, together with the necessity of adding olive oil in the first method, makes the second very preferable in this country. Liniment: Take of linseed oil and Liquor Calcis in equal proportions, put them together in a bottle and shake till they are well mixed and become white. Dose.74 MATERIA MEDICA Synonyms.OF MADRAS. 75 Remarks.76 MATERIA MEDICA. as internal piles. I have used it in several cases with more or less benefit, but in a few the result was very satisfactory, the bleeding dis- appearing rapidly and permanently. There is no doubt that the fruit will also produce a good effect in hæmatamesis, melæna and some other forms of hæmorrhage, but as it is not always procurable, I have not yet had an opportunity of trying it in those diseases. The fruit is also useful in relieving thirst and febrile excitement. Preparations.OF MADRAS. 77 RUTACEÆ. * Ruta angustifolia, Pers. A variety of R. graveolens, Linn. 138. Habitat.78 MATERIA MEDICA about its use from my own experience and knowledge. I refer the reader to the explanation of its medical properties, &c., in the Phar- macopOF MADRAS. 79 diaphoretic, decidedly more efficacious than Pulv. Jacobi Vera or James' powder, and a few other antipyretic medicines mentioned above. It, therefore, demands an especial notice of the medical profession. The root and root-bark are sold together in the bazaars of Madras, but the former can be easily removed, it being generally in a very small proportion. The root-bark occurs in hollow pieces, varying in length from 2 to 5 inches, and in thickness from ¾ to 1½ lines. It is more or less flexuous, often partially quilled, and covered with a yel- lowish corky epidermis. It possesses no particular odor, but is bitter in taste. In the fresh state it is aromatic and pungent and has an odor of citron. Of all the preparations of this drug above described, the tincture and decoction are the most useful, and the rest (the extract and powder) are inferior and unsatisfactory in their action. I make the tincture and decoction very strong, and this, together with the very large doses in which I use them in my practice, is apparently the chief cause of their great success in my hands. Six drachms of the tincture or twelve ounces of the decoction of T. aculeataare equal to one bottle of Warburg's tincture; and if either of them is used in two doses during the presence of simple continued fever or a paroxysm of ague, it produces the same good effect as the latter drug (Warburg's tincture), namely, a copious perspiration and relief of the febrile condition; and, again, if the tincture or decoction is repeated in the same dose during the interval of ague, every fourth or fifth hour, for two or three days, it prevents the return of paroxysm as successfully as very large doses of quinine. To render the cure more perfect and complete, the tincture or decoction should be continued in smaller doses for four or five days more. The beneficial influence of the tincture or decoction of T. aculeata in remittent fever is precisely the same, and the only difference is that it sometimes relieves the exacer- bation and checks its return at once; and at others, it first converts the remittent into intermittent fever and then cures the latter in the same way as explained above. Out of the many severe and very obsti- nate cases of malarious, jungle and other fevers, which yielded to this drug, there were several in which quinine with arsenic was first tried and failed. As the dose of the tincture of T. aculeata is much smaller than that of its decoction, and as it can also be prepared and kept always ready for use, it is preferable to the latter; but there is no difference whatever between the medical properties of both preparations. The root-bark of T. aculeata is not only much cheaper than quinine and Warburg's tincture, but is also one of the cheapest drugs in Southern India, its price being only about 2 annas per pound. In addition to this, its advantages over quinine are that it, unlike the latter, can be freely and successfully administered in the absence as well as in the presence of fever; and that however long and frequently it may be employed, it never produces ringing in the ear, deafness and some other disagreeable symptoms which are so commonly observed in the use of quinine. The analogy between the medical properties of the root-bark of T. aculeata and those of the root of Berberis Asiatica and some other species of Berberis is very great. The former, however, has one advan- tage over the latter, which is its procurability in every large bazaar of
80 MATERIA MIEDICA Southern India; whereas, the Indian Barberry-root requires to be sent for from some hills and distant places, as the Nílgiris, Shevaroy Hills, Calcutta, Delhi, &c. OF MADRAS. 81 Physiological Actions, Therapeutic Uses, Preparations and Doses.82 MATERIA MEDICA Local Sources.OF MADRAS. 83 Physiological Actions.84 MATERIA MEDICA Part Used.OF MADRAS. 85 that of the half-ripe for the powder. The powder, again, is more useful in acute diseases, and the syrup in the chronic. In acute dysentery the powder is required to be employed in much larger doses than in any other disease. The first good effect of the powder in acute dysentery is generally the disappearance of blood and a proportionate increase of the fæculent matter in evacuations. In fact, the powder seems to have more power in altering the nature of the dysenteric motions than in reducing their number. To cheek the frequency of evacuations, the powder generally requires the combination of opiates or some other astringent medicines. The powder and syrup, particu- larly the former, are also very useful in relieving the febrile condition in some forms of continued fever, including the hectic and typhoid. The abnormal temperature is reduced under its use in a remarkable manner and deserves particular attention. Preparations.86 MATERIA MEDICA. From its greater abundance and cheapness, the Wood-apple (Feronia Elephantum) is occasionally substituted for the Bael-fruit in the bazaar when the latter is sold in large quantities; but there will be no difficulty in distinguishing them from each other if the following dis- tinctions be attended to: OF MADRAS. 87 Beng. Thóra-bélácha-phalá, Mah. Mótu-bíli-nu-phal, Guz. Mahá- bélli, Lokka-bélli, Cing. Kígí-oushi-si, Bur. Shule-kalán, Balá- ghúne-klán, Pers. Safarjale-hindíé-kabír, Arab. Of the pulp (Nos. 154 and 155). The pulp of the large or cultivated variety of Bael-fruit or Bengal quince, Eng. Bare-qisam-ké-bél-phal-ká-maghz, Hind. and Duk. Periya-vilva-pazham-sadai, or Peru-vilva-param-sadai, Tam. Pedda-bilva-pandu-kanda, Pedda-bilva-pandu-guja, Tel. Maghze- shule-kalán, Maghze-balághúne-kalán, Pers. Maghze-safarjale-hindíé- kabír, Arab. Local Sources.88 MATERIA MEDICA European Drugs for which they may be substituted.-For belladonna, ether, morphia, salicylic acid and its salts, lactuca, conium, squills, lobelia and yellow jassamine (gelsemin). Remarks.OF MADRAS. 89 two pints; boil on a slow fire till the liquid is reduced to one pint, and strain when cool. Doses.90 MATERIA MEDICA thick. The bark is of a grey or deep-grey color internally, slightly demulcent and bitterish in taste, and is covered externally with a thin epidermis, which is greenish-brown and not scaly, but rough from numerous and small granular elevations. The bark is studded with "garnet-looking grains" of a reddish-yellow color and "apparently of a resinous nature." The grains can be easily separated from other parts of the bark by reducing the latter to a coarse powder and passing it through muslin. Most of the grains remain on the cloth and are very easily separated by winnowing or by the fingers. The weight of the grains is more than all other parts of the bark if it is from a young plant, but somewhat less if it is the produce of an old tree. With the exception of the color, they bear the greatest resemblance to the rolong of wheat in their outline and appearance, but are generally twice the size, particularly if they are from the bark of a young plant. When the bark is fresh, the grains are much paler or almost white in their color, and also much larger and more or less round. The bark from Quilon is in small and irregular pieces, varying in length and breadth from 3 to 5 and 2 to 3 inches, respectively, and in thickness from 2 to 5 lines. In all other characters it is quite identical with the bark from the Annamullay forests. Judging from the thickness of the bark from the latter place, which is fully one inch thick, it must have been from a very large and old tree, and that from the former locality (Quilon), which is only five lines in thickness, from a comparatively very young and small plant. I have not, however, found any distinct difference between the medical properties of the barks. With regard to the therapeutic uses of the resin of A. Malabarica, its first variety, if fresh, has a very remarkable control over dysentery and diarrhOF MADRAS. 91 did not even in a single instance observe any distinctly good effect. It is, however, a good bitter tonic, contains no tannin, and is therefore a very good substitute for calumba and quassia. Several other thick barks are erroneously sold in the bazaar under the same native names, but none should be considered genuine unless it is found to contain the resinous grains I have described. Moreover, the true bark of A. malabarica does not respond to the iron-test for tannic acid. 92 MATERIA MEDICA already mentioned, I have repeatedly examined their bark and root- bark and found them to be as follows:OF MADRAS. 93 jundán-pazham, Tam. Gára-pandu, Tel. Nanchunta-param, Malyal. Hingon-phal, Beng. Ingudi-phalam, Sans. Hingana-cha-phal, Mah. Hingernu-phalá, Guz. Local Sources.94 MATERIA MEDICA Dose.OF MADRAS. 95 Synonyms.96 MATERIA MEDICA Local Sources.OF MADRAS. 97 Price.98 MATERIA MEDICA When the tears or masses of Olibanum are placed in water, they become white like chalk or lime in a few minutes, and this is an import- ant character, by which alone they can be readily distinguished from all other gum-resins and gums to which they bear a great resemblance. The only drug which also possesses this character, as far as my own knowledge and experiments extend, is Ammoniacum; but the difference between all other physical properties of the latter and those of Olibanum is so great that they will not be easily confounded with each other. The small variety of Olibanum or Kundur consists of very small grain-like tears of various shapesOF MADRAS. 99 Kundur is one of the few drugs which are recommended for more than 30 or 35 complaints in some native medical works, particularly those in the Persian language. I have been employing it occasionally for some time and still continue its use in my practice, but find it dis- tinctly useful only in 7 or 8 diseases which I have mentioned under the heading of "Therapeutic Uses" in the present article. MELIACEÆ. 100 MATERIA MEDICA of the berries in which the seeds are contained is oval, hard, rough and five-celled with one seed in each cell. The root-bark is so thin and light that I had to destroy three plants and dig out the whole of their roots to get eight ounces of it. A decoc- tion was prepared and used in five children according to the directions in the Pharm. of India, p. 55. Out of these children only one passed a round worm, and the rest remained unaffected. A few days after- wards, however, the same children passed out from nine to twenty-three Ascaris lumbricoides under the use of Santonin. Under these circum- stances, if the root-bark of M. Azedarach is vermifuge at all, it is a very weak one. Although the berries of this plant are pretty abundant in their proper season, yet each of them contains only five small seeds, as mentioned above, and it is, therefore, rather difficult to collect the latter in a large quantity for use. * Melia Azadirachta, Linn. (Azadirachta indica, Juss. Melia indica, Brandin.) 175, 176, 177, 178, 179 and 180. Habitat.OF MADRAS. 101 Tukhme-níb, Pers. Of the oil102 MATERIA MEDICA or some other liquid before they can be applied to the skin or ulcers, and their use is, therefore, attended with so much inconvenience that they cannot be resorted to at all, except in those places where the oil is not procurable. A strong decoction of the fresh leaves is a slight anti- septic, and is useful like a weak carbolic lotion in washing wounds and ulcers, and syringing out the vagina in the after-treatment of partu- rition, &c. When the pustules of small or cow-pox burst and begin to ulcerate, the Hindu medical practitioners invariably recommend the application of the paste of the fresh margosa leaves two or three times in the twenty-four hours, and speak highly of its healing power. As the paste is a slight stimulant and antiseptic, I thought the supposition of the Vythians is not without foundation, and therefore watched some of the cases under its use and found the result to be good in all the slight and ordinary cases. In some severe forms of ulceration from small-pox, however, it proved quite useless, as naturally expected. On the whole, the use of the paste is quite justifiable in many slight and ordinary cases of ulceration from the pustules of small or cow-pox. The aroma of the fresh or recently dried leaves is sufficient to prevent the attack of insects, and they are therefore often placed in books and clothes by the natives of this country; but they are much inferior to camphor in this respect. The flowers are useful in some cases of atonic dyspepsia and general debility. The gum being bestowed with a slight tonic action in addition to its demulcent property, it is a better auxiliary to other remedies than Gum Arabic and Feronia gum in catarrhal and other affections, particularly when the latter are accompanied by great debility. The toddy of the margosa tree appears to be of great service in some chronic and long-standing cases of leprosy and other skin dis- eases, consumption, atonic dyspepsia and general debility, and although I have not prescribed it myself, I am acquainted with several persons who praise the drug very highly from personal use and observation. It is, however, extremely scarce, and this is a great drawback to its use and adoption into general practice. Preparations.OF MADRAS. 103 and rub the fresh leaves with hot or cold. water in a stone mortar till they are reduced to a soft and pulpy mass. Solution: Bruise and rub the kernel of the nuts with cocoanut oil, water or some other liquid, in a mortar till it becomes well mixed and thin. The oil is either applied by itself or in combination with other drugs, as chaulmugra oil, &c. Of the flowers104 MATERIA MEDICA in taste, with a peculiar and somewhat disagreeable smell. The nuts are oval and pale or greyish-brown with a thin and brittle shell, and an oily and very bitter kernel. The dry flowers are very small, pale or yellowish white, and possess a slight and peculiar aroma when recently dried. The gum is found in small and. roundish tears, trans- lucent, generally reddish in color but sometimes clear and colorless, and possesses, when new, a slightly bitterish taste. The ním or margosa toddy is an important therapeutic agent and requires a special notice. This toddy or sap is yielded either spon- taneously or extracted artificially. In the former case, a clear and colorless liquid begins to flow in a very thin stream or continuous drops from two or three and sometimes more parts of the plant, and con- tinues to do so from three to seven weeks. The trunk and large branches and roots are the parts from which the flow takes place through very small and recent cracks or fissures, and the quantity of the liquid discharged in the 24 hours from the whole tree varies from 2 to 8 bottles according to its size. Of the several margosa trees in Madras and its vicinity known to yield occasionally the sap under discussion, there was one in Mylapore which enjoyed. the greatest repute in this respect. This plant was in a small street at the southern end of the above village and died about 15 or 16 years ago. It. was a pretty large tree, about 50 or 60 years old, and produced the sap every 3rd or 4th year. After the last or 4th occasion, the trunk became rapidly hollow and the plant dried soon after this. On each occasion, before the sap began to flow, there was always, for 3 or 4 days, a distinct and peculiar rushing or pumping noise of a liquid within the trunk, and did not entirely cease till the discharge actually commenced from 3 or 4 parts of the plant. This is more like au animal or vital phenomenon than anything else. The above phenomenon being a sure forerunner of the flow of the sap, as just explained, the owner of the plant (Faiz Aimed Khan) always gave notice of its occurrence to all his neighbours and many other persons, with a view to be prepared to avail themselves of this extremely rare medicine if they were in need of it. The fame of the sap as a curative agent was certainly so great that the plant was sur- rounded by people morning and evening, who bought and drank the drug very eagerly. The price of it was very variable, but generally between 4 and 10 annas per bottle, and at one time it rose to a rupee for the same quantity. The sap was more or less bitterish in taste with a slight and peculiar aroma of the ním tree, and was never known to ferment or possess any intoxicating property. The word toddy is, therefore, not correctly applicable to this liquid drug. I have already mentioned the diseases which were most benefited. by its use under the heading of "Therapeutic Uses." The ním trees which yield the sap artificially seem to be more rare, for I have heard only of 3 or 4 of such plants. All these are said to have been pretty young and large trees, and were found near water or on the banks of nullas or water-courses which were constantly wet. The sap was extracted from them in the following manner:OF MADRAS. 105 which began to dribble or flow in a very small and thin stream. The sap thus collected is supposed to be identical with that produced by the tree spontaneously, but comparatively very small in quantity, amounting generally to only from 2 to 6 bottles in the 24 hours. I think if many of the margosa plants growing near water be tried in the manner I just explained, a much larger percentage of them will be found capable of yielding the liquid than is generally supposed at present. The ním or margosa trees are bestowed with another property, which is much more important than any of those I have already men- tioned. I allude to the healthiness they impart to the atmosphere. Some villages in South India are known to be quite free from cholera from the time it came into existence, and this immunity is attributable to their being surrounded by, or containing a much larger number of, those trees than usual. Although I am not personally acquainted with any of such villages, I am aware of some houses which enjoyed a similar exemption from cholera during its epidemics, while all other surrounding and adjoining houses suffered repeatedly from its visits. My own house is the best example of this kind. I live in Royapettah, opposite to the Triplicane Dispensary, and my house is separated from the latter only by a road. The Hospital attached to this Dispensary, which is com- monly known as the Royapettah Hospital, being the only Hospital in Madras on the south of the Mount Road, in which the sick are treated as in-patients, a large number of cholera cases are admitted into it from all the neighbouring and adjacent villages during every epidemic of that disease. The result is that Royapettah seldom or never escapes cholera whenever it prevails epidemically in any part of the southern half of the city of Madras, and often suffers from it more extensively and for a longer period than many other parts. In a locality like this, where the epidemics of cholera are so frequent and prolonged, as just explained, my house has escaped the visits of that disease during the last 25 years, while all others in the immediate vicinity of the Roya- pettah Hospital suffered from it repeatedly during the same period. The only reasonable and chief difference between my own and other houses is, that the former was always surrounded by some ním or margosa trees, while the latter were not. The margosa tree is also useful as a preventive to fever, as will be seen from the following quotation:106 MATERIA MEDICA CELASTRINEÆ. OF MADRAS. 107 Doses.108 MATERIA MEDICA dropsical symptoms. During the use of black oil, the native practi- tioners invariably enjoin a very low and strict diet, giving nothing to the patient except water and wheaten cakes for a long periodOF MADRAS. 109 Local Sources.110 MATERIA MEDICA Monaqqá, Hind., Duk. and Pers. Ularnda-diráksha-pazham or Ularnda-drácha-param, Tam. Endu-dráksha-pandu,Dípa-draksha- pandu, Tel. Unanniya-muntrinap-param, Malayl. Dípa-drakshí, Can. Monakkha, Beng. Vellich-cha-mudra-palam, Cing. Zabíb- mavéz, Arab. Of the small variety of raisins without stonesOF MADRAS. 111 112 MATERIA MEDICA Synonyms.OF MADRAS. 113 more or less extent, and generally more speedily than ipecacuanha and Tylophora asthmatica; and it is also useful in the same way in some cases of colic, particularly when the latter is depending on indigestion. A thick watery solution of the drug is often resorted to by the natives of this country for the relief of hemicrania, hysteria, and epilepsy. They drop a few drops of the solution in each nostril during the fit of any of the above diseases, and it produces a temporary relief by irritating the mucous membrane and increasing its secretion, which flows out by the nostrils or the mouth, or by both. I gave a trial to this plan of treatment in my own practice not only in the above maladies, but also in asthma, and the result is pretty favourable. There was more or less relief in almost every case of hemicrania and asthma in which the solution was tried; but the cases of hysteria and epilepsy benefited by it were very few. Although the relief afforded by the solution is always temporary, yet it is in many cases instan- taneous. The quantity of the solution must not be more than four or five drops in each nostril, for in one case in which it exceeded ten or twelve drops, the irritation of the membrane was severe and lasted for one or two days. Applied in the form of paste or poultice over the parts stung or bitten by some poisonous insects, as scorpion, centi- pede, &c., the pulp of soap-nut relieved the pain in two or three cases to my own knowledge. When bruised and agitated in water, it forms suds like soap, and in this condition is an efficient detergent and very useful for washing and cleaning the body, linen and hair. The kernel of the seeds is sweetish, nutrient, and yields an oil on expression, which is a very good substitute for almond oil. Preparations.114 MATERIA MEDICA with a soft, viscid, and translucent pulp, and, however long it may be exposed to the sun, it does not get sufficiently dry to be pulverised. The inner membrane or shell enclosing the seed is thin, tough, trans- lucent and leathery. The taste of the pulp is sweetish bitter, and the smell bears some resemblance to that of a very ripe and decom- posing mango, or the compound extract of colocynth (butyric acid). The active principle of the soap-nut is saponin, which occurs to the extent of about 10 per cent. in the pulp. The seed of the fruit is roundish, black, smooth, and about the size of a large pea; and the kernel is yellowish or pale-white, oily and sweetish in taste. I have been using the pericarp of soap-nut in my practice for the last several months, and have just (August 1887) discovered it to be one of the best, cheapest and commonest emetics in India. While it is as safe as ipecacuanha and several other vegetable emetics, it is decidedly more speedy in its action than all those drugs. It is, however, required to be employed in much larger dose than ipecacuanha; but this is no disadvantage, for it is always administered in the form of draught, and this draught is less nauseous and unpleasant than that of ipecacuanha and many other emetics. As an emetic, the soap-nut well deserves to be brought into general use by the medical profession. Soap-nut is supposed to be a good anthelmintic in some native medical works in four or five grain doses, but this is not really the case. I have used it in very large doses (3j to 3ij) in many cases. and its emetic action was sometimes accompanied by one or two loose motions; but I have neither seen nor heard of any of my patients passing a single round or any other abdominal worm on any occasion. The root of the soap-nut tree is woody, very hard and quite inert. The root-bark and bark, however, contain the vegetable principle saponin and form froth like soap when bruised and agitated in water. I have used each of these drugs in decoction, and in large and repeated doses, and found them to be very mild expectorant and demulcent. As medicines they are so weak that I did not consider them worthy of being treated as such. ANACARDIACEÆ. * Pistacia Lentiscus, Linn. 194 and 195. Habitat.OF MADRAS. 115 Physiological Actions.116 MATERIA MEDICA the Indian frankincense) and also to small pieces or fragments of the large variety of the same drug, but it can be easily and readily dis- tinguished from both by the water-test I have described in my remarks under the articles Boswellia floribundu, B. glabra and B. serrata. OF MADRAS. 117 mucronate. The largest galls have a diameter of from 118 MATERIA MEDICA With reference to its distinction from the small variety of Kundur (Olibanum or Indian frankincense), to which it bears a great resem- blance, see the "water-test" explained under that article. OF MADRAS. 119 often curved or bent and sometimes contorted. They bear a resem- blance to small horns of a goat; hence the word singi, shingi or sringi affixed to all their native synonyms, which means horny. The galls are generally brown and possess a strong astringent and slightly bitter taste. The galls in the small variety are about one half smaller than those in the large one, and are generally much darker in color and more astringent in taste. When the Simple and the Compound powders I have described under the head of "Preparations" are prepared with the small variety of Kákrá-singi, they have always been found more efficacious and useful in diarrh120 MATERIA MEDICA removed from the seeds by rubbing between the hands. The seeds are about one-half smaller in size, almost always oblong, very hard, slightly inclining to be kidney-shaped and possess no particular taste or smell. The seeds of R. coriaria are much recommended in some Persian and other native medical works in dysentery and diarrhOF MADRAS. 121 Therapeutic Uses.122 MATERIA MEDICA from 1½ to 2, and in breadth from 1 to 1½ inches; when fresh, it is about one-third longer and broader, white and soft. The taste of the kernel is slightly astringent and demulcent, and it possesses no particular smell. When the kernel of young mangoes is cut with a knife, a blue stain is left on both the instrument and the drug, indi- cating the existence of a large quantity of tannic acid in the latter. The gum of mango tree occurs in small and irregular masses, some of which consist of very small tears sticking to each other. The gum is generally reddish-yellow or reddish-brown in color, with a bland mucilaginous taste. During the great famine of 1877 and 1878 in Southern India, I heard from many famine-stricken persons sent from villages to the " Relief-houses" at Madras that, if the kernel of mango is fresh and roasted or boiled it is not unpleasant to taste, and is more nutritious than the pulp of that fruit in an equal quantity. This statement may be correct as far as the ordinary and sour mangoes are concerned, but will not hold true in the ease of grafted mangoes. As a rule the pulp of the latter is much more delicious, nutritious, smooth and wholesome than that of the common or ordinary mangoes. Of the many varieties of grafted mangoes in Southern India, there are five which justly enjoy the highest repute for their good and pleasant taste, wholesomeness and nutritious quality, and are readily recognised under the Hindustani or Dukhni names of Qádar-pasand, Mulghóhá, Pitar-pasand, Dil-pasand and Yáqúte-rummám. Of all these varieties, again, the first-named (Qádar-pasand) is the best. As already explained under the headings of " Preparations " and " Therapeutic uses," the kernel of young mangoes is a good astringent and possesses a considerable influence in diarrhOF MADRAS. 123 Paranki-mává-enna, Kappa-máva-enna, Malyal. Géra-poppu-yanne, Can. Hijli-bádám-tail, Beng. Kájú-cha-téla, Mah. Kájú-cha-tel,Guz. Kaju-tel, Cing. Síhosaye-sí or Tihotiya-sí, Bur. Of the gum124 MATERIA MEDICA but somewhat smaller in size than the latter, and is covered with a thin, membranous and rust-colored testa, which can be readily removed by rubbing with the fingers, particularly when it is dried in the sun. The kernel is white, soft, tasteful and wholesome, and abounds in a bland fixed oil, which it yields on expression. OF MADRAS. 125 Preparations.126 MATERIA MEDICA them all into a uniform mass. When bruised separately, the marking- nut is very viscid and sticks to the mortar and fingers, but when it is well rubbed and mixed with the other ingredients, it is formed into a soft and unctuous mass, which does not stick to anything. So, this Electuary is a very convenient preparation for handling, weighing and administering internally, and it also keeps well for a long time. The precaution of smearing the hands, &c., with oil should also be observed in preparing the Electuary, for its omission in one case gave rise to one of the bad effects described above. Doses.-Of the acrid oil, from sixty to one hundred and fifty minims; and of the Electuary, from sixty to one hundred and fifty grains. European Drugs for which they may be substituted.-Internally, for Salicylate of Soda, Salicylic acid, Colchicum, Ether, Belladonna, Iodide of Potassium, Perchloride of mercury, Aconite root, Valerianate of zinc, and Strychnia; and externally, for Cantharides. Remarks.-Like cashew-nut, the marking-nut is a fruit and not a seed or nut as its name implies; but it is commonly known as a nut in contradistinction to the fleshy torus, to which it is attached, and which is considered by the natives of this country as a fruit of S. Anacardium. The marking-nut bears a resemblance to the heart, particularly when it is fresh and attached to the torus; hence its Arabic synonym IIabbal-qalp or the heart-nut. As sold in the bazaar, the marking-nut is about 1 inch long, ¾ inch broad at the upper end, and very narrow at the lower; compressed or flat on both sides, dark-down, smooth and shining. On breaking the nut, the pericarp will be found to contain an oily juice, which is very black and of a thicker consistence than honey, viscid, and leaves a permanent black mark on cotton-cloths. Owing to its last named character the juice is in use for marking cotton cloths all over India, and the fruit producing it is therefore called the marking-nut in English. The taste of the oily juice is very acrid and unpleasant, with a slight but peculiar smell. In addition to this, both the taste and smell are smoky if the oil is prepared by the aid of heat, as mentioned elsewhere. It is readily and perfectly soluble in ether and chloroform, soluble in alcohol, and partially so in turpentine; miscible but not soluble in fixed oils. It leaves an oily stain on paper, and a wick dipped into it burns with a good flame like one dipped into any fixed oil. The number of the preparations described in some Persian and Arabic medical works, in which the viscid black oil of the marking-nut (Asle-bilOF MADRAS. 127 any other bad effect; but, with regard to the external use of the drug, a mere handling of it during the preparation of its oil, &c., or exposure to its smoke is often attended with injurious results as already ex- plained under the heading of "Preparations" Some care and caution, however, such as those I have mentioned under the same heading, are sufficient to prevent the injurious effects of the marking-nut in pre- paring its oil and electuary, and this is a very important circumstance in favor of not giving up the employment of so useful, active an effectual an internal remedy as the drug under discussion. Marking-nut is one of the few drugs which I have found more or less useful in all the diseases for which it is recommended in native and other medical works. These works, however, speak of the useful- ness of the drug in rheumatism in a very casual manner and only as a local application; but according to my own experience it is, as an internal remedy, so useful in the acute form of that disease that it deserves a special attention. Used in full and repeated medicinal doses, the relief it affords is very great and satisfactory, and I do not hesitate in calling it a sovereign remedy in acute rheumatism. It is certainly more sure and speedy in its action than Salicylic acid, Salicyl- ate of Soda, Colchicum, &c., and therefore the best drug for the above complaint. The more recent and acute the disease is, the more speedy and successful this medicine proves. Many of the patients suffering from acute rheumatism, who were brought to me in doolies or other vehicles, and who were quite unable to sit or move without assistance, were able from the use of the Electuary or the Acrid-oil of this drug to return to me walking on the 6th or 7th day after their first visit. On a few occasions, again, I was pleasantly surprised to see them walking lamely and coming to me on the very next or 3rd morning to say that they were much better. In the latter case, the patients were all youths or very young men. With regard to the preparations of the marking-nut I have des- cribed (Electuary and Acrid oil), there is no difference between the therapeutic uses of them, particularly in the treatment of acute rheumatism; but the patients generally prefer the former on account of its very pleasant taste. The number of the doses of these prepara- tions I have generally used in the 24 hours is 4, and the dose of both is the same, viz., from one and a half drachms to two drachms and a half. In some very severe cases, when the patients were very strong and robust, the dose was increased to three drachms, but the average dose is two drachms, which is the one I have most frequently employed in my practice. As soon as the patients are much relieved and able to walk about to some extent without assistance, I generally omit the drug and complete the cure with milder or less active medicines, such as Salicylate of Soda, Colchicum, alkalines, and with stimulant embrocations. In chronic and muscular forms of rheumatism, however, the mark- ing-nut is not half as useful as it is in its acute variety, and I am therefore unable to speak much in its favor in the treatment of the former diseases. Marking-nut is also a good therapeutic agent in asthma, but the relief it affords in so small doses as those mentioned in some books is
128 MATERIA MEDICA very slight. To secure its best effects in this disease, it should be used repeatedly and in doses similar to those I generally employ in acute rheumatism. Gout is so rare among the natives of this country that I never had an opportunity of using this drug in any well-marked case of that disease during the last two years; but from its great influence over acute rheumatism I am almost sure that it will also produce good results in the acute form of the former. There is a notion among the natives of Southern India that the internal use of the marking-nut is apt to produce sore-mouth or ptyalism; but I have never met with a single instance of these bad effects, though I have administered the drug in many cases and in so large and repeated doses as those explained above. During the employment of the marking-nut, either externally or internally, the least appearance of a rash or redness of the skin, or an itchy or uneasy sensation in any part of the body, should be con- sidered as a sign of the bad effects of the drug, and it should, therefore, be stopped immediately. Spiritus Ammoniæ Aromaticus is to be freely administered, with some demulcent drinks, such as Infusum Lini, and some oil, Olive or cocoanut, should be constantly smeared over the affected part or parts. This is generally sufficient to check the above symptoms; but if they get worse and become more developed, they must be treated with some other and stronger remedies according to their nature. OF MADRAS. 129 covered with a thin and rust-colored testa. The kernel is pale-white and contains more than half its own weight of oil. The seeds are very tasteful, wholesome and nutritive, and yield on expression a bland fixed oil, the physical and medical properties of which are similar to those of the Cashew-nut oil. 130 MATERIA MEDICA substance which was brown or dark-brown. The latter was just behind the layer of the gum and in contact with the tree and ground. If left in water the gum of this tree slightly swells and is formed into a kind of soft jelly, and is miscible but not completely soluble in water. The bark of the younger plants is ash-colored and not rough exter- nally and very fibrous and of a flesh color internally; and that of the older trees is very rough, scaly, generally about ¾ of an inch in thick- ness, brown externally, and reddish-brown internally. The taste of the inner bark is slightly astringent, due to tannic acid. OF MADRAS. 131 aware of three trees of this kind, one of which is not far from my resi- dence. On one occasion, some years ago, I found a large mass of gum and resin on the ground near the stem of this tree, which was more than 6 pounds in weight. About two-thirds of this mass was gum, and the remaining consisted partly of a brown and partly of a dark-brown substance, both of which were more resinous than anything else. In addition to the above occasional flow of gum, a small quantity of it is often found on S. mangifera, which generally is in small and trans- parent tears. This gum is quite soluble in water and resembles the Indian Gum-arabic in many other characters. MORINGEÆ. 132 MATERIA MEDICA practitioners in Southern India, but they have completely failed in my hands, though I have tried them in very large doses. They are at most a slight stimulant, but have not been found useful even as such in any particular disease. Applied externally in the form of a paste, the fresh root-bark and the bark act as a good vesicant and rubefacient. The former is much superior to the latter in this respect. Preparations.OF MADRAS. 133 Samare-mughílán, Arab. Vélam-káygal, Karu-vélam-káygal, Karu- vél-káygal, Tam. Nalla-tumma-káyalu, Barbúramu-káyalu, Tumma- chettu-káyalu, Tel. Karu-vélakam-káya, Malyal. Kare-jáli-káyi, Kare- gobbali-káyi, Can. Bábúl-sim, Bábla-sim. Beng. Kalabábili-cha-phalli Bábli-chakái, Mah. Kálo-bával-nu-singo, Guz. Of the gum134 MATERIA MEDICA fresh legumes dried in the sun before their seeds are well developed and hard is pretty useful in diarrhOF MADRAS. 135 or on a sand-bath. Of the bark136 MATERIA MEDICA As there are several varieties of Aqáqíyá, they may, for the sake of convenience in describing them, be first divided into a soft and a hard variety, and then each of the latter into two or more sub-varieties. The drug prepared from the pods of Acacia Arabica is a very good example of the soft variety of Aqáqíyå. When new, it is pretty soft, could be made into pills and bolusses very easily. Though it gets harder by keeping, yet not to such an extent as to be reduced to a fine powder. It is dark brown in color, very astringent in taste, and possesses a slight and peculiar odour. The only another soft variety of Aqáqíyá, I have seen is the one which was presented to me some time ago by a Hakeem at Madras. It bore a great resemblance to the above variety, but differed from it distinctly in one or two points. It was reddish instead of deep brown in color, and more demulcent than astringent in taste. The Hakeem said that he had bought it from a wholesale druggist at Black Town, and the latter seems to have obtained it from Bombay. It is the dearest variety I have seen, its price being about Rs. 5 per pound. Two kinds of Aqáqíyá are generally met with in the bazaars of Madras, and both of these are hard varieties and easily reduced to a fine powder. The first or the best of them is reddish brown with a demul- cent and slightly astringent taste, and the second possesses the same taste, but is dusky brown in color. Their price is about Rs. 2½ and 1½ per pound, respectively. I myself obtained Aqáqiyá twice from Bombay, and the drug was hard and pulverizable on both occasions. It was identical with the first variety I have just described; except this that on one occasion the medicine was full of minute particles of a dry leaf, which were seen in every part of it. The original cost of each of these varieties was about Rs. 2 per pound. I have just succeeded in finding that all the hard varieties are either impure or not at all made from the pods of any species of Acacia. For example the first or best hard variety I have described above corre- sponds in many respects with a watery extract prepared from the fresh legumes of Acacia Arabica with an equal proportion of Gum-arabic; and the second hard variety is identical in its physical and medicinal properties with a watery extract of the fresh leaves (not pods) of the same plant. In addition to its superiority as a drug as already explained, the advantage of the Aqáqíya prepared from the pods is, Acacia Arabica, over all other varieties, is its great cheapness, which is speaking comparatively, dust cheap when prepared on a large scale. The bark of A. Arabica is very fibrous, hard, rough, deep brown externally, rusty or reddish brown internally, and astringent in taste. It contains about 20 per cent. of tannin. The fresh legumes are long, slightly tomentose, ash-colored, and. possess a very peculiar and characteristic appearance, viz., moniliform or contracted on both sutures between the seeds, so as to resemble a string of compressed beads. The dry pods have the same appearance, but are dry, more or less curved, and brown, dusky brown or ash-colored. * Acacia Catechu, Willd. 220 and 221. Habitat.Of MADRAS. 137 Synonyms.138 MATERIA MEDICA OF MADRAS. Nutmeg, in powder, of each, one ounce. Mix them thoroughly, pass the powder through a fine sieve, and finally rub it lightly in a mortar. Keep it in a stoppered bottle. Tincture: Take of Black-catechu, in coarse powder, two ounces and a half; Cinnamon-bark bruised, one ounce; Proof-spirit, one pint. Macerate for seven days in a closed vessel with occasional agitation; press, strain, filter and add sufficient proof spirit to make one pint. Infusion: Take of Black-catechu, in coarse powder, one hundred and sixty grains; Cinnamon-bark, bruised, thirty grains; Boiling-water, ten fluid ounces. Infuse in a covered vessel for half an hour, and strain. Doses.INDEXES. INDEX OF BOTANICAL AND SCIENTIFIC NAMES. Abelmoschus esculentus, 55. 140 INDEX. Cucurbita Citrullus, 40. INDEX. 141 Pulvis cretæ aromaticus, 121. 142 INDEX. Betel-nut, 62. Bilimbi-fruit, 76. Black-dammar, 51, 95, 96. Black-mustard, 25. Black-oil, 106. Black poppy seeds, 19. Black tea, 48. Bombay mastich, 116. Botany bay kino, 116. Broom, 107. INDEX. 143 Lime peel, 81. Linseed, 72. 144 INDEX. INDEX OF GERMAN SYNONYMS. Bamwolle, 52. Bdellium, 94. Berberitze, 13, 14. Cacao butter, 69. INDEX. 145 Dákh, 109. Dámar, 50. Dárhald, 11, 13, 14, 15. Dhúná, 50. Gandah-barózáh, 97. Gardahe-samáq, 119. Garjan-ká146 INDEX. Nímb-kí-chhál, 100. Nimb-kí-jar, 100. Paivándi-ánb, 120. Páras-pípal-ká-phal, 58. Páras-pípál-kí-chhál, 58. Pitpápara, 24. Ragat-sémal-ké-bínj, 60. Ragat-sémal-kí-chhál, 61. Ragat-senbal-ké-bínj, 60. Ragat-sénbal-ké-pindé, 60. Ragat-sénbal-kí-ruí, 61. Ráí, 25. Rál, 50. Rám-turáí, 55. Rám-turí, 55. Rasvat, 14, 15. Ríthá, 112. Rithé-ké-bínj-ká-maghz, 112. Rúí, 52. Rúmí-mastakí, 114, 116. Rúmí-sadáb, 77. Sadabh-ká-pát, 77. San, 9. Sarsón, 25. Sarsón-ká-tél, 10, 11. Sch-pattí, 75. Sél-gónd, 96. Shíál-kántí-ká-tél, 22. Shiál-kántí-ké-bínj,, 22. Shíál-kánté-kí-jar, 22. Singapúr-kí-chá, 48. Singyá-bis, 3. Sítal-chíní, 47. Suféd-bachnág, 2, 3, 4. Suféd-dámar, 51. Suféd-garjan-ká-tél, 49. Suféd-kanval-ké-bínj, 18. Suféd-kanval-ké-phúl, 18. Suféd-kanval-kí-jar, 18. Suféd-lakri-ká-tél, 49. Suféd-múslí, 64. Suféd-nílúfar-ké-bínj, 18. Suféd-nílúfar-ké-phul, 18. Suféd-nílúfar-kí-jar, 18. Suféd-paphúl, 17. Suféd-paphúl-ké-bínj, 17. Suféd-paphúl-kí-jar, 17. Suféd-rái, 24. Suféd-ráyán, 24. Suféd-sémal-ké-bínj, 66. Suféd-sémal-ké-pindé, 66. Suféd-sémal-kí-rúí, 66. Suféd-sénbal-ké-bínj, 66. Suféd-sénbal-ké-pindé, 66. Suféd-sénbal-kí-rúí, 66. Surpan-ká-tél, 46. Surpan-ké-bínj, 46. Tísí, 72. Tísí-ká-tél, 72. Tólá-ké-pirdé, 66. Tólá-kí-ruí, 66. Turanj-ká-ras, 81. Turanj-ké-chhilté, 81. Viláyati, 5. INDEX OF DUKHNI SYNONYMS. Afím, 18. Alfan, 120. Alsí-ká-tel, 72. Alsí-ké-bínj, 72. Ám, 120. Ám-ká-gónd, 120. Ám-kí-gutlí-ká-maghz, 120. Anbótí-kí-bhájí, 75. Angúr, 109. Ausárahe-révan, 43. Bach-nág, 1, 3, 4. Balsán, 96. Balsán-ká-tél, 96. Banafshah, 33. Bandoq-ké-jhar-kí-chhál, 71. Banóláh, 52. Bare-qisam-ká-bél-phal, 84. Bare-qisam-ké-bélphal ká-maghz, 87. Bare-ráyán, 25. Barí-máyí, 42. Barmé-kí-patté, 30 Bramé-kí-chhál, 30. Barmé-kí-jar-kí-chhál, 30. Bédánah. 110. Belambú, 75. Bér, 108. Bésharam-ké-jhar-ká-gónd, 129. Bésharam-ké-jhar-kí-chhál, 129. Bhagátí-kí-jar, 33. Bharam-dandí-ká-tél, 22. Bharam-dandí-ké-bínj, 22. Bharam-dandí-kí-jar, 22. Bhatátí-kí-jar, 33 Bhéndí, 55. Bhiláván, 124. Bhiláván-ká-tél, 124. Bhuin-kavít-ké-patté, 84. Bibla, 124. Bilimbi, 76. Bó1, 95. Chá, 48. Chá-ká-pattá, 48. Champé-ké-phúl, 8. Champé-kí-chhál. 8. Chanoul -mógré-ká-tél, 36. Chanoul-mógré-ké-bínj, 36. Chár-kí-chárólí, 128. Cháróli-ká-tél, 128. Chhórí-ajván, 31. Chhoté-qisam-ká-bélphal, 84.
INDEX. 147. Chhóté-qisam-ká-belphal-kámaghz, 84. Chhóté-dángrí-ká-pattá, 12. Chhóté-máí, 43. Chírónjí-ká-tél, 128. Chounláyí-kí-bhájí, 41. Farangí-and, 97. Gandah-férózah, 97. Gardahe-samáq, 119. Gardahe-sumáq, 119. Ghan-phór-ká-pattá, 112. Ghókrú, 74. Ghókrú-ká-pattá, 74. Ghól-kí-bhájí, 41. Górak-amlí-ká-phal, 66. Górí-ním-kí-bínj, 99. Górí-ním-ké-jar-kí-chhál, 99. Gótáganbá, 43. Goulí-ním-ké-bínj, 99. Gouli-ním-kí-jar-kí-chhál, 99. Gudhél, 54. Gugal. 94. Gul-bél, 9, 10. Gul-bél-ká-sat, 10. Gul-bél-kí-jar, 9. Gule-kháíró-ké-bínj, 59. Gule-khaíro-ké-pattón-ké-dandíyán, 58. Gule-khaíró-kí-jar 59. Gule-khaíró-kípér, 60. Gule-pistáh, 116. Halím, 26. Hatí-khatyán-ká-phal, 66. Hati-khalyan-kí-Chhál, 67. Higan, 93. Higan-ká-maghz, 93. Hulhul-ké-bínj, 28. Hulhul-kepatté, 28. Hulhul-kí-jar, 28. Isbadí, 56. Isbadi-kí-jar, 56. Isarbadí, 56. Isrí, 57. Jamti-ká-pattá, 12. Janglí-ám, 130. Janglí-ám-ká-gónd, 130. Janglí-bádám, 37. Janglí-bádám-ká-tél, 37. Janglí-hulhul-ké-bínj, 31. Janglí-hulhul-ké-patté, 31. Janglí-kálí-mirchí-kí-jar-kí-chhál, 78. Janglí-lóng-ká-pattá, 71. Janglí-methí, 58. Jásút, 54. Jásút-ké-phúl, 54. Jhár-kí-haldí, 11. Kájú-ká-gónd, 123. Kájú-ká-tél, 123. Kájú-kí-gutlí, 124. Kákad-singí, 118. Kákár-singí, 118. Kákmárí-ké-bínj, 9. Kálá bachnág, 2, 3. Kálá-dámar, 51, 95. Kála-zírá, 5. Kálí-khashkhash, 19. Ká1í-ráí, 25. Kálí-ráyán, 25. Káh-vajje-turki, 5. Kangóí-ká-pattá, 67. Kangói-ké-bínj, 67. Kapás-ké-koplíyán, 52. Kapás-ké-pindé, 52. Karépák, 80. Karyá-pát, 80. Karyá-pát, 80. Kateré-ké-jhar-kí-rúí, 38. Kavít, 82. Kavít-ká-gónd, 82. Kavít-ké-patté, 82. Khamraq, 75. Khash-khash, 19. Khash-khash-ká-tél, 19. Khash-khash-ké-bondé, 19. Khatyán-ké-bínj, 66. Khatyán-ké-pindé, 66. Khatyán-kí-rúí, 66. Khulfé-kí-bínj, 40. Khulfé-kí-bhájí, 40. Kishmish, 110. Kóká-ká-tél, 69. Kóká-ké-bínj, 68. Kudhal, 54. Kundur, 96, 97, 98, 99, 116, 118. Ládan, 87, 88. Lakrí-ká-tél, 48. Lál-ambaré-ké-bínj, 54. Lál-bachnág, 2, 3. Lál-Chhóté-kanval-ké bínj, 16. Lál-Chhóté-kanval-kí-phúl. 15. Lál-Chhóté-kanval-kí-jar, 16. Lál-Chhóté-nílúfar-ké-binj, 16. Lál-Chhóté-nílúfar-ké-phúl, 15. Lál-Chhóté-nílúfar-kí-jar, 16. Lál-kanval-ké-binj, 17. Lál-kanval-ké-phúl, 17. Lál-kanval-kí-jar, 17. Lál-nílúfar-ké-bínj, 17. Lál-nílúfar-ké-phúl, 17. Lál-nílúfar-ké-jar, 17. Lál-khatyan-ké-bínj, 60. Lál-khatyán-ká-pindé, 61. Lál-khatyán-kí-chhál, 61. Lál-khatyán-kí-rúí, 61. Lambí-vajje-turkí, 5. Límú-ká-jouher, 81. Límu-ká-turshabáh, 81. Maddí-chakká, 92. Málkangní-ká-jantr, 106. Málkangní-ká-tel, 106. Málkangni-ké-bínj, 106. Marórí-kí-phallí, 70. Maryam-kí-phal, 130. Maryam-ké-jhar- gónd, 130. Mastakí, 116. Mócharus, 60. Monaqqá, 110. Múlí-ké-binj, 27. Mullí, 27.
148 INDEX Mushk-bhéndí-ké-bínj, 53. Mushk-dánah, 53. Múyí-gónd, 129. Mysúrí-ghótá-ghanbá, 44. Nagésar-ké-phúl, 47. Nahní-máyí, 43. Nailér, 111. Nát-ká-dévdár, 73. Nát-ká-gónd, 38. Nát-ká-katérá, 38. Nárangí-ké-chhilté, 80. Náríngí-ké-phúl, 80. Nímbú-ká-ras, 81. Nimbú-ké-chhilté, 81. Ním-ká-gónd, 101. Ním-ká-níá, 101. Ním-ká-tél, 101. Ním-ké-gutlíyán, 101. Ním-ká-nimbóliyàn, 100. Ním-ké-patté, 100. Ním-ké-phúl, 100. Ním-ké-jar-kí-chhál, 100. Ním-kí-chhál, 100. Paivandí-ám, 120. Páras-pippal-ká-phal, 58. Páras-pippal-kí-chhál, 58. Pí1é-dhatúrai-ká.-tél, 22. Pí1é-dhaturaí-ké-bínj, 19, 22. Pílé-dhaturaí-kí-jar, 22. Pí1é-kapás-kí-rúé, 38. Piyál-chárólé, 128. Piyár-chárólí, 128. Rál, 50. Ratan-purus, 35. Ráyán, 25. Ríthá,112. Rithé-ké-bínj-ká-maghz, 112. Rúí, 52. Rúmí-mastakí, 114, 116. Sadáf, 77. Sadaf-ká-pattá, 77. Ságván-ká-tél, 49. Shál-ké-pandú-ké-bínj, 39. Shá1-ké-pandù-ké-jar-ké-chhál, 69. Shátrá, 24. Shimptí-ká-gónd, 129. Suféd-Chhóté-kanval-ké-bínj, 17. Suféd-Chhóté-kanval-ké-phúl, 17. Suféd-Chhóté-kanval-kí-jar, 17. Suféd-Chhóté-nílúfar-ké-bínj, 17. Suféd-Chhóté-nílúfar-ké-plú1, 17. Suféd-Chhóté-nílúfar-kí-jar, 17. Suféd-dámar, 51. Suféd-kanval-ké-bínj, 18. Suféd-kanval-ké-phúl, 18. Suféd-kanval-kí-jar, 18. Suféd-khatyán-ké-binj, 66. Suféd-khatyán-ké-pindé, 66. Suféd-khatyán-kí-rúí, 66. Suféd-nílúfar-ké-binj, 18. Suféd-nílúfar-ké-phúl, 18. Suféd-nílúfar-kí-jár, 18. Suféd-ráí, 24. Suféd-ráyán, 24. Surfan-ká-tél, 46. Surfan-ké-bínj, 46. Súrí-chakká, 108. Turanj-ká ras, 81. Turanj-ké-chhilté, 81. Vajje-turkí, 5. Víláyatí-isband, 87. Víláyati-mhéndí-ké-binj, 87. Víláyatí-vajje-turkí, 4. Yék-qisam-ká-bachlá, 109. INDEX OF TAMIL SYNONYMS. Abin, 18. Adanda-vér, 33. Alashi-virai-ennay, 72. Alishi-virai, 72. Álivirai, 26. Ánai-puli, 67. Anai-puli-pattai, 67. Annashuppu, 7. Arruá-manu-púndu, 57. Arvadá, 77. Arvadá-ilai, 77. Ati-pari-cham, 106. Aunaikiri-pishin, 129. Bilimbi-kaya, 76. Brimadandu-enney, 22. Brimadandu-vér, 22. Brimadandu-virai, 22. Chappáttu-pú, 54. Diraksha-param. 109. Diraksha-pazham, 109. Elanda-param, 108. Elandap-pazham, 108. Elumich-cham-param-ras-am, 81. Elumich-cham-param-tól, 81. Elumich-cham-pazham-ras-am, 81. Elumich-cham-pazham-tól, 81. Gashagasha, 19. Gashagasha-enney, 19. Gashagasha-tó1, 19. Gukkal, 94. Gukkulu, 94. Ilavam-parutti, 66. Ilavam-pinji, 66. Ilavam-virai. 66. Isvari-ver, 57.
INDEX 149 Jáfra-virai, 39. Jáfra-virai-ver-pattai, 39. Kadugu, 25. Kákkata-shingi, 118. Kákkáy-kolli-virai, 9. Karká-taka-shiugi, 118. Karuppu-dámar, 53, 95. Karuppu-gashagasha, 19. Karuppu-kadugu, 25. Karun-shiragam, 5. Karu-vémbu, 80. Karu-véppilai, 80. Kastúri-vendaik-káy-virai, 55. Kátmánga-parpu-enney, 128. Kátmá-payam-enney, 128. Kátmá-payam-parpu, 128. Kátmá-pazham-parpu, 128. Káttu-kadugu, 31. Káttuk-kastúri-virai, 55. Kattuk-kodi-elai, 12. Káttu-manga, 130. Kich-chilip-param-pú, 80. Kich-chilip-param-tól, 80. Kich-chilip-pazham-pu, 80. Kich-chilip-pazham-tól, 80. Koch-chit-tamarta-káya, 76. Kodi-mundrip-pazham, 109. Kókó-enney, 69. Kókó-virai, 69. Kottai-mundiri, 123. Kuddurai-pudduku-káy-enney, 70. Kuddurai-pudduku-káy-virai, 70. Kundurakam-pishin, 97. Kungiliyam, 50. Kurangu-munjil-virai, 39. Kurangu-munjil-virai vér-pattai, 39. Kurindai, 73. Kutti-vilám-ilai, 84. Ládan, 88. Maddi-pál, 88. Maddi-pál-pattai, 88. Maisháchi, 93. Maishákshi, 93. Malai-vémbu-vér-pattai, 99. Malai-vémbu-virai, 99. Malai-véppam-vér-pattai, 99. Malai-véppam-virai, 99. Malai-tángi, 57. Mángá-param, 120. Mángá-pazham, 120. Mángá-pishin, 120. Mara-enney, 48. Mara-manjal, 11. Maratti-moggu, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65. Mari-manga, 130. Mari-manga-pishin, 130. Marya-manga, 130. Matti-pal, 88. Mávalingam-ilai 29. Mávalingam-pattai, 29. Mávalingam-vér-pattai, 29. Mayir-manikkam, 58. Milakarnai-vér-pattai, 78. Mul-ilava-pattai, 61. Mul-ilava-parutti, 54. Mul-ilava-virai, 54. Mullangi, 28. Mullangi-virai, 28. Mudak-kattán-ilai, 112. Mundiri-enney, 123. Mundiri-kottai, 123. Mundiri-pazham, 123. Mundiri-pishin, 123. Nágap-pú, 47. Nágasháp-pú, 47. Nágésar-pú, 47. Nalla-rojan, 96. Nanjundán-pazham, 94. Nanjundan-sade, 94. Narttam-param-rasam, 81. Narttam-param-tol, 81. Narttam-pazham-rasam, 81. Narttam-pazliam-tól, 81. Náy-velái-ilai, 31. Náy-velái-virai, 31. Nerunji, 74. Nerunji-ilai, 74. Nerunji-mullu, 74. Nila-vilám ilai, 84. Níradi-muttu-enney, 37. Níradi-muttu, 37. Odiya-pattai, 129. Odiy-maram-pattai, 129. Orilaittámarai, 35. Paini-pishin, 51. Papparap-puli, 67. Papparap-puli-pattai, 67. Pappili-chakkai, 108. Parangi-Shambirani, 96. Parpu-kíre, 40. Parpu-kíre-virai, 40. Parutti, 52. Parutti-pinji, 52. Parutti-virai, 52. Pasarai-kírai, 52. Perandai, 111. Perattai-kírai, 71. Periya-vilva-param, 87. Periya-vilva-pazham, 87. Periya-vilva-pazham-sadai, 87. Peru-maram-vér-pattai, 91. Peru-maratup-pattai, 91. Peru-vilva-param-sadai, 87. Pínári-enney, 70. Pínári-káy-enney, 70. Pínár-káy-virai, 70. Pínári-virai, 70. Ponnán-kottai, 110. Póstaka-tól, 19. Pulich-chakkay, 76. Puli-perandai, 109. Puliyárai, 75. Puliyárai-kirai, 75. Punnai-kottai, 46. Punnai-enney, 46. Punnák-kirai, 71. Púrasha-param, 58. Púrasha-pattai, 58. Púrasha-pazham, 58.
150 INDEX. Púri-puli, 67. Púri-puli-pattai, 67. Sadápa-ilai, 77. Sen-nábhi, 3. Shampangi-pu, 8. Shampangi-tól, 8. Shappattup-pu, 54. Shára-parpu, 128. Shén-kottai, 124. Shén-kottay-enney, 124. Shérán-kottai, 124. Shímai-ativadayam, 4. Shímai-azhavanai-virai, 86. Shímai-káshuruk-virai, 53. Shímai-vendaik-káy-verai, 55. Shíndil-kodi, 9. Shíndil-kodi-vér, 9. Shíndil-shakkarai, 10. Shiriya-vilva-pazham, 84. Shiru-vilva-param, 84. Shiru-vilva-param-sadai, 84. Shivappu-alli-pú, 15. Shivappu-alli-vér, 16. Shivappu-alli-virai, 16. Shivappu-kásal-virai, 53. Shivappu-káshuruk-virai, 53. Shivappu-nabhi, 3. Shivappu-pulachi-kirai-virai, 53. Shivappu-támara-pú, 17. Shivappu-támara-vér, 17. Shivappu-támara-virai, 17. Simai-puli, 67. Shimai-puli-pattai, 67. Siru-parpu-kírai, 41. Siru-pasarai kírai, 41. Surul-pattai, 108. Tain-púchi-pattai, 71. Tamarat-tam-káy, 75. Tanaku-parutti, 38. Tanuku-pishin, 38. Té-ilai, 48. Tévadáram, 73. Tumbugai-pishin, 51. Turá, 24. Tutti-ilai, 68. Tutti-virai, 68. Ularnda-diraksha-pazham, 110. Ularnda-drácha-param, 110. Valim-bari-káy, 70. Váluluvai, 106. Váluluvai-enney, 106. Váluluvai-tailam. 106. Váluluvai-virai, 106. Vasha-návi, 1. Vatta-tirippi-ver, 56. Vattu-manga-param, 120. Vattu-manga-pazham, 120. Vélai-ilai, 28. Vélai-verai, 28. Vélai-vér, 28. Vélam-pishin, 83. Vellai-alli-pú. 17. Vellai-alli-vér, 17. Vellai-alli-virai, 17. Vellai-damar, 51. Vellai-kadugu, 24. Vellai-kunrikam, 51. Vellai-támara-pú, 18. Vellai-támara-vér, 18. Vellai-támara-virai, 18. Vembádam, 108. Vémbu-enney, 101. Vémbu-ilai, 101. Vémbu-kottai, 100. Vémbu-pattai, 100. Vémbu-pishin, 101. Vémbu-pú, 101. Vémbu-vér-pattai, 100. Vendakkáy, 55. Véppam enney, 101. Véppam-ilai, 101. Véppam-kallu, 100. Véppam-kottai, 101. Véppam-param, 100. Véppam-pazham, 100. Véppam-pattai, 101. Véppam-pishin, 100. Véppam-pu, 101. Véppam-vér-pattai, 100. Vilám-ilai, 82. Vilám-param, 82. Vilám-pishin, 82. INDEX OF TELUGU SYNONYMS. Abhini, 18. Ada-syamali-káya, 70. Adavi-górinta, 73. Adavi-mámidi, 130. Ádeli, 26. Adiyálu, 26. Anasapuvvu, 7. Anbóti-kúra, 75. Andugu-pisunu, 96. Arudanda-véru, 33. Arudu-áku, 77. Arudu, 47. Atasi, 72. Atasi-núne, 72. Aválu, 25. Balintra-pólam, 94. Barre-bachchala, 109. Benda-kaya, 55. Bhallátaki, 122. Bhallátamu, 122. Bijapúra-pandu-rasam, 82. Bijapúra-pandu-tólu, 81. Bili-bili-kayalu, 76. Bilimbi-káyalu, 76. Bramhadandi-núne, 22.
INDEX. 151 Bramhadandi-veru, 22. Bramhadandi-vittulu, 22. Budda-kákara-áku, 112. Búraga-patti, 66. Búraga-pindé, 66. Búraga-sanna-káya, 66. Búraga-vittulu, 66. Búra-sanna-káya, 66. Chára-pappu, 126. Chára-pappu-núne, 128. Cháru-mámidi-pappu, 128. Chinna-bilva-pandu, 84. Chinna-bilva-pandu-kanda, 84. Cinnna-marédu-pandu, 84. Chiru-palléru, 74. Chiti-muti-veru, 56. Dabba-pandu-rasam, 81. Dabba-pandu-tólu, 81. Dampara-pisunu, 127. Dásáni-puvva, 54. Dévadáru, 73. Dipa-draksha-pandu, 110. Draksha-pandu, 109. Dúpa-dámaru, 51. Dúsari-tíge-áku, 12. Ekkudu-tíge-ákú. 112. Endu-dráksha-pandu, 110. Erra-alli-tamara-puvvu, 15. Erra-alli-tamara-véru, 16. Erra-alli-tamara-vittulu, 16. Erra-gómgura-vittulu, 53. Erra-góng-áku-vittulu, 53. Erra-góng-kúra-vittulu, 53. Erra-góngúra-vittulu, 53. Erra-nabhi, 3. Erra-támara-puvvu, 17. Erra-tamára-véru, 17. Erra-támara-vittulu, 17. Gaja-pushpamu, 47. Ganga-rávi-pandu, 58. Ganga-rávi-patta, 58. Ganga-régu-pandu, 108. Ganga-rénu-pandu, 58. Ganga-rénu-patta, 58. Gára-pandu, 93. Gára-pandu-goju, 92. Gára-pandu-kanda, 92. Gasagasala-núne. 19. Gasagasala-tólu, 19. Gasagasalu, 19. Goddu-pávili-kúra, 40. Goddu-pávili-kúra-vittulu, 40. Góstini-pandu, 108. Guggilamu, 40. Gundumeda, 106. Gurrapu-bádam-chettu-núne, 70. Gurrapu-bádam-chettu-vittulu, 70. Ivura-mámidi, 130. Ivura-mámidi-pisunu,130. Jáfra-vittulu, 39. Jáfra-vittulu-veru-patta, 39. Járu-mámidi-pappu, 126. Java-pushpamu, 54. Jédi-mámidi-núne, 123. Jédi-mámidi-pisunu, 123. Jédi-mámidi-vittu, 123. Jédi-vittulu-núne, 124. Jédi-vittulu, 124. Kákara-shingi, 118. Kákmári-vittulu, 9. Kamala-phala-puvva, 80. Kamala-phala-tólu, 80. Kapidh-dhamu, 82. Kapidh-dhamu-áku, 82. kapitthamu-pisunu, 82. Kari-vépa, 80. Karpása-vittulu, 52. Karpúra-benda-vittulu, 55. Kastúri-benda-vittulu, 55. Kavinchi-káya, 70. Kich-chili-pandu-puvvu, 80. Kich-chili-pandu-tólu, 80. Kittali-pandu-puvvu, 80. Kittali-pandu-tólu, 80. Konda-gógu-banka, 38. Konda-gógu-pisunu, 38. Konda-gógu-pattu, 38. Konda-kasinda-véru-patta, 78. Konda-vépa-vére-patta, 99. Konda-vépa-vittu, 99. Kukka-váminta-áku, 31. Kukka-váminta-vittulu, 31. Kukudu-kayaln, 112. Kunkudu-kayalu, 112. Kurangu-manjil-vittulu-véru-patta, 39. Kurangu-manjil-vittulu, 39. Lungamu-pandu-ras-am, 81. Lungamu-pandu-tólu, 81. Madana-ginjalu, 72. Madana-ginjalu-núne, 72. Maddi-chakka, 9. Maddi-pálu, 88. Maddi-pálu-patta, 88. Mádhavítíge, 73. Mádhipala-pandu-ras-am, 81. Mádhipala-pandu-tólu, 81. Mahi-sákshi, 93. Mahi-sákshi, 93. Mál-kunguni-núne, 106. Má1-kunguni-tailam, 106. Mál-kunguni-vittulu, 106. Mámidi-banka, 120. Mámidi-pandu, 120. Mámidi-pisunu, 120. Mánu-puspu, 11. Maráti-mogga, 61. Mávalingam-áku, 29. Mávalingam-patta, 30. Mávalingam-véru-patta, 30. Mayilu-mánikyam, 58. Mirapa-kándra-véru-patta, 78. Mul-ilava-patti, 61. Mullangi, 28. Mullangi-vittulu, 28. Mundla-búraga-patta, 61. Mundla-búraga-patti, 61. Mundla-búraga-vittulu, 60.
152 INDEX. Muni-ganga-rávi-pandu, 58. Muni-ganga-rávi-patta, 58. Munta-mámidi-banka, 123. Munta-mámidi-núne, 123. Munta-mámidi-vittu, 123. Mutuva-pulogum-véru, 56. Nága-késara-puvvu, 47. Nalla-áválu, 26. Nalla-dámar, 51. Nalla-gasagasálu, 19. Nalla-jilakara, 5. Nalla-rojan, 51. Nalléru, 111. Nára-dabba-pandu-ras-am, 81. Nára-dabba-pandu-tólu, 80. Nárinja-paudu-puvvu, 80. Nárija-pandu-tólu, 80. Néla-.velaga-áku, 84. Nimma-pandu-ras-am 81. Nimma-pandu-tólu, 81. Níradi-vittulu-núne, 37. Níradi-vittulu, 37. Nulite-kaya, 70. Oddi-chettu-patta, 129. Oddi-patta, 129. Oddi-pisunu, 129. Pagadapu-katta, 73. Palléru-áku, 74. Palléru-mullu, 74. Palléru, 74. Pappu-kúra, 40. Pappu-kúra-vittu, 40. Parangi-sámbrani, 97. Parinta, 71. Patali tivva-áku, 112. Patti, 51. Patti-pindé, 51. Patti-vittulu, 51. Pedda-bilva-pandu, 87. Pedda-bilva-pandu-guja, 87. Pedda-bilva-pandu-kanda, 87. Pedda-marídu-pandu, 87. Pedda-pávili-kúra, 40. Pedda-pávili-kúra-vittulu, 40. Péranta, 71. Péranta-kúra, 71. Pólam, 94. Ponna-núné, 46. Ponna-vittulu, 46. Pótu-vaINDEX. 153 INDEX OF MALYALIM SYNONYMS. Ambalam, 130. Amparam, 130. Amruta-valli, 9. Anpazham, 130. Ariya-véppa-anti, 101. Ariya-véppa-ela, 101. Ariya-véppa-pú, 101. Ariya-véppa-káya, 100. Ariya-véppa-tóli, 100. Ariya-véppa-pasha, 101. Ariya-véppa-enna, 101. Ayam-paratti, 54. Brahmadanti-enna, 22. Brahmadanti-véra, 22. Brahmadanti-vitta, 22. Chempakap-pú, 8. Chempa-rattip-púva, 54. Cheru-chana-vittinte-enna, 72. Cheru-chana-vittinte-vitta, 72. Cheru-naranga-tóli, 81. Cheriya-kúvalap-param, 84. Chérunkuru, 124. Chivanna-pulachi-chira-vitta, 53. Elanta-param, 109. Elantap-pazham, 109. Ganapati-naranga-tóli, 81. Ganapati-naranna-tóli, 81. Jonakam-náranga-tóli, 81. Kákka-totali-véra-tóla, 78. Kappal-chéran-kuru, 123. Kappal-chéran-pasha, 123. Kappa-máva-enna, 123. Kappa-máva-pasha, 123. Kappa-máva-kuru, 123. Kara-kundurukkam, 51. Karichakká, 76. Karinta-kattin-káya, 9. Kariya-pála, 80. Karun-chirakam, 5. Karuppa-katuka, 25. Karu-véppa, 79. Kasha-kasha-karuppa, 18. Kasha-kashak-kuru, 19. Kash-kashat-tól, 19. Kat-máva-parpu, 128. Katuka, 25. Kungiliyam, 50. Kasturi-venta-vitta, 55. Kattu-kasturi, 55. Katta-ventiyam, 58. Madhura-náranga-pushpam, 80. Madhura-náranga-tóli, 80. Mara-manjal, 11. Matti-pál, 88. Matti-pál-patte, 88. Mávva-káya, 120. Mávva-pasha, 120. Mayir-manikkam, 38. Mullila-púla-vitta, 60. Mull-ilava-tóla, 61. Mull-ilava-vitta, 60. Manna-kungiliyam, 97. Munti-rinnap-pazham, 109. Muntri-param, 109. Nanchunta-param, 94. Neringil, 74. Neringil-ela, 74. Náy-véla-bíjam, 30. Náy-véla-ela, 30. Painipasha, 51. Pangai-maram-parutti, 66. Pangai-vitta, 66. Paranki-máva-enna, 123. Paranki-máva-kuru, 123. Paranki-mava-pasha, 123. Parutti, 51. Parutti-vitta, 51. Payana, 51. Peru-maram-véra-tóli, 92. Peru-marat-tóli, 92. Pettaka-putti-ela, 68. Pettaka-putti-vitta, 68. Piranta, 111. Ponnan-kotta, 112. Pula-maram-parutti, 61, 66. Pula-maram-vitta, 60, 66. Puliyárala, 75. Punna-enne, 46. Punna-vitta, 46. Púvarasha-káya, 58. Púvarasha-tóli, 58. Shúna-pangi-parutti, 38. Shúna-pangi-pasha, 38. Tamarattu-ká, 75. Ténprákka, 122. Totáli-véra-tóla, 77. Tumbugai-pasha, 51. Tutta-ela, 68. Tutta-vitta, 68. Udi-maram-tóla, 129. Udi-pasha, 129. Udi-tóla, 129. Unanniya-muntrinap-param, 110. Urvanjik-káya, 112. Valampari-káya, 71. Valanku-chámbráni, 97. Valiya-kuvalap-param, 87. Valiya-marattóle, 92. Valsanabhi, 1. Váluluva, 106. Váluluva-enna, 106. Valu-zhuva, 106. Véla-bijam, 28. Véla-ela, 28. Véla-véra, 28. Vella-katuka, 24. Vella-kundirukkam, 96. Vella-kunturukkam, 51. Velutta-chempakap-pú, 47. Ventakkáya, 55. U
154 INDEX. Véppa-ela, 101. Véppa-enna, 101. Véppa-kuru, 101. Véppa-múlam, 100. Véppa-pasha, 100. Véppa-pú, 101. Véppa-tóli, 100. Velám-ela, 81. Velám-param, 81. Vilambikká, 76. Vilimbi, 76. Viranta, 111. INDEX OF CANARESE SYNONYMS. Alashi, 72. Alshi-enne, 72. Amrúta-balli, 9. Amte, 130. Amte-hannu, 130. Antu-mavina-hannu, 120. Aphimu, 19. Bendi-kayi, 55. Bettada-bévina-béru-patte, 99. Bévana-yanne, 101. Bévina-béru-patte, 100. Bévina-huvvu, 101. Bévina-mara-góndu, 101. Bévina-góndu, 101. Bévina-gotti, 101. Bévina-mara-hannu, 100. Bévina-mara-yale, 101. Bévina-yale, 101. Bili-sasave, 24. Bóla, 94. Búgni-hannu, 58. Búgni-patte, 58. Búraga-bija, 66. Búraga-hatti, 66. Bura-mara-bíja, 66. Búra-mara-hatte, 66. Byálada-góndú, 82. Byálada-hannu, 82. Byálada-yale, 82. Chara-pappu, 126. Dásválada-huvvu, 54. Dhúpadi-enne, 45. Dipa-drakshi, 110. Dodda-bilva-hannu, 87. Drakshi-hannu, 109. Dúpa-antu, 51. Géra-miána, 121. Géra-poppu-yanne, 123. Géru, 124. Guggala, 94. Guggila, 50. Hatti-bíja, 52. Hatti, 52. Kádu-máviná, 130. Kádu-menthyá, 58. Káka-mári-bíja, 9. Kare-jiraga, 5. Kamarak, 75. Kappu-sásve, 25. Kari-bévina-yelé, 80. Khasakhasi, 19. Kúkate-kayi, 112. Mádalada-hannu-tólu, 80. Mangarúli, 111. Maráda-arishna, 11. Mávina-hannu, 118. Mavina-miána, 118. Mullu-búraga-bíja, 60. Mullu-búraga-hatti, 61. Nágadáli-sappu, 77. Nágadáli-yalé, 77. Negalu, 74. Negalu-yalé, 74. Nimbe-hannu-tólu, 81. Pullam-purachi-sappa, 75. Pupli-chakka, 106. Rudrakshi, 71. Sampange-huvvu, 8. Sanna-bilva-hannu, 84. Sásve, 25. Shrimudri-bija, 68. Shrimudri-yale, 68. Suragonne-bija, 46. Suragonne-enne, 46. Vasanabhi, 1. Yalachi-hannu, 109. INDEX OF BENGALI SYNONYMS. Ám, 120. Ám-gun, 120. Ámrá, 130. Amrul, 75. Angúr, 109. Aphím, 19. Ban-hurhurya-bij, 31. Ban-hurhurya-páta, 31. Banosá, 33. Barangi-lobán, 97. Bara-shri-phal, 87. Baro-loniya, 40.
INDEX. 155 Baro-loniya-bij, 40. Barsingá, 80. Bér, 109. Bhélá, 124. Bhélva, 124. Bilimbi, 76. Ból, 94. Bón-methi, 58. Bór, 109. Bos-anti, 73. Chámpá, 8. Chá-pátá, 48. Chóta-bél, 84. Dhénras, 55. Dhéras, 55. Dhóp-rai, 24. Dhúná, 50. Drakhyá, 109. Gokhru, 74. Gókhru-pátá, 74. Gugul, 93. Hárbhánga, 111. Hijli-bádám, 123. Hijli-bádám-gun, 123. Hijli-bádám-táil, 123. Hingon-phal, 94. Hira-ból, 94. Hónsá-nébu-chilká, 81. Hónsá-nébu-ras, 82. Horjórá, 111. Hurhuriya-bij, 28. Hurhuriya-múl, 28. Hurhuriya-páta, 28. Isbaud, 87. Jhumka-gachh-bij, 68. Jhumka-gachh-pátá, 68. Jival-lásá, 130. Jóbá-phúl, 54. Kálá-dámar, 95. Kálá-jíra, 5. Kál-raí, 25. Kamarangá, 74. Kamrak, 74. Kapás, 49. Kappas-bij, 52. Karpásh, 52. Karpásh-bichi, 52. Karpásh-bij, 52. Kátbél, 52. Kátbél-gun, 52. Kátbél-pata, 52. Khaskhas, 19. Komolá-nébu-chilka, 80. Komolá-nébu-phúl, 80. Kóth-bél,82. Kóth-bél-gun, 82. Kóth-pátá, 82. Kúl, 109. Kundro, 97. Lál-mista-bij, 53. Lata-phatkari-páta, 112. Madhúbi, 73. Mádhúbi-latá, 73. Mahá-bél, 87. Mahá-ním-bíchi, 99. Mahá-ním-jar-chbál, 99. Málkangni, 104. Málkanguni-tail, 106. Monakkha, 110. Mosína, 72. Múli 27. Mushak-dáná, 55. Nágésar-ki-phúl, 47. Nárungi-chilká, 80. Nárungi-phúl, 80. Naya-phatki-páta, 112. Nébuchilka, 81. Néburas, 81. Ním-gotli, 101. Ním-lásá, 101. Ním páta, 101. Ním-phál, 100. Ním-phúl, 100. Ním-sál, 100. Ním-shikar-sál, 101. Ním-tail, 101. Omlóti, 75. Or-phúl, 54. Paló, 10. Phúta, 52. Pila-baréla, 58. Pila-baréla-shikar, 57. Pitari-gachh-bij, 68. Pitari-gachh-pata, 68. Piyal, 128. Piyál-tail, 128. Porash-chhál, 58. Porash-phal, 58. Rál, 50. Rámtorai, 55. Ritha, 112. Rokto-sémal-bij, 60. Rokto-sémal-rúi, 61. Rokto-semal-sál, 61. Rui, 52. Salai, 97. Salai-gun, 97. Shiál-kánta-bij, 22. Shiál-kánta-jár, 22. Shiál-kánta-tél, 22. Sultáná-chámpá-bij, 46. Sultáná-chámpá-tail, 46. Tisi, 72. Tisi-tail, 72. Tólá-rúi, 66. Turanj-chilká, 81. Turanj-ras, 81. X
156 INDEX. INDEX OF PERSIAN SYNONYMS. Abe-turanj, 81. Abe-límu, 81. Afyún, 18. Anbak, 120. Angharáe-hindí, 54. Angur, 109. Balághune-klán, 87. Balághune-khurd, 84. Balsán, 95. Bamiyah, 55. Banafshah, 33. Barge-ázád-darakhte-hindí, 101. Barge-darakhte-shanah, 68. Barge-kháre-khasak, 74. Barge-nile, 101. Barre-ázád-darakhte-hindí, 100. Barre-nile, 100. Bédánah, 110. Bíkhe-banafshah, 34. Biládur, 124. Bíshnág, 1. Boé-jahúdan, 94. Cháye, 48. Dárhald, 11, 13, 14, 15. Fíl-zahrah, 14. Gardahe-samaq, 117. Gasht-bargasht, 71. Gaz-angabín, 42. Gazmázaj, 42. Gazmázaje-khurd, 43. Gazmázak, 42. Gazmázú, 42. Gul-bé1, 9, 10. Gule-ázád-darakhte-hindí, 101. Gule-fofal, 62. Gule-halílah, 118. Gule-naranj, 80. Gule-níle, 101. Gule-pistah, 116. Halváe-biládur, 127. Isband, 87. Ispand, 87. Javárish-e-biládur, 127. Kabít, 82. Khare-khasak, 74. Khash-khásh, 19. Khurfah, 37. Kishmish, 110. Kíyá, 114. Kundur, 96, 97, 98, 99, 116, 118. Laale-moaabbari, 50. Maghze-balaghúne-kalán, 87. Maghze-ba iaghúne-khurd, 84. Maghze-shule-kalán, 87. Maghze-shule-khurd, 84. Maghze-tukhme-anbah, 120. Máyíne-khurd, 43. Monaqqá, 110. Mushk-dánah, 55, 56. Naghzak, 118. Panbah, 52. Panbah danch, 52. Póste-ázád-darakhte-hindí, 100. Póste-bíkhe-ázád-darakht, 99. Póste-bíkhe-níle, 100. Póste-kóknár, 19. Póste-límú, 81. Póste-náranj, 80. Póste-níle, 100 Póste-turanj, 81. Raziyánahe-khatáí, 7. Reshaí-khitmí, 59. Róghane-ázád-darakhte-hindí, 100. Róghane-balsán, 93. Róghane-brinj-mógrá, 36. Róghane-katán, 72. Róghane-níle, 101. Róghane-zaghir, 101. Samaghe-ázád-darakhté-hindí, 101. Samaghe-kabít, 82. Samaghe-níle, 101. Saqe-khitmí, 60. Satte-giló, 10, 11. Sháh-tarah, 24. Shamlite-dashtí, 58. Sheraé-límú, 81. Shiraé-turanj, 81. Shule-kalán, 87. Shule-khurd, 84. Sípandáne-supéd, 24. Síyáh-dánah, 5. Sudále, 77. Tukhme-ázád-darakht, 99. Tukhme-ázád-darakhte-hindí, 101. Tukhme-brinj-mógrá, 36. Tukhme-darakhte-shánah, 68. Tukhme-katán, 72. Tukhme-khitmí, 60. Tukhme-khurfah, 40. Tukhme-kóknár, 19. Tukhme-níle, 101. Tukhme-turle, 28. Tukhme-turrah-tézak, 26. Tukhme-zaghír, 72. Turanjabín, 42. Turb, 28. Vajje-turki, 4, 5.
INDEX. 157 INDEX OF ARABIC SYNONYMS. Aanab, 109. Aazbah, 43. Aflátan, 94. Afyún, 18. Ainab, 109. Alake-rúmí, 114. Anbaj, 120. Anqharáe-hindí, 54. Auhul-khitmi, 60. Ausárahe-révand, 43. Bádiyáne-khatái, 7. Balsán, 96 Bámiya, 55. Banafshaj, 33. Baqlatul-áarabbíyah, 41. Baqlatul-humqá, 40. Baqlatul-malik, 24. Bastaj, 97. Bastitáj, 74. Bazrul-baqlatul-humqá, 40. Bazrul-kattán, 72. Bazrul-khitmi, 60. Bazrul-mashtul-ghoul, 68. Bísh, 1, 2, 4. Bizrul-fajl, 28. Bizrul-khash-khásh, 19. Daqáq-kundar, 99. Dár-hald, 11, 13, 14, 15. Dhonul-balsán, 96. Dhonul-kattán, 72. Faijan, 74. Farfirán, 43. Féjan, 77. Fujl, 28. Gardahe-somáq, 119. Giló, 9. Habbul-asl, 43. Habbul-fahm, 122. Habbul-mishk, 55. Habbul-misk, 55. Habbul-mushk, 55. Habbul-qalle, 126. Habbul-qutn, 52. Habbut-tarfá, 42. Habhabú, 67. Hubburrashád, 26. Hujed, 67. Hurmal, 87. Hurmul, 84, 88. Huzuze-hindí, 14. Inqardiyá, 124. Jadvár, 4, 6, 7. Kabit, 82. Kamúno-asvad, 5. Kazánjabín, 42. Khardale-abyaz, 24. Khasak, 74. Kulbahe-barrí, 58. Kundur, 95, 96, 97, 116, 118. Kundur, madharaj, 98. Kundur-unsá, 98. Kundur-zakar, 98. Lubán, 96. Maghze-safarjale-hindíé-kabír, 87. Maghze-safarjale-hindíé-khurd, 84. Mastakí, 114. Mául-límá, 81. Mául-utráj, 81. Mávez, 110. Moql, 94. Moqle-arzaq, 94. Qaiqahar, 50. Qanqahar, 50. Qishár-kundur, 98. Qishrul-habhabu, 67. Qishrul-hujéd, 67. Qishrul-khash-khásh, 19. Qishrul-límú, 81. Qishrul-náránj, 81. Qishrul-utraj, 81. Qishrul-utruj, 81. Qutn, 52. Qutun, 52. Rubbe-révand, 43. Sáé, 48. Samaghe-kabit, 82. Samaratul-asl, 43. Samaratul-tarfá, 42. Safarjalé-hindíé-kabír, 87. Safarjalé-hindíé-saghír, 84. Sáqul-khitmi, 60. Satte-gelo, 10, 11. Sháh-traj, 24. Turanjabín, 42. Vardul-náranj, 80. Varqul-hastitáj, 74. Varqul-Khasak, 74. Varqul-mashtul-ghoul, 68. Zabíle, 110. Zarish, 14.
158 INDEX. INDEX OF SANSCRIT SYNONYMS. Ámra, 120. Ámra-niryásam, 120. Ámra-phalam, 120. Ámara-taka, 130. Aphim, 19. Arishta-phalam, 112. Arushkara, 124. Atasí, 72. Atasí-tailum, 72. Badari-phalam, 109. Bhallá-taka, 124. Bhallá-taki-bíjam, 124. Bhukapidtha-patram, 84. Champaka-pushpam, 8. Dárviká, 55. Dráksha phalam, 109. Ganda-rasaha, 94. Gókhurhá, 74. Gókhurhá-patram, 74. Guggilam, 50. Ingudi-phalam, 94. Japá-pushpam, 54. Jingini-niryásam, 129. Jyótishmati-patram, 112. Kala-sarsha-phala, 25. Kapidtha-niryásam, 81. Kapidtha-patram, 81. Kapidtha-phalam, 81. Karkata-sringi, 118. Karpás, 51. Karpása, 52. Karpása-bíjam, 52. Koushi-kaha, 50, 94. Lata-kasturikam, 55. Nága-kesaram-pushpam, 47. Núnba-múlam-valkalam, 100. Núnba-niryásam, 101. Núnba-patram, 101. Núnba-phalam, 100. Núnba-pushpam, 101. Núnba-tailam, 101. Núnba-valkalam, 100. Parvata-nímba-bíjam, 99. Parvata-nímba-múl-valkalam, 99. Phenila, 112. Piyála, 128. Póstubejam, 19. Punnága-bíjam, 46. Punnága-tailam, 46. Rasa-gandhaha, 95. Raktavalli, 108. Sadápaha, 77. Salai-niryásam, 96. Sarshaphaha, 25. Shvéta-sarshaphaha, 24. Sóma-valli, 9. Surabhi-nímba-patram, 80. Trikan-takavalli, 74. Vajra-valli, 111. Vanasarangáta-patram, 74. Vanasrangánta, 74. INDEX OF GUZRATTI SYNONYMS. Ambá, 120. Ambá-nu-gùndar, 120. Aphim, 19. Aritha, 112. Bálank-nu-chilkà, 81. Bálank-nu-ras, 82. Banphsá, 33. Bhilamu, 124. Bhindu, 55. Bijóra-nu-chilka, 81. Bijora-nu-ras, 82. Bilambu, 76. Ból, 95. Bór, 109. Chá, 48. Chirunji, 128. Chódhári, 111. Drakh, 109. Gokhru, 74. Gòkhru-nu-pándru, 74. Gorak-amlí-nu-chálo, 67. Gorak-amlí, 67. Gulvé1, 9. Gugul, 93. Hingernu-phala, 93. Jásút-nu-phúl, 54. Káju-nu-gótli, 123. Káju-nu gún, 123. Káju-nu-tél, 123. Kála-rai, 25. Kalo-dámar, 51, 95. Kangoi-nu-bíj, 65. Kangói-nu-pána, 68. Kán-ph ti-nu-pándru, 112. Kapás-nu-bij, 51. Karepák-nu-pandro, 80.
INDEX. 159 Kavít-82. Kavít-gón, 82. Kavít-pándru, 82. Khaskhas, 19. Khaskhas-nu-póst, 19. Kóthu, 82. Kóthu-pándru, 82. Lál-anbári-nu-bíj, 53. Limba-nu-chál, 100. Limba-nu-gotli, 101. Limba-nu-gúndar, 101. Limba-nu-jad-chál, 100. Limba-nu-pandru, 101. Limba-nu-phula, 100. Limba-nu-phal, 101. Limba-nu-tíl, 101. Mótu-bíli-nu-phal, 87. Nánu-bilinu-phal, 84. Náringi-nu-chilká, 80. Náringi-nu-phula, 80. Nímbu-nu-chilka, 81. Nímbu-nu-ras, 81. Párasa-piplo-nu-chál, 58. Párasu-piplo-nu-phal, 58. Ru, 52. Rú-nú-bij, 52. Sadáp, 77. Sitáp, 77. Tamarak, 75. Ujlo-ráyi, 24. Vachnág, 1. INDEX OF MAHRATTI SYNONYMS. Ambá, 120. Ambá-cha-gónda, 120. Aphim, 19. Bálata-bóla, 94. Bhíndá, 55. Bilia, 124. Bóra, 109. Chámpécha-phúla, 8. Charátte, 74. Charátte-cha-páno, 74. Chirunji, 128. Dásinda-cha-phúla, 54. Draksha, 109. Ghókaru, 74. Ghókaru-cha-pána, 74. Góraka-ainli, 66. Góraka-ainli-cha-patta, 66. Guggula, 93. Guggilu, 50. Gula-véli, 9. Hingana-cha-phal, 93. Jhádi-haladi, 11. Kaju-cha-antholi, 123. Kaju-cha-bi, 123. Kaju-cha-gónda, 123. Kaju-cha-téla, 123. Kákada-shingi, 118. Kala-mohare, 25. Kalo-dámar, 51. Kán-phúti-cha-páná, 112. Kápúsa-chá-bi, 51. Kápús, 51. Karépáka-cha-pána, 80. Kavíta, 82. Kavíta-gónda, 82. Kavíta-pána, 82. Khasakhasa, 19. Lahana-bélácha-phalá, 84. Lál-anbári-cha-bíj, 53. Limba-cha-anthóli, 101. Limba-cha-gónda, 101. Limba-cha-múli-patta, 100. Limba-cha-pána, 101. Limba-cha-patta, 100. Limba-cha-phúla, 101. Limba-cha-téla, 101. Limbu-cha-chilto, 81. Limbu-cha-ras, 81. Mál-kángóni, 106. Mál-kángóni-cha-téla, 106. Moharí, 25. Naringa-cha-chilto, 80. Naringa-cha-phúla, 80. Nim-cha-pandu, 100. Pandhora-moharí, 24. Párasá-cha-patta, 58. Pórasa-cha-phal, 58. Rála, 50. Rithá, 112. Shimpti-gónda, 129. Thóra-bélácha-phala, 87. Turanj-cha-chilto, 81. Turanj-cha-ras, 81. Véppa-káya, 100. Vilam-pasha, 82.
160 INDEX. INDEX OF BURMESE SYNONYMS. Amé-munniyén, 25. Angén oushi-si, 84. Balu-vaki, 55. Bhain, 19. Bhain-zi, 19. Bíla-magi-sí, 67. Bíla-magi-sikhav, 67. Bon-khoye, 68. Gon, 52. Gún, 52. Kála-zoun-sí, 76. Kála-zounya-sí, 76. Khi-sí, 124. Khounyan, 54. Kígí-oushi-sí, 87. Lambolean, 128. Laphí-khiáv, 48. Lepán-binis-gún, 61. Lepán-bin-sí, 60. Lepán-bin-wá, 61. Lepán-bin-zí, 60. Lonenpho, 128. Maávme-sue-khati, 112. Miavmen-suekhi-sí, 112. Moulá, 27. Mouláze, 27. Munniyén-zi, 25. Pido-sin, 80. Pindo-sin, 80. Sabí-sí, 109. Sabya-sí, 109. Shazán-lese, 111. Sihosaye-sí, 123. Sihosaye-zi, 123. Sinza-manne, 9. Siya-sí, 120. Siya-ti, 120. Sule anén, 74. Sule-anén-yINDEX. 161 Kohumba-mal, 101. Kohumba-melliyam, 101. Kohumba-múl-potta, 100. Kohumba-potta, 100. Kohumba-tél, 100. Koti-kám-babila, 58. Kudu-mirish-múl-potta, 78. Kumba-la-putta, 92. Kundrikam, 97. Lokka-bélli, 87. Mahá-bélli, 87. Mahá-nimbá-atta, 99. Mahá-nimbá-múl-potta, 99. Mair-mánikam, 58. Más-anká, 109. Mudraká, 109. Mudra-palam, 109. Neranchi, 74. Neranchi-kola, 74. Neranji, 74. Nimba-gadi, 100. Nimba-kola, 101. Nimba-kotta, 101. Nimba-mal, 101. Nimba-melliyam, 101. Nimba-múl-potta, 100. Nimba-tél, 101. Nimba-gaha-potta, 100. Punji-bélli, 84. Rasa-kinda, 9. Rata-dummula, 93. Rata-kekuna, 37. Sáppu, 8. Shén-kotte, 124. Sirivadi-babila-múl, 57. Suddu-abbí, 24. Tè-kóla, 48. Tólá-bíj, 66. Vachanabhi, 1. Vellich-cha-mudra-palam, 110. Venivel, 11.
