Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. VOL. VII. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM BOMBAY, SIND, BEHAR, AJMERE, COORG, BALUCHISTAN, AND BURMA TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74910413.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894. Price Two Rupees Eight Annas.
IP/DA.1 V 52. d. IP
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. VOL. VII. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM BOMBAY, SIND, BERAR, AJMERE, COORG, BALUCHISTAN, AND BURMA TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74910425.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894. Price Two Rupees Eight Annas.
QUESTIONS FRAMED BY THE COMMISSION. Evidence before the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-94. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY. 1. What opportunities have you had of obtain- ing information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs in regard to which your answers are framed? 2. In the most recent work on ganja (Dr. Prain's report of 21st June 1893) it is stated that "in India three narcotic articles are obtained naturally from hemp. These are, siddhi or bhang, charas, and ganja."They are thus defined by Dr. Prain: "Siddhi, bhang, subji or patti are different names applied to the dry leaves of the hemp plant, whether male or female and whether cultivated or uncultivated. "Charas is the name applied to the resinous matter which forms the active principle of the plant when collected separately. "Ganja consists of the dried flowering tops of cultivated female hemp plants which have become coated with resin in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely. The formation of seeds is prevented by the destruction of all the male plants. "Three varieties of ganja are sold, Ganja is usually manufactured by being trodden under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops assume a flattened shape. This is 'Flat ganja,' The other sort of ganja is not trodden, but rolled under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops are less closely adherent, and assume a rounded shape. This is 'Round ganja,' The flower-tops of ganja detached from the twigs, whether of flat or of round ganja, and whether the detachment has been accidental or deliberate, form 'chur' or 'Broken ganja.' " May these definitions be accepted for your pro- vince? By what name is each of these products locally known? CHAPTER II. CULTIVATION OR GROWTH OF HEMP. (Cannabis sativa.) 3. In what districts of which you have know- ledge does the hemp plant grow spontaneously? Mention any in which it is abundant. 4. By what different names is it known? Do these refer to exactly the same plant? 5. What special conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, elevation above sea level, etc., are necessary to the growth of the wild hemp? 6. Is the growth of the wild hemp ordinarily dense, or scattered? 7. Is there any cultivation of the hemp plant in your provinceii it quite lose its effect in time? How long does it keep good with ordinary care? What are the causes of deterioration? What special measures can be taken to prevent deterioration? CHAPTER IV. TRADE. (Statistics to be obtained from Government offices.) CHAPTER V. CONSUMPTION OR USE. NOTE.iii 38. Have the three different preparations of ganja (round and flat ganja and "chur") any different effects in kind or degree on consumers? 39. Is the smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant in any way a less injurious form of consumption than drinking or eating the same or any other preparation? Give reasons for your answer. 40. (a) Is the use of any of these drugs prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by any school of Native Doctors? (b) Are any of them used in the treatment of cattle disease? 41. May the moderate use of charas, ganja, or bhang be beneficial in its effectsiv 60. If ganja is produced in your province, do you think that the cultivation of the ganja-bear- ing plant and the process of its preparation are sufficiently controlled, or that the system requires modification in any respect? If so, in what respects and why? 61. If charas is produced in your province, do you think the cultivation of the hemp plant for its production and the process of preparation are sufficiently controlled, or that the system requires modification in any respect. If so, in what res- pects and why? 62. Do you think that the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should be in any way controlled? Would this be feasible? If so, indicate the method by which such control could be exercised. 63. Have you any objection to the present system of a wholesale/b retail vend of 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang or preparations of them? If you have any objections, state them at length, and indicate the improvements you suggest. 64. Have you any objections to the existing regulations governing the export and import of these drugs or of their preparations from and into your province, or their transport within the pro- vince? Give reasons for your answer. 65. In your opinion is the taxation of 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang reasonable with reference (a) to each other, (b) to alcoholic or other intoxicants? Give reasons for any alterations in the amount of taxation of any of these articles which you may suggest. 66. In your opinion is it necessary that there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja (such as the "flat," "round," and "broken" ganja produced in Bengal), or for ganja grown in different localities? If so, on what principle? 67. Having regard to the ultimate incidence of the tax on the consumer, have you any objections to the present method of taxing 1 ganja/2 charas/3 bhang ? 68. Are there in your province houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs or their prepar- ations where they may be consumed on the premi- ses? What is your view in respect to such houses or shops? 69. Are the wishes of the people consulted or considered in any way before a shop is opened in any locality? What measures are taken for this purpose? Ought local public opinion to be thus considered? 70. Are there any facts regarding the importa- tion or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States into your province to which you wish to draw attention? Is duty really paid in respect to the ganja and other hemp drugs used? Or is there any general use of untaxed drugs, and by whom?
INDEX To BOMBAY, SIND, BERAR, AJMERE-MERWARA, COORG, BALU- CHISTAN, AND BURMA WITNESSES. No. Name. Designation. Page. BOMBAY. 1 Honourable T. D. Mackenzievi No. Name. Designation. Page. BOMBAYvii No. Name. Desìgnation. Page. BOMBAYviii No. Name. Designation. Page. BOMBAYix No. Name. Designation. Page. SINDX No. Name. Designation. Page. BERARxi No. Name. Designation. Page. BURMA. 1 Colonel H. R. Spearman * Commissioner 375 2 Lieutenant-Colonel C. B Cooke * Ditto 376 3 J. E. Bridges * Ditto 377 4 Major B. A. N. Parrott Offg. ditto 380 5 A. R. Birks Commissioner ib. 6 J. K. Macrae xii No. Name. Designation. Page. BURMAINDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. EVIDENCE OF BOMBAY WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of the HON'BLE MR. T. D. MACKENZIE, Commissioner of Customs, Salt, Abkari and Opium, Bombay. Oral evidence. Question 1.2 say what measures have been taken by Govern- ment to ascertain the effects of the drugs. Hitherto the matter has not attracted attention. I base my opinion of the injurious effects of the drug on the statistics of the lunatic asylums, and the understood fact that violent crimes are committed under the influence of the drugs, i.e., by people who have primed themselves with them. But I am not able to say that the statistics in regard to insanity are trustworthy; nor have I, in twenty- eight years' experience, personally come across a case of violent crime of this kind. The Collector is responsible for the excise administration of the district. He does not visit the ganja shops with the object of seeing the effect of the drugs; nor does he collect the social wrecks caused by the drugs for purposes of inspection. I know of no general instructions issued by Government to undertake such inspection; nor, previous to this Commission, were any steps taken to cause medi- cal men to inform themselves of the effects of the drugs. Since restriction must proceed on a knowledge of the effects of the drug, it is certainly the duty of Government to satisfy itself as to these effects before introducing any restric- tion of a prohibitive character. In the past action of Government there may have been a desire to protect the morals of the people; but Government action has been prompted principally by the right to derive revenue from this source. The drugs are reputed to stimulate and afterwards to intoxicate. I have never seen any one intoxicated from the drugs. I have seen plenty of natives intoxicated by toddy or country spirit. Intoxication is not harmless. I nevertheless regard the hemp drugs as more injurious, because they are by repute more maddening and more productive of crime. In the Kolaba Asylum returns there appear seventy- two admissions from spirit drinking and sixty- two from hemp drugs during the five years from 1888 to 1892. As the number of consumers of alcohol is much the larger, the proportion of in- sanity would tell against the hemp drugs. I cannot make any distinction between the effects of ganja, bhang and charas. Charas in this presi- dency is hardly used at all, and ganja is, accord- ing to my information, worse than bhang. I think the taxation of the hemp drugs in this presidency might be raised; but the question would require detailed and careful examination. The ganja of this presidency is roughly manufac- tured, though the cultivation is careful enough. Referring to paragraph 10 of my memorandum, I regard the revenue assessment as disposing of the question of taxation as regards the cultivators. A direct tax would necessitate the adoption of a system of distinct wholesale vend. I see no objection to that as long as the tax does not fall on the cultivators. The variations in the retail price shown in paragraph 8 of my memorandum are no doubt excessive, and seem to indicate that there is room for taxation to regulate the whole- sale value of the drug. But it is to be noted that the cheap rates prevail in districts where the plant is cultivated. I think it reasonable that the consumers in the neighbourhood of cultivation should get the drug somewhat cheaper than con- sumers at a distance. I think that the maximum of possession (40 tolas) might be very materially reduced. I certainly do not think that this sort of restriction is ineffectual. It has not been found so in the case of opium. There is no con- sumption on the premises in the mufassal. I think it ought to be prohibited if it is found to exist. I do not think the provision in clause 6 of the license Form A, sanctioned with Government Resolution No. 4421, dated 23rd August 1880, results in causing the markets to be flooded by the outgoing contractor with the drugs sold at a ruinously cheap rate. The man has sense enough to avoid laying in a very large stock of a perish- able article. The large contract system, I have advocated in paragraph 11 of my memorandum, has the advantage that it enlists the farmer in the cause of excise. Government has a respon- sible man to deal with, who is more to be trusted than a number of petty shop-keepers. I think that it is desirable that Government should exer- cise the supervision over the drugs provided for in clause 5 of Form A. If a wholesome quality of drug is not ensured at the shops, people will be driven to get it by smuggling. The same principle applies as in the case of opium; but I would not go so far as to furnish a guarantee of the quality of the drug. The object is to pro- tect the excise revenue. 2. Evidence of MR. G. B. REID, Commissioner, Northern Division, Ahmedabad. Oral evidence. I have been in the Civil Service for twenty-six years. I have served in the Central Division in Sind, and also in the Northern Division, of which I am now Commissioner. My general impression in regard to the use of the hemp drugs is that in Northern Guzerat the use of bhang and ganja is very insignificant. The latter is confined to religious characters, such as bairagis, etc., and people, such as gamblers and others, of the loafing classes. The consumption is much larger in the city of Ahmedabad than in the districts, but is rather there confined to such class- es as I have indicated than to the permanent local population. Ahmedabad is a great centre for travel- ling mendicants and has a large loafing city popu- lation. I would remark that I have not been asked to make any special enquiries, and my statement deals with my general impression. I am informed that ganja is more used in Surat than in North- ern Guzerat, though in Surat also the consump- tion is not very large. I know little of other parts. Bhang is consumed by much better classes of people. It is used by the best classes, principally Hindus. It is not confined to any class. The consumption is not large; but occasional use is to be met with among all classes. It appears to be principally used as a cooling drink in the hot wea- ther with cooling spices, hardly at all in Guzerat for purposes of intoxication. There appears to be no religious prejudice against bhang, and no shame attaching to its use. The only class3 I think that there is a tendency to substitute alcohol for drugs among the lower classes also: but it is more expensive than they. Charas is hardly known in these parts. Yakuti is also hardly known. Majum is used to a slight extent. In regard to effects, I have made no special en- quiry, but from all I hear, the use of bhang is prac- tically innocuous. You hear of a "bandani" of ganja, i.e., a man who has the habit. You seldom hear of this with bhang. It is also said that jew- ellers when they have delicate appraising to do, clear their wits with bhang. This quality is fre- quently attributed to bhang. I have myself had no cases of ganja among my servants or depend- ents, but I know there is a general impression that ganja is bad, especially if you cannot satisfy the great appetite it produces. I have been told this. I have been told in asylums that some cases were due to ganja. I have also seen dissipated people of the loafer and fakir classes who had the red eyes and generally dissolute appearance popu- larly ascribed to ganja. But I have had no person- al experience in my official capacity of the effects of the drugs among the people. There can be no doubt of the general popular impression which as- cribes this dissipated appearance to ganja, but I have never known any popular opinion ascribing insanity to ganja. I have been told that in asy- lums only. I have had no cases myself in which insanity was attributed to ganja, i.e., in which that connection was brought to my notice. I find that the intelligent natives scoff at the idea of a man preparing himself by bhang and ganja for any desperate act. I myself have seen no connection between hemp and crime. I remember the Ah- medabad case referred to by Colonel Humfrey be- fore the Commission the other day. I was clearly of opinion that there was no connection between bhang and the crime, and I sent the case up for revision. The sentence was altered from one day to seven years. I know of no case in which a connection between hemp drugs and crime has been established. I wish, however, not to be understood as saying that the effect of ganja is not deleterious. I think it is deleterious. I mean that the effect of the ex- cessive use is deleterious. I think that excessive use is prevalent among the fakir classes and such disreputable classes as I have already indicated. It is not prevalent at all among the people gene- rally. I do not think that prohibition is at all necessary; and as regards the part of the country with which I am acquainted, I do not think that the Government policy should aim at further re- striction. The drug is mixed up with the religious ideas of the people, especially in regard to the followers of Shiva. Any actual restriction would thus be resented, and it is uncalled for. In regard to the effects of such restriction on the habits of the people, prohibition or severe restriction would tend to drive the people, perhaps, to opium, and certainly to liquor. I see no advantage in this whatever. Excessive consumption of drugs is checked by the difficulties of preparation. This is a natural restriction, which operates on the people generally. I think that the present system of administra- tion in regard to these drugs seems to have grown up in a haphazard way. But it seems to be work- ing well, and I am unable to see necessity at pre- sent for much modification. I think that Govern- ment is entitled to control the growth of the hemp drug and so to regulate supply. I should say also that there would be no hardship in localising cul- tivation, and no primâ facie reason why it should not be done. The production in Native States would also have to be considered. I may add, to prevent misconception, that some of the ganja cultivation shown in the returns, e.g., Broach and Surat, is really only bhang cultivation. The ela- borate cultivation of ganja is quite different. I have not studied the matter carefully; but, so far as I see at present, I see no adequate reason for so taxing the drug as materially to raise the price. I do not know any reason why taxation and the price of the drugs should be less here than in other provinces; but I have not per- sonally studied this aspect of the subject. Primâ facie, there seems to me no reason for different rates in different provinces. Of course the faci- lities for smuggling would have to be considered. As to the best means of raising taxation, I should prefer not to give an opinion at present, as I have had no notice that I should be asked about these details. 3.Evidence of MR. G. W. VIDAL, Chief Secretary to the Government of Bombay. Oral evidence. Question 1.4 unnecessary and impolitic. In saying this I refer to ganja as well as bhang. As at present advised, I do not think that adequate cause has been shown for any further restriction in this presidency than at present exists. Cultivation is restricted by the smallness of demand, and also by the restric- tions on sale. It is not now so extensive as to call for further restriction. My attention has not, however, been specially drawn to the extent of cultivation as compared with Bengal, etc. I think that the system which has been in force for the last thirteen years has worked well, and I am not prepared to suggest any modifications of that system at present. I have seen the memoran- dum prepared by the Hon5 obtained, but the general opinion is that the crop is a hungry one. The seed is sown about the end of July in straight rows at intervals of a foot or more between seeds, About one seer of seed per acre is said to be required. It germinates in a week, and in a month attains the height of 18 inches. Weeding is carefully attended to, and if rain falls, irrigation is required every ten days or so if ganja is wanted. The lower branches are removed in order to force a good top. About six weeks after planting an expert is put on, who seems to be rather an expensive item in the cost of cultivation, getting Rs. 8 or Rs. 9 per month and looking after two or three acres. His business is to exterminate pernicious plants, about the nature of which the ordinary agriculturist appears to have rather hazy notions, and if he finds symptoms of mischief and can trace no local cause, he has to search the country round about for it. So far as I, with small botanical knowledge, can judge from the examination of specimens, the plant is both monosexual and bisexual, and the plants that have to be exterminated are the male and the bisexuals, since ganja is alone formed by the non-fecundated flower-top of the female plant. There are several local names for the plant in all its kinds and stages, and when suffering from peculiar diseases that are said to attack it. I can only vouch for the following, which have come under my observation: 6 pared, and to the produce of the seeded plants and of male plants when the crop has been grown for seed. In the latter case the tops are laid on a floor and the seed is beaten out with sticks or trodden out by foot. The seeds are separated from the mass by means of a sieve, and the balance of broken leaves, etc., is called bhang. The above include all the local forms of prepar- ation of the raw drug. The question is not understood to refer to the further manufacture for consumption, which is described in answer No. 29. 16. (a) Not quite understood what is meant. If bhang drink is referred to, the answer is yes. If dry bhang, the answer is that it is prepared out-of-doors. (b) Yes. (c) Not known. 17. No particular class. The preparation of ganja and bhang is ordinary coolie work. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate. No inform- ation about charas. They become quite useless. From one to three years, according to care taken. Apparently exposure to cold and damp causes deterioration. No special measures to prevent deterioration are locally known. 19. Charas is alleged to be given to children as a substitute for opium, the use of which, as a means of quieting them, is locally prevalent. Ganja is locally used for all the purposes for which bhang can be used, i.e., it is eaten in the shape of majum, yakuti, and gulkand, and drunk in the form of ghota. 20. The use of charas is too insignificant to enable comparison to be instituted. What is obtained is smoked by such ordinary smokers as can lay hands on it. 21. Only flat ganja is known locally. 22. The only charas to be had locally is that described in answer to question 15. It appears to be the perquisite of the labourers to whose hands it sticks and is by them parted with to local smokers for what they can get for it, or is used by themselves. (See answer 19). It is not sold at the shops. 23. It is not known to be smoked locally. 24. According to officially collected information, out of a population of 888,755, there are only 127 bhang drinkers and 168 majum eaters, of which latter 151 live at Ahmednagar, where the only majum shop is situated. The principal drinkers are said to be Marwaris. Majum is eaten by the wealthier classes, and is said to be the special dainty of wrestlers. 25. The returns of retail sale at shops show a fairly steady comsumption. A hasty census taken throughout the district indicates that the number of smokers, in a population of 888,755, is 6,134, or. 69 per cent. The number of drinkers and eaters is utterly insignificant. In the absence of any conspicuous cause for increase or decrease, and considering that the habit of smoking is not con- sidered creditable, I am inclined to think no change either way is to be suspected. 26. The only information that it has been possible to collect relates to (a) and (b). Of 6,134 ganja smokers, 372 are excessive smokers. Of 127 bhang drinkers, 10 drink excessively. Of 168 majum eaters, 16 eat excessively. 27. In the chapter on "Population, " in volume XVII (Ahmednagar) of the Bombay Gazetteer, it will be found that the habitual use of the drug is predicated of a large proportion of the races and classes described there. I have had some of the ganja shops watched for a week, and find represented among the purchasers not only most of the people to whom the habit is ascribed in the Gazetteer, but also a number of classes in the de- scription of which the Gazetteer makes no mention of hemp. The following is a combined list of classes of consumers, as extracted from the book, and noticed during the week's observation of the shops. The former are entered in Roman, the latter in italics; and where the observation of the shop has confirmed the assertions of the Gazetteer, an asterisk has been added to the name: Brahmans. Deshasth.* Marwaris.* Paradeshi.* Kost. Traders. Gujrathi Wani.* Komtis. Lad Wanis.* Marwaris. Jangams. Craftsmen. Beldars.* Gaondis.* Ghisadis. Jain Shimpis.* Kattais. Khatris. Koshtis.* Buruds. Lohars.* Mochis.* Otaris. Halvais. Saltangars. Sonars.* Sutars.* Tambats. Vadars.* Kaikadis. Kasars. Kumbhars. Niralis. Telis. Padamsalis. Rangaris. Servants. Parits.* Nhavis. Shepherds. Gavlis. Dhangars. Labourers. Kahars. Bhois. Lamans. Vanjaris. Depressed classes. Bhangis.* Mangs.* Mhars.* Chambhars Beggars. Manbhaos.* Gondhalis. Gosavis. Kolhatis. Bairagis. Fakirs. Bharadis. Musalmans. Kasabs. Takars. Pinjaras. Servants. Landowners. Low Deccanis. Ghair Mahadis. ( My information from the shops does not give sub- divisions, but the largest number of purchasers in any one caste were in Musalmans.) Husbandmen. Kunabis. Malis. Marathas. Musicians. Ghadshis. Guravs. It is impossible without an exhaustive enquiry; of which time and opportunity have not allowed, to give a satisfactory answer to the latter part of this question. The purchasers at the shops gave many reasons for their use of the drug. Some, the most habitual user, said they sought intoxication; others wanted it for the relief of pain in joint, stomach, head, etc.; others sought relief from fatigue or strength to labour. The majority of the purchasers appear to have been men of the labouring classes, i.e., husbandmen and coolies, and poor Musalmans; and craftsmen, such as weavers, goldsmiths, blacksmiths, etc., And in the majority (80 per cent.) of cases the purchase did not exceed one pice worth, which is a clear indication that the drug is a poor man's luxury. There appears to be no doubt at all that the principal consumers as a class are the begging ascetics, such as fakirs, bairagis, etc., who use from quarter pound to one pound of the drug daily. After reading the Gazetteer, I was somewhat
7 astonished at the result of the rough census of smokers and drinkers throughout the district, which gave a total of only 6,429, or about. 7 per cent. of the population. On comparing this result, however, with the retail consumption, which last year reached an average of only 1,760 toles per day, I am not inclined to think that my census is very far from correct. 28. The common weight used for petty sale is the old copper coin, the Shivrai, the average weight of which is 135 grains or three-fourths of a tola. A man who does not smoke more than this quantity (which costs one pice) per day, is classed as a moderate consumer. But many make this quantity last three or four or more days. An excessive smoker uses from half anna to four annas worth per day, but there are men who can smoke any quantity. 29. Smoking ganja.8 35. Locally there would be no difficulty in prohibiting the cultivation and import. There would probably be smuggling. Serious discon- tent would be caused among consumers, but not such as to amount to political danger. I would not anticipate recourse to alcohol, as the majority of smokers are too poor to be able to afford it. There might be recourse to opium. 36. Local statistics afford no reason. The con- sumption of alcohol is very steady. 37. All that is known locally is that charas is very much stronger than ganja. 38. No information forthcoming, except that what is locally supposed to represent chur is milder than ganja, it being either refuse or infe- rior tops. 39. Local opinion seems to be that smoking is more injurious than drinking. Ghota is consi- dered to be a cooling drink, appetising and diges- tive when taken in moderation. Smoking is said by some to heat the system and to injure the con- stitution when carried to excess, unless accompa- nied by liberal diet, in which milk and ghi are essentials. Majum is said to be largely used by professional wrestlers as a stomachic and calmer of the system. I am inclined, therefore, to suppose that eating and drinking the drug is less injuri- ous than smoking it. 40. Very little local information to be had. Ganja is said to be an ingredient in an astringent mixture, of which the medico kept other particu- lars to himself as a trade secret. Another pre- scribes it in dysentery and for loosening phlegm. It is frequently mentioned as an anodyne for scorpion sting, for which purpose it is said to be administered fried in ghi, which would be a simple form of majum. Purchasers at the shops often described themselves as buying it for pains and ailments. It is given to cattle and horses, appa- rently when off feed. 41. The answers refer to ganja. (a), (b), (c) Yes. (d) To secure concentration of attention. To appease hunger. Answers to (a) and (b) are founded on an assertions of habitual smokers and drinkers. Popular opinion is that ganja smokers escape fever and many other complaints. It is asserted that the drug is used by gold- smiths and other doers of "barik kam" to keep their minds upon the work in hand, which use seems to be parallel to the alleged use by ascetics for concentration of thought on holy things Ascetics, however, largely use the drug to appease hunger, and what would be considered excessive consumption in the case of others is moderate in theirs. I am told on good authority that native soldiers who have gambled away their pay employ the ganja pipe as a cheap substitute for food until in funds again. If bad luck lasts long outward symptoms betray them, and they catch it at orderly room. 42. The moderate use of ganja appears to be quite harmless so long as consumption is propor- tioned to liberality of diet. A plentiful diet, in- cluding copious milk and ghi, is said to render the constitution unassailable by ganja. In such cases it gives appetite, aids digestion, opens the bowels, drives away fatigue, and induces refreshing sleep. So I am told by smokers. 43. It is said that, as a rule, they are quite in- offensive. But a beggar who has acquired 'con- centration of thought' by the use of it will be a nuisance till his object is attained by receipt of alms. If this be so, it is probable that much must depend on the natural suavity of the smoker's disposition. Yet I am assured by an habitual ex- cessive smoker that it calms the temper. 44. It is described as partial intoxication, on recovery from which a feeling of freshness super- venes, fatigue vanishes, and, if sufficient is taken, hunger disappears. When taken regularly by regular livers, appetite is promoted. The after- effect appears to be desire for more, and the want of gratification produces longing and uneasiness. I attempted to gain practical information by treating a few habitual consumers to ganja and ghota, etc. After about 1½ hour, in the course of which four or five men smoked that number of pipes in company (including a pipe of Penares ganja and one of claras) and drank a couple of seers of ghota, the party withdrew apparently as sober as when they came, and saying that they had enjoyed themselves very much. One member became very garrulous; but it was probably his nature. 45. Local opinion, as far as sounded, has attri- buted none of these effects to the moderate use of ganja when accompanied by sufficient diet. My enquiries have of necessity not been extensive enough to enable me to offer remarks worth re- cording on this page. In the whole district I am told of seven cases of madness, 57 of addleheaded- ness, and 124 of impaired constitution, attributed to the use of the drug; but I have not secured details of the cases for want of time. 47 and 48. Local opinion is in the negative. 49. They are said not to be so used. Reference is made by one witness to a medicine for promot- ing vigour, in which ganja is used in combination with the ash of some metal; but his knowledge was small. 55. It is said that a novice could be caused complete stupefaction by the drug in any shape without admixture. 57. Charas is not locally known to be eaten or drunk. Ganja is locally used for the manufacture of edible and drinkable forms of the drug in the same way that perhaps bhang is used in other localities. In these forms the action is said to be slower in arrival, but longer in duration than when the drug is smoked. 58. I think it is working well. 60. I see no local reason for supposing that further control than exists is requisite. 61. The extent to which charas is produced is described in answer No. 15, and I do not think that interference is necessary. 62. There appears locally to be no reason for more control than exists. 63. No. 64. No. As far as I can judge the regulations work smoothly and successfully. 65. As far as the result of local enquiry goes, I think the taxation to be reasonable. Cases of excessive and unhealthy use of the drug amongst local residents are very rare. The moderate use appears to be harmless, and a small luxury is placed within reach of the poor. 66. I have no knowledge of the subject. Any distinction should be made to depend on the ascertained proportions of strength.
9 67. No. 68. No. They would be extremely objection- able. 69. Wishes would be consulted if occasion arose for considering the question of opening or closing a shop, as is always the case in the instances of liquor, or opium, or toddy shops. Local public opinion certainly ought to be con- sidered. 70. No. I have no reason to suspect any abuse. Oral evidence. Question 1.10 The plant is not cultivated in the Konkan as a field crop, nor even as a market crop in gardens, but it occurs in small numbers in many private gardens, and I have seen specimens that seemed to me to be self-sown, and afterwards taken care of by the gardeners. This cultivation is some- thing like that of tobacco in English gardens and not much more important. 20. I can't recommend the Commission to trouble themselves about this district, where the consumption of hemp drugs by local natives is unimportant. 33. The habitual consumption is looked on as discreditable in the Thana district. 34. Probably not very serious. I don't think it is even found. necessary in jails to allow these drugs, though I have known eight ounces of alcohol per diem allowed in one case (gradually diminished to vanishing point with complete ease), and we allow Burmese convicts tobacco. 35. You can prohibit anything, but the prohi- bition of so portable an article could not easily be enforced. If it were, I suppose the few who now use it here would take to dhatura (a common weed), opium, or country spirit. 36. I should say not; the consumption of country spirit in this (very drunken) district is apparently diminishing. 45. Hemp Drugs Crime11 smoker, but I do not know anything about his smoking on that particular oc- casion." On the other hand, another witness, Mr. Dyer's butler, said in evi- dence: " I have known accused about four or five months. I do not know any- thing about his using. ganja." There is no other reference to hemp drugs in all the evidence except in the statement of the Assistant Surgeon, who on 4th Novem- ber 1887, said: "I know the accused Kun- jandas since the 9th ultimo, when he was lodged in the Alibag jail * * *. I found him on that occasion to be suffering from narcotism; and from the subsequent observation, I am of opinion that this was produced by the excessive use of some pre- paration of hemp, probably ganja." This Assistant Surgeon was not examined as to the grounds of this opinion, but generally remarked that "the whole of the symp- toms were consistent with a severe bout of ganja-smoking, lasting up to 8th ultimo inclusive." There is no mention anywhere of the prisoner asking for bhang; but in a letter of the Assistant Surgeon (not in his evidence) it is stated that the man asked for ganja and tobacco. (II) The Panwell case.12 The rainfall varies from 120 inches on the Ghâts to 25 in the eastern talukas. 6. There are so few plants in this district, I cannot say. I have only seen one plant, about 8½ feet long, with branches proceeding from a cen- tral stalk. The flowers were embedded amongst densely packed small leaves. 7. See answer 4. Only ambadi and tag are cultivated for fibres. No drug is made from them in Belgaum. No ganja is cultivated, nor are drugs made here from wild ganja. 8. There has been none. 9. Tag is sown as a whole field crop. Ambadi is sown as a row crop in fields of bajri and tur and some others. 10. None in this district. 11. and 12. Not in Belgaum. 13. There is no restriction on cultivating the ganja plant in Belgaum. The talukas near the Ghâts are said to be unsuitable. Those inland from the Ghâts can grow ganja and fibre hemps. 14. None. They are imported ready-made, that is to say, ganja (flower tips) is imported in the form of dried and compressed tips. 15. Majum is a sweetmeat looking like slabs of cream toffee. It is made of powdered ganja mixed with sugar and ghee boiled. It is eaten as a sweetmeat. Ganja itself is wetted, then rubbed in the hand to a sticky pulp, then mixed with tobacco and smoked. Bhang is powdered ganja mixed with spices, sugar and milk or water, and is drunk as a cooling mixture. It is called " ghota " in Marathi; Kanarese name not known. " Phake " is roasted ganja powdered and mixed with sugar and spices, eaten by male professional singers. 16. Bhang or ghota can be prepared by people in their houses. It can be prepared wherever ganja is grown. 17. There is no particular class. The licensees are Musalmans, Marathas, Jains and others. 18. It is said they keep for one year, but lose their effect as drugs entirely after two and-a- half years. This is stated by the ganja farmer for this district. No measures are known to prevent deterioration, nor are the causes known. The import of ganja in this district has been as follows, for the period for which information is available: - Year.QUANTITY.Revenue to Government. Maunds.Seers. R 1887-88 391304,213 1888-89 154...4,052 1889-90 198...3,287 1890-91 204253,301 1891-92 19453,312 1982-93 183184,109 19. Ganja itself is only smoked. Charas is not used here. 20. Ganja is smoked chiefly by bairagis, fakirs and gosains, and to a limited extent by all classes. It is sparingly used by a few in all classes. 21. Only flat ganja is used here for smoking. 22. None here. 23. No. 24. A few of all classes drink bhang (ghota). It is chiefly used by persons in good circumstances. Majum sweetmeat is also eaten by a few of all classes. 25. It has decreased in this district since 1887- 88 owing to the completion of the Southern Maratha Railway and the migration of the labourers thereon employed elsewhere. 26. This can only be guessed at. Perhaps13 (b) Also to give staying-power and lessen the effect of exposure. (c) Not known here. (d) Checks diarrh14 believe that their usual drink of bhang water sharpens their faculties and enables them to work better. Lastly, many resort to ganja smoking as a cure for rheumatism, indigestion, and certain other chronic diseases, and also to allay mental depression. More than one-half of the consumers belong to the poorer classes. 28. Ganja15 I am inclined to think it will only lead to the formation of clubs, which will have the disadvan- tage of less publicity. 69. No objection has ever been taken in this dis- trict to a ganja-bhang shop. If one was made, it would be attended to; but there is not the same feeling as there is against liquor or toddy shops. 70. Large quantities of the drug were smuggled in small parcels from the Baroda territory in former times; but since February 1892, when the sale was brought under control and a farming system introduced by His Highness the Gaekwar, smuggling has almost ceased. Oral evidence. Question 32.16 remember seeing a person intoxicated by ganja. I only know ganja intoxication by description, and it has been described to me as not dissimilar to that caused by alcohol. I have seen a great many cases of drunkenness from toddy. It must, I suppose, injure a person to get intoxicated from alcohol in any form. I do not know of any adulteration of the drugs. There does not appear to me to be any necessity for Government to take measures to prevent adulteration. I think 40 tolas is an unnecessarily high maximum for legal possession of ganja. I think five would be rather too low, owing to the shops being scat- tered; but it would be sufficient in average cases. Question 68.17 forty tolas is too high, and I would reduce that to five tolas. I think it is a good thing to have some shops in Bombay city, where the drugs are consumed on the premises. It keeps the consumers under notice. The shops are bound to close at a certain hour, and the consumers to behave in an orderly manner. This tends to regulate the practice, and control the habits of consumers. The closing of the chandu and madak shops is said to have really increased the number from 14 shops to about 150 clubs. The latter are not open to inspection or visit by the authorities. As a matter of fact, too, consumption of ganja within licensed shops is really small, and shows no serious evil. In statement K on page 16 of my memorandum the exports are of Bombay ganja, i.e., of ganja produced in the Bombay presidency. " Foreign Indian Ports" are mainly ports in Kathiawar. I believe that all the ganja exported is grown in the province. There was export ascribed to the Central Provinces; but this was found to be a mistake. The ganja exported has paid the trans- port duty on removal from the districts in which it is grown. I believe that in ordinary magisterial work there is no connection between hemp drugs and crime. But there are certain crimes18 25. As already stated, I infer from the higher sums paid for the right to sell the drug that the use of ganja is increasing, but I can assign no cause except a probable improvement in income. Mr. Artal states that the habit of smoking ganja is fostered by ascetics, and as they move about more rapidly now with the improved means of communication, the increase may be partly accounted for in this manner. 26. I can make only the roughest guesses at these proportions. Of the ganja consumers, I should think 10 per cent, are habitual excessive consumers, the rest being habitual moderate con- sumers, there being practically no occasional consu- mers at all of the drug in that form. Almost all the consumers of bhang in the form of ghota seem to be occasional moderate consumers. 27. I can give no information on this point in addition to what is stated above. 28. Ganja only habitually used19 which the plant is grown to an extent sufficient to meet the local consumption are exempt. If the duty were charged only on importation from places outside British India, there would be less objection, for the several British districts would then be on the same footing as regards duty, whether the plant is cultivated in them or not. But the fairest method is to charge an excise duty on the article produced in British India, and a corresponding import duty on the article import- ed from places outside British India. In the first instance the rate of excise and import duty should be low, but not so low as the existing duty on transport, the incidence of which is under 1/33 of a pie per tola. Also the minimum amount of duty leviable should not be so much as at present. I should think that a rate of 8 annas per seer of ganja, which would be little more than a pie per tola, would be an exceedingly moderate rate with reference to the present duties on spirit and toddy. I do not know whether the strength of bhang differs from that of ganja so much as to require a separate rate. Of course charas would need a rate for itself. I consider that it would probably be practicable and desirable to apply to ganja and bhang the system now in force in most districts with regard. to toddy mutatis mutandis20 being the means of the consumer. Physical aches and pains, mental depression, general joylessness of life among the more indigent classes, the force of bad example, are all incentives to get tempo- rary rest and oblivion. 28. (a) About ½ tola, costing ¼ anna. (b) Double or treble that quantity. 29. Tobacco is generally mixed with ganja to improve the flavour. Pepper, poppy-seed, almonds, cardamoms, and sometimes sugar and milk, are mixed with bhang-water according to fancy and taste, and with the object of rendering it more palatable and warmer to the stomach. I am told that dhatura is occasionally mixed with charas to enhance its inebriating powers. 30. Bhang and ganja are usually taken in com- pany, though some incorrigibles prefer ganja smoking by themselves. The habit is mainly confined to the male sex, who contract it at any time of life. Children seldom consume any of these drugs, though they may be allowed a sip of bhang-water as ours are of wine as a treat on special occasions. 31. Not more so than in the case of alcohol- drinkers in respect to bluing. Much more fre- quently the ganja smoker becomes a slave to the habit and falls into excess. 32. I understand that Shiva or Mahadev is regarded by Hindus as the special patron of bhang, and that it is always imbibed on his sacred days and festivals. I have not heard that orgies are indulged in on these occasions; and, as they are infrequent, I do not think they are likely to have any effect in forming habits. 33. Ganja smoking is regarded among all classes as a degrading and disgraceful habit. This feeling is due partly to the classes of people who consume it owing to its cheapness, and partly to the baneful effects which result from its exces- sive use. No such stigma applies to the taking of bhang. The hemp plant is not an object of wor- ship to my knowledge. 34. I am of opinion that it would for obvious reasons. In this district I do not think more than 5 per cent. of the population would be affected. 35. Absolute prohibition would certainly entail smuggling, which could not be stopped. The discontent would be sore among the classes affect- ed, but not such as to amount to a political danger. I don't believe in the possibility of absolute effective prohibition of the use of ganja and bhang; but if it could be, alcohol, I believe, would be the substitute. The remaining alter- native, opium, operates as a sedative, and could hardly be a fit substitute for hemp drugs, which are excitant and irritant in their nature. 36. See answer to question No. 25. 37. Only that they are much more rapid and far more powerful. 39. I should say that ganja and charas smoking with or without admixture are much more injurious than bhang-drinking. I know of no edible preparation made from the hemp plants. 40. Taken on a full stomach, bhang and ganja are esteemed to be good for digestion and as appetisers to brace the nerves and sharpen the intellect. Bhang is used in cases of rheumatism and fever. I do not know that they are used in cases of cattle disease, though bhang is given to cattle to increase their supply of milk. 41. See above. 42. No decided answer can be given. The effects depend upon the temperament of the taker, the quantity in which and the times when the stimulant is taken. Generally it may be said that, like smoking tobacco or drinking alcohol, it is comparatively harmless if taken with care, mode. ration, and due consideration of the consumer's constitutional peculiarities. No hard-and-fast rule can be laid down. 43. Quite so. 46. The excessive ganja smoker may be detected by his emaciated body, his dull lustre- less eye, his listlessness and feebleness. He becomes after a few years enfeebled in body and mind, and even a worse wreck than the victim of alcohol. Appetite goes, and at last the madden- ing fumes become his sole resort for temporary relief and oblivion. 47. No. 49. Not to my knowledge, though it is not doubtful that excessive ganja smoking will in time affect the virile powers. 51. None whatever. 53. Men, no doubt, become highly excited and lose their mental balance by excessive indulgence. It was commonly reported that the man who at- tacked and was shot by Mr. W. Woodward, Col- lector of Nasik, some years ago, was frenzied by the use of hemp drugs. 54. I know of no such cases; but it is said that persons about to run "amuck" do so to fortify themselves to get the steam up. 55. I have never heard of bhang or ganja being so used without the admixture of dhatura or some other potent drug, 58. I consider the system is as simple and effectual as it can well be, and I know of no measures which can be suggested for its improve- ment. 59. I think, perhaps that the maximum quantity allowed to be in any one's possession (40 tolas) is too high, and its reduction to one-fourth that amount would not be considered a hard- ship. 63 and 64. None. 68. No. 69. The consumption is so insignificant in this district that local option has seldom to be taken into consideration. As Collector of the district, however, I should ascertain the wishes of the people before establishing a new shop in any locality. 70. I should say that smuggling was rare and that the tax is usually paid.
21 12. Evidence of MR. A. CUMINE, Acting Collector, Dhulia, Khandesh. 1. Personally I have not had any, being a new- comer to the district. The Commission having desired that I should direct my attention specially to the question of to what extent, if any, the wild tribes of Khandesh are concerned in this matter, my answers refer to them alone. It will be seen that they are very little concerned indeed. My information has been obtained from mamlatdars, as I could not make personal enquiries in the short time allowed me. 2. Information for the district of Khandesh in general will be given by Rao Bahadur Sitaram Damodhar. 3. In the tracts inhabited by wild tribes the hemp plant does not, so far as I know, grow spontaneously at all. 7. In the tracts inhabited by the wild tribes there is no cultivation of the hemp plant at all. 13. No. 14. None are prepared in the tracts in which the wild tribes live. The wild tribes to whom the following answers refer are22 23. Bhang is not used in the district. 25. The use of ganja is largely on the increase, judging from the increase in the amount imported under passes, which is the only licit means of ob- taining it. 26. I can give no idea of these proportions. 27. Bad company and bowel complaints are said universally to be the two causes which lead per- sons to acquire the habit. 28. (a) For moderate consumers I would fix the maximum limit at ½ tola a day, costing 3 pies. I would put 1/16 as the average, costing ¾ pie. (b) Two tolas a day, price one anna, as the aver- age. 29. Sugar, jagri, tobacco, milk, poppy-heads and spices, according to the means of the con- sumer. 30. It is much more usual to take it in com- pany than alone. Women and children never take it otherwise than as medicine, except prostitutes. 31. It is extremely difficult to break off the habit, and it cannot be done suddenly. 32. There are no social or religious customs re- quiring the use of the drug. 33. It is generally considered disreputable to use the drug otherwise than as medicine. 34. The general opinion is that the practice cannot be suddenly stopped without danger to the life or person of an habitual consumer. 35. The consumers would attempt to import it ilicitly. Opium, or perhaps liquor, might be used by some in its place. 36. No. 37. Charas is not used here. 38. Only one sort is used here. 39. Opinions differ altogether on this. 40. It is prescribed for diarrh23 a negligible quantity, and (d) occasional excessives not 1 in 10,000 of the population. 27. The well or fairly well-to-do supply the majority of (a). Many of them, especially Mar- wadis, like ganja as a drink in hot weather; many I have no doubt take it as an aphrodisiac. A habitual moderate consumer told me he was much given to going to pilgrimages, and acquired the habit among the devotees at Nasík. Musalman fakirs and Hindu devotees (mendicant religious) constitute a large proportion of the consumers. 28. (a) 1/6 tola per diem; one pie per diem. (b) No information. 29. (a) Tobacco for smoking. For eating and drinking, see answer 19. (b) No information. Dhatura is not used. Ganja is mixed with other ingredients because it is too strong to take neat. Bhang massala is not known here. 30. Generally in solitude. There is (or was) a kind of private ganja-smoking club in Pen. Mainly confined to male sex and to adult life. Children do not usually consume it. 31. (a) and (b) Yes. (c) Smoking, I should say but little; eating and drinking, none. 32. (1) At the Muharram, the Shimga or Holi, and the Gawri (Ganesh Chaturthi), those who dance and sing and otherwise exert themselves in the procession, etc., are wont to take a drink of the milk (or water) of the cocoanut sweetened with jaggery and strengthened with ganja. This is to make them excited and lively. (2) On the Maha Shivratri, the god Shiva, being an ascetic, has a liquid preparation of things to which he is addicted, including ganja, poured over his image. (3) Kunbis are wont to make offerings at the .time of threshing to the local divinities of their fields. In a few (not more than 10 per cent.) of such offerings a small quantity of ganja is included. (1) is not essential; (2) and (3) are probably considered so by the worshippers. (1) is generally temperate, and not likely to lead to the formation of the habit, nor otherwise injurious; (2) and (3) are purely ceremonial. 33. Generally with disapproval, quâ smoking; drinking with indifference. I do not think there is any religious public opinion against ganja smoking. Fakirs and Hindu devotees (to whom apparently all things are permissible) are generally smokers. Social public opinion is against others smoking. The sentiment is attributable to the native aversion (possibly partly religious) to the use of intoxicants and excitants. The hemp plant is not worshipped. 34. Yes; a habitual moderate consumer has smoked his whiff of ganja (he tells me) daily for 30 years before dinner, and without it he would neither enjoy his dinner nor sleep at night. To occasional consumers the privation would be small. For numbers, see answer 26. 35. (a) Hardly. (b) Probably. (c) Not without much trouble and doubtful success. (d) and (e) No. (f) It is impossible to say, except by guess. I guess that to some extent it would. 36. No. 37. Note24 15. Evidence of MR. M. C. GIBB, First Assistant Collector, Ahmednagar. 51 and 52. Hemp is not largely consumed in any form by bad characters, and when it is, their consuming hemp has nothing to do with their committing crime. The largest hemp consumers are probably religious mendicants; some of these men may be bad characters, but if they are, their being so has no connection with their con- suming hemp. 53. I have never known a case in which crime of any sort could be traced to indulgence in hemp. I have consulted eleven of the other magistrates of this district: one of them says he has known of a man's cutting off his wife's nose under the influence of hemp which he had been smoking; he adds that he thinks consumption of hemp is not sufficient to induce a man to commit a crime of violence without provocation. The other magistrates report that they have never known cases in which crimes were the result of indul- gence in hemp. One magistrate reports that hemp produces inconsiderateness, i.e., carelessness of consequences. If this is the case (and it seems plausible) a man might commit crimes of violence more readily when under the influence of hemp, although the hemp did not directly pro- voke to violence. This would, for instance, ac- count for a man's cutting off his wife's nose when under the influence of hemp, but in con- sequence of infidelity or supposed infidelity on the part of the wife when possibly had the man not been taking hemp he would have been equally anxious to cut off his wife's nose, but would have too much been afraid of the conse- quences to himself to do so. The same effect of course, be produced by indulgence in liquor, and it cannot be said that indulgence in hemp, because it is (if it is) capable of pro- ducing this effect, incites to crimes of violence. As far, therefore, as my own experience goes, and as far as the opinion of eleven of the other magistrates of this district goes there is nothing to show that indulgence in hemp incites to crime. Of course I have heard of cases in which run- ning amuck has been said to be due to indulgence in hemp; these cases, however, as far as I remem- ber have occurred in the north of India, and I know nothing personally about them. Here, again it would be a question, supposing that the running amuck would not have taken place but for indulgence in hemp, "did such indulgence ac- tually cause a desire to be violent, or was the desire to be violent present before, and did indul- gence in hemp merely cause carelessness of con- sequences?" Cases of violence, the result of lunacy produced by indulgence in hemp, do not, I presume, come within the scope of the question. 54. Of eleven magistrates whom I have con- sulted, one says "licentious persons do take them (hemp drugs) to enhance * * * the pleasure they hope they derive from their vice, or per- haps more correctly to drive away any compunc- tions of conscience****. If such persons are thwarted*** hemp drugs consumed indirectly help them to commit some act of violence." This is the same magistrate who says hemp pro- duces inconsiderateness. Neither I nor any of the eleven magistrates I have consulted have ever known of a man taking hemp in order to fortify himself to commit crime. 55. I have no personal knowledge as to whether indulgence in hemp can produce complete stupefaction or not. The opinions of the eleven magistrates in this district whom I have con- sulted differ. Some say it can, some it cannot; some that it can in an unaccustomed subject. One says "one of my friends once thought of drinking ghota (a form of bhang). He took it in excess, and as a consequence he fell to the ground completely senseless for some hours." This is conclusive as regards the possibility of a man not accustomed to it being stupefied by drinking ghota; whether ganja smoking would completely stupefy is probably more doubtful. I have never come across a case in which criminals have stupefied their victims by means of any form of hemp. Some of the magistrates consulted, report that majum (a sweatmeat prepared from the hemp) is given by criminals to stupefy their victims, some that majum mixed with dhatura is given; I am inclined to think that majum when used in this way has dhatura mixed with it, or at all events is not a preparation of hemp unmixed. 16. Evidence of MR. H. W. BAGNELL, Assistant Magistrate, Poona. 51. Bad characters may be said generally to be habitual moderate consumers of these drugs according to their means. The moderate use has no marked connection with crime, either of general or particular character, except perhaps with thieving. Consumers of these drugs are now and then driven to theft to satisfy their craving for them. 52. Excessive use eventually makes the con- sumer go mad. But I do not consider that as a rule it excites to crime in general or to crime of a special character with the abovementioned rare exception. 53. Excessive indulgence is said to deter rather than to incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise; the consumer in excess becomes stupid and inactive so as to lose all his energy. I am not aware of a single case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Criminals do not use these drugs to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or crime. These drugs have a stupefy- ing effect, rendering a man almost helpless. 55. These drugs are said to be administered by criminals to their victims with the object of stupefying them, to facilitate theft or deception of any kind. Opinions differ as to the character of stupefaction caused. The majority consulted state that complete stupefaction can be caused without admixture; others believe that to a per- son unaccustomed to the use of such drugs only can such stupefaction be caused without the aid of other drugs. All agree that sufficient stupe- faction for the above-mentioned purposes can be effected without admixture, while one opinion declares that for complete stupefaction some ad- mixture is needed.
25 17. Evidence of MR. C. G. DODGSON, Assistant Magistrate and Collector, Khandesh. 1. I have had few opportunities, hemp drugs being used to a slight extent only in Khandesh. I have lately, however, i.e., since the receipt of these questions, been making enquiries from persons likely to be acquainted with the matter, viz., consumers, sellers, and Abkari Inspectors. I have also obtained information from the Civil Surgeon of Dhulia. My answers are chiefly the result of information derived from others rather than the results of my own observation. 2. There is no charas in Khandesh. Flat ganja and bhang are used here. These definitions may be accepted for flat ganja and bhang. Ganja and bhang are the names given to these products in Khandesh. 3. A few, but very few, hemp plants grow spon- taneously in the Dangs, which are under the Khandesh Political Agency. I know of no dis- tricts in which they are abundant. 5. I am unable to say. 6. In the Dangs the growth is scattered, there being hardly any plants at all. 7. Hemp plants are cultivated in the Jalgaon taluka of Khandesh, for the production of ganja and for use as bhang; they are not cultivated for the production of charas or for the sake of the fibre or seed. The cultivation is only carried on to a small extent. 9. I have no knowledge on this subject, never having seen the plant. 10. They do not form a special class. They are of the same classes as other agricultural culti- vators. 12. No; this is not the case here. 13.The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is not restricted to any particular part of Khandesh, although it so happens that cultiva- tion only takes place in one taluka, viz., Jalgaon. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in the Jalgaon taluka, but to a small extent only. 18. Ganja and bhang both deteriorate by keep- ing. Both will keep fairly good for about two or three years. There appears to be no means of preventing rapid deterioration after about three years. Deterioration, however, begins to set in after one year. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking; it is smoked out of a chillum together with tobacco, the tobacco being put on the top. 20. Ganja smoking is not confined to any parti- cular class, although fakirs and gosains smoke more than any other class. Bhils smoke a little, but not much. There appears to be no difference between Hindus and Musalmans as regards the extent to which ganja is smoked. Ganja smok- ing is not confined to any particular part of the district. 21. Flat ganja is the only form of ganja used in Khandesh. 22. To the best of my belief no charas is used here. 23. Yes, occasionally, but very seldom. Per- sons addicted to the habit of smoking ganja will, if ganja is not procurable, smoke bhang. Bhang, when smoked, is smoked without tobacco being mixed in it. It is smoked in the form of a cigar- ette, or native "bidi" 24. Bhang is seldom eaten; it is generally drunk. Fakirs, bairagis, and gosains both eat and drink it more than other classes do. Other Mussal- mans occasionally, but rarely, eat it, fried with meat. The practice is not confined to any parti- cular locality. 25. As far as I have been able to ascertain, the use is much the same as hitherto. There appears to be no increase or decrease. 27. The broad distinction between the use of ganja and bhang is that the former is chiefly con- fined to the poorer and lower classes of society. Fakirs, bairagis, and gosains may be classed as habitual consumers; the majority of them are habitual excessive consumers. Want of regular employment, want of settled homes, want of regular food are the principal causes which lead to the use of the drugs. 28. (a) From half to two tolas, i.e., six pies to two annas per diem for ganja. (b) About six tolas, i.e., six annas or more per diem for ganja. I do not refer to bhang, as bhang is used here to a much less extent than ganja, and I have little knowledge about it. 29. With ganja, tobacco is ordinarily mixed with a view to softening the effect. With bhang, pepper and sugar are ordinarily mixed. With ganja, dhatura is exceptionally mixed with a view to increasing the intoxicating effect. Persons who have been accustomed to the use of charas or opium are said to mix dhatura with their ganja. From bhang, three other preparations are made, viz., akhoti, majum, and gota. Akhoti is made by mixing one part of butter with two parts of bhang, adding a quantity of water and boiling the whole for several days. The result is a pink flat product, not unlike cocoanut rock to look at. Majum is made by mixing bhang and white sugar and boiling them in water. The result looks like chocolate. Gota is made by mixing bhang with almonds, black pepper, aniseed, milk, sugar and other spices. I know of no special preparation which is sold ready made for the pur- pose of being mixed with these drugs, but the use of gota is not uncommon; gota is prepared by the purchasers of the bhang. 30. Among the upper classes, such as Brahmins, these drugs, when consumed at all, are generally consumed in solitude. The largest class of con- sumers, however, i.e., fakirs, gosains, etc., gen- erally consume them in company. Ganja is more likely to be consumed in solitude than bhang. The use is chiefly confined to the male sex and to men well on in years. Women, how- ever, at times take akhoti. Old men take akhoti and majum. Children seldom, if ever, smoke ganja; they frequently take bhang in the form of gota. 31. The habit appears to he easily formed and to be difficult to break off. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the exces- sive. The habit of taking ganja is more easily formed than that of taking bhang. 32. The practice of drinking bhang in the form of gota is fairly common in the hot season. The drink is said to be refreshing and to have a cooling effect. 33. There is little opinion one way or another among the public concerning the use of these vol. vii. G
26 drugs. On the whole public opinion may be said to be against the use of ganja, on account of its intoxicating effects. There is no custom of wor- shipping the hemp plant. 34. It would be a very serious privation to fakirs, gosains and similar classes, on account of their being accustomed to the constant use of the drugs. The number of persons to whom the pri- vation would be serious would probably not exceed at the most 1,000 in the whole of Khandesh. 35. It would be difficult to enforce such a prohibition. There would undoubtedly be illicit consumption. Illicit cultivation of the hemp would be easy to check, but smuggling would increase. There would undoubtedly be serious discontent among the consumers, but it would not, in Khandesh, amount to a political danger. The prohibition would probably be followed by a slight increase in the consumption of liquor and by a decided increase in the use of tobacco. 38. I am only acquainted with flat ganja. 39. Smoking ganja is said to be less injurious than eating majum, unless the latter is only taken in very small quantities. Majum when taken in large quantities has an instantaneous and powerfully intoxicating effect. 40. Ganja is sometimes used by native doctors as a febrifuge and sedative in cases of fever and asthma. It is also occasionally used for poultices and also used for the purpose of relieving pain when performing operations. It is also used by them to check diarrh27 out for a lump sum. No fee is charged for per- mission to cultivate. 66. Only flat ganja is used in Khandesh. 67. The present system appears unobjectionable. 68. There are no such houses or shops and I do not think that there ought to be. 69. The people are consulted and I think rightly. Inquiries are made by Government officers and the general feeling on the subject is thus ascertained. 70. I do not think that these drugs are smuggled to a large extent. Smuggling to a small extent for the personal consumption of the smuggler no doubt takes place and is hard to stop. The farmer or contractor has to pay a lump sum to Government for his contract. He recovers the money from the purchasers of the drugs, a tax on which must therefore be considered to be really paid by the consumers. 18. Evidence of the HON'BLE G. D. PANSE, First Assistant Collector, Ratnagiri. 51. In discussing this question I have to divide bad characters into the following classes: 28 53. Unpremeditated crimes, violent or otherwise, are in my opinion incapable of being committed by persons given up to excessive indulgence in these drugs. I have never known an instance of a murder committed by a person whose temper was excited by the use of ganja or bhang. For the hemp does not deprive a man totally of his senses, and so much of sensibility is left in him as to make him distinguish between a good and a bad act. During my service as Assistant Col- lector in the districts of the Deccan and Gujarat, and latterly in Konkan, I never came across a single instance of murder committed under its influence. If murders are at all committed by a person after smoking ganja, I cannot believe it may be considered to be in any way influenced by its use. 54. No. I have given reasons in detail to show how the hemp does not fortify a man to do any active deed. It is merely a passive agent for keeping up spirits and confining a man's energies to any work in a limited groove to which one is accustomed. For when one is habituated to the use of ganja or bhang, the ordinary routine business of even the ordinarily employed is at a stop without it. Criminality is certainly beyond the pale of ordinary routine, however habitual an offence may become, and the tact and astuteness that are required to be exercised by the criminal cannot be mustered by the use of these drugs. 55. Ganja and bhang in their pure state are not generally employed by criminals in inducing their victims to partake of them to further their criminal designs. Ganja is sometimes used where the victims happen to be tobacco-smokers, a little strong powder being adulterated with tobacco while being placed in the pipe. To those who do not smoke the criminals administer bhang in the shape of preparations called "majum," a sweet- meat preparation, pleasant enough to eat. But neither of these drugs is sufficient to deprive the victims completely of their senses, but only to an extent sufficient to make them powerless to resist. It is only in extreme cases that I have heard of instances of some of the spurious bairagis using bhang admixtured in dhatura for inducing com- plete unconsciousness with the object latterly of committing serious crimes, as murder, etc. The victims happen to belong generally to illiterate classes or women and children. The higher classes are not generally induced to partake of such pre- parations, and the instances are few or none in which any intelligent person suffered himself to become a victim of such persons. Complete stupe- faction by the use of these drugs unadulterated with dhatura or opium is impossible. 19. Evidence of MR. A. H. PLUNKETT, City Magistrate, Poona. 1. My service extends over a period of 41 years, during which time I have served in Bombay, Sind, Dharwar, Thana, Nasik and Poona. The nature of my work has brought me in contact with men of many races and castes. My informa- tion regarding hemp drugs, the manufacture of narcotics therefrom, and their uses has been chiefly derived from persons from many classes selected and examined by me and from such general know- ledge of the subject as I have acquired while in Sind, the Southern Mahratta country and the Deccan. 1 have taken care to verify the informa- tion I have collected by reference to official records and by careful examination of many men, such as bairagis, gosains, fakirs and others whose state- ments I have taken down in writing. 2. The definitions given by Dr. Prain in his report of the two narcotic drugs (charas and ganja) may be accepted. Bhang as defined by him is not available in the district, and what is described as "chur" is called bhang. The differ- ent names of bhang mentioned by him are well understood in this part of the Deccan, but those that are commonly used are bhang and patti. The names subji and siddhi are rarely used. Of the three varieties of ganja only two are known29 proper is rarely imported into this part of India, as its place is supplied by the dried leaves of the female plant. The hemp plant as cultivated yields at one and the same time both ganja and the so-called bhang. In this district hemp is cultivated in a few villages of the Sirur, Indapur, and Bhimthari talukas, in all nine villages. The area under cultivation is about ten acres only. From 1873-74 to 1882-83 statistics are not available; in 1883-84 the area under cultivation was 24 acres, 10 and 19 acres in two succeeding years, 35 and 30 acres in 1886-87 and 1887-.88, and 16 to 17 acres for the three succeeding years respectively. The area under cultivation was highest in 1886-87 and lowest in 1889-90. On the whole, the culti- vation would appear to be on the decline. 8. In the Poona district the area under culti- vation has been decreasing from 1887-88. The reason assigned being that cultivators do not find it more profitable than ordinary agriculture. The area under cultivation is so small that the variations do not call for comment. The cultiva- tion of hemp appears not to be popular with the agriculturists in this district. The demands of the district being easily met by importations from the neighbouring district of Ahmednagar may also account for the decrease of local produc- tion. 9. The method followed in cultivating the hemp plant may be described briefly as under. There is no difficulty felt in the selection of land. Any soil is suited, except "muram" and hard soil. Black soil is however the best; al- though in many cases the whitish-grey as well as red soil is used. All bagait lands are well suited for the cultivation of the hemp plant. The sites selected are generally moist, not shaded. The land is ploughed well three or four times. The first, ploughing takes place in the months of April and May, when ordinarily agricultural lands are prepared. The soil is thus well prepared by two to three courses of ploughing. The rains are await- ed. In June when the land is once or twice flooded, it is again ploughed and harrowed. It is then manured with cow-dung and rubbish, also with ashes in some cases. After another fall of rain, the land is once more harrowed and the soil is then quite ready to receive the seed. About the close of June the seed is sown, which appears well within a week. The plants are then thinned if they come up too closely and are kept carefully weeded. If the rains are seasonable, no watering is required, otherwise one or two waterings are given. When the plant grows a little over a foot high, the lower twigs are cut off so as to favour a more healthy growth of the tops and flowers. Experts called "parkhi" are then employed to distinguish between the male and female plants in order to eradicate the former, as their presence in the field fecundates the female plants and causes them to run into seed, producing little or no ganja. This process over, weeding if necessary is repeated. The female plants mature towards the close of November when harvesting com- mences, the process of which is described under question 15. 10. My enquiries do not show that persons who cultivate hemp for its narcotic properties form a special class. They are ordinary agricultural cultivators. 11. No. Ganja plants are not raised from the seed of the wild hemp. Wild hemp is not known in this district. Seed for ganja cultivation is obtained from Ahmednagar, where seed is pur- chased. 12. The ganja plant is raised from seeds ob- tained as above stated. The plant so raised in no way partakes of the nature of wild hemp. The seed plant is not grown for the purpose of ganja, but for seed only. In this district the seed plant is not grown, but in Ahmednagar it is, and I understand in this case the male plant is not ex- tirpated, as otherwise it would not be possible to impregnate the female plant for the purpose of seed. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is not restricted in this district, although only in three of eight talukas the cultivation occurs. The Mawal taluka and the western parts of the Haveli, Junner and Khed talukas are unsuited for the cultivation of the plant owing to the heavy rainfall and the hard muram soil in those areas; lands situated in or adjoining the ghats where the rainfall is heavy do not appear to be suitable for hemp cultivation; the plant is said to thrive in a whitish brown soil in Newasa, Ahmednagar Collectorate, as stated by the mam- latdar. I am unable to say if the cultivation of the plant is impossible in any part of the district, but it would appear that heavy rainfall, a damp climate, and hilly tracts are not favourable to the growth of the plant. 14. My reply to question 7 shows that in this district the cultivation of the hemp plant is limited to about 17 acres. The products of the plant are comparatively small. The yield is about 153 maunds of ganja and as much of bhang. No reliable statistics are available on this head, and I have not been able as yet to obtain trustworthy information regarding the average annual out- turn of each of the two products of bhang and ganja during past years; but from enquiries made locally I learn an acre gives an average yield of 9 maunds of each of the two products. The out- turn of ganja and of bhang may in this district therefore be taken at 9 maunds per acre. The drugs are locally manufactured in the villages of Indapur, Bhimthari, Sirur and in Haveli taluka, in this district. Charas is not found to be manufactured in this district. 15. The wild plant is not found in this district, nor is it obtained for the purpose of manufacturing drugs therefrom. The cultivated plant only is available. As stated in replies to previous questions, ganja and bhang in this province are produced from one and the same plant. The flowering tops supply ganja, and the leaves and residue of the flowers, bhang. When the seed is sown in June, it matures in the month of November, about the Dewali holi- days, The state of maturity is indicated by a brownish appearance of the crop and falling down of all the larger leaves. The cultivator then makes his arrangements for reaping the crop and preparing the drug, a piece of ground is prepared and cleared of stubble and grass and made quite even. The ordinary threshing ground (Khale) serves the purpose. The ground being prepared, the crop is taken up generally in the morning. The flower tops are cut with a scythe, the leaves are pulled off by hand. The crop collected is stacked in the threshing ground and is trodden over in the afternoon; as evening sets in the operation of treading is suspended, leaving the stalks and flowers, etc., on the ground for exposure to the dew. On the following day the process of treading is resumed until the quantity
30 so trodden on becomes flat, when a second layer of flowering tops and leaves is brought in and pressed and trampled on; a third and fourth layer is formed until the mass rises a foot high. The treading is required in order to produce flat sheaves of ganja, which is easily accomplished by the resinous secretion which the plant and its flowers contain. The exudation so produced adheres to the crushed leaves and flowers and pro- duces a mass. This process is repeated for three or four consecutive days, by which time the pro- duct gets dry. The small twigs are thrown away, ganja is collected, the broken leaves and residue of the ganja is also separately collected. Seed if any is picked up and stored, ganja thus made is then packed in bales, the broken leaves and the small bits detached from ganja in the process of manufacture are separately packed, and supply what is known as bhang in this part of India. This preparation should be regarded as "chur" (broken ganja), but in this part of India it is sold as bhang. The cutting is usually done by women and the trampling by men. The women work from 7 to 11 A.M., the men from 1 to 6 P.M., with several intermissions. Both ganja and "chur" are used for smoking. The latter however rarely. "Chur" or "bhang" is mostly used for drinking; ganja is also used for preparing some of the narcotic preparations usually used for eating. The methods followed in preparing each of the preparations for smoking and eating and drinking are as described below:31 yakuti, etc., are rarely prepared and sold. Charas is not used in this district. 20. All classes of people resort to ganja smok- ing. But bairagis, sadhus, gosains, hakims and men of the mendicant class and ascetics use ganja for smoking throughout the district. Smoking is not confined to any locality. 21. Generally flat ganja is used for smoking. "Chur," which in this part of the country is call- ed bhang, is also used for smoking by the poorer classes. 22. Charas is not used in this district. 23. Bhang is used also, as stated above, for the purpose of smoking. Such use is not confined to any locality. It is used by the poorer people as being cheaper than ganja. 24. In answering this question I must state that, unlike Upper India, where real bhang is available, ganja is used for making confections, such as majum, yakuti, etc., and the so-called bhang is used here for drinking. The proportion of the people using the eatables to those who drink bhang is about the same. 25. Statistics available do not show that the use of ganja and bhang is increasing. The figures supplied by the farmers of the drug, and those obtained from official records, do not show a ten- dency towards any noticeable increase in consump- tion. 26. Statistics are not available, as under the present system of keeping accounts at shops for sale of intoxicating drugs, no record is kept of the number of persons purchasing ganja and its pre- parations. Taking, however, the average allowance of ganja which an habitual moderate consumer requires daily, as also the quantity of ganja sold in the year, it appears that in the Poona district there are 2,630 habitual moderate consumers of ganja and about 130 habitual excessive consumers of it. It is not possible to give the number for either occasional moderate or occasional exces- sive consumers of ganja. It is very rare that ganja is smoked occasionally. The relative pro- portion of consumers of the sweetened drugs and the consumers of the drink preparations is so small that it would be difficult to fix the number of consumers of the various preparations of ganja and bhang. The average proportions are noted in my reply to question 34. 27. I am unable to give the proportions of classes of persons using the drugs. All classes use them, but gosains, fakirs, bairagis and other people of the mendicant classes use the drugs as habitual moderate or excessive consumers. Their habits of life and their pilgrimages lead to the habitual use of the drugs, especially that of ganja smoking and gota-drinking, in order to enable them to bear climatic changes and to endure fatigue. 28. The average allowance and cost per diem of ganja to habitual moderate consumers and to habi- tual excessive consumers is one and two tolas weight and one and two annas respectively per head. The average daily allowance and cost of bhang per head is (3 and 6 mashas) 45 and 90 grains, valued at 3 and 6 pice respectively. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja when the latter is used for smoking; and sugar, milk, cardamoms and mace are used for making up the beverage called ghota from bhang. The narcotic preparations from ganja have been de- scribed above. The object of this admixture is to give a flavour to the preparations, and also to lessen to some extent the narcotic properties of the pre- parations. Dhatura is not so used in this part of the country as far as my information goes. The bhang "massala" consists of a conserve of black pepper, aniseed, almonds, cardamoms, mace, rose buds, sugar, etc. This massala is used for making up yakuti and shrikhand. 30. The extent cannot be precisely stated, but I learn that ganja and bhang are consumed more in company than in solitude except in the case of gosains and ascetics practising religious austerities, who habitually smoke ganja. The consumption is mostly confined to the male sex. The habit is said to be usually contracted in adult age. Women and children are not found to use the drugs. Prostitutes are said, however, to use them occasionally. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs is easily formed, and once formed, it is difficult to break off. There is, I learn, no tendency in the case of any of these drugs for the moderate habit to de- velop into the excessive. There are, however, cases of moderate consumers having developed into excessive consumers. There is, however, nothing inherent in the drug to lead to such results. An ordinary smoker is satisfied with two smokes of ganja a day, while the excessive has several. 32. On fast days it is usual to use the drugs more than otherwise. During the Maha Shivara- tra festivities which occur in the month of (Magh) February, bhang is much more used. The beve- rage called gota is drunk by all classes of men. The use of this drug in connection with this period of festivity is not regarded as essential; but as Maha Shivaratra is kept as the greatest fast day in the year, men resort to the beverage to counteract the effects of fasting, and to stimulate personal activity and merry-making. The beve- rage is, however, used moderately, and is not un- wholesome or injurious. It does not lead to the formation of the habit, as large numbers of people use the beverage only once in the year, and do not think of using it again until the following year. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is regarded differently. While ganja smoking is looked upon as a disreputable habit, bhang drinking is not so regarded. The reason appears to be that the former habit is generally confined to the lower classes, idlers and labourers, while the latter is tolerated or countenanced by the better classes in which the well-to-do indulge not infrequently in drinking gota. As far as I can learn, the hemp plant is not worshipped in this part of the country. The use of majum, yakuti, is not held in much disrepute. 34. It would be a serious privation to habitual consumers to forego the consumption of ganja and bhang. When the habit is formed, it is difficult to break off. The consumer will always long for the narcotic and he will not readily bear the privation. The smoker must have his ganja and the drinking man his bhang. I have not been able to get any reliable information regarding the number of men who use the different pre- parations of the hemp plant; but from the sales of such of the preparations as are recorded by the various vendors in the city and the cantonment of Poona, it would appear that in every hundred consumers of the hemp plant narcotics, there are about 90.4 ganja smokers, 2.4 majum eaters, l.9 yakuti eaters and as many shrikhand and gulkand eaters, and about 1.5 bhang drinking men. The total number of persons using ganja and its
32 perparations may be taken at about 2 (two) per cent. of the population of towns and cities in this district. It is not much used by the rural popu- lation. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of all the drugs. Ganja and bhang are used by people who do not use alcoholic stimulants. The deprivation by any prohibition of the produc- tion or sale of the drugs would be acutely felt by a population not accustomed to use opium or alcohol. It would be very difficult to check the use of the drug, which is not so baneful as alcohol. Any serious restriction on the production or sale would lead to illicit consumption, and much discontent among consumers would arise from a prohibition. I am not prepared to say that the discontent would amount to a political danger; but the ex- periment is not called for with the present limited use of the drug by only a small proportion of the population, and by certain classes of people who do not use alcohol. I am not prepared to say if ganja and bhang consumers would resort to the use of alcoholic stimulants or other narcotic drugs if deprived of ganja and bhang, as consumers of these drugs do not use alcohol or opium as a rule. The cultivation of the plant could, however, be restricted under a system of licenses. 36. I have no reason to think that alcohol is being substituted for any of these drugs. Alcohol is in disrepute, as far as is known, with the classes who use ganja. 37. Charas smoking does not prevail in this district to an extent sufficient to furnish a basis for comparing its effects with those of ganja smoking. I however learn that charas is much stronger than ganja in its effects. 38. Round ganja is not available in this part of the country. Flat ganja only is used for smok- ing, and sometimes the "chur" is a mix- ture of leaves and bits of flowers detached from ganja, and as such is weaker than ganja. The effects are in degree, not in kind. Ganja pro- duces greater intoxication than bhang. 39. I do not regard smoking of any of the hemp plant drugs as less injurious than drinking or eating the same. Ganja smoking is more in- toxicating than eating the confections made from it. The reason is that in smoking a much larger quantity of ganja is used proportionately than in manufacturing the sweetmeats or confections of ganja. The latter, moreover, are mixed with ghi and other ingredients which reduce the strength of the narcotic. For the same reason and because bhang is much milder than ganja, the beverage prepared from it is also much less powerful than ganja smoking. 40. Ganja is said to be prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by native, as also by European, medical practitioners. The drugs are also used in the treatment of cattle diseases (vide replies from Rao Bahadur, Assistant Surgeon (re- tired), Vishram Ramjee Gholley, Assistant Sur- geon Bhikaji Amrit Chobhe, and Dr. Ganesh Krishna Garde, appended). 41. The moderate use of ganja and bhang is considered by Rao Bahadur Dr. Vishram Ramjee Gholley, Dr. Ganesh Krishna Garde and Dr. Bhikaji Amrit Chobhe as beneficial in their effects. But they do not regard the habitual use as bene- ficial. It is thus the occasional moderate use that they speak of. (a) Ganja stimulates appetite for food and aids digestion to some extent. (b) It gives staying-power under severe ex- ertion and alleviates fatigue. (c) It is not regarded as a febrifuge or pre- ventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. I am not in a position to make a reply to clause (d). The poorer classes of Hindus and Muham- madans who are not within ready reach of medi- cinal preparations, use these drugs occasionally for exciting appetite or assisting digestion. Habitual consumers do not use them for such purposes. Bairagis, sadhus and fakirs, who travel long dis- tances on pilgrimages, use the drugs habitually in order to obtain staying-power under exposure and to alleviate fatigue. Workmen and labourers also use the drugs to enable them to bear hard work better (vide opinions of Rao Bahadur Assist- ant Surgeon Vishram Ramjee Gholley, Assistant Surgeon Bhikaji Amrit Chobhe and Dr. Ganesh Krishna Garde, all Graduates in Medicine, appended). 42. I am not prepared to make a reply. 43. Moderate consumers of the drugs are found to be perfectly inoffensive to their neighbours. During a long official career, of which nearly thirty years have been passed as a Magistrate, I have not met with a single case of intoxication in the streets from ganja or bhang, or a prosecution for disorderly behaviour in public from intoxica- tion from these drugs. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of any of the drugs on the habitual consumer is to produce slight exhilaration and pleasant sensa- tions. It is refreshing. It does not allay hunger, but creates it. The effects last for about an hour. There are no after-effects of the moderate use of the drugs. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing for it. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of the drugs produces noxious effects, physical especially. Ganja smoking especially has bad effects. It weakens the constitution and emaciates the body. Its continued use impairs the digestion, though the first use of it excites appetite. It produces an obstinate cough, which results in bronchitis or asthma in old age. The moderate use does not cause dysentery. Its excessive use causes bodily infirmity. Indolent habits are induced by the habitual use of the drug, however moderate. I do not think the mental faculties are generally affected by moderate use, although in some in- stances men are overcome by the smoking of the drug and temporarily get out of their mind. Insanity, it is said, does not follow the moderate habitual use of the drug. Bhang drinking is said not to be baneful and not to be attended with any of the effects stated above. 46. The habitual excessive use of any of the drugs produces noxious effects and in an aggrava- ted form. The constitution is completely im- paired, resulting in emaciation of the body. The excessive ganja smoker is a deplorable object, troubled with nausea and headache, and presenting the appearance of extreme general debility. He has an anæmic appearance, always sickly and fretful. The digestion is affected; there is loss of appetite; dysentery, bronchitis or asthma results. The moral sense is impaired and habits of indolence supervene. The sexual passions are excited oftentimes, leading to excessive debauchery. The excessive use deadens the intellect and frequently produces insanity, first melancholia followed by dementia, which is the common form of insanity
33 induced by the excessive use of ganja. This form of insanity is temporary, and disappears after the habit is broken off. I have had no personal experience to enable me to say if insanes have ever confessed to the use of the hemp drugs. 47. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not appear to be a hereditary habit, or to affect in any way the children of the moder- ate consumer. 48. I am not in a position to state if habitual excessive use of any of the drugs appears to be a hereditary habit, although the children of the excessive consumer are sickly. 49. The moderate use of the drugs is practised in some cases as an aphrodisiac; prostitutes are said to use them. The use for this purpose is more injurious than the use as an ordinary narcotic. The reason is that the system arti- ficially stimulated for sexual gratification suffers. Excessive indulgence in the use of ganja is also said to cause impotence. 50. Excessive use is not practised as an aphro- disiac, as impotency is produced and the con- stitution is much impaired. 51. Bad characters do resort to stimulants, but I am not prepared to say that most of them use hemp drugs in preference to other stimulants. Alcoholic drinks seem to be much more frequent- ly indulged in than the hemp drugs. I do not consider that the moderate use of any of the drugs incites to crime of any character. 52. Neither does the excessive use incite to crime as far as is known to me. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of the drugs does not lead to unpremeditated crime, as the ex- cessive consumer is generally incapable, stupid, and inactive. I am not, however, able to say whether or not homicidal frenzy is caused. 54. and 55. I am not in a position to make a reply to this question. 56. The effects of hemp used in moderation and in excess is modified by admixture of condiments and " massalas." The drug is made much milder by such admixture. But if dhatura and poppy seed are mixed, the drug gets much stronger. " Dhatura" is rarely used in this part of the country as an admixture in preparations of the hemp drugs. 57. Charas is not used here, and by what I have written under answers 19,20, 21 and 22 it will appear that ganja is used both for smoking and eating. It is not used for drinking; the effects of drinking and eating have been discussed above. 58. The system of excise administration in the Bombay Presidency has been fully described by the Honourable Mr. Mackenzie, Commissioner of Customs and Abkari, etc., in his letter No. 4752, dated 11th September 1893, to the Chief Secre- tary to Government. Reference is solicited to that report. The system is very simple and uniform. I think it serves the requirements of the Excise Administration and works well. 59. No experiments suggest themselves to me. 60 The taxation is fair, and the manufacture of narcotics from the hemp plant are well con- trolled. I do not think any improvement is called for. Though the cultivation of the hemp plant is unrestricted, I have not heard of illicit sales or manufacture of the drugs. The cultivation of the plant in this district is so very limited, that any restrictions other than those existing under the present system are not called for. The cul- tivation is noted and watched by the village officers and recorded in the village register. Moreover, the cultivator is not allowed to manu- facture or sell the drugs without a permit. No further restrictions are therefore needed. 61. Charas is not produced in this part of the country. 62. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang exclusively, as the ganja plant supplies what is known as bhang in this distriot. 63. The present system of both wholesale and retail vend of ganja and bhang works well and requires no modification. 64. None whatever. 65. In my opinion the taxation of ganja and bhang is reasonable with reference to each, and to alcoholic or other intoxicants. Ganja and bhang are taxed equally in this district, and I do not see any reason to disturb the arrangement. 66. I do not suggest different rates for taxing ganja and chur (otherwise called bhang). 67. The incidence per head is low. I do not see that any case in made out for altering of the present rate of taxation, which is quite unobjec- tionable. It is, however, clear that vendors make a large profit out of proportion to the taxes paid and expenses incurred. Appendix A will, I trust, be found useful and interesting as showing the net profits which a retail vendor makes out of his bargain. 68. There are no shops in this district where the drugs are consumed on the premises. The sweet- ened drugs, such as yakuti, majum, etc., and the drinks, such as bhang, though manufactured at shops licensed for the purpose, are not consumed on the premises. The consumers take home their purchases. it would not be advisable to permit consumption of the drugs on the shop premises, as it would probably lead to disorderly behaviour at the shops and in public. 69. The requirements of the people are consi- dered before a shop is opened in any locality. The ganja farmer generally applies to the Collector of the district for permission to open a shop or shops in a locality. The Collector calls on the mamlatdar of the taluka in which the locality lies to report if such a shop is needed, and after such local enquiry as he deems necessary, the mamlatdar reports his opinion, which is generally accepted and acted on by the Collector. 70. I do not think the Bhor State, which is the only Native State comprised in this district, ever imports any quantity of the intoxicating drugs. I am not aware of any case of smuggling having occurred. Bhor does not grow hemp. There is in consequence no likelihood that it would get untaxed ganja and import it into this district. Duty is paid on all drugs consumed here. I am not aware of any illicit dealings in the manufac- ture or transport of the drug. Appendix A. In the course of enquiries made by me regard- ing matters connected with the sale of the hemp plant drugs, it has struck me that the profits which the farmers of the right of vending the drugs make are very large. I shall endeavour briefly to state the accounts vol. vii. H
34 of the ganja farmer, so that his profits may be readily ascertained. In writing up the accounts I have closely fol- lowed the figures available for the Poona district. Hemp Drugs Farmer's Account for 1891-92. CREDIT. Price realised from the sale of 300 maunds of the hemp drugs at Rs. 120 per maund (the rate being Rs. 1-8-0 per lb. both for ganja and bhang) Rs. 36,000 Total 36,000 DEBIT. Ganja and bhang (about 300 maunds) purchased throughout the year at the rate of Rs. 10 per maund in- cluding cartage, wastage, etc. Rs. 3,000 Permit fees for transport. 150 Annual expenditure incurred in keep- ing 42 shops throughout the district at the rate of Rs. 7 per shop per mensem 3,600 Sundries 250 The amount of money paid for the license to manufacture and sell the hemp drugs 17,000 24,000 Net profit 12,000 Total 36,000 20. Evidence of KHAN BAHADUR P. H. DASTUR, Parsi, Presidency Magistrate, Bombay. 1. I must confess that I have had very few opportunities of obtaining information with regard to hemp drugs, as in the districts I have hitherto served, ganja and other products of the hemp plant are not much consumed, and I shall there- fore confine my answers to questions 51 to 55 in relation to matters which have come to my knowledge in my magisterial capacity. 51. No, not within my experience, nor am I aware of any connection existing between the moderate use of these drugs and crime in general or of any special character. 52. But the excessive use of ganja and charas may lead to crime, for those addicted to these drugs remain constantly under a stupor and are unable to follow any honest calling and must necessarily resort to crime. 53. I am informed that excessive indulgence in charas makes a man violent in his temper and leads him to commit offences attended with violence. The Pathans in Bombay are well known as a turbulent class, and they are mostly habitual consumers of charas. I had lately a case before me in which a Marwari goldsmith under the influence of charas attacked a bailiff with a pair of tongs and behaved very excitedly in court. I am not aware of any case in which the habit has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. No; but if a criminal addicted to these drugs intends to commit a crime, he feels himself powerless to act in the matter until he fortifies himself with the usual dose, The consumption of ganja generally makes a man timid; and he does not therefore commit premeditated acts of violence, but it is different with charas, which would certainly be used by a habitual consumer who intends to commit any act of violence. 55. Yes. I have had cases in Ahmedabad in which a gang was engaged in a conspiracy to rob unsuspecting travellers and other innocent persons. They invariably prepared a chillum containing ganja with dhatura seeds intermixed, and induced their victims to smoke the pipe and thus render themselves unconscious. Immediately afterwards the victim was robbed and the gang decamped with his goods. So far as I can form a judg- ment in the matter, I think complete stupefac- tion could not be induced by this drug without any admixture. 21. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR LALLUBHAI GORDHANDAS, Vania, Huzur Deputy Collector, Nasik. 1. My employment as personal assistant to the Commissioner of Abkari from 1880 to 1887 has enabled me to become acquainted with the de- tails of administration, taxation, and control. My information and my conclusions, so far as I have formed them, concerning the use and effects of the drugs, are derived from general observa- tion. I do not profess to have had any special opportunities of obtaining information regarding the use and effects of the hemp drugs. 2. I may observe, at the outset, that the hemp drugs have not claimed much attention from the Government of Bombay, or from the people in the Bombay presidency, for the simple reason that their use is neither extensive, nor spreading, and that, such as it is, it has not been regarded as detrimental to health or morality. That these poor drugs should come to engage the serious and solemn consideration of a high Commission was not thought of by the staunchest advocates of temperance in this presidency. One kind of ganja is used in this district, viz., flat ganja. The flower tops are used for smoking and are called ganja. The dry twigs and seeds which become detached and form a broken mass are sold as bhang. Charas is not known in these parts. 13. No restriction is imposed by Government on the cultivation of the hemp plant.
35 14. Charas is not prepared in this district. Ganja is manufactured to a small extent in the district, but the bulk of the drug sold is imported The flower tops are sold as ganja, and the broken mass is sold as bhang. 15. I believe that the only preparation which ganja requires before being smoked is that it is washed with water and then mixed with a little tobacco. The preparation of bhang for drinking is said to be as follows. It is warmed in an earthen plate placed over a slow fire until it begins to smell. It is then soaked in water for about half an hour. It is then placed in a piece of cloth, which is dipped in water and rubbed with the fingers, and the water is squeezed out. This pro- cess is repeated till the water squeezed out appears to be taintless. The washed bhang is then pound- ed with a few grains of pepper. Those that can afford it mix with it other ingredients (see answer to query 29). The pounded mass is diluted in water, and the liquid is strained through a piece of cloth three or four times, the refuse being thrown away, and the liquid so prepared is drunk as bhang. Bhang is also boiled in ghi, which is mixed with certain ingredients to make pak, or majum, or yakuti. Each seller has his special recipe for these preparations. Bhang is also mixed with gulkand (conserve of roses). 16. Bhang is usually prepared by people in their own houses; but in Bombay there are bhang shops wherein the pounded mass is kept ready for sale or is diluted, and the liquid, after being strained, is offered for drink. 17. I believe no particular classes of people are employed on this business. 18. Ganja and bhang are said to deteriorate by keeping and to lose their effect in time. The time will vary according to the state of the weather and the degree of care with which they may be kept. 19. To my knowledge, ganja is used only for smoking; bhang is used for drinking, and is also used in making pak, yakuti, majum, and gul- kand; charas is not used in this district at all. 20. Ganja is smoked invariably by bairagis and those who revere and associate with them. It is used by a comparatively small proportion of the lower classes of the population, a smoker of ganja being looked upon as a disreputable person. The use of bhang is almost unknown in the Deccan. The preparations of bhang, such as pak, yakuti, majum and gulkand are used by a few persons of the middle classes. 25. There is not the slightest indication that the use of the drugs is on the increase. 26. There could be only two classes, (a) and (b); not the third and fourth, (c) and (d). The majority of consumers may be taken to be moder- ate consumers. 27. See answer to query 20. 28. The quantities will vary according to the habit of each consumer, the frequency with which he indulges in the drug daily, and the degree of intoxicating power of the drug used. 29. Almonds, cardamoms, pepper and sugar are usually pounded and mixed with bhang. Those who like and can afford may also mix with bhang sweet fennel, dried rose buds, poppy seeds, con- serve of roses, rose water, seeds of various fruits, saffron, musk, milk, milk cream, etc., etc. Dhatura may at times be mixed with bhang when common bhang ceases to give an habitual drinker sufficient intoxication. 30. An habitual drinker of bhang drinks it at home, either alone or in company of friends, if any should join him. A man leaves off bhang gene- rally in old age; but a ganja smoker continues to smoke it till death. Females and children are not known to use the drugs to any great number. 31. The habit may be formed and may be broken off easily. A moderate consumer may develop into an excessive consumer; but the result cannot be said to be due to any inherent tendency in the drugs. 32. I am not aware of any such custom. 33. Ganja smoking is regarded as disreputable. Excessive drinkers of bhang are also looked down on with scorn. 34. Bairagis would regard it as a serious priva- tion to forego the consumption of ganja. It would be a deprivation of an innocent enjoyment to con- sumers of bhang. 35. (a) Feasible, but not at all advisable or necessary. (b) Yes, if it could be obtained. (c) By stopping cultivation and importation. (d) Certainly. (e) Not quite. (f) Yes. 36. Indulgence in alcohol is now-a-days con- sidered to be less disreputable than it was before the spread of English education and Western ideas, which have made very great strides during the last thirty years. It is probable that material prosperity among the lower classes would bring in its train a taste for the more expensive and fashionable alcohol in place of the poor hemp drugs. 39. Excessive smoking of ganja is more in- jurious than excessive drinking of bhang. A mo- derate use of either is said to be not injurious. 41. (a) Bhang is. (b) Ganja is. (c) Can't say. I refer to both moderate habitual and moderate occasional use. 43. Quite. 44. (b) It is said to be so. (c) Yes. (d) Ganja is said to do. (e) Bhang is said to create appetite. (f) About six hours. (g) A little depression. (h) No. 45. None of these effects are known to be pro- duced by habitual moderate use of ganja or bhang. The answers as regards habitual excessive use are 36 49. (a) To a certain extent. (b) Don't know. (c) Not at all. (d) I have not heard of any such conse- quence. 51. I do not think that moderate use has any connection with crime. 52. Even excessive use is not said to induce criminal tendency. 53. Not necessarily. No. 54. I don't think. 55. The hemp drug by itself would not stupefy completely. 58. I think the present system, which is de- signed with the object of raising a moderate revenue from the consumption of the drugs at least expense to Government and least inconvenience to consumers, is working well. Any improvement in the direction of tightening the control and restricting the production, manufacture, and sale of the drugs would cause needless harassment without any counterbalancing advantage. 60. No control is exercised on the production of the drugs, and none would appear to be necessary. 61. Charas is not produced. 62. Vide answer to query 60. 63. I have no objection to urge against the present system of wholesale and retail vend of ganja and bhang. 64. None. 65. There is no definite rate of taxation, the right of vend being sold annually to the highest bidder. The incidence of taxation, therefore, varies in different districts, and in the same district in different years. But, upon the whole, I think it is reasonable. 66. No; such different rates would be unwork- able, except at immense cost. 67. No. 68. None in this district. 69. No. 70. There are no facts regarding the importation or smuggling of hemp drugs from: Native States. Under the farming system, there is no room for evasion of duty. Oral evidence. Question 20.37 keeping for more than a year. If properly packed and secured from exposure to heat and dampness, they will keep well for about 18 months or two years. Charas can keep any length of time. 19. Charas is only smoked. Ganja is eaten like bhang made into "gota" in this district for want of bhang. 20. In this district fakirs, bairagis, gosavis, and other mendicants use ganja, as also dowries and other itinerant classes. In higher classes the use of this drug is very rare. 21. Flat ganja alone is imported. 25. It is difficult to answer this question. But looking to the quantity of ganja imported from year to year, it would appear that consumption is stationary. 26. There are no statistics available. 27. Habitually excessive smokers are from the mendicant classes, such as fakirs, bairagis and gosavis. Habitual moderate consumers come from all classes, particularly from the lower strata. Occa- sional moderate consumers can be traced to all castes, not excluding Brahmins and Lingayets. I believe there are no occasional excessive con- sumers. Fakirs, bairagis, gosavis, dowries, and similar mendicant classes are initiated as soon as they enter mendicant orders, or when they attain the age of puberty. Bairagi boys are initiated at even the early age of 12 and 14. In other classes this habit is contracted on account of bad company, and is seldom acquired for medicinal purposes. 28. It is difficult to say what class of consumers may be called habitual moderate consumers. There are persons who smoke only once in company with six or eight persons. One or half a tola is pre- pared and filled into a pipe, and is smoked by six or eight persons together in the afternoon once a day, each person paying the day's cost by turns. There are others who smoke two or three times a day and require a tola, and they are considered moderate consumers. The excessive consumers are persons who remain always under the influence of the drug. Such persons want about two to four tolas of ganja every day. They cannot do without one tola. This class of consumers is limited to a por- tion of itinerant mendicants who get the neces- saries of life without trouble. I should think that quarter tola is the allowance of an average moderate consumer, and two tolas is that of an excessive one. The cost of one tola by retail is two pice. Wholesale prices are annas 12 to Re. 1 in the Bri- tish districts and six to twelve annas in Native States. 29. Nothing is mixed with ganja ordinarily except tobacco. It is said that exceptionally dhatura, kutchala and aconite are used in very small quantities. My informants have not seen instances of this kind. When gota is made, undermentioned articles are used: 38 will not influence good people, who form the larg- est majority. Nor will the stopping of this drug lead to the use of alcoholic drinks. 36. I have seen a person weaned of the habit of drinking liquor by the moderate use of bhang. 39. Smoking is admittedly more injurious than drinking or eating. Smoking affects the lungs and brain more immediately and directly than the latter. 40. Yes; in the case of dysentery bhang is prescribed. It is used as tonic to the convalescent. Garda is administered to horses and cattle. In the ganja imported into this district, a quantity of dust or fine powder, most probably of leaves and flowers, is mixed. When separated, it forms the "garda," which also contains the seeds. 41. (a) Bhang taken in small quantities is good for digestion and to stimulate appetite. Ganja does the same with greater force. (b) There is staying-power as far as the ex- posure is concerned. A ganja smoker is not considered to be able to work much. Fatigue is alleviated by a smoke of ganja, as it induces sleep. (c) It is said that ganja smoking and bhang eating serve to prevent fever more or less. (d) smoking is said to concentrate attention or rather prevent distraction. It is why some singers and musicians have a smoke before they can play their best. These effects are observed in the moderate habi- tual and moderate occasional use. 42. Moderate use of bhang is useful as well as harmless, but I cannot say so of ganja smoking, which is injurious even to one who is well fed. Smokers, however, have a saying as follows.* It is, I believe, meant more to ensure the cleaning of the ganja smoked than to express its qualities and to point out bad effects. 43. Yes, ganja smokers are sometimes inclined to quarrel when under intoxication. Occasional consumers are loquacious and divulge secrets of others and even of their own. 44. The immediate effect is to drown all anxi- ety, to remove mental depression, and to exhi- larate the spirits. A drink of bhang not much spiced and sweetened is refreshing. Such a drink does not cause intoxication, so to speak, beyond the raising up of spirits. Hunger is not allayed; on the contrary, it is very slightly stimulated. The effect lasts from two to six hours, the length of time depending on the state of health and the quantity used. No after-effects. Want of grati- fication does produce longing as also uneasiness, and there is an unwillingness to work and a dis- position to take offence. 45. Smoking affects physically and mentally, but it is doubtful whether it has any effect on one's morality. It affects the lungs and the brain and impairs the constitution. The effects are slow in the ease of persons who live well, In- digestion and loss of appetite follow weakness of body, brain, and lungs. It is known to cause asthma and bronchitis, but is said not to cause dysentery. It does not pro- duce habits of debauchery or immorality, but in- duces habits of laziness. Habitual moderate use only blunts the intellect. It is not said to cause insanity. 46. In the case of habitual excessive use the abovementioned effects appear earlier and with greater severity. An ill-fed excessive consumer can be easily distinguished by his sunken eyes, black lips, pale face, and emaciated body. In- sanity, both permanent and temporary, and several mental affections, are said to result from excessive use. 49. It is said to be so. It is not used by prostitutes for this purpose. Excessive use leads to impotence, I am told. 51. Use of these drugs, as far as I know, has no connection with crime. I do not know whether a large proportion of bad characters use this drug. Some of them do so, not because they have to commit crime, but because they are bad characters and are addicted to vices. 52. I am told that excessive consumers of this drug are unfit to commit serious crime, because they are constantly under its influence. The intoxication caused by the drug is said to cause nervous depression or inactivity. 53. I have not heard of a single case of suicide nor of unpremeditated crime. 54. No, as far as I know. 55. I believe this is done sometimes, but I do not remember any instances. A person unaccus- tomed to the use of this drug can be completely stupefied by an over-dose of this drug. 58. The present system is working well. I have no suggestions to make for its improvement. 62. In my humble opinion it is unnecessary to control the cultivation and the preparation of these drugs. 63. and 64. None. 65. In my humble opinion the tax on ganja is not sufficiently high to check its consumption or to prevent increase of consumers and consumption. Bhang need not be as highly taxed as ganja. Manufacture and import of bhang must be encouraged with the object of preventing the people from using ganja for eating and drinking. Ganja is so used because bhang is not imported. As compared with liquor, ganja is exceedingly cheap, and a reasonable increase in its taxation will not lead to the use of alcohol. 68. None in this district. 69. No. 70. There is much smuggling from the Native States, where the ganja is had much cheaper than in this district. This is due to the fact that sales of ganja farms there are not so honestly and carefully made as here. 23. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR K. M. THATTE, District Deputy Collector, Nasik. 1. In the districts in which I have served hemp drugs are not extensively consumed, nor consumed in a manner to have pernicious effects on society at large. 51. My answer to this question is in the nega- tive. Considering the different classes of bad charac- ters which have come under my observation as * Vernacular saying not printed.
39 member of the community in general, and as a magistrate in particular, in the several districts in which I have had to move in my official career during the last 27 years, I can safely assert that the habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs do not form even the smallest proportion of such bad characters, and that the moderate use of such drugs has not been found in any way con- nected with the commission of crime, whether of a general or special character. The habitual moderate consumer uses the drugs under a certain religious belief of a supposed spiritual benefit therefrom, but more for the temporary beneficial effects which a moderate use of them produces, namely, the stay- ing-power which it gives under great exertion, the relief which it affords from fatigue and cares and anxieties, and also the indirect assistance which it is supposed to render as a food digestive. The habitual moderate consumer is, therefore, neces- sarily an innocent man, and has no object or motive to commit crimes of any description, and so does not fall under or is not included in the class of bad characters. 52 and 53. My answer to these two questions is the same as that given to the preceding question, but is qualified with this observation, that the habi- tual excessive use of these drugs necessarily creates noxious effects on the consumer, not only physically and mentally, but also morally, and the consumer is, in course of time, so much affected by their ex- treme use that it leads him sometimes to commit unpremeditated crimes in the same manner as an excessive use of liquor, opium, and other narcotic drugs, but certainly not to a crime of a violent nature. But generally the man who is addicted to excessive indulgence in these drugs becomes a victim of his own folly. No case has come to my notice or under my knowledge in which an excessive indulgence in these drugs had led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54 and 55. My answer to these questions is also severally in the negative. I have not found, in the course of my experience, gained by me as a visitor of criminal jails in different districts during the period of about 27 years as to the conduct and habits of criminals, that any such drugs are used by them to fortify themselves to commit a preme- ditated act of violence or other crime, or to induce their victims to partake of the same to get them stupefied in order to further their designs. 24. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR BHIMBHAI KIRPA RAM, Brahmin, Huzur Deputy Collector of Surat. 1. A copy of my paper on the narcotics and stimulants of Gujarat which was written for the Bombay Gazetteer is annexed.* During my thirty years' service in the Revenue and Agricultural Department of the Bombay Presidency, I had op- portunities to study the question from different points of view. My remarks are confined to Guja- rat. 2. Three preparations from hemp, Cannabis in- dica, viz., (1) bhang, sabji or mayapani; (2) yakuti, and (3) ganja are used in Gujarat. Charas is neither manufactured nor used. (1) Bhang, sabji or mayapani is made from the flower leaves and the seed of the plant. These are first baked over a fire, then well washed in cold water, and ground very fine, the intoxicating power depending to a considerable extent on the fineness of the powder. According to the taste and means of the consumer, dry rose leaves, almonds, carda- moms, pepper and other spices are pounded and mixed with the powder. The whole is then again ground, mixed with water, or sometimes with milk sweetened with sugar, and strained through a cloth. The preparation is now ready to be drunk. Bhang is a very-cheap luxury, one-sixteenth of a pound is enough to last an ordinary man for three days, costing only half penny or four pies. A poor man, as a rule, drinks his bhang mixed only with black pepper; on festivals and holidays many kinds of spices are added, and in this way the mixture becomes costly. A few Parsis and Musalmans drink bhang, but it is chiefly consumed by the higher classes of Hindus, viz., Brahmins, Banias, Kayasths, Sonis, and others who drink no other intoxicating liquor and do not eat opium. None of the preparations of hemp are taken by women except low-caste prostitutes. In the hot season and throughout the year on holidays and festivals bhang is very generally drunk, but only a few people take it regularly. As a rule it is drunk in the afternoon before sunset. In small quantities it is cooling and slightly intoxicating, causing at the same time a keen feeling of hunger. Under its influence goldsmiths and jewellers are prover- bially clever; it soothes rather than stimulates the brain; its appetising powers are of great value to begging Brahmins, who under its influence can, at a caste feast, eat enough to last them for 24 hours. (2) Yakuti or majum is bhang boiled in clarified butter. The clarified butter is flavoured with sugar and spices and is often coloured with vermillion and saffron. As a conserve, yakuti is generally eaten before sunset, chiefly by well-to-do Hindus and Musalmans. A man who drinks bhang may also take yakuti and smoke ganja. Yakuti is an expensive article, and when regularly taken costs from Rs. 2 to Rs. 3 a month. This drug is prepared by professional dealers called majum- walas, chiefly Banias by caste. It is also made by Hindu physicians. (3) Ganja is the dried hemp plant which has flowered and from which the resin has not been removed. This is generally brought in its rough state and made ready by the consumer. To pre- pare the ganja for smoking, a small quantity is taken on the palm of the hand, and the seed, if the flower contains any, is removed. The ganja is then washed four or five times, dried, and mixed with tobacco. The classes chiefly addicted to smoking ganja are religious mendicants, the lower order of Brahmins, and a few artizans. As a rule ganja smokers are found at shrines or temples and mosques. But some of them resort to special houses called Akhada, where bhang and ganja are prepared. Men addicted to the practice keep taking whiffs of ganja about every half hour. Its effects are sudden and strong. Three or four pulls at a ganja pipe will prostrate a man not accustomed to smoke it. Especially among the weakly and ill-fed the use of ganja is said to harm the mind and nerves and even in some cases to cause death. Ganja trodden under foot is generally used. *Not printed.
40 3. Bhang is cultivated to a very small extent in Surat and Broach (about thirty-five acres in all). The plant does not grow spontaneously; it is cultivated like cereals, i.e., jawari and bajri, and harvested in November and February, as is the case with kharif and rabi crops. Alluvial land is preferable; no special care or attention is needed. Plants are also found here and there in the compounds of temples. The Surat cultivators collect only bhang, i.e., leaves and seeds from the plant. Some of the Broach cultivators understand the process of collecting bhang and ganja from the plant. The plants, when ready, are uprooted, made into bundles, and left to dry for three or four days. The tops of ganja kalis are picked up with hand, the plants are thrashed, and the leaves and fine little branches are collected. The mixture of leaves, fine little branches, and seeds from the ganja tops is known by the name of bhang. The plants are known as nar (male) and mada (female); wild hemp grows in Palanpur. 8. Bhang cultivation is decreasing; profits small compared with trouble of obtaining licenses and finding purchaser. 9. Alluvial land is preferable. Method of cul- tivation same as that practised in respect to cereals. 10. Belong to the ordinary cultivating classes. 11. As far as I know, ganja plants are not raised from the seed of wild hemp. 12. As far as I know, wild hemp is not cul- tivated. 13. The cultivator has to obtain a license to cultivate hemp plant; no duty is levied for the grant of permit. The cultivator is bound to sell his produce to licensed farmers only. 14. to 16. Please see answer No. 2. 17. Please see answer No. 2. Bhang and ganja are prepared by the consumers themselves. Yakuti is prepared by experts. 18. Both bhang and ganja deteriorate, if they are kept longer than four or five months. Yakuti also becomes ineffective and tasteless after two or three months. 19. Ganja is used for smoking as described in answer No. 2. Some people use ganja leaves for eating with the object of producing its effect without smoking ganja in a pipe. 20. Ganja is smoked by mendicants and low- class Brahmins; a few artizans also smoke. Ganja smoking is confined chiefly to towns and cities. Village people seldom smoke ganja. Hardly one per cent. of the male adult popula- tion smokes ganja. This figure is arrived at after due consideration of the material and economic conditions of the several classes of people. 21. Ganja trodden under foot is generally used. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is generally drunk. To save time habitual consumers sometimes eat bhang. Bhang is drunk by well-to-do Hindus, a few Musalmans and Parsis. The habitual consumers are chiefly goldsmiths, jewellers and Brahmin mendicants. Some village people drink bhang. Bhang drinkers may be put at two per cent. 25. The use of bhang is decreasing among the higher classes, Liquor has taken its place. The use of ganja is stationary among the mendicants and fakirs who do not take to liquor drinking. Yakuti consumers are very few. Five in a thousand 26. Bhang.Yakuti.Ganja. (a)Habitual moderate consumers7010060 (b)Habitual excessive consumers5...40 (c)Occasional moderate consumers25...... (d)Occasional excessive consumers......... 100100100 Bhang is drunk in small dose occasionally by persons not accustomed to it. Ganja is consumed by those who are habituated to it; occasional consumers41 hardship. The existing system is good and satis- factory. The sale and transport are brought under control; accounts are kept by the licensed retailers; the abkari and revenue officers examine these accounts from time to time. Bhang is not in any way injurious, Ganja is injurious, if taken in large quantity. Ganja-smokers do not form part of the working or useful classes of the popu- lation; no large revenue can be raised from the farm of hemp plant produce, or by raising the duty on bhang and ganja. From a humanity point of view interference is unnecessary. The loss of lives is very small, even if it is conceded that the lives of fakirs and mendicants should be saved. Alcohol has been the curse of the country since the past few years. I am strongly of opinion that any change in the existing system is politically unwise and unnecessary. The evil is so insigni- ficant compared with the political danger in these days of agitation that the bhang and ganja subject should be left untouched. I will state my reasons in full before the Commission. 40. Ganja-smoking is recommended in the case of asthma and diseases of lung. It is also given to buffaloes with the object of causing an increased flow of milk. Bhang leaves are also used for fumigation, cases of piles, fistula of anus. 41. A moderate use of bhang is beneficial; it creates appetite: it alleviates the effects of fatigue; its effects are of a mild exhilarant character and free from any tendency to commit violence or self- destruction. Excessive bhang-drinkers do not suffer in health. A moderate use of ganja is not harmful; it is a febrifuge in malarious districts: it enables the consumer to keep up the vital powers, Excessive ganja-smokers suffer in health if they do not get nourishing food. Insanity, impo- tency and consumption are the results of excessive smoking. Excessive use produces derangement of the mental power. It has the effect of impair- ing the moral sense. 43. Most decidedly. 44. Bhang effects.42 sive smokers would become insane; not fit to go to the Colaba Asylum, but creatures that are unfit for anything except smoking. I have seen such in temples, fakirs and such people, in temples all day smoking with red eyes. None of them insane such as you would send to the asylum. I have not seen an insane person from hemp drugs. I do not know, of course, how lunatic asylum statistics are prepared. I do not think there is a popular belief that ganja makes a man mad, but that it makes him thus indifferent to the affairs of life and taking to smoking at the temple. I am sure that there is no popular belief that ganja is respon- sible for a large proportion of the lunatics in asylums. I speak of Gujarat. Question 59.-I think that drugs are cheaper than liquor. If they are made equally dear, then people will take to liquor, which is an objection. Also I think that for political and religious reasons the taxation of drugs should not be raised. I would not, however, abolish the present taxes, to which the people have become accustomed. The hold that the ascetics, sadhus and fakirs have on the people cannot be overrated in its political connection with this question. It would bring agitation(at present confined to the bigher classes) down to the lower classes, who follow these sadhus completely. The sadhus and fakirs use the drugs religiously. 25. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR VYANKATESH BAPUJI WADEKAR, Deputy Collector, Ahmednagar. 1. My duty requires me to examine ganja and bhang shops. It also brings me sometimes into contact with men cultivating ganja. 2. Except round ganja all these definitions may be accepted for this province. These products are locally known by the names here given in this question. 3. I have no knowledge of the districts where it spontaneously grows. 4. It is not known by different names in this district, since it does not grow here. 5 and 6. The wild hemp plant is not grown in this district, so the information called for regard- ing it is not available. 7. Yes. The cultivation of the hemp plant for production of ganja, bhang and its seeds is made at the following places in this district, in my charge in the quantity given against them43 seers of water to 30 seers of boja and filtered. The filtrate becomes useful for drinking purposes, and is used in the Sholapur district. Ghota.44 34. For some days at least the consumer fore- going the use of the drug would feel languid, dispirited, dejected and weak. But the effects of the disuse of the drug by the consumer would not be more serious than this. 35. Yes, it would in my opinion be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. The consumers are not materially benefited by the use of these drugs except that they feel cheerful while under its influence. Fakirs, bairagis, etc., who have no means at their command to enjoy themselves other- wise, seek enjoyment in the use of these drugs. Yes; the drug would be consumed illicitly. The prohibition can, I think, be only enforced by prohibiting absolutely the cultivation of this drug. The prohibition would at the outset engender considerable discontent among the consumers, the majority of whom are beggars. Their discontent would never amount to a political danger. The prohibition, however, is likely to increase the use of alcoholic stimulants or other drugs less ex- pensive, such as dhatura, which is more injurious than hemp drug. 36. At present there is no reason to apprehend that alcohol is being substituted for hemp drugs. But the prohibition to use them might, it is feared, lead their consumers to the use of these drugs as labouring classes and beggars often stand in need of some intoxicating drugs to make light the effects of the fatigues of their labour. 37. Yes. The former is more intoxicating. Charas has a more intoxicating effect than ganja, it being the essence of the hemp plant. It is used in smoking, simply by adding godakho to it; while ganja is first perfectly cleaned and washed with water, and by mixing tobacco with the so- cleaned ganja it is used for smoking. Ganja is easily procurable at shops. But charas cannot be had in markets. 38. Round ganja is not prepared in this part of the country. Flat ganja has a more intoxicating effect on consumers than chur. Chur is nothing hue a powder-like substance that remains at the bottom of the ganja prepared and collected. Chur is used for smoking only; while ganja is used for various preparations. 39. The smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant is more injurious than drinking or eating the same or any other preparation, because smoking is hurtful. It affects lungs and chest, produces cough and excessive heat in the system and dries up blood. While in drinking and eating it has a beneficial effect on the constitution, inasmuch as it cools the system. It is therefore consumed even by higher classes in the hot season. 40. Yes. Bhang or ganja is mixed with powders made of other ingredients and used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of ganja, bhang or charas is beneficial in its effects:45 56. (a) The effects of hemp used in moderation when modified by the admixture of foreign sub- stances except dhatura are harmless. (b) If used in excess they are injurious to health. I am not aware of an instance in which the admixture of dhatura for personal consumption is used. But I hear that dhatura is added some- times by criminals to majum for administering to their victims, when its effects are very dangerous. Oftentimes the victims turn out insane. 57. Charas is never eaten or drunk as far as I know. It is either mixed with ganja or gudakho and smoked. Ganja is only smoked. Charas has a stronger effect. It stupefies one at once, that is, sooner than ganja, and the stupor lasts longer. Ganja if smoked stupefies one also at once but the stupor does not last long. When bhang is drunk as ghota or when majum is eaten it has also stupefying effects like ganja. 58. I consider the present system of excise administration in this province in respect of hemp drugs as working well. 59. I do not think it is capable of any improve- ment. 60. I think the process of its preparation is sufficiently controlled. As to its cultivation there is little need of control on it. 61. Charas, as stated above, is produced in too small a quantity to find market for it. What little is produced is consumed in fields. So there is hardly any necessity for special measures to control the process of its preparation. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang is, I think, sufficiently con- trolled at present. 63. I think the present system of (a) whole- sale (b) retail vend of (1) ganja, (2) bhang, or their preparations is free from any objection. 64. I have no objections to the existing regula- tions governing the export and import of these drugs and their preparations. 65. I think the taxation referred to in this question is quite reasonable. 66 and 67. No. 68. As to such houses or shops there are none in this province. 69. The wishes of the people are consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. For this purpose application bearing the signatures of the residents in a locality is submitted to the Collector, who sends it to the mamlatdar of the place for enquiry and report. Permission to open a shop is granted should the mamlatdar report that there is necessity for it. 70. The production of hemp plants being abundant in this district, there is no importation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States. 26. Evidence of KHAN BAHADUR DADABHAI DEENSHAH, Parsi, Huzur Deputy Collector and Magistrate,1st Class, Kaira. 1. I had had opportunities for several years before 1880 of coming into daily contact with a few persons, some of them in well-to-do circumstances, and others of the class of peons in Government offices, and foot and mounted constables, who were habitual as well as occasional consumers of ganja. Some of them consumed it in excessive and some in moderate quantities; some had, after indulgence in it in excessive quantities, reverted to modera- tion or ceased altogether to smoke ganja. Now and then I had had occasion to notice gangs of bairagis, fakirs, and such like wandering tribes, who resort to ganja-smoking as a rule, and with whom some of the persons referred to above by me used some- times to associate. Since 1882 I have been living at a short distance from people of the labouring classes, a very large portion of whom are addicted to ganja smoking. After the receipt of Govern- ment orders, I endeavoured to seek information from every direction where I thought there was a possibility of my getting reliable particulars. I have consulted police officers, abkari inspectors, licensed vendors of ganja and bhang, ganja and bhang consumers, including those who have given up the use of ganja after indulgence in it for some time, and friends in all the districts of Gujarat, who are more or less conversant with the subject. 2. Charas and chur are not imported into and sold in this district. Flat ganja only is imported and sold in this district, and it is known as ganja. Bhang goes under that name only almost as a rule. Sometimes it is called subji. 3. I am not aware of any. 4. Vide answer to No. 3. 5 and 6. I do not know. 7. For its fibre the hemp plant is cultivated in several talukas of the Kaira district. The follow- ing are the particulars concerning it: 46 Ahmedabad Collectorate; but the mamlatdar of Daskrohi, to whom a reference was made by me, has not been able to confirm my information. My informant, however, most emphatically assures me that it was cultivated. Its cultivation there was given up also since the introduction of the Bombay Abkari Act. 9. The methods of cultivation of hemp plant for bhang and ganja were almost similar to those described in letter No. 562, dated 30th August 1893, from the District Deputy Collector of Bijapur, attached to letter No. 4752, dated 11th September 1893, from the Commissioner of Customs, Salt, Opium and Abkari, to the Chief Secretary to Government, Revenue Department. 10. They were of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 14. No. 18. Bhang deteriorates in quality after one year, and ganja begins gradually to lose its in- toxicating qualities generally after a year, and becomes unfit for smoking alter two years. The above are the periods for which bhang and ganja remain good with ordinary care. Damp weather affects them, from which they ought to be pro- tected as much as possible. Want of such pre- cautions leads to their early deterioration. No special remedies are known which can preserve their quality from the effects of time. 19. Charas is not at all imported for sale into Gujarat. Sometimes bairagis and fakirs bring it with them in small quantities, and people who habitually associate with them are offered to smoke it. Ganja is almost exclusively used for smoking. To a very limited extent it is used in the preparation of majum or pak, or yakuti. The majum prepared with the admixture of ghi obtained by boiling small leaves with water and ghi does not deteriorate in as short a time as majum prepared with bhang ghi. Ganja majum, if prepared with care and skill, keeps good for about six months, while bhang majum becomes rancid in half that period. 20. In all localities, and generally all classes of people smoke ganja. Those belonging to the higher classes of Hindus as well as Musalmans do not smoke openly, and do not admit that they are addicted to it. In the districts of Gujarat from four to five per cent. of the population are habitual ganja smokers; but as they almost, as a rule, belong to the class of male adults, the percentage of ganja smokers to the male adult population may be said to amount to something like 14 per cent. The population of the town of Kaira, according to the last census, is 10,101, and of males of the age of 20 years and upwards, 2,881. The total number of persons who indulge in ganja smoking are roughly estimated at 400. 21. Flat ganja only is imported into the district of Gujarat for sale. 22. Charas is not at all imported and sold. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. All classes of people more or less drink bhang during the hot season as a cool beverage; but in the districts of Ahmedabad and Kaira its use is not so general as in the districts of Broach and Surat. Well-to-do people use it in larger numbers than the poorer classes, because bhang drink is a little expensive when compared with ganja smoking. 25. Charas is not at all used. Bhang is used to a very limited extent only for drinking during the hot season. As to the extent of the use of ganja for smoking, please see answer to question No. 20. The use of ganja does not appear to have either increased or decreased to such an extent as to draw attention. The chief consumers of the drug are bairagis, fakirs, and mendicants, and people of the lower classes. Bairagis and fakirs live on alms, and are not able to spend much on intoxicants, which naturally confine them to ganja. The income of the lower classes is also very limited, and they, therefore, prefer ganja to other drinks or drugs as less costly. Ganja and bhang for the preparation of majum or yakuti, are not used to the same extent now as in former years. Before the introduction of the Bombay Abkari Act several persons in large towns used to make majum or yakuti of various quali- ties for sale. Their trade in it has been put a stop to by the restrictions of the law. Persons of respectable classes in good pecuniary circum- stances used to make majum or yakuti at their houses, and in some cases very costly, by the admixture of various ingredients and minerals. Members of the rising generation do not feel inclined to put themselves to all the trouble and expense required for yakutis of superior kinds in consequence of the facilities which have during the last few years increased for obtaining country confectioned liquor and foreign wines and spirits. Ganja, however, was to such a very limited extent required for majums and yakutis that the discontinuance of its use largely in that direction cannot be said to in any way have affected the quantity needed for general consumption. 26. Out of 100 ganja smokers47 Some persons take one part of tobacco and two parts of ganja. Tobacco is mixed, it is said, for two reasons, viz.:48 part; but ganja in a small quantity mixed with jagri is given to horses sometimes to enable them to perform long journeys without much feeling, through intoxication, the effect of fatigue. 41. (a) Those who are habitual moderate consum- ers of ganja do not feel hunger till they have smoked it. It cannot be said, however, to be beneficial in the sense of increasing the appetite or strengthening digestion. For a few days49 7. The hemp plant is grown for production of ganja and bhang only. It is cultivated in Surdi and Manegaum in Barsi taluka, in Kowta in Sholapur taluka, and in Kasegaum in Pandharpur taluka. The cultivation extends to 45 acres and 25 gunthas in the Sholapur district, on an aver- age struck from figures of thirteen years. The minimum extent of cultivation was 11 acres in Barsi in the Year 1883, and the maximum was 100 acres and 27 gunthas in Barsi and Pandharpur in 1875-76. 8. There has been no considerable increase or decrease recently. 9. The land is first prepared and manured at the rate of about two cart-loads per acre. The seeds are cast and beds are prepared as for garden crops with a view to water the crop. The male plants are subsequently removed. For the first month the crop is watered every week and a little later afterwards. 10. They are of the same classes as other culti- vators. 11 and 12. No. 13. I cannot say that the cultivation is restricted. I think it can be grown in any black soil as a garden crop in a hot climate where the rainfall is not excessive, as it is in the Concan. 14. Yes. Only ganja and bhang are prepared. The places and the extent to which they are grown have been named in the answer to question No. 7. 15. No wild hemp plant is to be found in this province. The only products prepared are (1) bhang, (2) ganja. From bhang ghota is prepared by the drug being well rubbed and mixed with milk or juice of sugarcane with some spices, as almonds, saffron, etc. This is drunk. There is another preparation called majum which is made from bhang. Bhang is washed clean and water is squeezed off. Ghee is then applied to it, and the mixture is then boiled in water for about two days, The liquid part is then extracted and mixed with syrup of sugar and hardened. The substance is then made into square pieces and sold under the name of majum. This is eaten. The method of preparing boja is as follows: 50 29. Dried tobacco is only mixed with ganja by all smokers when smoking. Nothing else is mixed with it. What is mixed with bhang is already stated in the answer to question No. 15. Dhatura is never used in any of the mixtures. The object of using tobacco is to make the preparation easy for smoking. In the different preparations of bhang, the liquid is used for making the drug drinkable or eatable. The other ingredients are mixed only to give it good taste or flavour. 30. Bhang is generally prepared and drunk privately, either singly, or in company of friends and relations. Ganja smokers form a company in several places. The use is mainly confined to the male sex and to adults. The drugs are not used by children. 31. The habit is easily formed. It is a little difficult to break off the practice of smoking ganja. The tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive is to be found amongst smokers and not amongst eaters or drinkers. 32. There is no such custom, social or religious. It is only on the night of the Maha Shivaratra that some persons use the bhang drink; but the use is neither essential nor much prevalent. 33. The smokers of ganja are held in disrepute. This may be said to be social public opinion. Those who use bhang are not so regarded. Ganja smokers are held in disrepute on account of their mental derangement, which results from the use of the drug. Hemp plant is not worshipped by any sects of the people. 34. I do not think it would, except in a few cases of ganja smokers. If any would be made to forego, he would gratify his craving by means of tobacco. There would be hardly any privation in the case of other preparations. 35. I do not think the entire prohibition of the drug in places adjacent to foreign territory is feasible. The drug will be easily consumed illicitly. The prohibition can be enforced by pro- hibiting the cultivation of the drug. I think that the prohibition would cause serious discontent amongst excessive consumers only of ganja. There will be no political danger. I do not think that the prohibition will be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs to any ap- preciable extent. 36. There is no reason to think so. 37. Charas is not used in these parts, and so the difference in effect cannot be explained. 38. Flat ganja is generally used, and not round ganja or chur in these parts. I think flat ganja is more appreciated than round ganja, the effect of intoxication being greater in the former than in the latter. 39. Smoking seems to be more injurious than drinking or eating. Smokers generally appear to be pale and weakened in constitution. The mental derangement amongst smokers appears to be appreciable. These effects do not appear to have been caused by drinking or eating the drug in any form. 40. No. Bhang is sometimes used in the case of some cattle diseases as a tonic or cooling draught. 41. Bhang may be to a certain extent as a cooling draught, as the general impression is. (a) Not as a food accessory but digestive. (b) Bhang may alleviate fatigue without pro- ducing bad effects. (c) No, so far as I know. Marwaris use bhang as a cooling draught after exhaustion in the hot season. Seventy-five per cent. of them use the drug. Among consumers of ganja, the same number may be said to use it for one purpose or other mentioned in (b). 42. I consider that the moderate use of the drug, except smoking ganja, seems harmless. I have not come across any instances in which the use of the drug in any other form has caused any appreciable injury, bodily or mental. 43. Yes, they are. 44. He feels a craving, and consequently the gratification seems to refresh him. It produces intoxication, during which the user may not feel the keenness of hunger. Ganja does not seem to create appetite as bhang or majum seems to do. The effect of intoxication seems to last for two or three hours. There seem to be no after-effects, except those produced by gradual use. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing and consequent uneasiness. 45. Even moderate use of ganja for smoking produces noxious effects, both physical and mental. It does impair the constitution. It seems to injure the digestion and cause asthma. It induces laziness; but does not seem to lead to habits of immorality or debauchery. It seems to deaden the intellect. I have not seen instances in which the moderate use of the drug has produced in- sanity. Long use produces mental derangement, making the user unfit for any work requiring proper exercise of the intellect. 46. The effects are in the same way more noxious in proportion. The excessive use of ganja by men of weak brains may produce insanity. I know of only one instance of the kind. 47. No. 48. No. In the case I have quoted in my answer to question No. 46, I have seen that the children of the consumer have not been affected in any way. 49. It is learnt that the moderate use of these drugs is practised as an aphrodisiac by prostitutes, and it is thus more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. The use of the hemp does not seem to produce impotence as a direct effect. 50. There seems to be no difference, except in the degree of its effects. 51 and 52. I have not learnt that there are. I do not think that any such direct connection can be traced. 53. No, neither. 54. I know of no instances. 55. Yes, there have been a few instances in which bhang was mixed with food in some shape. I do not think complete stupefaction can be thus induced. 56. The admixture of ganja with tobacco makes smoking easier, and that of milk or juice of sugarcane makes bhang agreeable as a drink, and the effect is sooner produced. Bhang is sometimes mixed with fried substances, in which form also it acts sooner. 57. I have never seen it eaten or drunk, nor have I heard in my enquiries that they are. 58. I think it is working well, but seems to require improvement in two respects. 59 and 60. The cultivation and harvesting of ganja or bhang are not properly controlled. No special inspection is made of its cultivation, nor is the crop kept under proper supervision, so as to prevent illicit export or sale. There is nothing to
51 prevent illicit sale to anyone having no permit or license to sell the drug. 61. No; and so I cannot answer the question. 62. I think it should be, and it would be feasible. The Abkari Inspector may go to the place where the crop is grown at the time of the har- vest, have it reaped in his presence, kept in a room under his seal, and sold to retail vendors in his presence. The cultivator of the drug should be required to give notice of the date of reaping the crop, and the time when the retail dealers may re- quire the drug for sale. 63. The objection to the system of wholesale sale of bhang and ganja is stated above, The system of retail sale is open to one objection, which is that the rates are not fixed by Government. This leaves the retail seller at liberty to unduly profit himself at the expense of the consumer. I should say that the rates should be fixed as in the case of opium and other like things. 64 None. 65. I think it is, so far as the present system is concerned. Some change will have to be made if the rates of retail sale will be fixed. 66. No. 67. No, except as stated in my answer to ques- tion No. 63. 68. None. 69. Representations from the people are consi- dered; but there is nothing which can be called local option. The number of shops is practically the same as it was before. If the general public opinion be in favour of the removal of the shop, it should, I think, be considered. 70 I know not of any. I think the imposition of duty on drugs used in British territory is evaded in very rare instances. 28. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR SITARAM DAMODAR, Huzur Deputy Collector, Khandesh. 1. As Daftardar (Personal Assistant) to the Collector of Khandesh, I have seen the whole of the Khandesh district during the years 1890-91, 1891-92 and 1892-93 and have come across men smoking ganja and drinking preparation made from bhang, have made enquiries with them as to the effect of the drug, and have seen hemp plant fields. 2. These definitions might be accepted for this district. It would, however, be well to note that in Sanskrit the plant is known as "vijaya" (promoter of success), and the Hindu mythology gives the history of it, that the plant was pro- duced when the gods were churning the ocean with Mount Mandara. The preparation from it is held as a favourite drink of Indra, the Hindu deity. In this district the distinctions of ganja, such as flat, round or chur, are not taken into con- sideration. Ganja of all the three descriptions is taken under one general head "Ganja," and no preference is given to one over the other. Bhang likewise is known under one general head, "Bhang," and the three names given are not used to draw any distinction in its kind. 3 and 4. Not to my knowledge in the Khan- desh District. 5 and 6. Require no reply. 7. Hemp plant is cultivated in Khandesh to a very small extent. The object of the culti- vation is to produce ganja, and with it the bhang, and for neither the fibre seed nor for to produce charas. The cultivation of this plant is confined to the Jalgaon taluka, in which an area of about 30 acres was cultivated last year. 8. There has been a decrease in the area culti- vated with these plants. The reason for the decrease, as given by the cultivators and owners of fields, is that the profit from the cultivation is uncertain and less remunerative than other crops. Also it is found that the cultivation of this plant in Khandesh requires great trouble and more expense than in Nimar and the Cen- tral Provinces, the climate of which agrees more favourably for the production of these drugs than the climate of this district. 9. The land selected for the cultivation of this plant is generally black or dusky white. This is richly manured every year and the cost of the manure is roughly estimated at Rs. 15 per acre. In the month of May or earlier, the ground is well ploughed, and at the commence- ment of the season, which period the culti- vators call "mrigá nakshatra" (commence- ment of June), the seed is sown in harrows. The estimated quantity of seed required per acre is 2½lb. From the date the seed is put in the ground the shoots germinate after eight days, and in about a month the plant reaches the height of about one foot. When this height is arrived at the side leaves or shoots are all removed so as to give the fullest strength to the stem to thrive in height, which is not the case if side shoots or branches are not removed. The removing of side shoots is continued till the plant comes to the height of three or four feet. The cultivation of seed is generally two inches apart. After the plant is a month old, an ex- perienced man, who is able to distinguish male from female plants, goes to the field and roots out all the male plants. This pahani or in- spection work is done every week, and at each time the male plant and "ardh-nari" (half male and half female) plants are extirpated. Removal of such plants makes the cultivation scattered. The plant stands for about fifteen days without rain; but after that time, if there is no rainfall, the field is watered every ten or fifteen days, and to allow this being done, bagait land, with means of irrigation either by a well or pat, is selected for cultivation of this plant. The plant generally flowers in November; and in December the flowering tops are cut and collected. (A photograph of ganja field is appended.) 10. The ordinary cultivators cultivate this plant in addition to other crops. There is not a special class of cultivators for this cultivation in Khandesh. 11. No. 12. Not in Khandesh. 13. No restriction is placed on the cultivation of this plant; but it being less remunerative, as Vol. vii. K 2
52 explained in paragraph 8, cultivators in other parts do not care to take to this cultivation. It could be cultivated in any part of Khandesh in ordinary good soil, and the elevation of land from sea- level, climate, etc., are not against the cultivation. 14. Ganja and bhang are manufactured in Khandesh in Jalgaon taluka to a small extent, and the quantity manufactured is estimated at 700 Indian maunds (a maund equal to 40 seers) of ganja and of about 30 maunds of bhang. 15. The flowering tops are cut with a bill-hook in December, as mentioned in paragraph 9, and arranged in a layer of about a foot high on a ground well-beaten and the floor cow-dung. The side flowering tops are then cut and placed in the hollow places of the bed so made. This being done, men (generally) commence squeezing the layer with the sole of their feet. This is done in the early morning, and after it, the layer is turned up and exposed to the heat of the sun, and allowed to remain so till the morning of the next day, when the same operation of squeezing com- mences. The process is carried for three days, and the ganja is then fit to be stored up. The tender leaves which fall from the tops are collected and stored as bhang. This is all the process employed in Khandesh for manufacturing ganja and bhang. As regards preparation for smoking, the ganja is first well soaked in water, and, removing the seed and stems therefrom, the leaves are washed in several changes of water. It is then squeezed between the two palms to extract water, and then it is considered fit to go to the pipe. In using it, one part of ganja to three parts of the tobacco are generally taken, and the two well mixed up. This being done, good charcoal or coir yarn fire is placed on it and smoked. The process will be better known from the photograph (No. 4) append- ed. In the case of bhang, the leaves only are taken and ground on a currystone, admixing therein pepper and other ingredients. When all is ground very fine, it is strained through cloth and the excretal is thrown away. The extract so taken is generally mixed with milk in the propor- tion of one to three parts of milk, and then it is poured up and down, which is considered necessary for thorough mixture. This being done, the bhang preparation is fit for being drunk. The process would be better understood from the photograph (No. 5) appended. For eating the decoction of bhang, it is mixed with sweet things richly spiced, sometimes with almonds, saffron or musk, and kept ready for consumers. This, however, is very little consumed in Khandesh. 16. It is prepared in their houses. The other portion of the question requires no reply. 17. It is general with all Hindus and Muham- madans, specially mendicants, such as gosavis, bairagis and fakirs; with others sparingly. It is therefore difficult to say which particular class use it and which not. 18. It does deteriorate in keeping, and, if kept for more than a year, it is fit to be thrown away as manure. With ordinary care it keeps good for 12 months. The causes of deterioration are that the resinous substance with which it is pressed is entirely dried up and evaporates from the leaves, and thereby the intoxicating qualities are lost. By keeping this article air-tight it might help to prevent its being deteriorated soon. But, since this has not been tried, nothing defi- nitely could be said in that direction. 19. Charas is not known in Khandesh. Ganja is known and is used for smoking only and for no other purpose, to my knowledge, in this dis- trict. 20. I would refer to my answer to question 17, and add that, amongst gosavis 90, bairagis and fakirs 70, pardeshis 50, and from other classes 5 per cent. of the Hindu and Muhammadan population smoke ganja. It is common through- out the district, and not confined to a particular portion or locality. 21. I would refer to my answer to question 2. No distinction is observed in Khandesh as regards its kind. 22. Requires no reply, since charas is not used in Khandesh. 23. No. 24. The same proportion as in question 20. Those who are for the drug use it in either way. No special class can be shown. 25. Not on an increase, but might be said to be on the decrease. The reason for the decrease appears to be (1) that there is now less tendency towards encouraging the sect of gosavis, bairagis, and fakirs, and consequently their number is fast diminishing; (2) that the old religious scruples against using alcoholic drinks are dying away and therefore those whose inclination is excited to indulge in intoxication go to the latter, leaving the former, and this is what appears to be the cause of decrease. 26. Ganja and bhang collectively (a) 50 (b) 85 (c) 25 (d) 10 27. For (a) from pardeshis, (b) gosavis and fakirs, (c) and (d) pardeshis and others collec- tively. Under (a) and (b) the men who have resigned all worldly care and are scantily clad and fed and sheltered have, in order to forget their sufferings, contracted the practice. In the case of others, it is regarded as a stimulant. The practice of drinking bhang amongst the pardeshis is chiefly due to the fact that they are originally the natives of Northern India, and as ganja or bhang is the ordinary staple narcotic plant in that province, they get into the habit of using this drug as a drink. The preparation made for drinking is termed thandai (cooling draught), and the general belief is that it keeps them cool from the excessive heat of the country, because the effect of this drink is cooling. 28. (a) Half or one tola of the drug, and in price ½ or 1 anna. (b) Three to five tolas, and in price 3 or 5 annas the value of the drug. 29. Ordinarily, the bhang is ground and drunk with sugar, pepper, and a little milk, and the following ingredients are used for an excep- tional or luxurious drink: 53 Dhatura is not used as an ingredient, but is sometimes admixed in common joke to befool any of their companions. 30. Bhang and ganja is consumed chiefly by gosavis, bairagis, fakirs, and other religious men- dicant classes. It is consumed to a considerable extent by banias, Marwaris, and pardeshis. Now and then a Kunbi or Brahmin may be seen smok- ing ganja or drinking bhang; but the practice is not common. Among the Brahmins and the higher classes it is carried on in solitude, as it is considered a vice. Both these drugs are taken in solitude and in company. Its consumption is confined chiefly to the male sex. It is very seldom that a man below the age of 25 takes to these habits; but when once the habit is formed, it generally does not leave them till death. I have not heard of children consuming any of these drugs. Charas in unknown in these parts; so that there is nothing to say about its consumption. 31. The habit of taking either ganja or bhang is not easily formed. Occasional smokers of ganja and drinkers of bhang are seen hundreds of times using it; but they have no craving for it. Bairagis, fakirs and other mendicant classes who pretend to a celibate life, form the habit on pur- pose, as they believe that the smoking of ganja keeps them from sexual and other desires; but when once it is formed, the habit is difficult to break off. I have never yet seen a moderate smoker of ganja or drinker of bhang having a craving for more. It does not appear that the habit has a tendency to develop into excess. 32. There are no social or religious customs that I can point out with regard to the con- sumption of ganja, unless the custom of bairagis and others of smoking ganja in company be called a social custom. Bhang, on the other hand, is consumed on both social or religious occasions. On fast days it is generally taken, because it is believed to be a sort of a cooling draught. Among the Hindus generally on Maha Shiv- ratra holiday, these drinkers of bhang join together in a temple of the god Shiva and drink bhang or ghota as it is technically called, in company in honour of the god, as that plant is supposed to be the favourite one of the deity in the Hindu mythology. At the time of the holi- days bhang is consumed by most people, because it is considered as a sort of a stimulant to help them to enjoy. It is at the same time not essen- tial that bhang or ganja should be offered on social or religious occasions. It is left to the choice of the people. It is more optional than essential. The use of these drugs on social and festive occasions is temperate, and never, to my knowledge, led to the formation of a habit, nor had it any injurious effect. 33. Occasional smoking of ganja or drinking of bhang is not generally regarded as much worse than the smoking of tobacco. But when a man has contracted the habit of being intoxicated with the narcotic drug, it is generally considered as disreputable in a social point of view. From a religious point of view, he is not condemned, nor his conduct disapproved. The reason why the use of the narcotic is in disrepute is that it is supposed to unnerve a man and make him generally unfit for the ordinary duties of life. It is supposed also to unhinge the intellect to a certain extent. I do not know of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant practised on any occasion by any sect of people54 43. Yes, they are. 44. Benumbing them from all anxieties of life; stimulates them to take to work; produces little intoxication and creates hunger. The effects of smoking last for a few minutes, but that of eating or drinking last for several hours. It cannot be said that it allays hunger. In moderate use there are no perceptible after-effects. 45 and 46. Information on these points is not within my knowledge. 47 and 48. This does not become a hereditary habit, except in the case of gosavis and bairagis, and in no way affect the children. 49 to 54. Not to my knowledge. 55. There are no such examples of its kind in Khandesh. 56. When hemp is used in moderation by the admixture of other medicinal substances, it serves as a tonic; but when it is taken in excess, it has its bad qualities like other narcotic drugs, and proves injurious to the health of consumers, though admixture might soften a little. Dhatura is not used as an ingredient. 57. There are no instances of eating ganja to my knowledge in Khandesh. 58. The excise administration in respect of hemp drugs is working well in this district. The Collector, under the control and direction of the Commissioner of Customs, Salt, Opium and Abkari, is charged with the carrying out of the provisions of the Akbari Act. In this he is aided by his assistants and other subordinate officers, also establishment designated as district inspectors and sub-inspectors specially employed for duties under the Act. The import, export and transport of these drugs are controlled by passes issued by responsible officers. The sale of the drugs is permitted under certain conditions of the license. The sale of drugs to one man in one day is limited to a certain weight, and the possession of the drugs over the given limit is watched as an offence. Thus the burning desire of the consumers is tempered down to moderation and the spread of the vice is checked. Since the above good objects are gained by the present administration, no improvement in it appears necessary. 59. The present administration is not suggestive of any improvement. 60. The Abkari Act, as it now stands, does not lay any control on cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant and the process of its preparation, and so any modification in the present system is not practicable. If, however, it is provided in the Act55 8 and 9. Requires no answer, as there is no cultivation of the hemp plant. 10. Persons who cultivate hemp do not form a special class; but they are of the same class as other agricultural cultivators. 11 and 12. Cannot say. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is not restricted in my district; but it is not culti- vated, as the cultivators in these parts are igno- rant as to the mode of its cultivation. I am unable to furnish information about special conditions, etc. 14. No; but ganja is imported from Satara and Ahmednagar. 15. Preparations for ganja are made thus56 generally temperate. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit, and is not otherwise injurious. 33. In this district those who make use of ganja as an intoxicating ingredient are regarded as men of a lower social grade, and their actions are severe- ly criticised. There is a public opinion, but not so strong as before. As the consumption of in- toxicants is prohibited according to the Hindu religion, those who consume them incur a certain amount of odium. The use of any form of the narcotic is generally in disrepute on account of religious sentiment. There is no custom of wor- shipping the hemp plant in this district. 34. It will be a serious privation to those who ore habituated to the excessive consumption of the drug to forego its use. The consumers would suffer from illness when they are deprived of the drug they are accustomed to. They will not be able to take their ordinary meals, and will get maciated. The probable number of ganja con- sumers will be one per cent. of the total population. 35. It will be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. The drug would be consumed illicitly. The use of ganja can be effectively pro- hibited by putting a stop to its cultivation. The prohibition will occasion serious discontent among the consumers. Such discontent will not amount to a political danger. Most of the consumers are said to have become cowards by the use of the hemp plant. It is impossible to say that the pro- hibition will be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. But the probabilities are that recourse will be had to alcoholic stimu- lants. 36. There is no reason for thinking that alcohol is now being substituted for ganja. 37. Charas smoking is not practised in this district. 38. Round ganja is not imported here for sale. The flat ganja is considered more intoxicating than the chur ganja. 39. Smoking is considered more injurious than drinking or eating any of these drugs, as the smoke affects the brain more quickly than eating or drinking. 40. Native doctors substitute on rare occasions ganja for chloroform on account of the medicinal qualitities of the former. Ganja is also utilized in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of ganja is beneficial in its effects57 produced much sooner by the habitual excessive use of ganja than by its moderate use. 47. The habitual moderate use of ganja is not a hereditary habit, and does not affect the children of the moderate consumer. 48. The longing for ganja is not hereditary, and has no effect on the children of the excessive ganja consumer. 49. Ganja is used by some persons as an aphro- disiac. It is so used by some prostitutes. The use of ganja for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. It weakens the human body, and consequently brings on im- potence. 50. The excessive use of ganja for the above purpose sooner produces deleterious effects than its moderate use. 51. Of the bad characters, most gamblers are moderate ganja-consumers. The general commis- sion of crimes has no connection with the con- sumption of ganja. 52. Even in the case of excessive consumption crimes are not committed. 53. Even the excessive consumption of ganja does not incite to unpremeditated crimes, and there are no instances in which indulgence in ganja has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Criminals do not use ganja to fortify them- selves to commit premeditated acts of violence or other crimes. 55. It is customary for criminals to induce their victims to partake of ganja and so stupefy them in order to further their bad designs. But com- plete stupefaction cannot be induced by ganja without admixture. Dhatura is mixed with it to produce complete stupefaction. 56. The effects of ganja used (a) in moderation and (b) in excess, are not modified by the admix- ture of other substances. Those who require strong narcotics mix dhatura for their personal use or for administration to others. 57. Ganja is not eaten or drunk to any great extent in this district, and hence no more inform- ation than what has already been given can be supplied. 58. The present system of excise administration in respect of hemp drugs has been working well. 59. Requires no improvement. 60. Ganja is not produced in this district. 61. Charas is not produced in this district. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should be controlled by issuing licenses for its cultivation and for the preparation of bhang. 63. There is no objection to the present system of the vend of ganja. 64. No objection. 65. The taxation of ganja is reasonable with reference to other intoxicants. 66. It is not necessary that there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja. 67. There is no objection to the present method of taxing ganja. 68. There are no houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs or their preparations, where they may be consumed on the premises. 69. Before a shop is opened in any locality the wishes of the people are consulted Their opinions are received through the mamlatdar of the taluka in which the shop is to be opened. Local public opinion ought to be given weight to. 70. There are no facts regarding the smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States into the dis- trict of Dharwar. Oral evidence. Question 1.58 brought from Nagar in the Ahmednagar District. It also can be had in the ganja-producing villages of this district. The seed is of blue colour, and in form resembles the Argad seed, but is little flat- tened. At the time of sowing the seed, the soil, which has already been tilled, is first made level, and the next day the seed is sown into it in a row by means of a bamboo pipe fixed to the plough. The rows are about a cubit and a half (three feet) apart from each other. The seed is sown in the rainy season at the time when the Punarwasu Nakshatra sets in. About one and a half to two seers of the seed is required for the cultivation of one acre of the soil. Fifteen days after the sowing of the seed the field is weeded with the implement called kolpe, and then after 8 days the field is weeded with the hand. The same process (weeding with the hand) is repeated every fortnight. By these processes the spontaneous growth of weeds is prevented between the rows of the crop. The intervening space between the rows of the crop is made soft and crumbly by repeated- ly turning it over with a kolpe at intervals of 15 days at a time. This conduces to the growth of crop and consequent budding. It is necessary for the cultivator to engage a servant at a cost of about Rs. 8 a month, a fortnight after the sow- ing of the seed. The duty of the servant is to go through the crop daily, and to remove all male plants and plants affected with the following vegetable diseases. The plants are generally affected by them at the top: 59 20. Charas is not used here. Ganja is smoked by all classes of the native community in this district. The proportion is about 5 per cent. in the whole district. 21. Only flat ganja is used in this district. 22. Not in use. 23. Not used for smoking. 24. Higher classes of the Hindu community drink bhang, especially on certain fast days in the district60 31. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR RANGO RAMCHANDRA BHARDI, Deputy Collector and Native Assistant to the Commissioner, Poona, Central Division. 1. I am a native of the Southern Mahratta country, for which I have to give evidence, and have served Government in different capacities in the revenue branch for more than ten years in that country. I have spent nearly the whole of that period in the Dharwar district. I have served only for a few months in the Belgaum and Bijapur districts. During almost the whole period of my service in the Dharwar district I was a travelling officer. I had then opportunities of knowing the habits and customs of the people of that district; but cannot say that I then acquired such know- ledge of the subject as would enable me to answer fully and properly the questions put to me by the Commission. I am framing my answer to the questions from the results of the enquiries that I have recently made under the directions contained in paragraph 1 of Government Resolution No. 6601, dated the 11th September 1893, Revenue Department. 2. Dr. Prain's definition of ganja and charas may be accepted for the Southern Mahratta country. Ganja which is sold in that province is flat ganja. Round ganja and chur or broken ganja are unknown in that province. The defi- nition of bhang as given by Dr. Prain does not hold good in that province, as ganja which is reduced to powder either at the time when flat ganja is prepared or subsequently when it is deposited in bags or packages is sold as bhang there. Bhang is locally known among the Canarese-speaking people by the name of bhangi. 3. The hemp plant does not grow spontaneously in any of the districts of which I have knowledge. 4, 5 and 6. Vide answer to the preceding question. 7. Yes; for production of only ganja and bhang. The cultivation of the plant for that purpose is carried on only in the Bijapur district, and to a very small extent. The area under such cultivation in that district was 13 acres in 1892-93, 3 acres in 1891-92, and only 1 acre in each of the preced- ing three years In the Dharwar district the plant is not at all cultivated, and in the Belgaum district only 2 acres were under its cultivation in the year 1889-90. Since that year there has been no cultivation of the plant in that district for any purpose. 8. The figures given in the answer to the pre- ceding question will show that the area under such cultivation is itself inconsiderable. 9. Mode of cultivation.61 Gulkand is conserve of roses mixed with ghi prepared as described above. The only kind of sweetmeat known in the Southern Mahratta country is majum, The sweet- meats known in the Deccan by the names of yakuti, shrikhand, and gulkand are unknown in the Southern Mahratta country. Preparation of bhang for drinking ghota.62 per cent., and as compared with that for the year 1888-89, shows an increase of more than cent. per cent. This increase may be due to some extent to competition, and is no doubt partly due to the in- crease in the population, which is about 24 per cent.; but, as it is reported by the mamlatdar of Bijapur that the retail sale price has been uniform since 1887-88; I conclude that the increase in the revenue is to a great extent due to the increased use of the drugs in this district too. For the Bel- gaum district information as regards the quantity of the drugs consumed is available only for the last two years. No conclusion can be drawn from this information. The amount of the license-fees realised during the past year, 1892-93, as com- pared with that for the year 1883-84, represents an increase of more than 44 per cent.; but the in- crease during the preceding three years was not so high: it was only 16 per cent. The retail sale price is reported to have risen from 8 annas to 10 or 12 annas per lb since 1891-92. Considering the increase in the population, which is about 17 per cent. during the past 10 years, and the rise in the price lately, I am not prepared to say that the use of the drugs is on the increase in this dis- trict. 26. It is difficult to estimate the proportion, but I can say only that habitual excessive consu- mers and occasional excessive consumers are con- siderably few. Occasional moderate consumers are also few. A large number of the consumers is, I believe, made up of habitual moderate con- sumers. 27. Habitual excessive consumers are mainly taken from bairagis, gosávis, and fakirs, and habitual moderate consumers belong to these and other classes of the people mentioned in my answer to question No. 20. Occasional moderate consumers and occasional excessive consumers will be found in any class of the people; but, as al- ready remarked, such consumers are, I believe, considerably few in number in the Southern Mahratta country. The habits of bairagis, gosá- vis and fakirs, who are generally habitual exces- sive consumers, are well known. They are the most indolent and useless persons in the world. They wander about the country begging, and indulge in the use of the drugs. Many illiterate persons acquire the habit of using the drugs with the as- sociation of these beggars. Some acquire the habit by using the drugs on account of their medicinal qualities. Some acquire it by using the drugs under the belief that they produce con- centration of thoughts. People of the working class and musical performers acquire the habit by using the drugs as stimulants alleviating their fatigue. Such people are generally habitual mode- rate consumers. Occasional moderate or occasion- al excessive consumers are generally persons who use the drugs on Maha Shivratra, or such other days on which they are prevented by their religion from resorting to alcoholic stimulants. Some of this class of consumers happen to use the drugs when offered by their friends or acquaintances, who are either habitual moderate or habitual exces- sive consumers. 28. The average allowance and cost of ganja and bhang per diem to each of the two classes of consumers is detailed below:63 would not be impossible, to prohibit the use of the drugs; but it is not quite necessary to do so. The entire prohibition would, no doubt, cause serious discontent among the habitual excessive consumers, such as bairagis, gosávis, fakirs, and mendicants; but I do not think that such discon- tent would amount to a political danger, as such persons carry no influence with the public in general, and are limited in number in the South- ern Mahratta country. Considering the baneful effect the use of the drugs produces on the mental and physical condition of the persons using them immoderately, I am humbly of opinion that it is absolutely necessary that the consumption of the drugs should be restricted as far as possible. If the drugs become dearer and scarce, the consumers will naturally be more economical and prudent than now in using them. The consequence will be that the number of excessive consumers will gradually decrease, and some of the moderate consumers will, perhaps, substitute tobacco for ganja for smoking. I do not think that any con- siderable number of such people will have recourse to alcoholic stimulants if further restrictions be placed on the consumption of the drugs. 36. No; I do not think that alcohol is now being, to any considerable extent, substituted for any of the drugs. 37. Charas is rarely used in the Southern Mahratta country; so nothing can be said of the effects it produces from smoking. 38. Only one kind of ganja is used in the Southern Mahratta country. 39. Only ganja is used for smoking, and smoking is considered as more injurious than drinking or eating any of the preparations of the hemp drugs, as it affects the brain quicker than drinking or eating. 40. Yes; ganja is used by native doctors in preparing medicines on diseases such as asthma, dysentery, diarrh64 51. I do not think so. Neither the moderate nor excessive use of any of the drugs has any close connection with crime in general, or with crime of any special character. 52. Vide answer to question No. 51. 53. No; I am not aware of any case of the kind. 54. I do not think so. 55. It seems from what Rao Bahadur Rudra- gowda, District Deputy Collector, Bijapur, has written in his report, which is quoted by the Commissioner of Customs, Salt, Opium and Abkari, in his report to Government, No. 4752, dated the 11th September 1893, that criminals, in order to further their designs, sometimes induce their victims to partake of ganja mixed with madan-masta, madan-kamsi and dhatura, and so stupefy themselves. I do not think that com- plete stupefaction can be thus induced by this drug without admixture. 56. I am unable to answer this question, as I have not received proper information on this point. 57. Some years ago I had an occasion of observ- ing the effects which the use of bhang for drink- ing produced on a novice. If I recollect well, the individual who used it began to act like a mad- man. When it seemed that he was highly intoxi- cated, he was kept in a dark room and given an antidote, which gradually restored him to his proper senses. I think he was only drowsy the whole night and had no sound sleep. 58. I consider the present system is capable of some improvement. 59. The only suggestions that I can make are (1) that the maximum quantity at present fixed, 40 tolas, for retail sale to, and possession by, one person, should be reduced to 10 tolas; (2) that minimum retail sale prices of the drugs should be fixed; and (3) that the rate of duty on import, export and transport of the drugs should be enhanced. I make these suggestions with a view to restrict the use of the drugs as far as possible for the reasons given in my answer to question No. 35. 60. Yes; I think so. The present system re- quires no modification in this respect. 61. Charas is not produced in the Southern Mahratta country. 62. No. 63. The only suggestion that I have to make is, as already stated, that the minimum retail sale prices of the drugs should be fixed. 64. In order to enhance the price of the drugs, I propose that the present rate of duty on import, export and transport of the drugs should be doubled. 65. At present ganja and bhang are sold under one license, and the rate of taxation on both the drugs is the same. The present taxation on the drugs, as compared with that on alcoholic and other intoxicants, is considerably light. I am of opinion that the minimum rate of retail sale price of ganja should be fixed at R2-8 per lb., and that of bhang at 10 annas per lb. The highest rate at which ganja is sold by retail is R1-4 per lb., and that at which bhang is sold by retail is 2 annas per lb. If the rates proposed by me be adopted, the drugs will be dearer and the consumers will naturally be more economic and considerate in using them than now. 66. Only one kind of ganja is produced in the Southern Mahratta country. 67. I consider the present method of taxing the drugs entails a very light incidence of the tax on the consumer, and I am of opinion that it should be improved, as suggested in my answer to ques- tion No. 65. 68. Sometimes consumers use drugs on the premises of the shops licensed for the sale of the drugs. I am of opinion that they should be strictly prohibited from using them there. 69. From the enquiries made it seems that the wishes of the people are consulted before a shop is opened, in some districts through mamlatdars and village officers. It is necessary that local public opinion should be considered invariably. 70. There are none. I think duty is really paid in respect of the drugs used. I cannot say that there is any general use of untaxed drugs in the Southern Mahratta country. Statement referred to in the answer to question No. 25. Name of district. Year. Total Popula- tion. Amount of license fees. QUANTITY SOLD BY RETAIL of ganja. of bhang. Of other preparation of the hemp plant R M.S. M.S. M.S. Belgaum 1883-84 864,014 2,731 ... ... ... 1884-85 Do. 2,844 ... ... ... 1885-86 Do. 3,223 ... ... ... 1886-87 Do. 3,372 ... ... ... 1887-88 Do. 4,031 ... ... ... 1888-89 Do. 3, 960 ... ... ... 1889-90 Do. 3,136 ... ... ... 1890-91 Do. 3,163 ... ... ... 1891-92 1,013,261 3,166 189.21 ... 2.10 1892-93 Do. 3,935 178.4 ... 1.7 Dharwar 1883-84 882,907 6,107 346.5 ... 2.33 1884-85 Do. 6,255 496.14 ... 1.14 1885-86 Do. 6,086 692.24 ... 2.24 1886-87 Do. 7,505 840.28 ... 2.40 1887-88 Do. 10,500 849.5 0.35 1888-89 Do. 11,025 880.42 ... 7.25 1889-90 Do. 11,000 833.16 ... 2.23 1890-91 Do. 9,550 1,117.2 ... ... 1891-92 1,051,314 11,180 1,110.17 ... ... 1892-93 Do. 10,800 ... ... ... Bijapur 1883-84 638,493 1,578 150.31 ... ... 1884-85 Do. 1,795 224.11 ... ... 1885-86 Do. 1,485 ... ... ... 1886-87 Do. 1,400 ... ... ... 1887-88 Do. 1,579 ... ... ... 1888-89 Do. 2,015 ... ... ... 1889-90 Do. 2,065 435.0 ... ... 1890-91 Do. 2,525 135.0 ... ... 1891-92 796,339 3,510 113.0 ... ... 1892-93 Do. 4,400 ... ... ... 32. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR RUDRAGOWDA CHANVIRGOWDA ARTAL, Lengayet, Deputy Collector, Bijapur. 1. By coming in contact with the masses as well as by observing the health and conduct of persons addicted to the vice, and also by visiting places where sadhus or saints reside. 2. The definitions of ganja and charas herein given may be accepted as correct for this district. The ganja manufactured and sold here is flat ganja.
65 3. In none of the districts in the Southern Mahratta country the hemp plant grows sponta- neously. 4. The plants do not grow wild here. 5 and 6. As the plant does not grow wild here, I am unable to answer these questions. 7. The hemp plant has been cultivated only at Bijapur on a very small scale for the produc- tion of ganja and bhang only for the last two years. Charas is not prepared here. The plant is grown in this part of the country as a narcotic and not as a fibre plant. The area sown in 1892 at Bijapur was about 13 acres. 8. The area under hemp plant in 1893 is only about 4½ acres. The reason for the decrease in the area under cultivation is due to the fact that there is a considerable stock in hand of the yield of the last year. 9. As regards the method of cultivation, I beg to refer to paragraph 3 of my report, No. 562, dated the 30th August last, printed at page 7 of the note submitted to Government by the Com- missioner of Customs, Salt, Opium and Abkari, with his letter No. 4752, dated 11th September 1893. 10. The person who has been cultivating hemp plant for the last two years at Bijapur, is a mar- vadi, but not an expert. He has, however, secured the services of two experts from Lengria in the Satara district. Generally the agricultural culti- vators do not know how to cultivate the plant; but the agricultural operations common to the production of this and other plants are carried on by the ordinary cultivators. 11. The plants are never cultivated in this district for the production of ganja from the seed of wild hemp. 12. As the plants do not grow wild in this part of the country, I am unable to answer this question. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant is not restricted in this part of the country; but the cultivator cannot manufacture the drug without a license to be granted by the Collector on this behalf in the Form B, sanctioned by Government, and the drug can only be sold to persons duly licensed to sell the same by wholesale. I am not aware of any special conditions of climate, rainfall and elevation above sea level, but I think it can be grown in red or loamy soil as an irrigated crop. Except in parts of the Badami taluka where the soil is sandy and rocky, I am of opinion the plant can be cultivated as an irrigated crop with success in any other part of this district. 14. Yes; ganja and bhang are produced from the hemp plant cultivated at Bijapur. Charas is not prepared here. As regards the extent, I beg to refer to paragraph 4 of my report above quoted. 15. Vide paragraphs 5, 8, 9, 10 and 11 of my report above alluded to. (b) The hemp plants do not grow wild here. 16. No; the people do not prepare bhang in their houses. Yes; it can be prepared from the hemp plant grown in any place. The last part of the question cannot be answered because the plants do not grow wild here. 17. By any class of people; but generally the Muhammadans prepare the majum or majun. The ghota is prepared occasionally by higher castes of Hindus. 18. Yes; they do. After about five years these drugs lose their intoxicating property, and become quite useless for consumption. The drugs can be kept in good condition with ordinary care for two years. So far as I can ascertain from the people who generally deal in these drugs, I learn that no special measures can be taken to prevent deterioration after two years. 19. Yes; charas is not at all used in this part of the country. Ganja is used only for smoking. As regards other uses of ganja and its seeds, I beg a reference to paragraphs 6, 13 and 14 of my report above quoted. 20. As regards classes, vide the concluding portion of paragraph 5 of my report. The proportion of the ganja-smoking people is estimated to be 30 per cent. in the Sholapur, Satara, Ahmednagar and Poona districts, and 10 per cent. in the Southern Mahratta country. 21. Only the flat ganja is used in this district. I, however, learn that there is no difference in the intoxicating nature of the different kinds of ganja. 22. Charas is not at all used in the Bijapur district. 23. As far as I can ascertain, bhang is not used for smoking in this part of the country. 24. Generally the Muhammadans eat and drink bhang in the shape of fakki and ghota. The pro- portion of bhang-eaters (a) is estimated to be 1 per cent., and that of bhang-drinkers about 3 per cent. I have actually come across a Gondhali or a Joshiger at Dharwar who used to eat in my presence mere bhang powder mixed with cold water, then ground on a stone and made into small balls. If I remember right, I think he used to eat at one time from 20 to 40 tolas. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the increase, the rate of the increase being about 2 or 3 per cent. every year. This can be attributed to the fact that if there is a sadhu, an arudh or a fakir, making his residence in a certain locality, it is invariably the case that good many people living in the vicinity flock in numbers around him, and 1 have observed that such resorts are the chief rendezvous of ganja-smoking. This contagion is spreading every day with the increased facilities of communications, as the so-called sadhus are now able to wander from place to place without much inconvenience and trouble. 26. The following is the proportion of the consumers of the drugs:66 nutmegs are also occasionally mixed with ganja and smoked, with a view to increase the intoxi- cating power of the drug. I have actually seen a Bava at a place near my native place (Artal in the Dharwar district) smoking ganja mixed with opium, aconite powder and cast skin of a cobra capella. Dhatura is occasionally mixed with the smoking dose of the drug. As regards other ingredients mixed with various preparations of hemp, vide paragraphs 8, 9, 10 and 11 of my report. It is said that these admixtures enhance the power of intoxication. 30. It is mainly used by the male sex, but also to a very small extent by low prostitutes. If once addicted to the habit, a person finds it very difficult to give it up. It is not usual for children to consume any of the drugs, but when attacked by dysentery children are given bhang to drink. 31. Yes; it is easily formed. It is very difficult to break off. It is said that there is a strong tendency, in the case of these drugs, for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive habit. 33. The first aim of Hindu Theosophy is to secure the concentration of the mind, and it is the popular belief that this drug possesses the marvel- lous qualities of bringing on this effect. The drug is so far adored that it has received epithets in Sanskrit such as "cheedanand" and "siddhapatri", which literally mean "giver of delight to the mind" and "leaves endowed with supernatural powers", respectively. The higher classes who use the drug for this purpose hold that the use of the drug is conducive to health if it is cleaned thoroughly before using it and taken moderately. The habitual use of these drugs is considered discreditable, and the habitual consumers are not as a rule respected and trusted. So far as I can ascertain, the plant is not worshipped in this part of the country. 34. Certainly it would be a serious privation to habitual excessive consumers of these drugs, as it is exceedingly difficult to break off the habit once contracted, though very probably beneficial. The probable number of habitual excessive con- sumers would be 8,000, i.e., 1 per cent. accord- ing to the imperial census of 1891 (Bijapur district). 35. I do not think that it would be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs altogether. Certain- ly it would be consumed illicitly unless the culti- vation of the drug is prohibited also in the Native States. Undoubtedly the entire prohibition of the use of the drug would create serious dis- content for a time at least; but such a sort of discontent would scarcely amount to a political danger. With some proper restriction these drugs should, I think, be sold for medi- cinal purposes by persons licensed by the Collector to do so; perhaps the entire prohibition of the drug may drive the habitual excessive consumer to the use of other drugs, such as dhatura seeds, aconite and nux vomica, which grow wild, and other stimulants such as opium, &c. I think it is very desirable that the use of these drugs should be restricted, if not entirely prohibited, by making them expensive through the imposition of heavy excise duty. Such a measure will keep these drugs out of the reach of the poor people who are generally habitual excessive consumers. 36. I do not think so. On the contrary, I should say the tendency is the other way, as there are religious objections to the use of liquors con- taining alcohol. 37. I am informed that the smoking of charas produces more intoxication than that of ganja, as it contains the active principle of the plant. 38. I am informed that no different effects in kind or degree are produced on the consumers. 39. It is said that the drinking or eating of the hemp plant is more injurious than smok- ing the same through a pipe. 40. Vide paragraph 12 of my report. 41. It is said that the moderate use of these drugs is beneficial in effects (a) as a food accessory or digestive. Its moderate use alleviates fatigue67 to the highest bidder, as is now done invariably in every district, but separate shop licenses should be issued to applicants on payment of a fixed fee. To secure the efficient administration of the system, the right of selling the farm in the ad- joining Native States will have to be purchased by paying compensation to the chiefs, as has been done in the case of country liquor. 60. and 61. As it is impossible to prepare or cultivate the drugs surreptitiously, there is no need for control. 62. As the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang is not separate from the cul- tivation of the plant for the production of ganja, no further control than that now exercised is needed. 63 and 64. See answers to questions 58 and 59. 65. No tax is at present levied on the prepara- tions of these drugs, except the import and trans- port duties, in respect of which vide answers to questions 58 and 59. 66. Only flat ganja is prepared in this district, and I do not think it necessary that there should be different rates of taxation, because the different kinds of ganja do not differ materially in their strength. 67. The transport and export duties levied at present are merely nominal, and I would suggest that the present rates should be considerably en- hanced. 68. There are licensed shops in this district where these drugs are sold, but there is nothing in the terms of the licenses granted prohibiting the use of these drugs on the premises of such shops. 69. Generally some sort of preliminary en- quiries are made by the local officers without con- sulting the wishes of the inhabitants of the local- ity where a new shop is intended to be opened. If the local officers are of opinion that a shop is required at a particular place, it is generally sanc- tioned. 70. See paragraph 18 of my Report No. 562 of 30th August last. Probably people living on the borders of Native States buy their supplies from shops in the States, as it is said that these drugs are sold there cheaper than in the British territory. According to the present terms of the contract, a farmer or licensee is authorized to sell to one and the same person on any one day as much as 40 tolas. I think this limit is rather high, and it should be reduced to two tolas as has been recently done in the case of opium. Oral evidence. Question 1.68 2. The definitions given by Dr. Prain might be accepted for this State and Southern Mahratta country generally. The words subji, siddhi and patti are not in use here. The word bhang is in use here, but it is synonymous with ganja. There is no bhang here as is found in Northern India. Round ganja is not made in this part of the country. Chur is called here gadada. 3, 4, 5 and 6. The wild hemp plant is not found in this part of the country, and therefore these questions need no answer. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated in this part for the production of ganja only. No cultivation is made for (b), (c) and (d). The hemp plant is cultivated in the Jath State at Kumbhari, Bagewadi, Báj, Belunki, Yeldari, Jath, Jangalgi, Boblad, Aukla, and at Kharsundi* (Aundh State), Mhaswad* and Lengre* of the Satara district, and Morale* of Miraj Junior. The total extent of hemp cultivation in this State is about 30 acres. I have no means of ascertaining the acreage under hemp cultivation in the villages marked * in the above list. But I can say from a reference to statements of crops given in the Annual Report of the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, 1889-90, that in the surrounding British districts of Satara, Bijapur and Belgaum 368, 1, and 2 acres are, respectively, under the hemp cultivation. 8. From the statistics to hand I find that there has been an increase in the area under hemp cultiva- tion; because the soil and the climate of the western portion of Jath are favourable for its culti- vation, and the produce pays very well. The increase has been since the past seven or eight years. There has been greater demand for ganja, and hence the increase. 9. The land called Marul (mixture of red earth with white) is generally selected for ganja culti- vation. The site thus selected is well ploughed and manured with cowdung and then it is harrowed several times. The seed is not preserved here, but is brought from the Khanapur taluka of the Satara district. I am informed that the ganja seed from Ahmednagar is considered the best; and the Khanapur cultivators bring it from that district. The sowing operation commences as soon as the rain periods called Punarwasu and Pushia set in69 preparation of gram flower and slices of brinjal, etc. (here instead of brinjal, ganja is put), soaked in oil or butter and fried. (C) Drinking. For drinking purposes a pre- paration called ghota is made. The method of this preparation is as given below:70 cannot altogether give it up. I cannot say there is any tendency in the ganja itself for the moder- ate habit to develop into the excessive. Much depends upon society. 32. So far as the Hindu community is con- cerned, it is difficult to make a distinction between social and religious customs, as every custom is attributed to some religious principle. The con- sumption of ganja in one form or another is customary on holidays such as the Shivaratra or Muharram. In this part of the country pil- grimages are held at different places in honour of Shidanath, the supposed incarnation of Shiva (one of the Hindu Trinity). Ghota made of ganja is offered to the deity. On this occasion it is con- sidered incumbent on the devotee to take a cup of ghota himself and give some to his friends, rela- tions and followers, as the use of the drug in con- nection with the custom is regarded essential. The use is generally temperate. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit; nor is it injurious, as the use is only made once a year in a moderate form. 33. The consumption of ganja is regarded vicious and disreputable. There exists a strong public opinion against the use of ganja, as the person addicted to this kind of intoxication is not considered respectable in society. I do think that the use of any form of the narcotic is held in disrepute, and I attribute the sentiment to the following reasons:71 be reduced to 20 tolas; so also a rate should be fixed at which the licensee should sell the drug. 64. No. 65. According to the present system the monopoly of selling intoxicating drugs (including ganja, bhang and charas) is put to public auction, and the person whose bid is accepted is given a license. The licensee sells these articles at his own rates. Under such circumstances it is impossible to state what is the taxation of each of the drugs (ganja, bhang and charas) and therefore comparison with reference to each other is im- possible. A comparison of the tax on ganja with that on alcoholic intoxicants shows that the former tax is lighter than the latter. In order to check the vice of the use of ganja some enhancement in the tax seems desirable. 66. I think there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja according as such kind possesses more or less narcotic property. 67 and 68. No. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. I think the opinion of the local bodies ought to be con- sidered before a shop is opened for the retail sale of intoxicating drugs. 70. I am not aware of any facts. The Bombay Abkari Act has been introduced by the Native States, which are bound by agreement to enforce it. Everything is done according to the rules under the Act and strict supervision is exercised by the Abkari Department, and therefore the payment of duty is not, so far I know, evaded. There is no general use of untaxed drugs. Appendix to the evidence of RAO BAHA- DUR RAMCHANDRA RAJARAM MULÉ. Translation. Great is the holy preceptor, Sitaram The warrior Bajrang before him stands, The enemy's skull is off. Having drunk the nectar of devotion to Ram, He stands in an attitude of meditation And contemplates devoutly the preceptor's feet. Take (the name) of the hill (deity). Great (deity of) Badri, Send, oh! bearded god (Mahadev), Bread like unto the cloud, And dal (as plentiful) as the ocean, For your worshippers to eat. Thou art near unto him who is present And far from him who is negligent. Take (the name) of Bramha Mahadev. The body is dirty; The mind is pure; He stands on one foot contemplating. Some one says, " I am a sadhu (saint)." A mine of extreme fraud he is; Deceit takes possession of a hypocrite's heart, But a sadhu has Ram in his mind. We do not know of any deceit; The object is to fill the stomach. Take (the name) of the hill (deity). A sadhu devotes himself to another sadhu, But a deceitful man devotes himself to (the acquisition of treasure): Keep the company of the great, Greatness will increase; Associate with a sadhu, And you will be turned into a pearl. Associate with the bad, And lose the (fruits of) meditation. Take (the name) of the hill (deity). Come, oh ! thou Kali (ganja) Of Calcutta: Thy word will never prove untrue; Take the front one to the rear, Pluck the scoundrel's beard, He who has spoiled the ways of religion. Thrash the scoundrel In front of the chavdi. Burn, oh ! mother (ganja?), burn: Bramha Mahadev. (N.B.72 34. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR V. H. SHIKHRE, Brahmin, Huzur Deputy Col- lector, Alibagh, Kolaba District. 1. I have made personal enquiries with a few persons at Alibagh, who smoke ganja. 2. Charas is not smoked in this district, and consequently nothing is known about it by the people here. Nothing is known of the definitions given here, as the hemp plant is not cultivated and manufactured in this district; what is im- ported for sale and smoked is called ganja, which appears to be of a mixed variety, viz., flat and round ganja; what is used for drinking is called bhang, consisting of smaller leaves or "patti" selected or remaining from the longer leaves of ganja. 3. Not known. It does not grow spontane- ously in the Kolaba district. 4, 5 and 6. Not known here. 7. None in the Kolaba district. 8. Requires no answer. 9. Not known, as the plant is not cultivated here. 10, 11 and 12. Not known. 13. Cultivation is not restricted in the presi- dency of Bombay. But restrictions are placed on its import, export, and sale73 quantities as a cooling drink, is not viewed as a vice. There appears to be no custom here of worship- ping the hemp plant. 34. Yes. Because the habit once contracted of using ganja and bhang, if removed, would be in- jurious to their health in many ways. 35. (a) and (b) No. (d) Yes. (e) and (f) No 36. No. The following answers relate to ganja smoking only. 37. Charas smoking is not known in this dis- trict. 38 and 39. Not known here. 40. Yes74 wild plant, but appendix A ( attached hereto ) contains a memorandum of preparations made from ganja and bhang for drinking and eating purposes. It describes also the process ganja goes through preparatory to its being smoked. Bhang drinking is much patronized during the hot months of the year. It is said to have a peculiar effect on different constitutions; in some cases it excites mirth and risibility, in some grief and crying, and in some quiet and repose. It has also a further peculiar effect on those who have taken it in that they are unable to face a burning light with eyes open. 16. As far as I am aware, bhang as a drink is invariably prepared by people in their houses. I am unable to give information on the other two points. 18. As a rule, the drugs would deteriorate in due course unless kept in hermetically closed bottles or tin cases. Loss of effect must follow deterioration. 19. Ganja is chiefly used for smoking in the Ahmedabad district, and this to a very limited extent indeed, its use being confined to wandering gosains, natives of Upper India sojourning in the district in consequence of employment, and some of the lower classes of the local population. Charas, as stated before, is not used at all in that district. 20.The foregoing reply answers the query as regards the classes of people. It is utterly impossible to give proportion even at a guess. It is principally in the city of Ahmedabad and some of the larger towns in the district that ganja is smoked. 21. Flat ganja is what is used in the Ahmedabad district. 22. No chums is used in the Ahmedabad district. 23. Not in the Ahmedabad district, so far as I am aware. 24. It is the Hindus who generally use bhang as a drink on certain occasions, during hot weather especially. They do not form a large number, and what they do use is used in moderation, As regards eating, the use of the extract from bhang drawn in ghi and mixed up with poppy seed, etc. (vide paragraph VI, appendix A), is confined to an infinitesimally small section of the population, and that among the rich and well-to-do people. 25. I do not think it is on the increase. In- deed, the habits of the people preclude the possi- bility of ganja or bhang (charas is not used) ever taking hold of them beyond a moderate indul- gence. 26. They are all moderate consumers, and occa- sional consumers in the Ahmedabad district. 28. So far as my information goes, there are no habitual excessive consumers in Ahmedabad. The moderate consumers75 opened in the city of Ahmedabad, where bhang beverage is prepared for the public and used ac- cordingly. I think this ought to be stopped. 69. There was no occasion for such a proceed- ing in my time. Appendix A. GANJA PREPARATIONS. Eating. I.76 His definition of charas is correct. Charas is the resinous gummy matter which sticks to the scythe or hand or foot, by which the top flowering and knot shoot branches of the hemp plant are cut or pulled out or trodden. This gummy sub- stance, which is collected together and converted into small pills, is called charas. It is more in- toxicating than ganja. The definition of the word ganja is correct, with this addition, that not only the dried flower- ing tops, but the flower bunches that shoot out at each knot also constitute ganja when trodden. The crumbles that are collected at the time of treading down the flowering tops and knot shoots together with their tiny leaves to make flat ganja are called bhang, i.e., fragments of the ganja. In short, bhang and ganja are almost one and the same in the Deccan. Round ganja is not produced here, but flat ganja only. 3 to 6. I have not come to know of the growth spontaneously of the hemp plant in any of the districts of which I had immediate charge. It is not produced in the district of Satara, of which I am the principal witness; consequently answers to queries from Nos. 3 to 6 are blank. 7. Hemp plant is cultivated in the Satara Col- lectorate and in the Aundh State (a) for production of ganja, (b) charas, and (c) bhang, but (d) not for its fibre or seeds. The extent of cultivation in the Satara Collectorate, together with the total produce, can be learnt from the statement prepared by the Collector of Satara. 8. Owing to the restriction placed by the Abkari Act on the manufacture, sale, and export of ganja, the cultivation of the hemp plant is not on the increase. 9. Hemp plant grows luxuriantly in irrigated lands of all kinds, whether they be black, reddish, or whitish. It grows in dry crop land also, pro- vided the fall of rain be seasonable and plentiful. I have seen the hemp plant growing luxuriantly in an irrigated field of whitish gaonthan land belonging to a Brahmin gentleman surnamed Tadpatri in the Rahuri taluka of the Ahmed- nagar Collectorate, twenty years ago, while Assistant Commissioner. I have also seen it growing in black and reddish sails in the Satara Collectorate and in the Aundh State. The lands selected for the hemp cultivation are ploughed and harrowed in the months of February and March and manured in the month of May. Twenty-five cart-loads of manure are required for each acre. The seed used is from the Nagar Collectorate generally, because it is supposed to produce a smaller number of male plants or to give rise to a smaller number of the plagues hereinafter men- tioned. The hemp seed is like múg seed, and can be had at one seer of 80 tolas per rupee. It is sown in the month of July generally, and the crop is reaped in the month of November or December. It commences to grow within a week. If the plants grow thicker they are thinned, and only those at a distance of one inch apart are allowed to stand. In order that the crop may not be thick, two of the three holes of the sowing machine intended for the passage of the seed are blocked up at the time of sowing. From one and a quarter to two seers of seed are required for an acre. The plants are one foot high within a month, when they are weeded and the task of rooting out the male plant or plants affected with plague follows. It is a difficult task to find. out male plants; but it can generally be recognized by the small pin-like white flower growing in any one of the bunches of the plant when it is ripe and in the shoots when young. This is also called the andya plague. The Mamlatdar of Khanapur informs me that there are other five kinds of plagues for the hemp plant called (1) shevarya, (2) haldya, (3) kapshia, (4) pundia, (5) mora, the plants affected by which are required to be carefully rooted out in due time. The shevarya plague is recognized by one of the branches growing higher and bending down with a jowari-like grain flower at the end of it. The haldya plague is recognized by a yellow shoot at one of the knots of the plant. The kapshia and pundia plagues can be recognized by a jowari-like grain on the top of the plant. It transforms afterwards into a white or yellow flower. The mora plague, recognized by the yellow flower in the top bunch, makes its appearance sometimes fifteen days prior to the reaping of the crop, and has the effect of destroying the better quality of the ganja. No one is able to recognize the male plant and the plagues with slight observation, and therefore experts are employed. At the time of reaping the crop two men are employed, one to cut the flower top bunches with a scythe, and another man to pull out the knot shoot bunches. About 520lb of ganja are said to be produced in an acre when the crop is superior. Exclusive of the labour of the cultivator, the expense of producing one acre of hemp crop is about R60, and including the cultivator's labour R100. It is worthy of note that this crop is not eaten by cattle, but by sheep only, and as sheep are not to be found straying anywhere, hemp plants do not require hedging generally. 10. The agricultural cultivators are the very persons who cultivate hemp. 11. There is no wild. hemp plant in the Satara Collectorate. 12. Wild hemp is nowhere especially cultivated in the Satara district. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant is not restricted in the Satara Collectorate and in the Aundh State. There was a doubt on this point, but it was cleared by the High Court ruling, dated 15th November 1888, to the effect that the mere cultivation of hemp plant is not punishable under section 43 of the Abkari Act, V of 1878. The manufacture of the plant into ganja, bhang and charas alone requires a license. The sale and export are also covered with passes. The cultivation is not common to all districts, nor are ali the cultivators in the habit of culti- vating hemp. Such of the cultivators only as find it profitable cultivate it. I do not think that the cultivation of the hemp plant is impossible any- where. It can be produced in all garden lands. 14. Ganja, charas and bhang are prepared in the Satara Collectorate by the cultivators thereof. The extent of the cultivation will be known from the statement furnished through the Collector. 15. The top bunches and the knot bunches of the hemp plant are trodden separately, because they cannot be trodden together properly. The process of treading goes on till the bunches are completely flattened. This is called ganja. The process of preparing charas is simple. The charas is the resinous gummy matter with which the scythe or the hand or foot becomes besmeared at the time of cutting or pulling out or treading the flower top or knot shoot bunches. This matter is collected and converted into small pills.
77 Bhang (i.e., fragments of the ganja) is ground and put into milk mixed up with cardamoms, almonds, poppy seed, sugar, sweet fennel, nutmeg, black pepper and mace, and strained several times and drunk. This is called bhang ghota. Ganja is used for smoking thus: It is first washed, until it ceases to give out green water. By this washing process it becomes gummy. One tola of ganja is sufficient to fill in two to three smoking pipes. As ganja is put in the smoking pipe in its wet state, one-half tola of tobacco is mixed with it, or placed above and below it to make it ignite. Bhang is also converted into small cakes by boiling it with ghi and sugar. This is called majum or yakuti. This is eaten. There are no wild hemp plants in the Deccan. 16. Ghota from bhang for drinking is prepared by the drinkers in their own houses. It cannot be prepared from the hemp plant in its raw state wherever it is growing. Ganja and charas cannot, I think, be prepared from the wild plants wherever grown. But there are no such wild plants in this district. 17. I have already stated in answer to the query No. 14 that charas and ganja are prepared by the cultivators themselves. Ghota from bhang for drinking is prepared by the Gosavis, and in some cases by other people, on Shivaratra day. Ghota from bhang is more used by all classes at Indore and in the North-Western Provinces. 18. Ganja, charas and bhang deteriorate by keeping. Ganja and bhang become less effective next year, and useless as a narcotic after three years. Charas is of use till the next rains, when vermin commence to make appearance therein and dimi- nish its value. The causes of deterioration are that the resinous and gummy matter which exists in these articles dries up or deteriorates. There are no preventive means known here. 19. Ganja is used for smoking throughout the Collectorate. Charas is used for the same purpose, but very seldom in this part of the country, on account of its costliness. 20. The smoking of ganja is very rare among Brahmins and females of all classes, save prosti- tutes of the worst type, With these exceptions three or four per cent. of the other classes smoke ganja to a smaller or larger extent throughout the Collectorate. Charas is rarely in use, 21. Flat ganja, which is alone obtainable here, is smoked. 22. Charas locally prepared is rarely used. No importation of foreign charas occurs, so far as I know. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. The classes who drink bhang ghota are bairagis, gosavis, and on Shivaratra day a few more Hindus, mostly cooks, water-carriers, song- sters, and other licentious characters. This kind of drinking prevails in the country lying north of the Narbada river. The proportion of the people who drink bhang ghota is very small, i.e., one in a thousand, in the Satara Collectorate. Majum or yakuti, the preparation of bhang, as per reply to query No. 15, is not permitted in the Satara Collectorate, and therefore it is seldom eaten. 25. The use of ganja is on the increase for the following reasons:78 because it leads to vices. The hemp plant is not worshipped in this district. 34. Habitual excessive consumers, such as gosavis, bairagis, fakirs, etc., will alone expe- rience serious privation if they do not get the drug. Non-habitual or non-excessive consumers will not experience any privation. They will leave off the habit. 35. It is not feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs, so long as alcoholic stimuiants and other drugs are freely procurable. Excessive liquor drinkers are more formidable than ganja smokers or bhang or ghota drinkers, and therefore men who want intoxication may have ganja in preference to liquor. It is easy to effectually prohibit the use of these drugs by prohibiting the cultivation of the hemp plant without any discontent amounting to a political danger. 36. There is no religious objection for the use of ganja or bhang, as they are not liquids pre- pared by other castes; but there e ists a prohibi- tion regarding the use of liquor. I know persons who wish to have intoxication preferring liquor to ganja, and therefore the consumption of alcohol is on the increase and will increase as the ties of religious bonds are becoming slackened by edu- cation, and the action of the respectable people in excommunicating drinkers of liquor becomes more and more hampered by the operation of the defamation section of the Indian Penal Code. 37. The effects of charas smoking are unknown here. 38. Flat ganja is alone to be had here. 39. Drinking ghota or bhang is less injurious than smoking ganja or eating majum or yakuti. The smoking of ganja affects one's brains79 contracts in the British territory and annas eight per each maund of the drug when exported from or imported into a Native State is reasonable. 66. Only flat ganja is produced here; but I think there should be no different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja, because they will be troublesome to the exporters, manufacturers and sellers. 67. No. 68. There are no houses or shops in this district to my knowledge for the consumption of these drugs on the premises, and none such will thrive or be viewed with favour, as a majority of the smokers or drinkers still drink or smoke in private. 69. I must say that the wishes of the people are not consulted as they should be. The con- tractors are always inclined to open more shops, and they make some ganja smokers send a petition, which is complied with. If the people are told that it is in their hands to prevent the pernicious effects of the ganja smoking by objecting to the opening of a shop, they are sure to do so, as non- consumers of the drug form a majority. 70. No. Oral evidence. Question 24.80 38. Evidence of MR. W. ALMON, Assistant Collector, Abkari Department, Bombay. 1. The opportunities connected with my duties in the island of Bombay as Assistant Collector, Abkari Department. 2. The definitions given may be accepted. Round ganja is unknown here; only flat ganja is seen and sold. (1) Bhang, subji, and maya; (2) charas; (3) ganja; (4) garda or broken ganja. 7. In the island of Bombay there is no culti- vation of the hemp plant for (a), (b), (c), or (d). 14. I am aware that ganja is prepared in the districts of Ahmednagar, Satara, and Nasik, and that bhang is prepared at Surat. We receive supplies from these districts. 18. Ganja, charas and bhang deteriorate, I am told, by keeping, and eventually lose their narcotic properties. They keep good, it is said, for a year or two. In Bombay the deterioration is attributed to atmospheric moisture and dampness. The drugs should be stored in a dry godown. A godown where ganja is stored should be kept free of rats. Rats like hemp seed, and injure the ganja in their search for the seed. I know of one instance in which ganja was destroyed by white- ants. 19. In Bombay, ganja and charas are used only for smoking. Garda, that is broken ganja, is used for drinking. It is also sometimes given to buffaloes and cows as an appetizer. Garda is sometimes smoked mixed with ganja. 20. Ganja is smoked principally by Hindu sadhus and labourers, and by Muhammadans of the working classes, and by fakirs. A few of the better classes of both communities, chiefly among the Hindus, also smoke ganja. In Bombay but little charas is used. It is smoked by Pathans, fakirs, sadhus, and people from northern India. I estimate that there are of all classes about 2,000 to 2,500 ganja smokers, and from 100 to 150 charas smokers in Bombay. 21. Flat ganja is smoked in Bombay. There is no round ganja. A little garda is also used for smoking, mixed with flat ganja. 22. Very little charas is smoked in Bombay. The charas smoked is generally brought from Amritsar. I do not know if this charas is Indian or foreign. 23. So far as I know or can learn bhang is not smoked in Bombay. 24. Bhang is chiefly drunk in Bombay by Hindus from Guzerat, Kathiawar, and places north of Bombay. The Deccani and Konkani Hindus use it occasionally. I believe that bhang drinkers will be found chiefly among those classes of the people to whom the use of alcohol is pro- hibited. There are fewer bhang drinkers among the Muhammadans than among the Hindus here. But little bhang is eaten in Bombay. It is used in this way by the Hindus who drink bhang. I estimate that there are about 400 bhang drinkers altogether in Bombay. Garda is chiefly consumed as a drink in Bombay, and 1 estimate the con- sumers of garda in this way are from 400 to 450. 25. My belief is that the use of all these drugs is about stationary or slightly on the decrease in Bombay. The following figures show the aver- age quantity of each drug brought into Bombay by the farmer during a year in the three last terms for which he held the farm: 81 Well-to-do people use the exceptional ingre- dients and poor people the ordinary additions. I have not learnt that dhatura is used with hemp drugs in Bombay. I am told that it is necessary to mix tobacco with ganja and charas to make it smoke freely and to improve the taste of the smoke. The mixing of black pepper with bhang and garda is said to be essential to prevent its producing pains in the stomach. The other ingredients are added to make the drink more palatable and pleasant. I cannot learn that any ready-made preparation, "bhang masala," is sold here to be mixed with bhang. 30. I learn that the consumption of ganja, bhang, garda and charas is practised chiefly in company. The habitual consumer does also smoke ganja or drink bhang alone in his house. The consumption of hemp drugs in Bombay is mainly confined to the male sex. Occasionally females may be seen smoking ganja or drinking bhang or garda; but the use of these drugs by females is exceptional. The females that use these drugs are usually prostitutes. The use of these drugs is confined to adults. It is, I believe, very unusual for children to consume these drugs. 31. I think it mainly depends upon the charac- ter of the individual as to whether he will acquire the habit or not. If the individual does not happen to associate or come in contact with con- sumers of these drugs, he will not probably smoke or drink himself. On the whole, I would say that the temptation to form the habit is not great in Bombay; but the habit would be very easily acquired if the individual had friends and asso- ciates who were habitual consumers. I un- derstand from my enquiries that the habit of smoking ganja, if of long standing, would be difficult to break off, and that the habit of drinking bhang is not so difficult to throw off. I believe the tendency is for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive; but this also depends very much on the individual himself. There are many moderate habitual consumers of hemp drugs who do not, I learn, become habitual excessive consumers. 32. I have not learnt that there is any social custom among Bombay people requiring them to use a hemp drug. During the Shimga and other holidays, bhang is sometimes made and drunk by Hindus who do not use alcohol. Offerings of bhang are said to be very acceptable to the god Shiva; but the offering of bhang is not essential. Offerings of bhang are said to be essential in the worship of Baldeo. Bhang is, I learn, offered to Dévi by those who cannot, on account of caste, offer spirits to the goddess. The use of bhang in the customs above referred to would not, I believe, be likely to lead to the habit of consuming the drug, except perhaps in the case of pujaris. The Hindu ganja smoker, before smoking, will often make offering to Shiva by repeating the words "Lena Shankar Lena Babulnath." 33. Public opinion is averse to the moderate or excessive habitual use of any of the hemp drugs. The occasional use of a hemp drug by an indivi- dual would not, I am told, be regarded as disre- putable. I understand that the habitual use of ganja is looked upon as more disreputable than the habitual use of bhang. I attribute the above mentioned sentiment as regards the habitual use of a hemp drug to the objection and dislike that respectable natives have to the use of intoxicants of all kinds. I have not learnt that there is any custom if worshipping the hemp plant by any sects of the people here. 34. It would, I believe, be a serious deprivation to an habitual excessive consumer of a hemp drug of long standing to have his supply of the drug cut off. The habitual moderate consumer would not feel the deprivation so great; but a person of this class would feel the deprivation for some little time also. Some, at any rate, of the occa- sional consumers of bhang would also consider they had a grievance, as they believe that the use of bhang is beneficial to their health. I estimate the total number of hemp drug consumers in Bombay at from 3,000 to 4,000. 35. In the island of Bombay it would, I believe, be feasible to prohibit practically the consumption of hemp drugs. The drugs would to some extent, without doubt, be smuggled and consumed illicitly. Prohibition would have to be enforced by making the possession and sale of a hemp drug a penal act. Prohibition would, I think, be an ill-advised measure. It would cause much discontent among consumers, and, having regard to its use in Hindu religious rites, the discontent would not, I believe, be confined to consumers. I consider that the dis- content consequent on prohibition would amount to a political danger. I believe that if the use of hemp drugs was prohibited, many of the consumers would take to alcohol or opium, and many ignorant people would attribute the prohibition to the desire of Government to favour the consumption of liquor, particularly of European liquors. 36. My belief is that wines and spirits are now being to a certain extent substituted for hemp drugs. I believe that many of the poorer classes of consumers of hemp drugs will go into the liquor shops if they have money. The hemp drug consumer resorts to ganja or bhang because it is a cheaper intoxicant or he has caste objections against drinking liquor. I believe that the man with au English education, whose caste feelings are not strong, and whose parents would occasion- ally perhaps only drink bhang, will now take wine or spirits as being, according to his notions, more fashionable and in keeping with cultivated ideas. 37. As far as I have learnt, the effects of charas and ganja smoking are the same. The difference is said to be that charas is very much stronger than ganja. 38. Round ganja is not known in Bombay. Flat ganja is usually smoked here. Garda, when smoked, is usually mixed with flat ganja. Garda is seldom smoked without being mixed with flat ganja, and then only because it is cheaper. The difference between the effects of flat ganja and garda smoking is, I understand, one of degree; the latter being weaker in its effects than flat ganja. 39. I am told that bhang drinking is the least injurious form in which a hemp drug may be used, and that charas smoking is the worst form. Ganja smoking is said to be more injurious than bhang drinking. A little bhang only is eaten in Bombay, and I understand, when eaten, it is more injurious than when drunk. Garda is drunk in the shops like bhang, and is said to be stronger in intoxi- cating effect and more injurious than bhang. 40. Bhang and ganja are prescribed, I believe, by vaidyas as a medicine. Bhang is given to horses and garda to buffaloes as an appetizer or tonic. 41. I am told that the moderate use of ganja acts as a digestive; it alleviates fatigue, and is a preventive of disease in an unhealthy country, or where the drinking water is not good. It is said also to be an appetizer. Bhang in moder- vol. vii. o
82 ation is reported to act as a food accessory, to alleviate fatigue, and to be a febrifuge. It is said also to have cooling properties on the system. Many of the Jain jewellers in Bombay are habitual moderate users of bhang. They use it as a food accessory, to alleviate fatigue, and on account of its cooling properties. I am also told that in Guzerat and Kathiawar bhang is drunk by people in the hot season on account of its cool- ing properties. Many of these people only use it in the hot season. 42. The habitual use of any of the hemp drugs, except in moderation, is, I believe, harmful. The occasional moderate use is, I understand, beneficial. I have come to these conclusions from what I see and hear. 43. I believe that moderate consumers of a hemp drug are not offensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja on the habitual consumer is said to be refreshing. It produces slight intoxication. It creates an appetite, gives sound sleep, and acts as a digestive. The effects last about three hours. The after-effects are lassitude, prompting subse- quent gratification, and producing a longing and uneasiness until the want is again supplied. The immediate effect of bhang on the moderate habitual consumer is said to be refreshing. It produces slight intoxication. It creates an appetite, and the effect lasts about seven hours. The after-effects are said to be similar to those produced by ganja smoking. 45 and 46. The habitual moderate or excessive use of a hemp ding does, I believe, eventually harm the consumer in a greater or lesser degree. The harm done will depend much on the individual's constitution and his style of living. 51 and 52. In Bombay it cannot be said that any large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate or excessive consumers of hemp drugs. So far as I know or have learnt, there is only a little connection between crime and the use of a hemp drug. Consumers say that when they are under the influence of a hemp drug they feel timid and disinclined to fight; but I am also told that sometimes a ganja smoker acts violently. Some occasional consumers of hemp drugs are abusive when under the influence of the drug. 53. So far as I know, excessive indulgence in any of the hemp drugs does not generally incite to unpremeditated crime of any kind. In excep- tional cases, however, excessive charas and ganja smoking is said to make a man violent and fren- zied. I do not myself know of any case in which the use of a hemp drug has led the consumer to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. I am told the drugs are not so used. 55. I do not know of any case in which a cri- minal, to further his design, has induced his victim to partake of a hemp drug and become stupefied. I am told that it is done but very rarely. It is said that complete stupefaction can be induced if a sufficient quantity of a hemp drug is consumed. An habitual consumer would require a larger quan- tity of the drug to completely stupefy him than would be required for a new or occasional con- sumer. 56. I have not learnt that in Bombay anything s added to hemp drugs to modify their intoxicat- ing effects. Tobacco and goorako are smoked with ganja and charas to make the latter smoke freely. Black pepper is added to bhang and garda to prevent wind and stomach-ache, and other in- gredients are added to make the drink pleasant. I have not learnt that in Bombay dhatura is added to hemp drugs for personal consumption or for administration to others. It is, however, said that sometimes dhatura and the roots of the jawari plant are added to hemp drugs to make them more intoxicating. 57. I do not learn that ganja and charas are eaten or drunk in Bombay. Garda is drunk generally. Garda is also eaten with bhang; but a very little of this preparation is consumed here. 58. I am acquainted with the present system of excise administration in respect to hemp drugs in the Island of Bombay, and I think it works fairly well. Some little improvement might be made; but there is no great need, I think, for any change. A very small number of people use hemp drugs in Bombay83 66.Only flat ganja is consumed here. See answer to question No. 65. 67. I have no objections. See answer to ques- tion No. 59. 68. In the island of Bombay there are seven shops where ganja., bhang or garda, and charas are consumed on the premises. There are also thir- teen places where bhang and garda are consumed on the premises. I feel very strongly that it would be a mistake to close such shops. The closing of these houses would cause a multiplica- tion of smoking and drinking places, over which neither the excise nor police authorities would have control. It would increase the sale and smoking of ganja by fakirs and other very poor people at street corners, near markets, and at other places where people congregate. It would also drive many respectable ganja and charas smokers and bhang drinkers to prepare and consume the drugs in their houses, which would, I think, tend to increase the number of persons who make use of hemp drugs. 69. The wishes of the people in the neighbour- hood of the proposed shop are consulted in Bom- bay before the Collector sanctions the opening of the shop, and the opening of the shop is disallowed if the objections of the people are considered reasonable. In the case where hemp drugs may only be sold at the shop the abkari officers make the enquiry, and in the case where drugs are sold and consumed on the premises additional enquiry is made by the police, as in the last-mentioned case a police license is required under Bombay Act XLVIII of 1860. 70. I do not think any hemp drugs are smuggled into Bombay from Native States. The present farmer holds the hemp drugs farm for the Thana district, and there is, I believe, but little smuggling from other districts into Bombay. There is no general use of untaxed drugs in Bombay. Oral evidence. Question 20.84 a higher duty with the large contract system, because the large contractor would not be so ready to take to illicit practices. I do not think that there is any advantage in respect to control in the city of Bombay from the large contract system, though there is in districts. We have the small contract system in the city in respect to liquor. I do not think that the Government should di- rect its attention to the refinement or purification of the drugs. I think the condition at present entered in the contractor's license sufficiently pro- vides for any action of Government in respect to the purity and quality of the drugs. The only complaints we ordinarily receive are in respect to the drugs not being sufficiently intoxicating. We destroy drugs that have deteriorated. I do not think I have ever had to take action myself. The contractor destroys useless stuff because it is his interest to do so. Question 68.85 cient maturity to enable the expert to distinguish between the male and the female plants, the extir- pation of the male plants86 18. Yes; ganja and bhang deteriorate by keep- ing. Bhang being naturally a milder intoxicant deteriorates earlier. It has not been ascertained by actual experiments that they quite lose their effects in time. But as their intoxicating pro- perties are gradually de creased, it seems that they will lose them. entirely in time. They can be kept good, with ordinary care, for not more than twelvemonths. The principal causes of deterioration are, I think, exposure to heat, damp, or atmos- phere and frequent handling. The first destroys the resinous substance by its formation into some other substance by chemical combination with the ingredients of the atmosphere, rain, etc.; and the second by separating such resinous substance from the flowering tops, which, being dry, allow it to be easily detached from them by the smallest force. 19. Ganja is also used for preparing majum, etc., as stated in reply to question 15. It is also used as a medicine by physicians practising in native medicine to cure looseness of bowels, to im- prove digestion, and, in small doses, to bring on sleep when the patient is restless. It is also used in the treatment of some of the cattle dis- eases. These uses are not limited to any particular localities. 20. Charas smoking is nowhere practised, except perhaps to a very small extent in the town of Bombay. In the mufassal ganja alone is used. No statistics are available as to the classes and the proportion of people smoking ganja. Different estimates might be given about this proportion; but none, I think, could be accepted as correct. The best mode of finding out this proportion would, I think, be the following:87 solitude. Majum, yakuti, etc., are, on the other hand, consumed more in solitude than in company. Yes, the use of these drugs is mainly confined to the male sex and to the mature age. No, child- dren are not found to indulge in these drugs. 31. The habit is not easily formed; but, once formed, it is certainly difficult to break off. Like other intoxicants, these drugs have also a ten- dency to develop a moderate habit into an exces- sive one. Among bairagis and others who form the largest class of ganja smokers this tendency is, however, kept in check by the difficulty which they find in obtaining the money sufficient to buy the required quantity of ganja. 32. I am not aware of any such custom pre- vailing in this part of the presidency. It is some- times said that at Shiva puja (or the worship of the god Shiva) ghota drink is necessary. But this is not a fact. Habitual ghota drinkers pre- pare the drink at such puja for themselves, and offer it to a new man who may happen to be in their company as a mere matter of courtesy, en- tirely leaving it to himself to take a small quantity if he chooses to do so. I remember, however, it to have been stated to me that it is a custom among the persons of the ascetic class to initiate a new man to ganja-smok- ing before he can be formally admitted to their class as a regular disciple. Once introduced to smoking in this way, he gradually falls into the habit, and in time becomes a thorough ganja smoker. 33. Consumption of ganja and bhang in any form is regarded as a vice, and looked upon as a practice unworthy of society. The public would not ob- ject to the use of these drugs on religious grounds; but on social grounds it would be held in great disrepute, especially the consumption of ganja and its preparations. This sentiment is primarily to be attributed to the possession by these drugs of intoxicating properties, and to their mischievous effects on body and mind. The use of intoxicants is regarded with contempt by every society; and the Indians, who, under the warm climate of their country, can altogether dispense with such use, would naturally look upon it as one of the worst type of indulgence. The fact that the number of the ganja consumers is proportion- ately very small has something to do with this sentiment. No narcotic or stimulant would fall in disrepute if it is indulged in by a whole na- tion. Were, therefore, all the Indians, or at least a large majority, users of this narcotic, its consumption would not have been regarded with so much contempt. But, as the number of persons indulging in these drugs is very small, the con- sumption is regarded by the non-consuming population as a bad practice. Ghota drink, not possessing such strong intoxicating properties, is not in so much disrepute. I know of no custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion. 34. Yes; it would, I think, be a serious priva- tion to all classes of the consumers of these drugs to forego the consumption of the particular drug they use. Their habit of using the particular drug is, by long practice, carried to such a height that they will not be able, under any circum- stances, to break it off soon. Nor will they be satisfied by the use of any other drug or stimulant for the one they had been using. If, therefore, they are prevented from using the particular drug, there will be serious discontent and uneasiness among them. Of the consumers, 60 per cent. are, I think, gosains, bairagis, mendicants, etc.; 30 per cent. artizans, men of handicraft, etc.; 5 per cent. prostitutes; and 5 per cent. others. 35. Under the present circumstances it is not, I think, feasible to stop altogether the use of any of these drugs. Such a prohibition would un- doubtedly encourage illicit consumption, at least for some time, especially among the mendicant class, which forms the majority of the ganja con- sumers, and who will not be satisfied by the sub- stitution of any other narcotic. Such a prohibition could be enforced either by recourse to special legislation, making the use of the narcotic penal, or by preventing the cultivation and importation of ganja altogether. But such a serious step would, I think, be quite uncalled for, and would create serious discontent among the con- sumers. I am not prepared to say that it may amount to a political danger. The whole body of the consumers, taken together, is so insignificant in number and wanting in influence that they are incapable of spreading the infection of their dis- content to the general public, so as to stimulate them to any action amounting to political danger. I do not think alcoholic stimulants or other in- toxicants will be had recourse to in case such a prohibition is enforced. Such substitutes would not satisfy ganja consumers of long habit. 36. No, I don't think alcohol is being substi- tuted. If there be any decrease in the quantity of these drugs consumed, it is to be explained by the fact of the gradual disappearance of the men- dicant class rather than by the substitution of alcohol. 37. Charas-smoking is not known in this part. 38. Flat ganja alone being used, I cannot an- swer the question. 39. I am not in a position to answer this ques- tion satisfactorily. In practice, however, I have found that, in the long run, ganja smokers are more injuriously affected than those that eat or drink it in some form. The reason, I think, is that the poison directly enters by inhalation into the lungs, and is absorbed by, and circulated through, the system more rapidly, thus producing more injurious effects. 40. The reply is already given under question No. 19. 41. I am not in a position to state definitely whether the moderate use of these drugs may be beneficial or not. In practice, however, it is used as a food accessory as well as to give staying- power. I do not know of ganja or bhang ever being used as a febrifuge. I refer to moderate occasional use. Moderate habitual use.88 appetite to a small extent The effects last for about an hour or an hour and a half. Yes; the after-effects are general depression of spirits, moroseness and unwillingness to work. Want of subsequent gratification produces longing as well as uneasiness. 45. Habitual moderate use of the hemp drugs is observed to cause the following infirmities. Whether these results can, and if so by what scientific process, be connected with the consump- tion I am not in a position to say. A person long given to the habit of ganja consumption, even in a moderate form, is found to be very thin and generally weak, with impaired digestion, and suffering from bronchitis and, in a few cases, from asthma. He becomes lazy and averse to hard work; but his moral sense is not impaired, nor does he acquire habits of immorality or de- bauchery. I am of opinion that a long use of the drugs would result in a loss of appetite for sexual passions, owing probably to the affection of the nervous system. I am not in a position to say definitely to what extent the use of these drugs is connected with the production of insanity. 46. The above injurious effects are observed in an aggravated form in an habitual excessive con- sumer. His constitution is completely pulled down, and he becomes quite useless for work. He suffers from bronchitis and asthma of a worse type and is labouring under constant headache, uneasiness, and vacantness of mind. 47 and 48. No, not to my knowledge. 49 and 50. I have no information on these points. 51. I am not of opinion that any large propor- tion of bad characters are habitual moderate con- sumers of these drugs. The classes generally known to be of bad character in this part of the country are:89 offered to him by the latter, or allow his ganja90 price officially reported is Re. 1-8-0 per pound of 40 tolas; but I think the retail sale price actually charged is Rs. 2-8-0 per pound. There are at pre- sent no means to examine the accounts of the ganja-farmer. Had they been regularly kept, I am sure they would have shown a large profit to the farmer. For all these reasons, I am respectfully of opi- nion that the system of officially fixing the retail sale price is at least worth experimenting upon. 64. The present regulations seem to be unobjec- tionable. 65. No charas smoking known in this part. Con- sumption of bhang comparatively small. Bhang is not separately taxed. The taxation, as com- pared with alcoholic and other intoxicants, seems moderate and fair. The quantity of the alcoho- lic stimulant required by an habitual moderate consumer costs about 5 annas per diem and that of opium 2 annas. Compared with these, the cost of these drugs required also by an habitual mode- rate consumer is much less, and must therefore be considered reasonable. This cost includes the contractor's profits, which seems to me unreason- ably high. If, therefore, they are reduced to a fair minimum by officially fixing the price, as suggested in reply to question No. 66, the cost will be still reduced, and the taxation will be clear- ly seen as quite moderate. 66. The principle which governs or should govern the taxation of intoxicating drugs is, I think, that the State should, by the imposition of heavy taxes, endeavour to check, as far as practic- able, the use of such drugs because they act injuri- ously on the body and mind of its subjects. Accord- ing to this principle the intoxicant which has more mischievous effects by spoiling the body or mind or by creating a greater tendency to commit the crime should, I think, be more heavily taxed. Unless, therefore, the different varieties have differ- ent powers of so acting, they need not be taxed at different rates. 67. My views have already been expressed in reply to question No. 63. The retail sale price not being fixed officially, the consumer is practi- cally required to pay a much higher tax in the shape of the price of ganja, though the tax impos- ed by Government is very moderate. The system, therefore, requires modification. 68. In the mufassal there are not such houses. I am of opinion that it is not desirable that there should be such houses. 69. Yes; generally they are. If a particular locality is objected to by the people, their com- plaint is sent to the local revenue officer for in- quiry and report; and if, on receipt of such report, the Collector is satisfied that there are sufficient grounds not to allow the shop to be opened, no permission is granted. 70. No, there are no facts regarding the import- ation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States to which I wish to draw attention. Yes; duty is paid in respect of all the hemp plant drugs used. So far as I am aware, there is no use of untaxed drugs. Oral evidence. Question 13.91 54. These drugs are used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of vio- lence or other crime. I have observed one or two cases of this nature in the Chopda taluka during the last six months. 55. Criminals, in order to further their designs, do, in rare cases, induce their victims to partake of majum (a sweet preparation of bhang), and so stupefy themselves. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced by the hemp drug without admixture. I observed a case three years ago in the Nandgaon taluka of the Nasik district, in which a gosain administered majum to a person, and while the latter was in the drowziness of the drug, commit- ted theft of some rupees he had in his turban. 41. Evidence of RAO SAHEB SHESHO KRISNA MUDKAVI, Mamlatdar of Taluka Bijapur, Bijapur. 1. I had no opportunity before of collecting the information I am now giving on this subject. Still I have attempted to answer the questions with the aid of statistics I have obtained from the ganja contractors, the Abkari inspectors, persons using bhang and ganja, and from my own scanty experience. 2. In this part of the country charas is not manufactured at all. The definition given of ganja is correct. The kind of ganja manufac- tured here is flat ganja, known by its generic term ganja, instead of champta ganja. 3. As far as I know from my experience in the Belgaum, Dharwar and Bijapur districts, hemp plant does not grow spontaneously in any of these districts. 7. In Bijapur town 6 acres and 13 gunthas were cultivated for bhang and ganja. 8. The cultivation is so infinitesimally small that it seems unnecessary to answer the question. 9. After the opening of the monsoon, ganja is sown at the end of June or beginning of July in plough land in the same manner as jawari. The plant needs no irrigation (artificial) during the monsoon, after which it is watered by means of " mote" (water bucket). From the month of September male plants begin to come up among crops, and they are at once removed, for their presence causes the female plants to seed and in- jures the crops. Grass or dirt among the ganja crops is weeded out from time to time. 10. Here there is no separate class of ganja cul- tivators. They belong to the agricultural class. But, in order that the female plants may not be injured from the growth of male plants, experts are imported from other districts, and the culti- vation is managed under their supervision. 11. The plants cultivated for the production of ganja are not raised from the seed of wild hemp. 12. Wild hemp is not sown. 13. The cultivation of ganja is not restricted to any part of the country. Moisture and a sup- ply of water are essential conditions, but rocky soil is unsuitable. 14. In this part of the country ganja is culti- vated to a small extent. Bhang is also prepared from it. Charas is, however, not prepared. The cultivation in Bijapur of bhang and ganja this year will, it is estimated, produce about 60 maunds of ganja and 15 maunds of bhang. 15. In this part of the country ganja is not produced from the wild plants, which do not exist here at all. (A) Ganja used for smoking purposes. About the end of December, when the crop of ganja is ready, the tops of the plant, otherwise called the buds, are pulled out. These are placed in a pile four inches thick. It is then spread out on the ground and trodden under foot by coolies for three or four days, and then the ganja thus pre- pared is filled into bags. The ganja thus pre- pared becomes ready for sale. The people pur- chasing the ganja so prepared, if they wish to use any portion of it for smoking, squeeze it with their hands mixed with water, which is then thrown out and water mixed afresh. This pro- cess is repeated ten times at least. The ganja thus prepared, though fit for smoking, is not so used without a mixture of tobacco. (B) No ganja is eaten in this part of the country. (C) The powder left after the process of tread- ing, to which the buds placed in heaps are subject- ed, and from which the ganja is separated, is called bhang. That powder is sold to consumers using it for drinking. To render it fit for drinking purposes the consumers soak it in water. It is then rubbed with hands and cleansed with water, the process being repeated so often as to cause its green colour almost to disappear. The bhang so prepared is then fried on a pan mixed with ghi. It is then mixed with water, poppy seeds, almonds, cardamoms, ginger, pepper and aniseed, and grounded on a stone and rolled into balls. Then a tinned pot or an earthen pot with a broad mouth is taken, and its mouth closed with a piece of cloth tied round it. On the cloth is then placed one of these balls, about four or five tolas in weight; water is then poured down on the ball in small droppings, and the ball is then dissolved with hands. The proportion of water to be put in is 80 tolas for each ball. When the dilution thus prepared is ready, the cloth is removed and sugar or gule mixed with the dilution. Afterwards two receptacles are used. The one (empty) is placed on the ground, and the other containing the dilution is held over it at some distance, which is gradually increased to the height of a man; and the dilution is then dribbled down into the empty receptacle. When the pouring is finished, the process is re- peated as often as is necessary to produce that amount of intoxicating power in the dilution which the drinker wishes it to possess, a repetition forty times being considered as a maximum. The mix- ture thus obtained is termed ghota. It then be- comes fit for drinking. During the hot season, this is used without anything else lacing mixed with it. In other seasons milk is mixed with it. 16. Smokers prepare the ganja they buy for smoking. Ghota-drinkers prepare ghota in their houses from the bhang they purchase. These smokers or drinkers are ascetics, bairagis, salis, koshtis, Marathas, and Musalmans. 17. There is no limitation as to the class or caste of the persons making the preparations of the hemp drug. The ganja cultivators therefore belong to the agricultural class, and they make the vol. vii. p 2
92 preparations themselves with the aid of experienc- ed persons. 18. I have no personal knowledge on this sub- ject. I consider two years to be the longest time beyond which the drugs cannot keep good. Its keeping in good condition or deterioration depends upon the climate, according as it is dry or wet. I have no experience of the causes of deterioration, neither can I think of any means to prevent such deterioration. 19. In this part of the country ganja is used only for smoking. 20. Ascetics, bairagis, salis, koshtis, Musal- mans, and occasionally singers chiefly smoke ganja. Their proportion to the general population cannot be stated in exact percentage, but approxi- mately it may be estimated at 1 to 2 per cent. 21. In this part of the country, flat ganja only is used for smoking, and it is considered the best of all. 22. Charas is not at all prepared in this part of the country. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. People of the ordinary class drink bhang. Detailed information on this point is given in the answer to the 17th question. On the whole the proportion of this class of people is not greater than 5 per cent. 25. That the use of ganja is on the increase is evident from the fact that the ganja-revenue is increasing every year. 26. It is very difficult to ascertain the propor- tion of these classes to the total consumers indi- cated in the respective headings, but the following seems a fairly reasonable estimate:93 such community would lead to political danger. The increasing practice being detrimental to the public health, it is the duty of the good-principled ruler to stop it. Although the vice of indulging in bhang and ganja and that of drinking liquor have no connection with each other, the prohibition is likely to lead some of them to have recourse to opium and others to alcoholic stimulants. 36. For the present there is no practice come to notice of alcohol being substituted for these drugs. N. B.94 ed by him in this behalf, regard being had to the duty paid by the farmer and the cost of the drugs. 64 to 66. This has been explained in the answer to the questions 58 and 59, There seems no objec- tion to a same rate of taxation being imposed on bhang and ganja. 67. The imposition of a high duty as suggested in the answer to question 59 would relieve poorer classes from this vice, as their means generally would not enable them to purchase the drug at the proposed rate. It is, however, true that persons who can afford that rate would buy, but the number of such persons is very small; but, all things considered, the number of consumers would decrease. 68. The number of persons openly drinking on the premises of licensed shops is very small; there is a suggestion on the part of respectable classes that the consumption on the premises should not be allowed as tending to multiply the number ad- dicted to this vice, and causing annoyance to the general public; but as the use of ganja, and bhang is prejudicial to the health of the consumers, it seems to me desirable that special measures should be adopted to check the spread of the vice and gradually reduce the number of consumers. As observed in the answer to question 67 the imposi- tion of a duty would lessen the number of the poorer classes of consumers and confine its pur- chase to persons of means. My opinion therefore on this part of the subject is that a rule should be made providing that persons wishing to purchase bhang or prepare ghota should consume the stuff on the premises of the shops. This measure will deter persons whose means permit them to indulge in this drug from resorting to the shops for con- suming the drug there on the premises, as to do so will be felt by them as a very disgraceful act. Thus the number of persons resorting to the shops will be considerably reduced. I therefore consider that the rule requiring consumption on the premis- es should be passed. 69. Whenever a shop is desired in any village for the sale of this drug, the farmer first makes an application. The wishes of the villagers are then consulted; and on consideration of the extent of consumption of bhang and ganja in that village, the shop is allowed if the villagers wished it, and there is no objection on other grounds. I see no necessity for a change in this system. 70. Instances of smuggling of such drugs from Native States are not detected. There is, however, a considerable cultivation of ganja in Native States, and it is sold there at cheaper rates, There is there- fore reason to believe that persons addicted to this drug and residing in British villages on the fron- tier are in the habit of illicitly importing ganja into British territory. 42. Evidence of RAO SAHEB VITHAL RAGHUNATH DANJI Mamlatdar and Magistrate, 2nd class, Vengurla, Batnagiri. 51. Generally speaking, only a few bad charac- ters are to be found amongst those who consume these drugs (excepting charas, which is not known in this district) on a moderate scale. It is to be observed that these consumers on a moderate scale have connection with gambling and ordinarily not with any other crime. 52. There are but very few such kind of consu- mers here, and of them a larger proportion (than that of moderate consumers) are bad characters, and take to gambling, petty thieving, petty violence and immoral acts. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs is generally believed to incite to such crime, though such a case has not crossed my experience. There was not a case of this kind in my own court or in any office I served. But I hove read High Court decisions (Indian Law Report, Vol. XIV, page 564) in which the accused was addicted to smoking for two years and thereby two murders, one of his wife and the other of his child, were committed by him. Therefore, I think that the using of hemp drugs spoils the head and induces the frenzy allud- ed to. 54. There was not a case in my court in which a criminal had fortified himself by the use of these drugs to commit a crime. But I have known in- stances in which people wishing to be rough or violent in religious assemblies or processions forti- fied themselves in the manner indicated by the question. 55. A case of the kind meant by the question has not come within my personal experience as a Karkun or as a Magistrate. Excessive use of ganja or bhang alone is known to induce complete stupefaction for a stated period; but with admix- ture of dhatura or such other drugs, the stupefying intoxication is more easily reached in practice. As mentioned above, the use of charas is not known in this district. 43. Evidence of RAO SAHIB L. M. DESHPANDE, Brahmin, Mamlatdar and Magistrate, 1st Class, Poona City. 7. Cultivation.95 pilgrimage from place to place, as the use of the drug is said to help them to take long journey and to deaden the pain of suffering and starvation in their tours. The use of bhang and of the sweet confections from the ganja is not very extensive, as would appear from the following proportions which have been arrived at from an inspection of the accounts of the vendors of the drugs. In every hundred consumers of the drugs there are about 90.4 ganja smokers, 2.4 majum eaters, 1.9 yakooti eaters, and the same proportion for shri- khand and guikand eaters, and about 1.5 drink bhang (ghota). The number of men using the drugs cannot be precisely given, as no reliable sta- tistics are available, but regard being had to the average daily allowance of ganja required by a habitual moderate consumer, and the quantity of ganja sold annually in the district, the figure might be put down at 2,800 for the district. This will give us about 2,520 men as ganja smokers, about 56 yakuti eaters, and about 28 for each of the other confections and bhang. In every thousand of population of the district there are not more than 2.6 men who use hemp narcotics. This will show that the use of the eatables and bhang is so limited, that it. is not possible to arrive at any conclusion regarding them as causes of crime and violence. The number of ganja smokers, though comparatively very large, is entirely in- significant when compared with the population of the district. 28. The daily allowance of ganja per head is one and two tolas, and that of bhang three and six masas for habitual moderate and excessive con- sumers respectively. 40. Effects.96 44. Evidence of RAO SAHIB KRISHNAJI BALLAL DEVAL, Chitpavan, Brahmin, Mamlatdar and Magistrate, 1st Class, Chiplon. 1. I have been serving in the Revenue Depart- ment for the last twenty-one years. I have been serving as Mamlatdar and Magistrate, first class, for the last twelve years. I have served in five districts, viz., Belgaum, Dharwar, Bijapur, Canara, and Ratnagiri. In my official capacity I have had many opportunities of observing the general con- duct of ganja consumers. I have had to exercise some control over the retail shops. Some cases of smuggling have been tried by me. 2. Yes. Round and flat ganja is locally known as ganja che boot, i.e., ganja buds. 13. Mere cultivation of the hemp plant is not restricted by law. The High Court of Bombay have also held so. (Vide Criminal Rulings No. 82 of 15th November of 1888, Imperatrix vs. Dada bin Apaji.) Though not restricted, the plant is not grown by the people in the five districts in which I have served. 18. From the enquiries I have made with the retail vendor, I state that if ganja or bhang is kept for more than one year, it is deteriorated and becomes unfit for use. In the districts below Ghats, deterioration commences sooner and begins to set in after six months form the date of import. 20. Charas is seldom used in the districts in which I have served. Only ganja is used for smoking purposes here. Bairagis, fakirs (travelling mendicants), night- mongers, dramatie company, and tamasha dancers as a class do smoke ganja. In Chiplon taluka, and especially in the town of Guhagar, a consider- able number of Brahmins do smoke as a rule; but in the districts of Belgaum, Bijapur, Dhar- war, and Canara Brahmins do not smoke. Gene- rally speaking, idle folks of all classes do smoke and drink ganja and bhang in special places where they assemble to chit-chat. The population of this taluka is 185,000; out of this about 80,000 are women and about 25,000 are children, and the number of adult males amounts to 80,000 nearly. It is also to be noted here that though the proportion of the persons consuming these stuffs with the whole population is 2 per cent., yet it must be borne in mind that the proportion is 5 per cent. with the male popula- tion; and as each of these consumers is an adult male member or a headman of his family, if he goes astray, the prospects of the whole family are sure to be marred. 21. Round ganja is generally preferred for smoking. 23. Bhang or dry leaves of the hemp plant are seldom imported and used for smoking. 24. In the districts in which I have served, people do not eat or drink bhang. This practice prevails in the districts of Northern India, such as Malwa, Benares, etc. 25. The licensed vendor in this taluka has been vending these stuffs, ganja and bhang, for the last twenty-five years; and he states that the use of this stuff is highly on the increase, but no minimum or maximum rate for selling these stuffs is fixed; the vendor sells as he likes. The evidence is conflict- ing on this point, because, though there is a gra- dual decrease in the annual amount of auction sale, yet the quantity of these stuffs imported by the shop-keeper, and the fixed duty, is slightly on the increase. It is also to be noted here that the habitual moderate ganja-consumers bring good ganja from other districts and keep in their pos- session such quantity as is allowed by law. 26. As far as I know, the consumers of ganja whom I have mentioned generally come under head (a) habitual moderate consumers, and their number according to the vendor's statements and other enquiries made lies between 3,000 and 4,000. 27. Please for the first part of this question see answer to question 20. Bairagis, fakirs, and other travelling mendicants have no established houses. They travel from village to village, and district to district, with their families and children. The elders consume these stuffs, and the youngers follow their example. When the elders die, the youngers become elders, and their sons in their turn follow their example, and so on. In other classes, the practice is obtained thus: 97 cants, who are indolent and troublesome to the com- munity ingeneral. Consumers are looked down by the gentry; and if under these circumstance "grow- ing of the hemp plant as well as the importation of the drug " be prohibited by law', the habit of consuming these drugs of the consumers will be gradually checked, and in a few years it will disappear. For some time habitual consumers will no doubt continue to consume the drug illi- citly; but once the growing of the hemp plant and importation of the drug is prohibited by law, the illicit. consumption will soon disappear, and the people will turn their attention to peaceful avoca- tions of agriculure. Under the circumstances stated above, the prohibition would not occasion serious discontent among the consumers. The prohibition will not, in my opinion, encourage the use of alcoholic stimulants or other intoxicating drugs. However, as I have advocated the prohi- bition of the use of ganja for reasons recorded, I beg also to propose for good reasons to check by further restrictions the use of alcoholic drinks. If high authorities in Europe, like John Bright and others, are to be believed. then the best drink that a man can have is potable water. Alcoholic drinks are producing mischief in Europe. The main factors of the Indian population consist chiefly of Hindus and Muhammadans. Alcoholic drinks have been strictly prohibited by Hindu as well as by Muhammadan religion. Alcohol was not so widely used in former days as in the present days. The population is incensing year by year. The great question before Nation and Government is how to utilize the existing lands, and to grow more corn therein for the maintenance of people; therefore the sooner we take precautionary measures to check the use of intoxicating drugs as well as intoxicating drinks in India the better. I should like to propose that only one shop of country liquor and one shop of intoxicating drugs in each taluka is quite sufficient. No passes should be given to open temporary shops in fairs and jatras. These and similar other measures will prevent the spread of bad habits, and the people will turn their attention to peaceful avocations of agri- culture. The land at present used for growing intoxicat- ing poppy plants, etc., will be utilized in growing corn and cotton, the scarcity of which is feeling year by year. Cocoanut trees are now used for drawing toddy, and thus the people are deprived of delicious food of kernel and its edible oil. The more shops we open the more customers we get. Of late, the tendency to open more shops is checked by departmental orders; still I would advocate that only one shop in each taluka is sufficient. 36. There is no reason to believe that alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for any of these drugs. But the more and more use of alcoholic stimulants year by year is attributable to other causes, which need not be enumerated here. 43. The consumers of ganja are generally trouble- some, not only to their neighbours but to their friends and family members also. 44. It is not really refreshing. Though habitual moderate use does not produce intoxication, yet its effects on the consumer's constitution and be- haviour are unwholesome and bad; because I have observed this in each ganja consumer's case when- ever he came in contact with me, either as a witness in my court or as a friend in society. 51. In my opinion if hundred bad characters are collected together, you will find seventy-five out of them to be habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs. There is no connection between the moderate use of these drugs and the grave crimes coming under the Indian Penal Code; but crimes of giving abuses and assaults, etc., are, in my opinion, committed by ganja consumers when under its influence. 53 and 54. No such case has come before me. 55. I do not know of any such case. 58. The administration is working well. 68. There is only one shop in Chiplon taluka licensed for retail sale of these drugs. 69. At present no local opinion is considered before a shop is opened; but I propose that no new shops should be opened unless applied for by the people in an application signed by them. 70. There is no general use of ganja which is illegally imported or on which duty is not paid. During the course of twelve years, I have tried only three or four eases of smuggling; but the control over illegal importation as at present exercised by the Excise Department and the Police and the Magistrates is, in my opinion, quite sufficient. Oral evidence. Question 35.98 45. Evidence of RAO SAHIB RAMCHANDRA NARAYAN JOGLEKAR, Brahmin, Mamlatdar and First Class Magistrate, on special duty, Satara. 51. The consumers of ganja are mostly persons who have no position in life, but they do not necessarily happen to be bad characters as such. Bad characters seldom use bhang, ghota or charas. The moderate use of any of these drugs has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 52. Excessive use of ganja leads to irritation on account of trifling matters and sometimes to quarrels resulting in breach of public peace. It has no connection with any other crime. 53. Excessive indulgence in ganja incites to unpremeditated breach of public peace as above stated. I know of no case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54 and 55. No. 46. Evidence of BALKRISHNA NARAYAN VAIDYA, Parbhu, State Karbhari of Sangli. 1. I was a mamlatdar in the British districts, and have been Karbhari of Sangli for seven years. In my official capacities 1 have often come in contact with the cultivators of hemp, from whom I have obtained some knowledge about the culti- vation and manufacture of these drugs. 2. The definitions of bhang, charas, and ganja are correct, so far as the Sangli State is con- cerned, and the drugs prepared out of hemp go by the above names. 3. I have no knowledge of the district in which the hemp plant grows spontaneously. 4 to 6. Not known. 7. The cultivation of the hemp plant is carried on in the following six villages in the Sangli State to the following extent for production of ganja:99 15. In this State only ganja is prepared from the hemp plant. It is prepared in the following manner:100 prescribed as one of the ingredients of the medicine to be administered in cases of dysentry and diarrh101 of the wild plant does not take place in this district. 6. As the wild hemp plant is hardly scat- tered in almost the whole of this district, I am unable to give any definite answer as to whether its growth is either dense or scattered. 7. There is cultivation of the hemp plant in the district of Ahmednagar102 condition for about two years. The causes of their deterioration are numerous, but the people of this province are unable to ascertain the exact ones. The chief cause I can best understand is the bad arrangement of their packing in gunny bags, which does not perfectly protect them from the destructive agencies of their narcotic property, viz., heat, light, and rain. In order to prevent deterioration, they should be kept in tin or wood boxes, and should, as far as possible, be kept apart from the destructive agencies cited above. The other precaution to be taken is that in trans- mission they should not be allowed to break into chur, which becomes less effective. 19. Ganja mixed with tobacco is used for smok- ing as well as for medicinal purposes, while charas mixed with gudakhu (a substance prepared by mixing tobaco with jagri) is only used for smoking. Ganja, bhang or ghota, and boja also are used for drinking purposes. The above pre- parations except boja are generally used in the city of Nagar and large populous places in the district of Ahmednagar. Boja is only prepared and consumed in the Sholapur district. 20. As charas is produced in a comparatively small proportion, very few people can procure it for smoking. Among persons who get opportu- nities to be present at the time of ganja being harvested, those who are given to ganja-smoking generally try to secure it, and owing to its small production it is never brought to market for sale. Ganja-smoking is not generally restricted to any particular class of people, but it is used by a great number of fakirs, bairagis, gosains, and other beggars. 21. The flat kind of ganja is only known and used in this district; therefore it is not possible to give any particulars of the other kinds. 22. Native charas is used in this district, as stated in questions No. 20 and 37, to the extent and in the form secured as explained in the said question. Owing to the insignificant quantity consumed in this district, no foreign charas is imported, and therefore no particulars regarding it can be given. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking, but it is used for drinking in the form of ghota, which is generally taken to a moderate extent by the bairagis, sadhus, fakirs, and marwadis, the object being to cool their brains in the hot weather in this district. 24. Use of majum is generally made by people who are debauched. If comparison be made as regards the users of it in the city of Nagar, it will be found in the proportion of one or two persons to every one hundred of its population. Yakuti, gulkand, and shrikhand are used by rich persons on account of their sweet scent, and because of their partial intoxicating quality. Fakki is used by mendicants and bairagis, etc., who cannot afford to spend money. These persons indulge in this, because they are prohibited from using alcohol on account of religious restrictions. 25. The use of ganja, charas, and bhang is generally on the decrease amongst the higher classes on account of their advance in civilization. But in the lower classes the use of them is on the increase, because they are cheaper as compared with other intoxicants, being at the same time less harmless to health. 26. (a) The proportion of the moderate habi- tual consumers is 2 per cent. (b) The proportion of habitual excessive con- sumers is 2 per cent. (c) The proportion of occasional moderate consumers is 1 per cent. (d) The proportion of occasional excessive consumers is 1 per cent. 27. The Parsis and Christians do not use any of the above drugs at all; the principal class is that of marwadis, labourers, fakirs and bairagis, who particularly indulge in them. The habit of drinking or smoking is generally obtained by keeping company with the persons who indulge in any of these drugs. The reason why the labourers use any of these drugs is that they forget for a while their fatigues, and others use it for the sake of pleasure. 28. The average allowance and cost of each of these drugs per diem to (a) habitual moderate consumers is ¼ of an anna of the weight of ½ tola of ganja. (b) Habitual excessive consumers, ¾ of an anna or nine pies worth of ganja, which weighs 1½ tolas. 29. When either ganja or charas is used for smoking, one-fourth quantity of tobacco or gudakhu is mixed with three-fourths quantity of either of the drugs to enable the ganja or charas to burn soon, especially the former, which is not used without being well washed, and while in a wet state. Different classes of consumers are not known to mix any other ingredients. All classes of people generally mix the same kinds of ingredients, viz., tobacco. Dhatura is a most injurious and harmful drug; it is never used by consumers except when much intoxication is required by them, and even on this occasion they first mix it with ganja or charas before using it, i.e., it is not smoked in its original form. It is generally used by criminals to carry out their designs sooner without fear of detection. The use of the admixture is simply to effect intoxication, in absence of which no intoxicating effect can be had. I am not aware of any preparation such as bhang-massala, as it is unknown in this district. But bhang is mixed with milk, almonds, sugar- candy, ginger, cardamoms, and poppy seeds by the rich. The poor use bhang with jagri. The object of mixing bhang with other ingredients is simply to give a kind of relish to the bhang drink. Besides the above, majum, yakuti, shrikhand, gulkand, and fakki are also prepared from ganja. I am also informed that there is such a prepara- ation as boja, of which there is a regular Govern- ment farm in the Sholapur district of the Bombay presidency. The mixture consists of the ingredients as per recipe attached. The preparation of boja is as follows:103 the lower classes, as, for instance, labourers, bairagis, sadhus, fakirs, etc., to the extent of 6 per cent. It is mainly confined to the male sex. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs, but as medicine it is sometimes given to them in particular diseases. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is not easily formed. It is formed by company of persons who are solely given to these drugs. It is not very difficult to break off to the moderate users of it, and it has a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. But the excessive cannot break off the habit. 32. The consumption of any of these drugs is regarded as religious by ascetics and bairagis, who say that by the use of any of these drugs their sole attention is devoted to the Almighty. Some of the worshippers of the god Shiva regard the use of these drugs in a high sense. The use of these drugs in connection with such custom is regarded as essential, simply because it is bene- ficial to health when temperately used. No doubt it leads to the formation of the habit, and is not injurious if properly used. The social position of a man addicted to the use of these drugs is not much lowered in the eyes of his co-religionists as that of a man given to alcohol. I am not aware of any other, either social or religious customs in regard to the consumption of these drugs, with the exception of the one mentioned by me above, as regards the liking of it by the god Shiva. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is generally regarded as a low thing, but morally viewed the use is not condemned. Persons using these drugs are not held irreligious. The use of smoking is generally in disrepute. The disrepute is attributable to its intoxicating influence under which the user of it some time remains. There is not a custom of worshipping the hemp plant in this district on any occasion by any sects of the people. Before the hemp plant is harvested, it is worshipped like other agricultural produce by the cultivators of it. The object in so doing is nothing but to seek the assistance of the agricul- tural goddess in procuring eligible sale proceeds of the ganja. 34. It would be a serious hardship to the consumers of these drugs, if their consumption be stopped. As these drugs beguile the tedious- ness or fatigue of their labour and can be obtain- ed at a cheap rate, and as they have in them a quality of making a man forget for a while all worldly cares and anxieties, they are chiefly used by labouring classes. The prohibition of its use would not be liked by 75 per cent. of the consumers. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. The drug would be con- sumed illicitly. If the cultivation of the hemp plant be totally discontinued, the prohibition can be easily enforced, but thereby the agricul- turists would suffer much, because the cultivation of ganja improves the quality of the soil. The prohibition of any of these drugs would un- doubtedly occasion a serious discontent amongst the consumers generally. Such discontent, in my opinion, would not amount to a political danger. The prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs, which will depend upon the means of the con- sumer; but it is a work of time, because the native drugs to which they are easily accustomed can be had at a smaller price than any alcoholic stimulants. 36. It cannot be stated that alcohol is now being substituted for any of these drugs. It chiefly depends upon the choice of the people using them. Some people use alcohol and some these drugs, but for these drugs alcohol is not preferred, as the latter is more expensive than the former, and is regarded irreligious by parti- cular classes of people. 37. Charas has more intoxicating effect than ganja, being the essence of the plant. It is used in smoking simply by adding gudakhu, while ganja is first perfectly cleaned and washed with water, and by mixing gudakhu to the so- cleaned ganja it is used for smoking. The latter is easily procurable at the shops, but the former cannot be had in shops, but it is used by culti- vators while harvesting. 38. Round ganja is not prepared in this district. Flat ganja has more intoxicating effect on con- sumers than chur. Chur is nothing but a powder- like substance that remains at the bottom of the ganja prepared and collected. Chur is sometimes used for smoking, while ganja is used for various preparations. 39. The smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant is more injurious than drinking or eating the same or any other preparation, because the excessive use in smoking is hurtful. It affects the lungs and chest, produces cough and excessive heat in the body, and dries up blood in the system. While in drinking and eating it has a beneficial effect on the constitution, in- asmuch as it cools the system, and it is consumed even by more advanced classes in the hot season. 40. Native doctors prescribe the use of these drugs for medicinal qualities on most diseases. They are also used in the treatment of cattle and all kinds of animal diseases. It is given to cattle and horses to encourage their eating more. Being under the influence of it, they go on chewing their food and run faster. 41. The moderate use of ganja, bhang, or charas is beneficial in its effects. (a) It has a digestive power. (b) It gives staying power under severe exer- tion and alleviates fatigue. (c) It destroys the bad effects resulting from bad water in malarious and unhealthy tracts. The tendency of the people in using the drug is mainly to secure the effects stated above. The reference is applicable to the moderate habitual users as well as to the moderate occasional users, but in the case of the latter the effects are prompt and quick. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is harmless and is beneficial, because it has got the quality of exciting appetite and a digestive power. It has an astringent taste, and gives refreshing sleep in order to enable the user of it to overcome the effects of fatigue. 43. The moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours, because when the drug is taken, it stupefies the user of it for two or three hours at least; and while under its influence he is un- able to do any harm to his neighbours. 44. Habitual consumers do not get any intoxi- cating effect by a moderate use of any of these drugs. It is refreshing in a less degree. It does not produce intoxication at all. It does not allay hunger, but excites it. It creates appetite. The effect lasts for a few hours. As to after-effects there are practically none. The want of subse-
104 quent gratification produces longing and un- easiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not produce any noxious effects, physical, mental, or moral. It impairs the constitution in some way if substantial food be not taken. It does not injure digestion or cause loss of appetite, but it creates appetite. it arrests dysentery, but causes bronchitis or asthma if used in excess in smok- ing in the absence of any substantial food, It impairs the moral sense and does not induce lazi- ness or habits of immorality or debauchery It does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity to the habitual moderate users. It does not produce insanity. The persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease obtain relief from the moderate use of these drugs. As to the latter portion of this query, I am not in a position to answer it better than a medical person. No further account under each of the above points can be given by me, being unacquainted with any of its medicinal effects. 46. An excessive consumer of any of these drugs would suffer severely. The excessive use of these drugs is likewise considered to stupefy the intel- lect and produce insanity. I am unable to say anything about the time for which the stupefac- tion or insanity continues. 47. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not appear to be a hereditary habit or to affect in any way the children of the moderate consumer. 48. Please see answer to the preceding question (i.e., No. 47). 49. The moderate use of these drugs is practised as an aphrodisiac. It is not generally used by prostitutes. It is not more injurious than any ordinary narcotic. It tends to produce impotence if it is used in excess. 50. The excessive use of any of these drugs can never be practised as an aphrodisiac. Prosti- tutes never use it in excess. It is certainly more harmful than its use as an ordinary narcotic. Excessive use produces impotence. 51. Habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs are never as a rule men of bad charac- ter. The use of these drugs has no tendency to- wards the committal of crime, and therefore it has no connection with crime. 52. As stated in the above question, the mode- rate use of any of these drugs has no connection with crime; and when there is none by moderate use, there is naturally an entire absence in the case of excessive use, the use resulting, as elsewhere stated, of making the man harmless and useless for any but sedentary work. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime at all. I have not seen or heard any instance in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. These drugs are not used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime in any way, the effects being, as stated elsewhere, to make a man useless for any active work. 55. Entire stupefaction cannot be effected by the simple use of these drugs. It must be mixed with dhatura; and a crimi- nal generally, when he attempts any thing, makes sure of his victim, so he always makes it a point to administer the drug with dhatura. I have not heard of a case in which by simple use complete stupefaction has ensued. 56. The effects of hemp used in moderation, modified by the admixture of other substances like spices, are not dangerous to the consumer himself or others. But when mixed with dhatura or any such bad article105 62. I think that the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang is sufficiently controlled. 63. As regards the answer to this query, I beg to invite a reference to the answer given by me to question No. 59106 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is not restricted in this province. It is not, how- ever. common to all districts, the conditions being necessary for the cultivation. Ganja plants would not grow in places where the rainfall was heavy or the temperature low. The cultivation of hemp plant for ganja in Mahableshwar and other similar places would be impossible. 14 (a) Ganja alone is prepared from the hemp plant in the Satara district, about 330 acres of land being under cultivation for the purpose. (b) Charas is not prepared or sold here. (c) Bhang is not prepared here. It is, as de- fined above, the powdered dust and leaves produced by the handling of ganja. it is mostly used as manure, and partly in some preparations called ghota and dudhia. 15. (a) The wild plant is not known here, and so the several methods of preparations from the cultivated and the wild plant cannot be distin- guished. Ganja from the cultivated plant is pre- pared thus:107 and cardamom are mixed with bhang. By mixing milk to ghota dudhia is prepared. The spices are hot substances, and, with a view to give heat to the body, they are mixed with bhang. I do not know anything about the preparation called bhang massala. 30. A smoker of ganja would prefer to smoke in company if a smoker friend or two happen to be near him. If not, he will smoke in solitude. Ghota and dudhia are drinks which would mostly be consumed in company. By previous appoint- ment there would be a company of friends at a particular place, when the ghota or dudhia would be prepared and drunk. Ganja is generally smok- ed by persons over the age of twenty-five up to any time in advanced life. Similarly ghota and dudhia are drunk by males of like age. Children do not consume any of these drugs. 31. A habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed, and it is difficult to break it off. There is a tendency of the habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There are no customs, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of any of these drugs. 33. The consumption and use of all or any of these drugs is regarded with contempt and dis- repute by the public. People hold this opinion, I think, on account of the bad effects the drugs possess over the consumers. None of the people worship the hemp plant. 34. In my opinion it would not be a serious privation to any class of consumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use, because there are instances of men who used to smoke ganja before, but who have since left off smoking. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of the three drugs and their preparations. The pro- hibition must extend to Native States also, that there may not be any chance of the drugs being smuggled and used in this district. For the pro- hibition to be enforced either that the cultivation of the ganja plant should stop altogether, or that heavy duties should be levied immediately the ganja is manufactured. The prohibition would not cause any serious discontent amongst the consumers. It would not cause any political danger. The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. I do not think that alcohol is now being to any extent substituted for any of the three drugs. 37. As charas smoking is so very rare in this district, the difference between the effects of ganja and charas smoking cannot be stated. 38. Only flat ganja is known in this district. So the difference in the effects between it and the round and chur ganja cannot be stated. 39. I cannot answer this question. 40. Ganja is used in making a massala for horses. 41 and 42. I cannot answer these questions. 43. Moderate consumers of ganja and bhang are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of moderate ganja smoking on the habitual smoker is that it is re- freshing. It produces intoxication and creates appetite. The effect lasts for about an hour, and after that time there is a depression of mind. The want of subsequent smoking produces un- easiness. 45 and 46. I cannot answer these. 47. The habitual moderate use of ganja does not appear to be a hereditary habit. It does not affect in any way the children of the moderate consumer. 48. I cannot answer this. 49. Moderate ganja smoking does not produce any desire for sexual intercourse. Prostitutes smoke ganja; but I do not know whether they do so as an aphrodisiac. The use of ganja tends to produce impotence. Ghota and dudhia are used in Guzerat by males as an aphrodisiac. 50 to 53. I cannot answer these questions. 54. Ganja or bhang is not used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55 and 56. I cannot answer these. 57. Ganja and charas are not known to be eaten or drunk in this district. 58. The present system of excise administration works well and does not require any improve- ment. 59. No improvement necessary. 60. Ganja is produced in this district, and the ganja plants and the ganja itself are sufficiently under control, and no modification in the system appears to be necessary. 61. Charas is not produced in this district. 62. There is no cultivation in this district of the hemp plant for production of bhang, as bhang is nothing but the powdered dust and leaves of ganja produced by a handling of the ganja. 63. I have no objection to the present system of wholesale and retail vend of ganja. Charas is not sold at all. Bhang is not sold wholesale. It is sold retail. I have no objection against its system of retail vend. 64. I have no objection to the existing regula- tions governing the export and import of ganja from and into Satara or its transport within the province, excepting that all ganja for export and transport should be taken for examination, pre- vious to removal to its destination, to the mamlat- dar's office of the taluka to which the village whence the ganja is removed belongs. Charas and bhang are not exported from or imported into or transported within the Satara district. 65. With reference to alcoholic and other in- toxicants ganja is lightly taxed; but as it is principally used by poor people, no change with a view to increase the duty would be desirable. Charas is not sold at all, and bhang is sold retail along with ganja. 66. I have not seen round or "broken" ganja, and so I cannot say whether there should be one uniform rate or different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja. 67. I have no objection to propose to the pre- sent method of taxing ganja and bhang, charas not being sold. 68. There are no houses or shops in this district licensed for the sale of ganja and bhang, where the purchasers are permitted to consume the drugs on the premises. I am of opinion that there should not be such houses or shops. 69. The wishes of the people are partly con- sidered before a shop is opened in any locality. Immediately an application for the opening of a shop is received, it is enquired into by the mam- latdar of the taluka to which the place where the shop is intended to be opened is subordinate and reported on to the Collector, with whom the final decision rests. Local public opinion should al- ways be considered. vol. vii. R 2
108 70. No hemp drugs are imported or smuggled from Native States into the Satara district. Duty is really paid in respect of all the ganja and bhang used here, no untaxed drugs being consumed. 49. Evidence of YASHVANT NILKANTH, Patana Prabhu, Superintendent, Office of Survey Commissioner, and Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Bombay. 1. Observation and conversation with persons dealing in and using these drugs. 2. So far as ganja and charas are concerned, Dr. Prain's definition is thoroughly applicable to the drugs used in the Deccan under these names. Bhang, as is generally used here, differs slightly from what is stated in the definition in being a mass of broken leaves of the hemp plant mixed with crushed pieces of the dried flower head in its immature state. This flowering top of the cultivated female hemp plant is called ganja. The three described varieties of ganja109 three drugs are manufactured. Lengre in the Khanapur taluka of Satara, and Javulke in the Khed, and Jategaon, Mukhai, and Shikrapur in the Sirur talukas of Poona are famous for their ganja. 10. The cultivators who grow ganja belong to the ordinary cultivating classes, but possess the special knowledge required to distinguish male from female plants, and also a knowledge of the curing of ganja. 11 and 12. No information. 13. All the Deccan districts grow ganja for local consumption, but Ahmednagar, Satara, and Nasik also for export; but its area is especially large in the Khanapur taluka of Satara, and the Nagar, Rahuri and Newasa talukas of Ahmed- nagar. The cultivation once established seems to be maintained by the skill acquired and handed down from father to son. It may also be due to the suitability of soil, dry climate and light rainfall, which are essential for the proper growth of the plant. The extension of the cultivation of the plant in equally favourable parts of other districts is discouraged for reasons stated in reply No. 8. The plant is not likely to produce a large flowering top in the hilly tracts of the Western Ghauts and the Konkan, where the rainfall is excessive. 14. As stated above in reply No. 9, ganja and bhang are manufactured in the places where the hemp plant is specially grown for the purpose to meet local demand and for export to Bombay. Charas is manufactured in the Ahmednagar district only to a very limited extent for private use in the manner described above in reply No. 7. 15. As stated above in reply Nos. 3 to 6, I have no knowledge of the hemp plant growing in a wild, state in any of the Deccan districts, and the facts stated refer to the products of the cul- tivated plant only. (A) Ganja is not subjected to any special treatment until it passes into the hand of the smoker, who breaks the top into small bits, removes seeds, leaves and foreign matter if there be any. He then places the broken ganja on the palm of his left hand, and pours water over it three or four times till the water is clear, each time kneading it with the thumb of his right hand. This process takes about 10 minutes if it is properly done. By this time the ganja becomes sticky. It is then squeezed with the two hands till the water is pressed out. A small cake is left, from which pieces are broken and mixed with an equal quantity of tobacco, and smoked off in an ordinary native tobacco pipe. Care is taken both to wash and to knead the ganja thoroughly. Insufficient washing leaves a substance which is said to cause coughing, and, if the water is not all pressed out, it will not smoke easily. (B) Sweetmeats sold under the name of yakuti, majum, shrikhand, and gulkand are made with extract of ganja, which is prepared as follows:110 India, who, when they can manage it, bring bhang from their own parts of the country. When bhang is not procurable, an habitual drinker will make his drink of ganja instead of bhang, but this is rare. Green leaves of the hemp plant are sometimes made into bhajas, the preparation consisting of hemp leaves, gram flour and spices mixed together in water, formed into small roundish cakes and fried in oil or ghi. Sometimes powdered ganja is used in this dish instead of the leaves. Young and tender hemp plants are also eaten as a vege- table. Charas requires no preparation before its use. It is simply made into small pills and smoked either with ganja or tobacco, according to the choice of the smoker. Boja.111 29. Bhang is never drunk without a seasoning of black pepper; but often it is spiced with al- monds, or mixed with milk, sweetened with sugar or sugarcandy, and flavoured with some or all of the following articles of the bhang massala: poppy seeds, rose petals, fennel, nutmeg, cardamoms, black pepper and kasni seed (Cinchorium intybus). Ganja is always smoked with tobacco. In- stances of ganja being smoked unwashed and with- out tobacco are very rare. Sometimes, but very rarely, say in one of 500 cases, dhatura or nux vomica is smoked with ganja to increase its in- toxicating properties. Among gosavis and bairagis on rare occasions a mixture of dhatura, nux vomica, aconite, opium, arsenic and raskapur (a mixture of the mercurial chlorides) is said to be smoked with ganja or drunk with bhang. When smoked, the mixture is called panchratni chillum, or the bowl containing five jewels; and when drunk, the preparation, panchratni bhang or bhang made of five jewels. Charas is smoked with ganja or tobacco; when smoked with tobacco it is milder in effect. 30. The consumption of these drugs is practised both in solidude and in company. The well-to-do and the respectable, who value public opinion, generally use these drugs in private. But they will not object to take a few sips of bhang in company of friends, or with a religious devotee of some reputation. The poor and the idle generally meet at a temple or some other public place and indulge in these drugs. Sometimes they meet at the house of a well-to-do smoker or drinker who can afford to stand treat and does not object to their company. Such places of meeting are called " ganjacha akhada " or " bhangecha akhada" as the case may be, and the ganja smoker is called a 'ganjekas' or 'ganjad' and the bhang drinker 'bhangya' or 'bhangad '. The use of these drugs is chiefly confined to the male sex, only a few women, always those of loose character, using ganja and behang. Boys are not known to in- dulge in these drugs. The use of ganja sweat- meats is more general; but even these are not eaten by children. 31. The habit of using these drugs is not so easily formed as that of tobacco; for ganja and bhang cannot be used in secret without time know- ledge of elders, as both these drugs require some special treatment before their use. Besides, ganja emits a strong smell and at times nauseates the novice. The habit is not very difficult to break off, the uneasiness lasting only for a few days. There is not a greater tendency in the case of these drugs than in other narcotics for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. Bhang, being considered favourite of the god Shiva, is drunk on the Maha Shivaratra, the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of the Hindu month Magh (February-March), and on Mon- days of the month Shravan (July-August), all these days being sacred to that deity. It is also drunk during the Shimga holidays, the Saturnalia of the Hindus, when more or less indulgence112 39. The smoking of ganja and charas is con- sidered more injurious than bhang drinking, though it takes a longer time to take effect, and its influence lasts longer. Many moderate smokers of ganja and charas are said to suffer, though slightly, from chest affections, such as cough and asthma, in old age. Again, ganja and charas smoking is said to have caused insanity oftener than bhang drinking. 40. These drugs are sometimes used by them- selves in empiric treatment and in combination with other drugs by native doctors. Bhang forms an ingredient in the massala or condition balls given to horses and cattle. 41. The moderate use of ganja or bhang, com- bined with highly nourishing food, is said to be beneficial in its effects. It improves digestion and alleviates fatigue. It is sometimes used as an alleged preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts, ganja smoking for this purpose being not quite unknown in the lower ranks of survey subordinates, whose work causes much exposure to unaccustomed climate. The use is very moderate and occasional. 42. In the absence of proper nourishment, even the moderate use of these drugs is considered more or less injurious. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of ganja on a habitual but moderate smoker is said to be refreshing and only highly intoxicating. It is said to create appetite. Bhang takes longer time to operate, but its ultimate effect is similar. The duration of influence varies with the quantity used. Habitual but moderate consumers do not acknowledge any bad after-effect. The want of subsequent gratifi- cation is said to cause longing, listlessness, depression of spirits, heaviness of limbs and loss of appetite, and to disturb digestion. 45 and 46. There is no reason to suppose that habitual moderate consumers, when properly fed, suffer either in body, mind, or morals; but exces- sive consumers may suffer both in body and mind, and certainly do suffer in morals. 47 and 48. There is nothing to show that the habit of consuming hemp drugs is hereditarily transmitted, or that there is any special ten- dency, apart from association and example, for children of even immoderate consumers to become addicted to the vice. 49 and 50. The moderate use of bhang or ganja is practised as an aphrodisiac, and some prostitutes are said to practise it. The use of these drugs for this purpose is more harmful than ordinary narcotics, as it is likely to lead to sexual excesses. The excessive use of these drugs is said to cause impotence, and it is urged by vowed celibates among religious mendicants that they use the drugs to weaken sexual desire and aid them in fulfilling their vow. 51 and 52. Undoubtedly dissipated consumers of hemp drugs associate with bad characters and may be thus led to crime; but there is nothing to show that their vice prompts criminality. 53 and 54. No knowledge. 55. There are instances of people having been robbed after they had been designedly stupefied with ganja. 56. The effects of the hemp drugs are often in- tensified by the addition of dhatura, opium or nux vomica. Cardamoms smoked with ganja are said to increase the intoxicating effect of the drug. 57. Charas is not known either to be eaten or drunk in the Deccan. Ganja, as stated above in reply No 15, is rarely drunk as bhang, and in that case it is more intoxicating than bhang. 58 to 70. I am not sufficiently acquainted with the present system of excise administration of the presidency to suggest any improvement in it. A. Area under Bhang and Ganja (Indian Hemp) in the districts of the Bombay Presidency, including Sind, during the last eight years, from 1885-86 to 1892-93. No. DISTRICTS. 1885-86. 1886-87. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. A.113 Area under Bhang and Ganja (Indian Hemp) in the districts of the Bombay Presidency, including Sind, during the last eight years, from 1885-86 to 1892-93114 62. By restricting cultivation, and farming the contracts at high rates, the prices of the drugs would be enhanced and consumption would tend to decline. 65. The taxation is unknown to me. 66. In my opinion it should be taxed at one rate for all qualities and kinds. 68. Yes; in every town. Such houses and shops are necessary, but should be well looked after by the police or other authorities. 51. Evidence of LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. HUMFREY, Inspector-General of Police, Poona. Oral evidence. Question 1.115 with a view to shoot a police constable who had been placed on guard over the prisoner's hut. He was taken to the quarter-guard by order of the Subadar, and it was on his way thither that he made this assignation with Bhima, who was conducting him. At about 11 P.M. he got away from the quarter- guard under a false pretext and met Bhima as they had previously arranged. Then he went into the hut of another sepoy who was absent, or whom he thought to be absent, and stole from it a rifle and cartridges. He loaded the rifle and fired at the policeman, and he wounded him severely on the hand. The prisoner then ran away. As he was retiring, the rifle was dis- charged a second time. This implies that it had been reloaded, even if we accept the prisoner's statement that it went off accidentally. To this account the prisoner adds that he was instigated by Bhima after the latter had given him some sherbet, from the effects of which he says he felt intoxicated. He thought he had been drugged. But the sherbet was drunk even before he was taken to the Subadar's. The alleged intoxication did not prevent his making the appointment with Bhima as he was taken from the Subadar's to the quarter-guard. Nor did it prevent his bearing the appointment in mind and contriving by a false pretext to keep it. It is impossible therefore to suppose, whether a drug had been administered to him or not, that he was so affected by it as to prevent his knowing what he was about or the ordinary consequences of his acts. He must, especially as a soldier, have known that to fire a bullet at the policeman was an act so imminently dan- gerous that, if it took effect, it would in all pro- bability immediately or mediately cause death. Fortunately it did not cause death, but it did cause hurt. Had death been caused, the prisoner would undoubtedly have been punishable for mur- der. As it is, he is, for the attempt carried so nearly to completion, subject to punishment under the second part of paragraph I of section 301 of the Indian Penal Code. The crime he has com- mitted is one of the gravest character, since military lawlessness is the most serious of dan- gers to society. We must therefore sentence the prisoner to be transported for seven (7) years, which sentence will be concurrent with that which he is already undergoing under the sentence of a Court Martial. 52. Evidence of MR. H. SCANNELL, Superintendent, Great Indian Peninsula Railway Police, Poona. Oral evidence. Question 1.116 if the report is used for the purpose of filling up a printed form. I have never heard of ganja as being the cause of cases of intoxication on the Railway. I have never had to deal with smug- gling of the hemp drugs in the Railway. The ganja shops are, with the liquor shops, closed during the Moharram, but that is the only occa- sion on which the precaution is taken. 53. Evidence of MR. R. W. E. H. VINCENT, C. I. E., Officiating Commissioner of Police, Bombay. Oral evidence. Question 1.117 54. Evidence of MR. H. KENNEDY, District Superintendent of Police, Ahmednagar. 1. Have questioned my subordinates and persons acquainted with the cultivation and sale of hemp drugs; also those who are addicted to their consumption. 2. Yes, the definitions are correct, but round ganja is not known in this district, nor is chur, but bhusa or ganja dust is known and is somewhat equivalent to chur. It is exported to Europe, and is also used occasionally in place of bhang, having a milder effect. Ganja bhusa or ganja dust, charas, and bhang are all known, the latter when taken in the form of a beverage being also known as ghota ( the common term here) and thandai. 3. In the Nagar district only. Talukas Nagar, Karjat, Newasa, Rahuri, Kopergaon, Sheogaon, Parner, Shrigonda. Abundant in the first three. 4. Male plant is generally called bhangera; female plant ganja. The latter is also known as green tobacco. All refer to the same plant. 5. Wild hemp is apparently unknown. It does grow, however, as I have a male and female plant in my compound, from which I gather it grows elsewhere, though I have not seen or heard of it. 6. There is a kind of ganja which is known as ran ganja, but this term is only applied to ganja that depends upon the rainfall, as distinct from well water or irrigation, for its cultivation. 7. (a) Yes. (b) Charas is also produced in the picking and preparation of the plant for ganja; but it is not produced specially for consumption; or, if so, it is surreptitiously so used. At Maka, taluka Newasa, and at Kamargaon, taluka Nagar, it is cultivated for seed purposes. (c) and (d) Yes. 8. The plants grown exclusively for seed pur- poses are known as bhang plants, because the best bhang comes from them. 9. Garden land and black soil are best for its cultivation. A plentiful supply of water and careful manuring required; also ploughing and harrowing. One man required to watch every three bigas of land cultivated, for weeding. The male plant has to be carefully eliminated when cultivat- ing for production of ganja. One male plant will sterilise a whole field of ganja. In cultivating for seed purposes the female plant is eliminated. 10. The ordinary cultivator class. Some Brahmins grow the hemp also. 11. Not known, but probably not as far as this district is concerned, as wild hemp is not known. The result would probably be spurious ganja. 12. No, so far as this district is concerned. 13. A permit has to be obtained for the prepa- ration of ganja but not for the cultivation of the hemp plant118 to be warmed up before use. Ganja and bhang in course of time get dried up and crumble to dust. 19. Yes, but ganja can be either eaten or drunk as already explained. 20. People of all castes smoke ganja. Opium eaters chiefly indulge in charas smoking and foreigners, up-country men. 21. The flat or trodden kind is the only one known in this district. Ganja dust or bhusa used to be thrown away as useless, but it is now exported to Europe. It is also occasionally taken in place of bhang, being milder in its effects. 23. No. 24. Bhang not eaten as a rule, except when made into sweetmeats. Marwadis chiefly, but also Pardesis, Bhatias, Gugan, and bairagis indulge in bhang-drinking. 25. It is difficult to say, but probably the use of these drugs is not on the increase. The use of alcohol is gradually spreading among the classes that would be disposed to indulge in these intoxi- cants. Bhang-drinking only may possibly be on the increase, if anything. 26. As regards ganja and bhang, one chatak of the drug per diem is considered moderate, two chataks excessive. At this estimate probably 20 per cent. are moderate and 10 per cent. excessive consumers. The rest probably do not take either, or only so occasionally that no distinction can be drawn between them and non-consumers. 27. Gosains and bairagis are the chief con- sumers of both ganja and bhang. Muhammadans, fakirs chiefly for ganja only, Marwadis bhang only. Force of example leads to the practice. 28. (a) One chatak, costing one to two annas. (b) Two chataks, costing two to four annas. 29. Vide answer to question 15. Dhatura is not used. The object of the admixtures is to make the drug palatable and to strengthen its effect. Bhang massala consists of kuskus, almonds, black pepper, rose petals, etc. No separate preparation kept ready made. 30. Children never indulge; women rarely except the prostitute class. Ganja smoking chiefly confined to prostitutes and the lower classes, both in solitude and in company. bhang drinking common to all classes. Marwadi women some- times drink bhang. Respectable women take neither bhang nor ganja. 31. Easily formed, but not so easily given up. Like tobacco smoking, it develops from the moderate into the excessive in course of time. Can be given up like smoking, but would be felt more severely. 32. Bhang drinking is indulged in at Marwadi marriages. Sometimes Brahmins at dinner parties and other convivial occasions take it with gram fried in ghee. It is not an essential part of the ceremony or feast in either case. It is taken in moderation, and is neither injurious nor calculated to develop a habit in this way. 33. Both ganja smoking and bhang drinking are looked down upon if habitually indulged in. They give a man a bad name. Bhangili or gotebaz and ganjedi or ganjebaz are terms of reproach for those who habitually indulge. Habitual takers, if otherwise respectable men, are ashamed to admit their failing. There is no religious objection to the drug in either form. The hemp plant is not worshipped. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit, but not to entirely stop the use of these drugs. They would assuredly be consumed illicitly. Prohibition could not be thoroughly enforced, and would certainly cause discontent, which would amount to a serious embarrassment, if not a political danger. If for- bidden in any shape or form, recourse would be had undoubtedly to alcohol, and also to opium. 37. Charas smoking is said to be stronger and more injurious than ganja smoking. Produces headache. Ganja is said not to. 38. None but flat ganja known in this district. 39. Ganja smoking takes effect at once, and is said to be a more injurious form of taking the drug than either eating or drinking it. Bhang is always drunk. In this form not so strong as when eaten. Is taken more as a refreshing beverage, and chiefly in the hot weather. 40. Both ganja and bhang are said to be recom- mended by native doctors for diarrh119 53. I do know of a case in which a sepoy of a Biluch regiment, when under the influence of ganja or bhang120 ally used to give ganja a more intoxicating effect. Bhang massala is unknown here. 30. It is not usual for children to consume these drugs. 31. The habit of smoking ganja is easily formed and is difficult to break off. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the exces- sive, but this is by no means a natural result. 32. There is no custom here, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of the drug. 33. The habitual consumer of the drug is generally regarded as degraded and not much trust or confidence can be reposed in such a person. 34. To the habitual consumer the foregoing of the drug would be a serious privation, as his health would suffer thereby and he would lose his energy, appetite, and digestion. 35. It would not, in my opinion, be practicable to prohibit the use of ganja. It would lead to much discontent and means would be found to obtain and consume it illicitly. I cannot say the discontent would amount to a political danger. The prohibition would, in some cases, probably be followed by a recourse to alcoholic stimulants, or other drugs. 36. No. 38. The smoking of ganja is said to have a longer lasting intoxicating effect than the other two. 40. Is sometimes prescribed by native doctors as a febrifuge and for dysentery; also for cattle or horses having colds. 41. Those who use it appear to think that the moderate use of ganja has beneficial effects as a digestive. The use is not restricted to any parti- cular class. 42. The moderate use of ganja does not appear to be altogether harmless. It seems to produce coughs, and a weakening tendency if consumed habitually. 43. Yes. 44. It appears to produce a sort of pleasant intoxication. It does not allay hunger but promotes it. After the intoxication stage, which lasts generally from three to seven hours, the consumer feels languid and dull. The want of subsequent gratification produces desire for it. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja and bhang appears to impair the constitution and produce chest affections. It induces laziness, and probably impairs to some extent the moral sense. It probably deadens the intellect, but I have no personal knowledge of any instance where it produced insanity. 46. The habitual excessive use of the drug might probably eventually produce insanity. 47. No. 49. Prostitutes sometimes use the drug to pro- duce a mild intoxicating effect. The use of hemp is said to produce impotency. 51 and 52. No. 53. I can recall no case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. I have never heard of such use being made of it by criminals. 55. Such instances are not known in this district. 56. By the admixture of dhatura intoxication is increased, and decreased by mixing with tobacco. 57. Neither ganja nor charas is eaten or drunk here. 63 and 64. No. 68. There are thirty-four shops in this district having licenses to sell ganja. 56. Evidence of MAJOR T. R. M. MACPHERSON, District Superintendent of Police, Poona. 1. None in particular. 2. Dr. Prain's definitions may be accepted for this district. Each of the products is locally known by the same names. 7. Hemp is cultivated in a few places in the Indapur, Shirur, and Khed talukas of this dis- trict. Charas is not used here. The other pro- ducts are collected. 10. They form no special class, but are the ordinary agricultural cultivators. 13. The cultivation is not restricted to any par- ticular part of this district. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in the Inda- pur, Shirur, and Khed talukas. 17. There is no special class. 18. They do deteriorate. They keep good for about two years. Damp is the chief cause of deterioration. 21. Flat ganja is preferred for smoking. 22. It is not generally used in this district. 23. It is not used for smoking. 30. The consumption of these drugs is chiefly confined to the male sex. 35. (a) No, (b) It would be consumed illicitly. (c) It could not be enforced. (d) Yes. (e) Possibly. (f) Probably to both, if the prohibition could be enforced. 43. Yes. 51. (a) No. (b) No connection whatever. 53. It is said to. No. I know of no case. 68. There are licensed shops. 69. No; the wishes of the people are not con- sulted before opening shops.
121 57. Evidence of MR. F. T. V. AUSTIN, District Superintendent of Police, Surat. 1. From personal observation in different parts of the presidency and in Sind, in which province it is extensively used. 2. The definitions given by Dr. Prain may be generally accepted as correct. Bhang and its pre- parations are known in Gujarat as bhang or subji, maya, vijia, and Shiva's butti. Charas is known by that name, but is not sold or used in this district. Ganja is the name given to the dry flowering tops of the female plants. Flat or chepta ganja is also sold, but round ganja is not specially prepared. 3. The hemp plant, so far as I know, does not grow spontaneously in any of the Gujarat districts. It it said, however, to grow wild in the Palanpur. Superintendency. 7. Hemp is cultivated to a small extent in this district for use as bhang, from 20 to 25 acres be- ing under cultivation in the Chorasi and Olpad talukas. 8. There has been a decrease during recent years in the acreage under hemp cultivation in this district. In 1889 some 30 to 35 acres were so cultivated in the Chorasi taluka alone; but the cultivators not being able to sell it to the licensee it had to be destroyed, as they cannot otherwise dispose of it. 9. Yellow loam or sandy soil is the best. It does not grow well in black soil. The ground requires to be well ploughed and frequently har- rowed, and all clods broken, and the growing crop to be well weeded, The male plants, called bhan- gro, are also uprooted. Two crops are obtainable in the year, but not on the same ground. The kharif crop is said to contain more narcotic pro- perties than the rabi. 10. The cultivation of hemp is not restricted to any particular class of cultivators. 11. Not that I am aware of. 13. Hemp is not cultivated for ganja in this district, or in any part of Gujarat, so far as I know. 14. Bhang to the extent of 150 to 200 mounds is produced in this district, but neither ganja nor charas is prepared. 15. Bhang is prepared as follows: 122 of other ingredients is to give the ganja a more agreeable flavour. The ingredients ordinarily mixed with bhang are pepper and poppy seeds, while those exception- ally so used are sugar, rose buds, almonds, pista- chios, fennel seed, cardamoms. The admixture of dhatura seeds is very exceptional. The object of these additions is to render it more palatable. Bhang massala is a conserve of rose buds, almonds, cardamoms, pistachios and certain aromatic seeds, which is specially prepared and sold for mixing with bhang. 30. Among the lower classes who are addicted to smoking ganja or drinking bhang, both are generally practised in company, and while among the better classes the smoking of ganja is consider- ed disreputable, the drinking of bhang among one's friends is not so regarded. Both practices are almost altogether confined to the male sex, and it is very unusual, indeed, for children to be allowed to indulge in either of these drugs. 31. The habit of either smoking or drinking is easily formed, but its discontinuance, except by excessive consumers, is not difficult. There is a tendency, especially as regards ganja, for the moderate use to develop into the excessive. 32. In the worship of Shiva on the Maha Shivaratri a preparation of bhang is sprinkled over the Shivalingam and some placed in a vessel before it as an offering, which is afterwards distributed among the people present. I cannot say whether this custom is essential, but it is the usual practice, and the large number among whom the bhang is distributed prevents its excessive consumption on such occasions. The use of bhang on such occa- sions is hardly likely to develop into a habit, as many of the worshippers, especially those not addicted to its use, drink only as much as they can hold in the palm of the hand. 33. Smoking of ganja is generally regarded as disreputable; but the same cannot be said of the moderate use of bhang. Possibly the fact that ganja smoking is more generally confined to the lower classes accounts for its being so considered by the well-to-do, and a respectable person who would not mind his friends knowing that he occa- sionally used bhang would, in case he had acquir- ed the habit of smoking ganja, be very careful to keep it a secret. The hemp plant, so far as I know, is not an object of worship. 34. It would be a serious privation to fakirs, sadhus and habitual smokers to be compelled to fore- go the use of ganja, and the same remark would apply to the habitual drinker of bhang, though not to the moderate consumer. Habitual ganja smokers would, I think, suffer from indigestion if the practice were suddenly abandoned. 35. I do not consider that it would be possible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs, unless the growth of the hemp plant be entirely prohibited; but any such stringent measure would certainly cause discontent, and it might possibly amount to a political danger, as the time-honoured practices of fakirs, sadhus and other more or less venerated in- dividuals who have the ear of the people, especially of the lower orders, would be interfered with. Any such prohibition, even if it were possible, would lead to an increased use of liquor and of other drugs. 36. I think that the use of alcohol is gradually taking the place of bhang among the better classes of consumers in this part of India. This is probably due to the increased facilities, especi- ally in towns, for obtaining cheap foreign spirits, the importation of which has very largely increased during recent years. 37. A greater degree of intoxication is produced by charas than by ganja. 38. Flat ganja is supposed to have more in- toxicating effect than round ganja or chur. 39. The habitual smoking of any preparation of hemp is, I consider, more injurious than the eating or drinking of bhang. The continued, though moderate, use of ganja appears to dry up the natural fluids, and to prematurely age and give a haggard appearance to the consumer; whereas no such marked changes are, as a rule, noticeable in the moderate bhang drinker. 40. I am unable to say whether any of these drugs are habitually prescribed by native doctors, but bhang is supposed to possess valuable medi- cinal properties, and to be useful in cases of gonor- rh123 48. I do not think that the habitual excessive use of these drugs is likely to become a hereditary habit, or to affect to any great extent the offspring of such consumers. 49. I do not think that ganja is used as an aphrodisiac, though bhang and majum probably are. Majum is sometimes so used by prostitutes. Doubtlessly, if so used, the effects would be more injurious than if used as an ordinary narcotic. The excessive smoking of ganja induces impot- ency, and it is used for this purpose by sadhus. 51. Not so far as I am aware of, and I don't think that there is any general connection between the habitual moderate users of these drugs and any particular class of criminals. 52. Neither do I think that even the excessive use of any of these drugs has any connection with any general or special class of crime. 53. Excessive indulgence does, I consider, in- cite to unpremeditated violence, though not to crime. Habitual ganja smokers are, when under the influence of the drug, inclined to be quarrel- some, and, if interfered with, to commit acts of violence. 54. So far as my experience goes, these drugs are not used by criminals preparatory to commit- ting premediated crime, for increased cheerfulness and good humour, followed by drowsiness, is the effect generally produced. 55. I do not think that the preparations of hemp are so used, though complete stupefaction can be induced if they are partaken of in large quantities by persons unaccustomed to them. 56. The effects of ganja are modified by ad- mixture of tobacco and of bhang by the use of different massalas, while excessive habitual users mix dhatura seeds with both ganja and bhang. 58. The present system is working well, and I have no suggestions to offer as to its improvement. Only one license for the retail sale of ganja and bhang, and another for their exportation are issued, and cultivators can only sell their crops to one or the other licensee. 60. Ganja is not made from the hemp grown in this district or in any part of Gujarat, so far as I know. 61. Charas is not prepared in this part of India. 62. The cultivation of hemp is controlled in this district, as also in the other parts of the presidency, inasmuch as the cultivator has to take out a license, and though the license does not specify the amount which may be grown, the extent to which it is cultivated is limited to the quantity he can induce the licensees to purchase at a remunerative rate. All not so disposed of has to be destroyed. 63. I have no objections to offer to the present system. 64. No. 65. Yes. 66. I do not consider it desirable to have differ- ent rates of taxation for the different kinds of ganja. 67. None. 68. Neither in this district, nor, as far as I know, in any district in Gujarat, are any shops licensed to sell these drugs to be consumed on the premises. Ganja and bhang are sold in twenty-two shops in this district, eight in the city of Surat and fourteen in the different talukas, and the annual sales amount to about 30 maunds of ganja and 40 of bhang. 69. The wishes of the neighbouring shopkeepers are not, so far as I know, consulted before the issue of a license for the sale of these drugs, and as they are not consumed on the premises, no objection is ever raised, and I do not consider that local public Opinion should be in any way considered, for these preparations of hemp are very often sold by grain sellers, tobacco shopkeepers, etc., and their sale is no more likely to be objec- tionable to the neighbouring shopkeepers or to the public than the sale of any other commodity. 70. This district is much intersected with Gaik- wari territory, and prior to 1892 both bhang and ganja were to some extent smuggled from the State; but the introduction of the license system into the Baroda State has almost entirely pre- vented this smuggling; and to this is also due the increase in the sales of ganja and bhang in this district during the past as compared with former years. 58. Evidence of Mr. DHANJISHA DADABHOY, Parsi, District Superintendent of Police, Thana. 1. Nothing beyond my own observation and the little experience ordinarily obtained. 4. It is known by the name of ganja plant, and refers to exactly the same plant. It grows generally in the Satara and Ahmed- nagar districts and soon after the rainy season. 6. It is scattered. 7. Vide No. 5. 8. I cannot say. 9. I am not acquainted with the method of its cultivation. 11. I do not know. 14 and 15. (a) Ganja is the leaves of ganja tree. Seeds are found when it is dried. When the seeds are sown they produce the bhang plants. Ganja is used only for smoking. The plants are called nar and mada (male and female). Nar is bhang tree and mada ganja tree. (b) Charas is the gum of bhang tree, and is aise used for smoking. (c) Bhang plants grow when ganja seeds are sown. Bhang is used for drinking only. 16. Bhang can be prepared by the people in their houses, and it can be prepared from the hemp plant, wherever grown. Ganja can, but charas cannot. 17. Specially Hindus. 18. They do after some time; and no measure can be taken to prevent their deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking and also for medical purposes in rare cases in India and other countries. 21. Flat ganja and chur are used for smoking and drinking respectively. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used, and it is imported from Arabia and Persia. vol. vii. T 2
124 23. No. 25. It is on the increase, it seems, in conse- quence of increase of population. 27. Ganja and bhang are used by a majority of Hindus, and charas by a majority of Muhamma- dans and a few Hindus. 29. Ganja is mixed with tobacco, and bhang with massala containing khaskas, black pepper, rose flower, sugar, elachi and badam. Charas is mixed with tobacco and sometimes with ganja. 30. In company and between the years of twenty and forty. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed, but it is rather difficult to break off. There is a tendency in the case of any of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into excessive. 34. There would be no serious privation to con- sumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. It would be consumed illicitly if procurable. The prohibition could be enforced by forbidding cultivation. The prohi- bition would occasion for a time a slight dis- content which would not amount to political danger. Half the number only would have re- course to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36. Yes, on account of change of fashion. 37. Charas is stronger than ganja. 38. No. 42. Harmful. 43. I think so. 44. It does produce intoxication. 51 and 52. Yes. The plans of crimes are gen- erally concerted either with the use of ganja, liquor or opium, according to the districts in which the use of these articles preponderates. They never meet to plan an offence without some such things being used at the time. 53. Yes, I think. No. 54. Yes. 55. Yes, in some cases. Complete stupefaction can be induced. 59. Evidence of MR. T. G. FOARD, Superintendent of Police, Cambay. 1. The answers to questions furnished by me are based on information received from consumers of the drug and others. The hemp plant is not cultivated in this State, nor does it grow spon- taneously, and, as far as I have been able to ascertain, it is not cultivated in the province of Guzerat. 2. Charas is not used in any form in this State, nor is it imported by the vendors of the drug. Occasionally visitors bring small quantities of it for their own use. Habitual ganja smokers prefer it to ganja when procurable. I have seen charas, and it is generally smoked in Bombay by con- sumers of the drug, who usually prefer it to ganja, as its narcotic properties are said to be stronger than ganja. There is only one kind of ganja used in this State, viz., flat ganja. No such name as " chur " is known in this State. The only names by which the narcotic articles obtained from the plant are known in this State are subji, bhang, ganja and charas. The flower tops detached from the twigs, whether by accident or deliberately, are called ganja. 3. I have never seen the hemp plant growing spontaneously in any district of which I have experience; occasionally an odd tree or so may be found near the haunts of fakirs or sadhus, but they are very rare. The presence of these trees is accounted for by fakirs and sadhus, who say that seeds discarded when preparing ganja for smoking germinate. 4. The wild plant is not found in this State, and the only information I have been able to obtain on this point is from gosains, sadhus and fakirs, who know it by the name of "jungli ganja." 5 and 6. I am unable to furnish any informa- tion on this point, as the wild plant does not grow in this province. 7. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant in this State, and, as far as I have been able to ascertain, I believe it is not cultivated through- out the province of Guzerat. 8. The plant is not cultivated in this province. 9. I am unable to give any methods of culti- vation. 10. There are no cultivators of the plant in this province. 11, There is no cultivation of the plant in this province. 12. I have no personal knowledge of the cul- tivation of wild hemp, and no information can be obtained on the subject here. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant is not prohibited in this State. 14. Ganja is not prepared in this State, as defined in paragraph (2) of the accompaniments by being rolled or trodden under foot. The only ganja used in this State is flat ganja, and is said to be prepared from the cultivated plant. Charas is not prepared here, nor is it imported. Ganja and bhang are imported. 15. The only preparation ganja or bhang under- goes here is for eating or drinking. See para- graph 19. 16. A decoction is made from bhang generally by people in their houses, and is known here as bhang-ka-pani, bhang or subji. The wild plant is not procurable here, but I have been given to understand by fakirs, sadhus, and gosains, who are habitual consumers of the drug in all its forms, that bhang can be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. Ganja can also be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. Fakirs sadhus and gosains, when travelling, use it, but they prefer the cultivated plant when procurable. 17. The decoction referred to in the preceding paragraph known as bhang-ka-pani is made by all classes in their houses in the hot season. It is also asocial custom in Guzerat among all classes of Hindus to make this decoction on festive occasions, and it is lavishly supplied by the host to his guests. The custom is much the same as amongst the Rajputs and people of Kathiawar, who give their guests a decoction of opium called kasumba. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping. With ordinary care both will keep good for about two years. I am unable to say whether it quite
125 loses its effect in time. There are different opi- nions on this point. It, however, deteriorates to such an extent that no consumer of the drug, whether by eating, drinking or smoking, will buy old ganja or bhang if he can possibly get fresh, and the fresher the better he likes it, as its effect is said to be stronger. The only cause of deterio- ration that I know is dampness. If ganja or bhang be kept in a damp place or get wet by rain, it immediately deteriorates, and in a short time becomes absolutely useless. The only measures adopted by the vendors of the drug, who keep it in large quantities, is to keep it in a dry place and occasionally expose it to the sun. 19. Charas, I believe, is only used for smoking. Ganja is eaten in various ways. It may be eaten alone, or mixed with food. It is generally eaten here and throughout Guzerat in two ways, viz., majum and fakki. The following are the ingredi- ents used in the preparation of majum. For one seer of majum, two seers ganja, one seer and a quarter of ghee, and one seer of sugar. The following is the process of preparation of majum. Two seers of ganja or bhang are pounded to dust and tied up in a cloth and soaked in water for three days, after which it is well washed several times until it does not discolour the water. It is then put into about 3 gallons of water and boiled for about three hours. One seer of ghee is then added to the water whilst boiling. After the ghee is added, the whole is boiled for about four hours. The water and ghee are then strained through a cloth and the ganja thrown away. The water and ghee are allowed to stand for two days, and when the ghee congeals and floats to the surface of the water, it is skimmed off. About quarter seer of fresh ghee is then added to the ghee im- pregnated with the essence of ganja or bhang, and the whole is again boiled. Whilst boiling one seer of fine sugar is added, and the whole is boiled for about half an hour. It is then poured into a shallow dish and allowed to congeal, and when cold, is cut into slices of various shapes. The average quantity of majum for an adult is from one to two tolas. Some are of course able to take more, but if taken to excess it pro- duces intoxication. Majum made from bhang is not so strong as that made from ganja. There is a far greater demand for majum during the rainy season than any other time. There is only one man licensed to sell it. His sales for the year amount to about 4 maunds or 160 lbs. It is sold at ten annas per seer. It is used on fes- tive occasions, but rarely used habitually. It is principally used by building contractors, who give it to their labourers, men and women, when making concrete roofs or floors to houses. This accounts for the singing invariably heard when men and women are engaged on such works. The object of administering it to labourers is said to be to stimulate them, and give them energy for their work. It is often made much stronger than described above. The licensed vendor usually keeps in stock a quantity of ghee impregnated with the essence of ganja, so if he gets an order for majum, he can supply it at short notice by simply adding fresh ghee and sugar to it. This ghee, which is called ganja- ka-ghee, will keep good for about a year if kept in a cool place. The following is the recipé for fakki and its mode of preparation. In- gredients126 moments. The habits of life of these people are too well known to need recapitulation. Occa- sional moderate consumers belong to all classes of society, and no community can be specifically particularized as being more addicted to the use of these drugs than others. The habit of smok- ing these drugs is usually contracted from sadhus and fakirs. Hindus reverence their sadhus and gosains, and in order to ingratiate themselves into their good graces are always ready to perform little offices for them. The preparation of the ganja pipe comes within the category of such offices, and when prepared they are invariably asked by the bawa to light it, from which the habit is usually contracted. The same remarks apply to Muhammadans, who invariably contract the habit from fakirs in the same way. The habit of smoking ganja is also propagated to a certain extent by ordinary members of society, who smoke it in their houses, and who always appear willing, and in fact anxious, to initiate novices into the use of the drug for the sake of company. 28. The average cost per diem to habitual mo- derate smokers of ganja is one pice. The cost to habitual excessive smokers of ganja is from six pice to two annas per diem. The habitual excessive smokers are mostly sadhus, gosains, and fakirs. The majority of these people renounce the world and its pleasures. The supply of the drug is practically no expense to them. When once a sadhu, gosain, or fakir establishes himself in a place, he is visited by his caste-fellows, who supply the drug and other necessaries of life. The cost to the moderate consumer of bhang, if taken without ingredients, is about half a pice. To the excessive consumer, from one to two pice. Bhang is drunk without ingredients by the poor classes, but those who can afford it use milk and spices with it. 29. Ganja is usually smoked with tobacco and sometimes with gooraku. Dhatura is not mixed with the drug for either drinking or smoking. Ganja is said to be mixed with oil extracted from dhatura seed for external application to the geni- tal organs in cases of impotence. The habitual consumers of bhang of the poor classes drink it without admixtures. Those who can afford to do so add the following ingredients to make it sa- voury and palatable, but with no other object:127 their lucid moments, or when unable to procure the drug, they are most dejected. 35. I am inclined to think that it would be impracticable to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. If the use of these drugs were prohibited, they would in my opinion be used illicitly. The prohibition of the use of the drug would, I think, cause serious discontent among the consumers. The discontent may not amount to a political danger, but in view of the fact that the use of the drug in its various forms is principally pro- pagated by sadhus and fakirs, who command wonderful influence over the masses and are so blindly followed by them, it is quite possible that these sadhus, fakirs and others would try to spread sedition, and would at least cause a deal of agitation. Many of these sadhus, fakirs, etc., were formerly ordinary members of society, but now follow these vocations merely to gratify a craving for the drug, which they could not satisfy were they to remain in their ordinary spheres in life. There are, of course, many of these sadhus, fakirs, etc., whose vocations are hereditary; whether hereditary or adopted, the use of the drug in some form is indispensable. They are never free from the effects of the drug, and smoke it eternally from morning till night. As soon as the effect of one pipe commences to wane, it is revived by another. I do not think that the prohibition of the use of these drugs would be followed by re- course to alcoholic stimulants, but opium would I think be used in larger quantities. 36. There is no reason for thinking that al- cohol is now being substituted for any of these drugs in this State and, as far as I know, in any other part of Guzerat. On the contrary, bhang is substituted for alcoholic stimulants by the poor classes on festive occasions. For two pice a host can supply about 20 guests with bhang, provided it be drunk without ingredients, whereas to supply the same number with alco- holic stimulants in moderation, it would cost him at least Rs. 2. 37. Charas is not used in this State, but I am told by people who have smoked it that its effect is much stronger than ganja. This I am told is the only way in which the effect of charas, when smoked, differs from ganja. The fumes of charas when inhaled, are said to be much cooler than those of ganja. 38. Flat ganja only is used locally. People who have travelled in India say they prefer round ganja when procurable. It is said to be stronger than flat ganja. Flat ganja is also said to produce thirst and a burning sensation in the throat, stomach and chest, which is not experi- enced by smoking round ganja. Round ganja is also said to have less seeds and leaves. Broken ganja is said to produce more cough than round or flat ganja, and is never used for smoking if it can be avoided. Broken ganja is invariably used for making majum or fakki. 39. I am unable to answer this question from personal knowledge or observation; but from in- formation I have been able to gather from smok- ers, eaters and drinkers of the drug, I am told that smoking the drug is far more injurious to the constitution than either eating or drinking it. There are thousands who drink decoctions of the drug who would scorn the idea of smoking it. Either eating, drinking or smoking the drug to excess by a novice produces intoxication, where- as habitual smokers or drinkers may either smoke or drink it from morning till night and never become stupefied. The effect produced by drink- ing bhang lasts much longer than the effect produced by smoking either charas or ganja. Smoking the drug to excess produces insanity, asthma, bronchitis and impotence. It also dead- ens the intellect and generally impairs the con- stitution. The general belief is that eating or drinking preparations of the drug does not pro- duce the above-mentioned symptoms, but such a question can be better answered by a medical man. 40. Ganja and bhang are used by native quacks for dysentery in one-grain doses twice a day. It is also used to check the flow of seminal fluid in cases of spermatorrh128 pipe before the effect of the first has passed off, I think accounts for the idea that the first smoke only is effective. The effect appears to be main- tained from morning till night by continuous smoking. Smoking ganja and charas do produce after-effects, which are said to be as follows. They are usually felt the first thing in the morn- ing; but with the first smoke they all disappear. Water runs from the eyes and nostrils, eyes become red and pus oozes from them during sleep, aching of the limbs and joints, headache and sleeplessness. The want of subsequent gratifica- tion goes produce uneasiness and longing for the drug. Cessation of the use of the drug is invariably followed by diarrh129 practically no control over the licensees in any way. They are at liberty to sell any quantity and import these drugs without duty. They keep no accounts, and their shops are never inspected. One of the licensees of this State keeps a shop in Petlad, which is a large town in Baroda territory, and about three miles from Fanganee, which is in Cambay territory, and where he has a shop also. In. Petlad this man can only sell one seer of any of these drugs at a time, whereas he can sell any quantity at Fanganee. In consequence of import dues and license-fees these drugs cost double the price at Petlad that they do at Fanganee, which is close by. I think it is very desirable that the vendors of these drugs should be made to keep accounts showing their imports and sales, and that their shops, stock-in-trade and books should be periodically inspected by some responsible reve- nue or police officer. The licensees in this State get their supply of these drugs wherever it can be had. at the cheapest rate. The local consumers of these drugs bitterly complain of their inferior quality. The licensee at Fanganee imports bhang and ganja from Ahmednagar (Deccan), and he occasionally supplies the Cambay vendors, who also buy these drugs in Baroda and import them free of duty. I am of opinion that the sale of these drugs to one individual should be limited to a reasonable quantity; and that the vendors should not be allowed to sell them wholesale indiscrimi- nately as they do at present. 60. Ganja is not prepared in this State. 61. Charas is not produced in this State. 62. I have no idea of the cultivation of the hemp plant. 63. Charas is not sold in this State. Ganja and bhang are sold wholesale and retail. I am of opinion that the sale of these drugs, except to vendors, should be restricted to a reasonable quantity. 64. There are no regulations in this State governing the export and import of these drugs or their transport within the State. There is no import duty on any of these drugs in this State. They are not exported unless surreptitiously. There is a wide field open for the illicit trade in these drugs in this State. As an instance of which the licensee at Fanganee is allowed to im- port any quantity of these drugs without duty. Whereas in Petlad, which is close by, where he holds a license for the sale of these drugs from the Baroda State, he has to pay import duty on these drugs. The price of these drugs at Petlad is double that at Fanganee. This leaves a wide field open to this man to smuggle these drugs from Fanganee, where they are imported free of duty, to Petlad, where he has to pay heavy duty and license-fees. I am of opinion that an import duty should be levied on these drugs. 65. There is no tax on these drugs in this State. 66. There is only one kind of ganja used in this State which is either imported direct from Ahmed- nagar (Deccan) or from Baroda. As far as I am able to gather, the ganja farmer of the Baroda State imports all his drugs from Ahmeduagar (Deccan). Round ganja is not used here. 67. There is no tax on these drugs in this State. 68. There are no houses or shops in this State where these drugs are consumed on the premises. Where such houses and shops exist, I think it is very desirable that they should be open to inspec- tion by the police, as in the case of liquor shops and other places of public resort. 69. There are no shops for the consumption of these drugs on the premises in this State. 70. There is only one man in this State who imports these drugs. He has a shop at Fanganee, which is surrounded by Baroda and British terri- tory. His sales of these drugs at Fanganee are more than at Petlad, which is a large town. This, I think, can be accounted for by the fact that these drugs are much cheaper at Fanganee than at Petlad. The other two vendors in this State get their supply of these drugs from him sometimes, and they also get it from Baroda or wherever they find the cheapest market. There is no import duty on these drugs in this State. The licensee of Fanganee tells me he pays an export duty at the rate of Rs. 5 on every three Bengal maunds. This he says he pays at Ahmednagar. 60. Evidence of KHAN BAHADUR NANABHOY COWASJI, Parsi, City Police Inspect- or, Surat. I had opportunities for several years of coming into contact with such persons when I was in Kathiawar. Some of them consumed ganja and bhang in excessive, and some in moderate quanti- ties. After the receipt of Government orders, I have endeavoured to seek information from differ- ent directions where I thought it was possible to get some reliable particulars. I have consulted my subordinate Police Officers and licensed vendors of ganja and bhang and also with some of the consumers. 2. Charas and chur are not prepared and sold in this district, Flat ganja only is produced and sold in this district, and it is known by the name of ganja. "Bhang" goes under that name chiefly. Sometimes it is called subji or maya. 3. I am not aware of this. 4, 5 and 6. I do not know. 7. Hemp is cultivated to a small extent in two talukas of this district, Olpad and Chorasi; and the land used for this purpose may be about 30 acres. 8. In consequence of the restrictions imposed by the Abkari Act, for transporting and exporting ganja and bhang, and for their sale and possession, the cultivation was given up owing to its being troublesome and unremunerative. 9. The soil required for hemp cultivation ought to be best yellow or sandy. It cannot grow in black soil. The ground requires to be well ploughed, and ought to be frequently weeded. Two crops can be obtained during one year, but not in the same land. Kharif crop is said to possess more narcotic properties than the rabi. 10. The cultivators are of the same class as other agricultural cultivators. 11, 12 and 13. I do not know. 14. Bhang is produced in this district in Olpad and Chorasi talukas, but ganja and charas are not prepared in this district. vol. vii. U
130 15. The following is the methed of manufac- turing bhang: 131 nothing else equally cheap and effective to take the place of ganja, the consumers can be content with this drug. 35. The prohibition may not amount to any- thing like a political danger, but the discontent among the lower and ignorant classes would be great, so entire prohibition is not advisable. It would, however, I consider, lead to increase in the consumption of alcoholic stimulants. I think that the use of alcohol is gradually taking the place of bhang among the better class of con- sumers in this district, probably owing to the facilities in obtaining low-priced foreign spirit, the importation of which has increased during the recent years. 36. I consider the use of alcohol is gradually taking the place of bhang among better classes of people in this district, probably due to the in- creased facilities, especially in towns, for obtain- ing cheap foreign spirits, the importation of which seems to have increased enormously. 37. I have already mentioned above that charas is not produced nor sold in this district. Those who have smoked charas say that its effects are much stronger than those of ganja, and a small quantity of it produces more intoxication. 38. Only flat ganja is sold and consumed in this district, so I am unable to furnish inform- ation on this subject. 39. Bhang is used for drinking purposes, and ganja for smoking. The habitual smoking of hemp preparations is more injurious than the eating or drinking of bhang. 40. Bhang is sometimes used by native doctors. In the treatment of cattle disease bhang or ganja is not used in this district. 41. (a) Those who are even moderate consumers of ganja do not feel hungry till they smoke it It is said to increase appetite or strengthen diges- tion. In the case of such consumers sometimes it assists digestion, and it is smoked with that object after having a heavy meal at caste dinners. (b) Consumers think that ganja-smoking always helps to undergo exertion and fatigue. (c) Ganja is not used as a febrifuge, but bhang is sometimes used in cases of fever by some persons. (d) I do not know. Persons in well-to-do circumstances do not, except in some cases when travelling, smoke ganja to counteract the effects of bad water. 42. As far as I know, moderate use of ganja is not harmful, nor is it beneficial. In moderate use if the consumers are in a position to get proper quantity of food, milk, and ghee, it will not pro- duce bad effects. It is very injurious and weak- ens the consumers, specially those persons who are not able to get sufficient food. I have come to these conclusions after having consultation with some of the ganja-smokers. 43. Yes. 44. The habitual consumer of ganja feels hunger soon after smoking it, as it produces in- toxication, and the smoker feels refreshed. In some cases the effects do not last for more than two hours, and if a consumer does not get smok- ing at its time, he feels sometimes headaches or un easiness. 45. Kindly see answer to question No. 42. Young persons in habit of smoking ganja for some time are induced to incur habits of debau chery, but not so great as caused by other intoxi- cating things. Ganja taken in large quantity for smoking may produce insanity in a few cases. 46 and 47. I do not know. 48. I don't think the habitual, moderate, or excessive use is likely to become hereditary habit or to affect the children of such consumers. 49. It is not used as an aphrodisiac, nor is it used by prostitutes. The excessive smoking of ganja may bring impotency, and so it is used by sadhus for this purpose. 50. Excessive use for a length of time might produce impotency. 51. Ganja smokers and bhang drinkers are not supposed to be connected with crimes in general or with crimes of any special character. 52. I do not think that excessive use of any of these drugs has any connection with general or special class of crime. However, in one case to my knowledge it so occurred that in November 1885 in Broach certain Talavias having gathered together one morning, and after smoking ganja, committed a riot in that town, in which the Su- perintendent of Police, Mr. Prescott, was killed. Further particulars, if required, may be obtained from Broach. 53. The above is the only case I know of. 54. Generally it is not so, but the above case came to my notice which I have mentioned al- ready. 55. I do not think that the different prepara- tions of hemp are so used, but ganja, I should say, might induce such persons to commit crimes if partaken in a large quantity by persons unaccus- tomed to its use. 56. The effects of ganja are modified by mixing tobacco and those of bhang by mixing different spices. 57. I do not know. 58. The Excise Administration regarding hemp drugs is working well, and I do not see what further suggestions I can offer as to its improve- ment. 59 and 60. I do not know. 61. Charas is not made in this district. 62. I do not know. 63. I have no objection to offer to the present system of its working. 64. I do not know. 65. I have no suggestion to make in this con- nection. 66 and 67. I cannot say. 68. In the city of Surat and in the district the preparations of bhang and ganja are only sold. There are 22 shops in this district, and the annual consumption is 50 maunds of ganja and 40 of bhang. 69. The wishes of the residents of the locality are very seldom consulted in this district before opening a shop therein. Such objections are very seldom raised. I do not remember a single case known to me. Preparations of hemp are very often sold by grain-sellers, tobacco shopkeepers, and their sale does not appear objectionable to neighbours. 70. This district is surrounded by Gaekwari territory, and in old Gaekwari time ganja and bhang were no doubt smuggled from these States, but the introduction of the license system in vol. vii. U2
132 Gaekwari territory has prevented smuggling, and owing to this the increased sale of bhang and ganja had taken place since the new system intro- duced in. Gaekwari territory. Letter from the Collector of Broach ap- pended to NANABHOY COWASJI'S evidence. Replying to your letter No. 9, dated 2l st ultimo, I have the honour to inform you that the riot referred to took place at Broach in November 1885. The rioters were a band of Talavias (an aboriginal depressed tribe) who, under stress of poverty and on account of various imaginary grievances, had combined to urge a demand for sub- sistence, land, etc., upon the authorities. Failing to get satisfaction they remained for some time under the influence of a "Bhagat," or religious leader, who excited their fanaticism by a promise of the Raj of Broach. He told them (and probably believed) that he could turn bullets into water, should they attack the English authorities, and actually went through a ceremony of planting his flag on one of the Broach bastions, The proceed- ings of this small band of outcastes, who seldom assembled in any numbers, attracted little atten- tion and, when noticed, were regarded as the harmless pranks of a few ignorant beggars. On the occasion in question, however, about 200 of the Talavias came together and marched to the Collector's bungalow, armed with bows and arrows and clubs. They were regarded as ordinary pro- cessionists and were not interfered with. Failing to find the Collector, they marched towards the town without apparently any precise object and on the road were overtaken by Mr. Prescott, District Superintendent of Police, whom, either mistaking him for the Collector or in a fit of blind fanaticism, they at once attacked and killed. After other less important outrages they came into colli- sion with the pursuing police, who fired several volleys at them and put them to flight with the loss of a few killed. Most of the rioters were apprehended before long, and after trial the leaders were hanged, the remainder being sentenced to transportation or various terms of imprisonment. 2. The connection of these events with the consumption of ganja is very slight. I have examin- ed the record of the trial and other papers con- nected with the case, and find that the rioters are said by an approver to have started on the march to the Collector's house after having "first bathed and made the red mark and smoked ganja." I find no other reference to the subject. The District Judge in his finding merely remarks that the ac- cused acted as described by the approver. 3. No doubt the rioters did smoke ganja, but there is nothing to show that they were in a state of ganja intoxication or that they took it otherwise than as they might have taken alcohol or any other stimulant before proceeding to an important under- taking. 61. Evidence of MR. J. A. GUIDER, Inspector of Police, Munmad. 51. My experience, based on over twelve years' service in the Bombay City and District Police, nega- tives the first portion of this question. The moder- ate use of the drugs has no material effect on crime in general or on crime of any special character. 52. The excessive use of any of the drugs is not indulged in by bad characters to any calculable extent. Crime in general is not influenced by the small percentage of the criminal class who go in for excessive indulgence. Isolated cases of violent crime do sometimes occur, perpetrated by persons under an excessive influence of bhang unintentionally brought about. These instances are, however, rare. 53. Occasional excessive indulgence in bhang has a tendency in non-habitual consumers to crimes of unpremeditated violence, much in the same way as the effect of alcohol on certain temperaments. I know of no case in which an excessive indulgence in this drug has led to homicidal frenzy. 54. Not as a rule, except in cases of habitual consumers, who indulge in it to steady their nerves, in the same way as an ordinary consumer of alcohol would resort to his peg before entering upon an undertaking in which he desires to have his wits about him. 55. Some of the class of criminals who drug people for the commission of crime use ganja as a means of bringing about stupor to facilitate the execution of their designs. Travellers on the road or putting up at dharmsalas are generally the victims in these cases. The drug is administered under the disguise of a friendly smoke of tobacco, and is seldom administered pure, in order to avoid suspicion and to render the stupor more intense, as complete stupefaction cannot be induced by a moderate effect of the pure drug such as would result from an ordinary smoke. I know of a case in which a man who was an habitual ganja smoker was rendered completely insensible by being given pounded dhatura seeds mixed with ganja to smoke. He was so completely stupefied that one of his legs was broken by being struck with a heavy stone without his being aware of it. Comple stupefaction can be induced by this drug alone without admixture if administered in suffi- ciently large quantities. 62. Evidence of RAO SAHIB PRANSHANKAR, Brahmin, Inspector of Police, Detective Branch, Bombay. 18. Yes, they deteriorate by keeping. Yes, after two years it quite loses its effect. With ordinary care these drugs will keep good for from eighteen to twenty-four months after they are first obtained from the plant. Contact of external air, exposure, evaporation, and consequent effects are the causes of deterioration. No special measures can be taken to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smoking. 20. Sadhus, bairagis, fakirs, pardesis, some gold- smiths, some Brahmins, and even a few of the re- spectable classes smoke ganja and charas. Among the sadhus, fakirs, etc. the proportion may be about 60 per cent., and among other classes the proportion varies from 1 per cent. to 3 per cent. 21. Flat ganja is preferred for smoking. The
133 ganja considered best is known as baluchery ganja, which is eight times stronger than the ordinary. 24. (b) Bhang is drunk by Brahmins, Shrawaks, Gosains, Musalmans, goldsmiths, sadhus, etc., and even by well-to-do classes in all localities. Among the Brahmins, Shrawaks, Gosains, the proportion of bhang drinkers is 25 per cent., and in others from 1 per cent to 10 per cent. 25. The use of ganja, bhang and charas is neither on the increase nor on the decrease. Taking the last fifteen years' experience, the use was on the increase for the first ten years; but for the last five years, the use of alcohol (liquor) has considerably counter- acted the slowly growing increase. Experience has shown that many ganja smokers and bhang drink- ers have left the drug owing to their intimacy with liquor. 28. For ganja and charas the cost is 134 known rarely to lead to insanity. Such insanity is more of a temporary nature than permanent. The symptoms are liable to be reintroduced. Insanes often do confess to the use of ganja on recovery. There is good ground to believe that ganja in moderate doses leads to insanity, only if there are predisposing causes. I know of a very recent case where a menial servant who showed symp- toms of weakness of intellect and had a bad com- pany turned insane by moderate use of ganja for two months. He has recovered after six months in the asylum. I know of a bhang case, in which a boy aged 18 years first took to moderate drinking of bhang. This was followed by occasional smoking of ganja in moderate doses. The boy went from moderate to excessive use of both and turned insane, and has been suffering for the last eight years. He has not yet recovered; but is showing signs of improvement. of late. 46. In large doses ganja and even bhang is known to lead to insanity, which is curable generally. The experience in a lunatic asylum is calculated to demonstrate this clearly. The average of persons admitted in the Ahmedabad Asylum as insane on account of ganja is six per year, calculating a five-year's average. The average per year of such insane ganja smokers cured and discharged is three. This shows that 50 per cent. are curable. 49. Yes, especially by a few prostitutes. 51. No, I believe the moderate use of the drugs has no connection with crime at all. This is best known by the fact that out of the total number of persons annually convicted and sentenced there are few such consumers135 base my opinion on my general experience and the statements of the prisoners themselves. The jail records give no information on the fact whether the convicts are consumers of the hemp drugs. I have not questioned each of the 1,700 prisoners on the point. I have sought informa- tion from authorities and from prisoners regard- ing their fellow-prisoners. 63. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR-GENERAL P. S. TURNBULL, Surgeon-General with the Government of Bombay. Oral evidence. Question 1.136 42. Being prejudiced against the drug when first studying Materia Medica, I have ignored it ever since. 44. Don't know. Writers on Materia Medica given certain uses for the drug, but they are so uncertain in their statements that I doubted their correctness, and have never used it. 45 and 47. Don't know. 49. Don't know. 57. Have no experience. In conclusion, I already reported that I know nothing whatever about this drug, but have been again called on to make this report. 65. Evidence of BRIGADE-SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. ARNOTT, M.D., Physician in charge, St. George's Hospital, Bombay. 1. Insufficient opportunities, appointments I have held affording no scope for such enquiries. 30. I believe that these drugs are chiefly used by men. I have not seen them used by children. 31. Yes. 32. I believe bhang is used during religious festivals, and I have seen low caste Hindus appa- rently under its influence during the Muharram. 41. Yes. 42. I should consider them harmful. 45. (d) to (g) Yes. 66. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR D. N. PARAKH, Parsi, Surgeon to the Gocul Dass Tejpal Hospital, Malabar Hill, Bombay. 1. I have had very few opportunities; have met with only one case of a man "running amuck" in military practice; and have seen a few persons addicted to the habit, and four or five cases of poisoning by Cannabis indica. I have not had charge of any lunatic asylums, where alone cases are met with of insanity from this cause, and where such experience as would enable one to answer these questions could be gained. 2. Yes. By the same names. 41. Very moderate use of bhang increases ap- petite, and gives staying-power under severe ex- ertion. This I have noticed in the very few cases I have seen. It does not act as a febrifuge or pre- ventive of disease. By bhang I mean the infu- sion of the leaves and seeds commonly called subji. Bhang in the form of infusion I have known to produce the following effects in the persons who take it habitually:137 In the other case, there was great violence and delirium, which was followed by great depression, and finally the man became paralysed, as far as I remember. Acute mania was the prominent symptom in both cases. I have not seen acute mania from the effects of dhatura, but am not pre- pared to say that it does not result. There is a variety of acute mania called transient mania. Ganja-smoking may be a cause of such mania; but it is not necessarily connected with toxic sub- stances, such as ganja and dhatura. I could not diagnose the transient mania that results from toxic causes from that due to other causes. I have never examined a brain of a ganja insane, nor have I read that any lessons are to be found in such cases. I should accept Dr. Warden's state- ment that they have not been discovered. The ultimate paralysis in one of the cases was not, I believe, due to ganja, and was not consistent with the ganja theory; but the other symptoms he had may have been caused by ganja. The diagnosis of a case of ganja insanity depends almost entire- ly on previous history. The suddenness of onset and other symptoms afford little guide to diagnos- is. The diagnosis is practically one "by exclu- sion." In attributing the insanity in these cases to ganja, I cannot say that I am satisfied that I excluded all other causes, The diagnosis in the two cases rested on statements made by the friends. I had no experience at that time of the moderate use of the drugs. The only cases I saw were those described. Since 1876 to 1877 I have seen no cases of insanity arising from ganja- smoking or the use of the hemp drugs in any form. These last twelve years I have been in civil surgeoncies for three years, and for nine years in charge of the Gokaldass Hospital. This hospital does not admit insanity cases. If we suspect insanity, the patient is handed over to the police, who make arrangements for disposing of him. The man who ran amuck did not come to hospital, and the case was not under my observation. He shot himself. I cannot say exactly whether the man was intoxicated or insane; but it was ganja which upset him. I cannot say whether it is possible to differentiate between intoxication and insanity caused by the hemp drugs, except in the matter of duration of the attack. This attack lasted, as far as I know, only a few minutes. I know nothing of the man's state before he ran amuck except that he smoked ganja. 67. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR H. W. B. BOYD, Superintend nt, Colaba Lunatic Asylum, Bombay. 1. About seventeen years' service in India, during which I served three and a half years with regiments, seven years as Civil Surgeon and Super- intendent of a Jail, and about three and a half years as Superintendent, Colaba Lunatic Asylum. 2. Yes; they are locally known as (a) ganja, (b) charas, and (c) bhang. 19. Ganja and charas are both used for smok- ing. Ganja is also used in the treatment of cattle for diseases of the digestive system, and ganja mixed with tobacco is used as an application to local inflammations. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 28. (a) About 4 tolas, cost about 4 annas. (b) Up to 12 tolas, cost 1 rupee. The above refers to the use of ganja and charas used in smoking. As regards bhang, moderate consumers, about 2 annas worth per diem, and excessive consumers, 8 annas per diem, No exact weight can be mentioned, as bhang is given in solution with sugar and bhang massala. About 1 tola full for moderate, and 3 tolas for exces- sive consumers. 29. (a) Ordinarily tobacco (country) is mixed with ganja as well as with charas. (b) Dhatura is used sometimes with ganja to increase its intoxicant effects. Bhang massala contains bhang ¼ seer, sugar 1 seer, massala (consisting of almonds 2 tolas, pista- chio nuts 2 tolas, poppy seeds 1 tole, aniseed ½ tola, cardamoms ½0 of a tola, rose petals (fresh) 1 tola, charolee 1 tola, plums or raisins 1½ tola, black pepper ¼ tola), water, cold, 24 ounces. 30. Bhang is chiefly used in company; ganja and charas are also used in company. These drugs are also consumed in solitude, but to a limited extent. The use of these drugs is mainly confined to male sex; although it is also used to considerable extent among the lower class of females, such as Chamars and Dheds. It is not usual to give these drugs to children, but in exceptional cases bhang is used in the form of bala golee, viz., pills mixed with aromatics, for colic in infants, and also as a sedative in restlessness of new-born infants. 31, The habit is easily formed, and easily left off. This refers only to the use of drinking bhang. The smoking of ganja and charas, however, is said to be difficult to leave off. There is a tendency to increase the drug. 32. Smoking ganja and charas is prevalent in social meetings of a friendly nature. Bhang is very seldom used as a drink in religious ceremo- nies, though it is used considerably on holidays as Dewali, Dussera, and pleasure parties. 36. Ganja, charas and bhang are preferred to alcohol, as they are cheaper, and it does not appear that alcohol is substituted in their stead. 37. Charas is a stronger preparation than ganja, and the intoxication produced thereby is more lasting in its effects. The intoxication resulting from the use of ganja-smoking lasts usually for about a couple of hours. The intoxication pro- duced by bhang results in a condition of hilarity and hallucinations of a pleasurable nature, and during this condition the appetite is enormously increased. 39. Smoking ganja and charas appears to be more injurious than the drinking of bhang, be- cause drinking is indulged in to a limited extent, while smoking the drug is indulged in to a larger extent. 40. Ganja is commonly used as a medicine in- ternally in digestive disorders affecting cattle. It is used by native practitioners, hakims, etc., as follows:138 41. (a) Native practitioners use it as such in small doses. (b) This is a popular belief, but of the truth of it there is no reliable evidence obtainable. (c) It is used as such in some parts of Bengal. It undoubtedly acts as a stimulant and seda- tive, and people accustomed to its use can bear hunger and work without food for a longer time; so in this way it prevents bodily waste of tissues. 42. I do. I have not known a case where the moderate use of the drug has done harm. 44. Primarily stimulant; secondarily anodyne, sedative and antispasmodic. Narcotic in large doses. In small doses it is said to allay hunger; in moderately large doses it is believed to increase the appetite; diuretic and parturifacient proper- ties have been assigned to it, but these latter require confirmation. Narcotic and intoxicant effect usually lasts a couple of hours. Slight longing or uneasiness is felt by the want of it. No marked after-effects. The following have been noted as occurring after its use:139 ful than either whether it is eaten or smoked. I know of no organic change taking place in the human system from opium. The difference be- tween hemp drugs (except bhang) and opium is one of degree: the excessive use of ganja or charas being more deleterious than opium. I think bhang is probably, if possible, less deleterious than opium. I think that the opium and hemp drug habits are about equally practised. Therefore the Colaba Asylum statistics seem to bear out my view; for the admissions from hemp drugs are set down as higher than the opium cases. The alcoholic habit also is not extensively practised by natives. I speak only of Bombay. There the use of opium and hemp drugs is more general among the natives than that of alcohol. I have no statistics, but give my own opinion only. The admissions to the asylum are from other parts of the country (principally Bombay and the surrounding talukas); but my remarks regarding the people generally are con- fined to Bombay. I cannot say whether all the mill hands drink. I cannot give detailed statis- tics of different classes. I have only stated my general impression that there are more hemp drug than alcohol consumers in Bombay. I refer to hemp drugs taken as a whole. Those who in a year take hemp drugs are more numerous than those who take alcohol; but I think that the habi- tual consumers of alcohol are more numerous than the habitual consumers of hemp drugs. Ganja is habitually consumed, bhang (as a rule) more occasionally and by a large number of the popula- tion on festive occasions. Question 46.140 the death of his wife and child, when he changed his habits and was found to have taken to drugs. There is no hereditary tendency; and I think that the history and symptoms both point to hemp drugs, though the bereavements may have had to do with it. I should therefore say the cause was hemp drugs. In Vithu's case (No. 8) I have been unable to get further information. The man was sane with us; but he had to be shown in our books; and his friends said he had taken ganja. The case looks like it. In case No. 5, Moti Hemrai, I do not believe ganja was the cause: (1) The case was melan- cholia with excitement, not mania; this might be excited not caused by hemp drugs; (2) He died from dropsy and old age, shewing disease of kidneys, and possibly consequent disease of the brain; this would be sufficient cause; and (3) the prolonged absence of improvement. Case No. 10, Hirji Makji, is undoubtedly not a ganja case, I think. The man died of anæmia and fatty degeneration of the heart. Case No. 12, Vishnu Laxmon's father, was epi- leptic. The man ate tobacco very largely, and his brother now attributes his insanity to this. He says he never saw him take ganja, Disap- pointment is often a cause of insanity where there is predisposition, as in this case from his father's epilepsy. He was also dissolute in life. I do not believe that this is a ganja case. Case No. 2, Yeso Ragho, is probably not a ganja case. The partial paraplegia shows that brain disease is the cause; and melancholia is the natural form for the disease to take in that case. I reject this as a ganja case. Case No. 11, Deolo, is a very doubtful case. I do not believe the insanity was primarily due to ganja, though that may have been the exciting cause. I have been unable to get more informa- tion in this case. Cases No. 3 (Motiram), No. 6 (Mahomed Saf- dar), and No. 7 (Chiutaman) are cases where the cause rests on the statement of friends. In the first of these three cases, I have as- certained from the Aden Staff Surgeon that this man's companions denied that he ever smoked ganja; and the first class Magistrate writes that he cannot ascertain anything about the alleged ganja habit. I think myself that though a case of acute mania, it was not due to ganja, because it came on in a very insidious way which is un- usual in ganja, and was preceded by moroseness and tendency to wander. Besides the long period under treatment is against the theory of hemp origin. In case No. 6 no information can be obtained. It is a doubtful case; the man is still in the asylum, and not much improved and denies the use of ganja; but probably as a beggar he did use the drug, and that may have been the exciting cause; but that is only a probability. I would not remove this from the category of toxic in- sanity without better information, but I regard it as a very doubtful case. In case No. 7 I think that ganja was the excit- ing cause of the insanity141 I do not know of any preparation, such as bhang massala. 30. Ganja is mostly used in this district, I believe, and is mainly confined to the male sex. Children never use it. 31. Yes; but moderate consumers can also easily break it off; and there is no tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive under ordinary circumstances. 36. No. 39. Most of the cases which were under my observation were cases of ganja-smoking result- ing in insanity. Certain constitutions seems more prone to insanity under the influence of ganja, either from abuse of the drug, or from injudicious use of it before the habit is formed, especially in early adult life. 41. Not sufficiently acquainted with the subject to offer an opinion thereon. Under exceptional circumstances it may be use- ful under (a) and (b) to those accustomed to its use; but the probability is that its ill-effects in the long run counterbalance its beneficial effects; therefore I am inclined to say that even the moderate use of it is not to be encouraged. 45. I have not seen a sufficient number of cases to enable me to give a definite opinion on the sub- ject discussed. That it brings about insanity I have no doubt; but, as mentioned before, it is the abuse of the drug, or the injudicious use of it by young people unaccustomed to its use, which unhinges the intellect. But the prognosis in these cases of insanity is generally favourable, the patient generally recovering within six or eighteen months when under treatment. Mania is the usual form of insanity, and on recovery the patient is liable to a relapse if he resumes the habit of ganja-smoking. This would lead me to believe that ganja-smoking is the predisposing, cause of the insanity. There are no typical symp- toms. When insanity results from ganja, patients on recovery generally attribute the cause to ganja. This is all the information I am in a position to offer with reference to ganja. 69. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL W. MCCONAGHY, Civil Surgeon, and Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Poona. 1. Reference to books, conversations with per- sons familiar with their uses, and observations on patients whilst under treatment in asylum, etc. 2. Yes; flat ganja, is usually procurable here. They are locally known as bhang, charas (not generally used here) and ganja. 19. In the absence of bhang, ghota, which is prepared by making or rubbing down ganja in a vessel, and mixing it with water, is occasionally drunk as a substitute for bhang. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 28. Habitual moderate consumers of bhang require half a pice worth or one tola per day. An excessive consumer requires two annas worth or from 15 to 20 tolas daily. A moderate consumer of ganja requires about half a tola, costing about half an anna. An excessive consumer of ganja requires about four times the above amount. 29. Bhang is rubbed into a thin paste with water. More water is then added to it, and ordi- narily mixed with sugar and black pepper. Excep- tionally, in addition to the before-mentioned, poppy seeds, rose petals, fennel, nutmeg and almonds are added to give it flavour and taste, and rarely kasni seeds (Cichorium endivia). Dhatura is sometimes added to bhang to increase its intoxicating pro- perties. Ganja is generally mixed with an equal quan- tity of tobacco to moderate its action, and excep- tionally with dhatura or opium to add to its intox- icating properties. Among gosains and bairagis a mixture of ganja, dhatura, nux vomica, aconite, opium, and even, it is said, white arsenic and ras kapur (an impure mixture of mercurial chlorides) is used for smoking and called "panchratni chillum." Charas is said to be generally mixed with six to eight times its bulk of tobacco to moderate its action. Yes; bhang massala consists of black pepper, fennel, rose petals, poppy seeds, nutmeg and kasni seeds. 30. The consumption of these drugs is practised both in solitude and company; but, it is said, to a greater extent in company. It is chiefly confined to the male sex. The habit is generally contracted after puberty. Women and children do not, as a rule, use these drugs. Some prostitutes are known to use bhang and ganja. 31. The habit of taking these drugs is not easily formed; but when formed, it is difficult to break off. There is a tendency in moderate consumers to develop into excessive consumers. 32. Bhang being considered a favourite of the god Shiva, it is drunk by many on Maha Shiva- ratra day. It is not considered essential, and is generally taken in moderation. It is indulged in during the Shimga holidays for creating mirthful sensations, and usually temperately. The practice is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit or be otherwise injurious. 36. There is not sufficient reason for thinking that alcohol is now being substituted for any of these drugs. 37. Charas and ganja produce immediate intoxi- cation, the effect of the former lasting longer. Ganja-smoking does not lead to excessive nar- cotism, and the effects pass off sooner. The nar- cotism induced by bhang will vary with the quantity drunk. It comes on later and lasts for a longer time than that from ganja. 39. No; the reverse is generally considered to be the more correct. Ganja and charas-smoking are more injurious than bhang-drinking, in conse- quence of the nervous system being more readily affected through the pulmonary than the digestive system. The above statement is supported by the admission into the asylum in 1892 of six cases attributable to the use of hemp drugs. Of these, five were due to ganja-smoking and only one to bhang-drinking. The type of insanity resulting from excessive use of hemp drugs is almost in- variably mania of the acute form. 40. They are never prescribed alone by native vaidyas or hakims; but bhang forms an ingredient of some prescriptions. Bhang is used in the treat- ment of cattle-disease.
142 41. (a) The moderate use of ganja or bhang is said to be beneficial to the digestive system and to give (b) staying-power under severe exertion; (c) and (d) it does not serve as a febrifuge or pre- ventive of malaria. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is pro- bably harmless. I have known a few moderate consumers of ganja and bhang to enjoy good health and long life. 44. The moderate habitual use of these drugs, especially bhang, is refreshing, slightly intoxi- cating, and creates appetite. The effects last for about six to eight hours. Feeling of depression, blunting or impairment of taste, slight feeling of heaviness in head are the usual after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification causes longing and uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of bhang or ganja does not injure the constitution in any way. It does not injure digestion or cause loss of appe- tite. It does not cause dysentery, bronchitis, or asthma. It does not impair the moral sense or induce laziness or habits of immorality or debauch- ery. It does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. 46. The habitual excessive use of bhang or ganja impairs the constitution, injures digestion, causes loss of appetite and bronchitis, impairs the moral sense, and induces laziness. It may deaden the intellect and produce insanity, especially in those predisposed to nervous affections. The type is generally acute mania, and in about 50 per cent. of a temporary nature. Patients discharged cured are liable to a recurrence of mania if the ganja habit is resumed on returning home. The majority of insanes from ganja usually confess o having taken the drug. 47. The habitual moderate use does not appear to be a hereditary habit and does not affect the children. 48. I am not aware of any case in which the habit could be considered hereditary, or the children in any way affected by its use. 49. The moderate use of bhang or ganja is practised as an aphrodisiac, and said to be used by some prostitutes for this purpose. The use as an aphrodisiac is more injurious than that as an ordinary narcotic, as it may induce to sexual excesses. It does not produce impotence. 50. The excessive use of these drugs may lead to impotence. 56. The effects of hemp drugs in moderation and excess are modified by the administration of the following substances, viz., dhatura and opium increase intoxicating effect, nux vomica and can- tharides appear to increase the aphrodisiac action. 57. When ganja or charas is eaten or drunk, the effects are more marked than in the case of bhang. Ganja or charas is rarely taken in this way, and then only in the absence of bhang. 57. (a) I cannot offer any further information on these points. The above questions have been answered in con- sultation with Assistant Surgeons Rao Saheb Bhicajee Amroot Chobhe and Dattu Ganesh Sab- nis, teachers in the Byramjee J. Medical School, Poona., the former of whom has considerable local experience in these subjects. Oral evidence. Question 1.143 ation probably would be made if information of a reliable character could be obtained, but this is not often done. The alteration would not be made without the permission of the Magistrate. Form C ought to be filled up by the Magistrate. That has been my experience in four other stations. The Civil Surgeon has not the same facilities as the Magis- trate for collecting the required information as to history and cause. The case comes to the Civil Surgeon for observation only. As Superintendent of the Asylum, I should not alter the register, of which the entries have been derived from Form C, without reporting the matter to the Magistrate. Any alteration of the kind would have a record in the shape of an erasure and a reference to the Magis- trate. The Magistrate has the facility of making en- quiry that is supplied by the attendance of the rela- tions in some cases. I don't know the procedure followed by the police. In the case of Guljar Shah the entry in the asylum register is ganja-smoking. That does not agree with head 12 in Form C, where the entry is " The abovementioned ganja- smoking and religious and isolated habits," and the assistant admitted to me that a mistake had been made in not copying the whole entry which appears in Form C. In the case of Rangnath Trimbak, the cause entered in the asylum register is " Drinks bhang," while the entry against head 12 of Form C is " Unknown." It is probable that the entry in the register was taken from the entry against head 6 of Form C, which is apparently copied verbatim. This was not in my time, but I think that if an entry in Form C shows that the lunatic drinks bhang it would be a mistake to put cause unknown against head 12 of the form, even though bhang may not have been the only cause. In the case of Trimbak Vinayak, the entry against head 12 of Form C is " Ganja-smoking and absti- nence from food," and in the register the cause is put down as " Ganja-smoking." This occurred before my time. The Superintendent may not have considered that abstinence from food was an existing cause, but I think he was wrong in mak- ing the entry he did. In the case of Laxman Nandram, the entry " Ganja and liquor " reverses the order in which the drug appears in head 6 of Form C, and is contrary to head 12 of Form C, where the entry is " Unknown." I can't explain why this was done. In the case of Hari Trimbak, the entry against head 12 of Form C is " Unknown beyond the habit of smoking ganja," and in the register " Ganja-smoking." In the case of Paras- ram there is no entry of cause in Form C, but against heads 11 and 12 appears: " He had an illness seven years ago, but does not give a clear account." The register shews " Ganja-smoking." In these six cases the register entry does not agree with the Civil Surgeon's certificate, and there ought to be something on the record to explain the differ- ence. I cannot explain the procedure of that time, for Dr. Hughes was in charge and the assistant is dead. It is from this register that the annual returns are compiled which show these six cases as the only hemp drug admissions of 1892. In the case of Guljar Shah there is no further information beyond that furnished in the papers. I think ganja has been properly entered as the cause. It was in my opinion the chief and the existing cause; and I think that, if the man had not taken the ganja, he would not have become insane, although the ascetic and isolated habit may have predisposed him towards insanity. The fur- ther information that has been gathered by recent enquiry in the case of Rangnath shows that the bhang-drinking was moderate, and in accordance with what I had previously been told. But my private opinion is that the bhang drinking must have been greater. As a rule the insanity from bhang drinking passes off quickly, and I think there must have been a predisposing cause in the present case, because the man had previously been insane, and his present attack had lasted two and a half years. I believe that country liquor is more likely to cause insanity than bhang, and I have no reason to doubt that in the present case the man did take liquor, as he himself said. The case may therefore have been due to both liquor and bhang, and liquor may have been the more important factor of the two. The asylum records show that during the last five years there have been 31 admissions from ganja, 1 from bhang, and 10 from country liquor, and I therefore regard liquor as a more prolific cause of insanity than bhang. In the case of Trimbak Vinayak, I think the cause is ganja, the effects of which were increased by the abstinence from food. In the case of Lax- man Nandram, the lunatic was insane for two and a half years before he came into the asylum and one and a half years since. I see no reason to doubt his statement that he only smoked ganja occasionally and drank liquor frequently for years. The dose of ganja, as shown in the recent enquiry, is moderate. If the man's statement regarding his drinking is accepted, I think it may have been, as much as ganja, the existing cause, or perhaps the more important cause. In any case, there was probably some predisposing cause. In the case of Parasram, the recent enquiry has not resulted in confirming the alleged ganja habit. But I think nevertheless that the man's in- sanity was due to ganja, because he admits the prac- tice; and I do not believe that he gave up the habit five or ten years ago. He says this sometimes, but at other times he admits the habit. His appearance also confirms me in my opinion. The fact that in the recent enquiry people who knew the insane say that they never saw him indulge in ganja makes us regard the case as a doubtful one. If I were preparing statistics for the purpose of showing the effects of hemp drugs, I should not class this as a hemp case.* In the case of Hari Trimbak, the Civil Surgeon evidently had doubts as to the cause of insanity. I have never known insanity to arise from cholera, though the disease might predispose it by weakening the constitution. I don't at- tribute the attack of insanity in this case to the cholera. If the insane had not resumed his ganja habit after recovery from the cholera, I don't think he would have become insane. The cholera weakened the man's constitution and rendered him more liable to the ganja poison. Out of the six hemp cases admitted to the asylum in 1892, I would only exclude the two cases of Rangnath and Parasram for the reasons given above. The usual type of hemp drug insanity is acute mania. Acute mania may be due to various causes. * Extract from a letter No. 112, dated 6th December 1893, from the Magistrate, 1st Class, Bhusawal, Khandesh, to the Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Poona, read over to witness. * * * * * * * " None of the persons who knew anything of Parasram says that he was ever addicted to smoking ganja or taking any other narcotic or alcohol in any form whatsoever. There is nothing except the medical certificate (copy not retained. here) sent you that he ever smoked ganja at all." * * * * * * *
144 There are no typical symptoms that I am aware of to enable you to diagnose hemp drug insanity. Ganja cases generally recover rapidly. Cases arising from mental shock are of longer duration. To diagnose by this symptom, therefore, the patient must be under continuous observation. It is nevertheless the practice to enter the cause im- mediately on the admission of a case to the asylum. But it is supposed that the Civil Surgeon bas had the man under observation for a week or ten days more or less, and has diagnosed the cause. Insanes are rarely cured by the time they reach the asylum. The Civil Surgeon only keeps the man long enough to satisfy himself that he is insane. As a rule the Civil Surgeon's diagnosis is accepted, but if the Superintendent has reason to think the diagnosis is wrong, he ought to change it. As a fact, I have not known of any case of such change since I have been at Poona. The symptoms are of short duration in the majority of cases, about a week or ten dys. If it is a second attack, or the indulgence has gone to great excess, the insanity would last longer. I know the insanity of the kind called transient mania. I believe it to be caused by mental shock or nervous shock, or a debauch of wine, bhang, or other intoxicants, especially by a. person of weak temperament. I have known fever to produce it in the latter case. It is most often due to moral causes, and not to toxic physical causes, though these may produce it. I think that transient mania caused by ganja would be difficult or almost impossible to distinguish from the same form of insanity due to any other case if history were wanting. I think I have noticed that persons insane from bhang have red and watery eyes. This symptom may be produced by fever, but is generally present in bhang cases. The use of hemp is likely to produce contraction of the pupil, but in great excess to the point of intoxication or insensibility it might cause dilatation. I do not think short duration, redness of eyes, and dilated pupils would be sufficient to diagnose a case upon. These symptoms would point to hemp insanity rather than any other cause, but they are recognised as symptoms of transient mania due to other causes than hemp drugs. But I think redness of eyes is more marked in hemp insanity than in other cases. I think an accurate history is essential to diagnose the cause of insanity. Hemp drugs may predispose, but I should rather regard them as exciting cause of insanity. I think the hemp drugs have slightly cumulative effects, but not more so than alcohol. They are not to be classed with digitalis or arsenic in this respect. For diagnosis, duration of the habit, the amount of drug used, and hereditary history are necessary. I think that if the information regarding a man suffering from acute mania were nothing more than that he was ganja smoker, the ganja should be regarded as the existing cause in eighteen cases out of twenty. The mere statement of the ganja habit would be sufficient if there were no reason to disbelieve it. The man whose case is reported by Mr. Fox was brought to me occasionally as an out-door patient a year ago. I have endeavoured to get further information about him, but Mr. Fox is at present in Bombay, and he has not mentioned the man's name. My recollection is that I was informed that his attack was due in great measure to the persecution he had suffered on account of his conversion to Christianity, and that he had taken to smoking ganja in consequence. I only saw the man two or three times as an out- patient, and am unable to exclude other possible causes to account for his mental condition. I remember telling Mr. Fox that if he allowed the man to go on smoking, he would certainly get an attack of acute mania. I formed this impression from the man's looks, which appeared to me to show that he was verging on insanity. The information about the cause of the man's distress came from his friends, who either told me or the house surgeon. I have been observing eases of hemp drug insanity for seven or eight years. I have not observed the effects of the hemp drugs apart from insanity. I have spoken to many people who have told me they were moderate smokers, but seen no effects among such persons. I do not know any excessive consumer, nor have I had to do with any such persons, except in the way of treatment for mental disease. My impression of the connection between hemp drugs and insanity is therefore not based on any knowledge of the general consumption and effects of the drug among the people. 70. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR H. McCALMAN, Civil Surgeon, and Superintendent, Dharwar Lunatic Asylum. Oral evidence. Question 1.145 transfer it to the asylum register. It would be entered in the register within a day or two of the admission of the lunatic. I would accept it, because I think the Magistrate has greater facilities than I have to conduct an enquiry into the previous history of the patient, and because the diagnosis of cause depends practically exclusively on his- tory. I don't know through what officer the Magis- trate conducts his enquiry. I should hesitate to accept the results of an enquiry conducted by a Head Constable unless they had been verified by the Magistrate. I am not aware of the procedure, and cannot say if it is usual for the Magistrate to verify the enquiry. In the case of Dariappa, admitted to the asylum in 1892, I have read the remarks in column 5, and I am inclined to think that though insanity may have arisen from both liquor and ganja, the latter should be regarded as the predisposing cause. I should hardly say that there were any typical symptoms in hemp drug insanity. The symptoms present are generally those of acute mania. It would, I think, be incorrect to say that all the symptoms which I have observed in hemp drugs insanity are to be found in cases of acute mania, due to other causes. The shortness of duration of the attack is, I think, suggestive of the hemp drug cause. To discover this sign the patient must be kept under observation. The cause is entered in the register directly the patient arrives. I do not recollect an instance in which I have found it necessary to alter the cause recorded by the Magistrate. The diagnosis of cause is that furnished by the Magistrate, when it is given. The opinion quoted in the remarks on the case of Raya-bin-Basapa that " habitual use of ganja may weaken the mind, while the occasional exces- sive use produces acute mania " is mine. I mean prolonged moderate use by the term " habitual use; " and I think the effect of that is to produce mental vacuity rather than acute mania; but I would not exclude the possibility of acute mania arising from such use. In the absence of any other cause, if the ganja habit were asserted, I should accept that as the cause of insanity. 71. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR D. C. DAVIDSON, Acting Civil Surgeon, and Super- intendent of the Jail and Lunatic Asylum, Dharwar. 1. As Civil Surgeon in various places, Superin- tendent of Jails, Acting Health Officer of Bombay, in native regiments, etc. 2. The only two varieties that I have been able to obtain in this district are ganja and bhang. Charas is practically unknown. 19. Charas does not appear to be used at all in this district, and ganja for smoking only. 23. Bhang does not appear to be used in this district. 28. (a) Roughly speaking, about two drachms and over. (b) One ounce or more. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with the ganja. I have not met with instances in which the other articles have been used. Bhang massala has been repeatedly described to me. It is generally stated, with some slight variations, to consist of bhang, opium seeds, cucum- ber, pepper, nutmeg, milk, sugar, etc. 30. Appears to be smoked indifferently in com- pany or in solitude. Mainly confined to the male sex, and to no particular time of adult life. I know of no instance in which ganja has been con- sumed by children. 31. Appears to be easily formed, and as a rule difficult to break off. There does not appear to be any particular tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. Nothing more I should say than an occasional instance liable to occur in the habitual use of all stimulants or sedatives. 32. I am not aware of any. 36. I have not met with or heard of any in- stances. 37. Charas is practically unknown in this dis- trict as also drinking of preparations of bhang. 39. Ganja-smoking appears to be practically the only form in which the hemp plant is used in this district. 40. It is used extensively by the people them- selves in malarial fever, rheumatism, dyspepsia, diarrh146 56. I have no information of admixture of any of the substances mentioned except opium seeds in bhang massala. 57. Charas appears to be unknown in this dis- trict as also ganja drinking or eating. 57(a). Yes; that contained in the accompanying form, which contains the results of enquiries amongst the prisoners in the Dharwar Jail. The only preparation referred to throughout is ganja, which is used for smoking in this district. 72. Evidence of SURGEON-CAPTAIN W. E. JENNINGS, Civil Surgeon, and Superintend- ent, Ratnagiri Lunatic Asylum. Oral evidence. I am Superintendent of the Ratnagiri Asylum. I have been iu charge just over a year since Nov- mber 1892. I have had no other experience of a special character in respect to insanity. I had seen a few cases of people affected by ganja in regiments. They were cases of the temporary effects of ganja, rather cases of intoxication from ganja. I do not remember to have seen any cases of insanity. I know of no literature dealing with the sub- ject of hemp drug insanity. When I came here, I arrived at the causation of hemp drug insanity from the history, from such facts and history as I have been able to collect. I could not tell from seeing an insane person that his insanity was due to ganja. There is, I may say, a craving in some cases for the drug which is asked for. I have not recognized any special symptoms of hemp drug insanity. The type is generally a kind of chronic mania with occasional attacks of acute mania at longer or shorter intervals. Speaking generally, in coming to a diagnosis as to cause, I am guided wholly by the history. In inquiring I generally begin by asking the friends or the police if the man is addicted to any bad habits. If they seem to hesitate, I go on to ask leading questions, such as " Does he take liquor ?" or "Does he take ganja?" If they say yes, then I ask, " In what form: does he smoke ? " If they say yes, I enquire as to period and amount to ascertain whether he smokes it in excess. At the same time I inquire whether there is any hereditary history of insanity. I do discriminate between the moderate and excessive use of the drug; but this is only relative, for what is moderate to one man may be excessive to another. I know from prescribing it that the effects of the drug are most uncertain. If from the replies I found that the evidence showed the moderate habit, and if at the same time I had no evidence of any other cause, I should ascribe the insanity to ganja, disbelieving the evidence that the use was merely moderate. And if I got a history of the excessive use of ganja I should ascribe the insanity to that without hesita- tatiou, in the absence of any other cause. I al- ways, however, ask about heredity and the previous state of the patient. If I have a history of heredity and also a state- ment of the moderate use of the drug, 1 should be inclined to think the insanity was hereditary. I should inquire as to the degree of heredity, and consider the relative strength of these two factors. If it was a case of near heredity and the moderate use of the drug, I should exclude the ganja, and show the cause as heredity. If it were remote heredity and the moderate use, I should do the opposite. Speaking generally, if I had the moderate use of ganja and another cause, I should take the stronger cause. Thus, if a habitual drunkard used ganja moderately, I should show alcoholism as the cause. I could hardly give quantities as to what would be generally speaking the moderate and excessive use in a native. I should depend on what the friends said about the use being moderate or excessive, but I should disbelieve them, as above stated, if they said it was moderate, and there was no other cause of insanity. All the above refers to cases where I have to make in- quiries myself; but I should never make any inquiry if clear cause were assigned in the papers received from the Magistrate. 73. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR K. R. KIRTIKAR, Civil Surgeon, Thana, and Medical Officer, Thana Depôt and District Jail. 1. I have personally known men who have for years used hemp drugs both moderately and. immoderately, and I have had frequent opportu- nities of watching the effects of the drugs on them generally in the practice of my profession and otherwise. 2. Dr. Prain's definitions are correct, and may be accepted for this district. Bhang is also known as ghota in this district. I may observe that Dr. Prain's remarks require some modification, where he says that " ganja consists of dried flowering tops of cultivated female hemp plants which have become coated with resin in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely." The result of my observations on cultivated plants in two localities in Thana is that the resin is not the result of the seeds not setting freely, but that it is the essential condition of the whole plant. The plant is sticky to the touch, and has the strong odour of sabja (Ocymum basili- cum). Hence the name sabji given to bhang. The stickiness is due to the resinous matter, which when collected in masses forms charas. This resinous exudation is seen in hemp seedlings even when they are too young to flower. Dr. Prain further says that "the formation of seeds is prevented by the destruction of all the male plants." This is no doubt the usual practice for securing good compact leafy heads of flower- ing tops and for preventing the formation of seeds. It must not, however, be forgotten that although male and female plants exist separately, as a general rule there are some plants on which the male and female flowers co-exist. I mention this point particularly, because I do not wish it to be supposed that the mere destruction of male plants is sufficient to stop all seed formation. 19. Ganja is used for smoking. I know nothing about charas.
147 23. Bhang is never used for smoking, so far as I know. 28. Average allowance. Cost. Habitual moderate consumer. Bhang ¼ to ½ tola ½ anna per tola. Ganja ¼ tola 2 annas per tola. Habitual excessive consumer. Bhang 2 to 4 tolas ½ anna per tola. Ganja 1 to 2 tolas 2 annas per tola. 29. Ganja is seldom, if ever, smoked by itself. It is always washed in water until the water comes out clear, and thoroughly mixed with an equal part of tobacco. Every drop of water is squeezed out of this mixed mass before it is used. Bhang is always mixed with black pepper in the proportion of 10 grains (dried fruits) to every tola of bhang. It is finely rubbed on a curry stone, and strained through a piece of fine muslin. Persons who drink bhang for mere pleasure always add, besides black pepper, the following ingredients for flavouring the potion: 148 circle of their own homes, men who have to work for their living and minister to the daily wants of their wives and children, to develop into the exces- sive ganja smoker or bhang drinker. It is the men who have nothing to do in the world, and with the world149 It does intoxicate men not accustomed to it. It staves off hunger. The effect of ganja is tran- sient. It lasts for an hour or two at the utmost. Want of a ganja smoke to a habitual but moderate smoker produces uneasiness. The man misses his little excitement. There is always a longing for it among confirmed smokers. The same is the case with habitual moderate bhang drinkers. Bhang drinking is decidedly cooling at first; by- and-bye the drinker feels exhilarated; within half an hour he becomes talkative, after which he feels sleepy, especially if he is a novice. The sleep is full of dreams. On waking there is a desire for food. The desire for food is in some instances immediate; and a man may eat voraciously under its influence. Some prefer taking bhang on an empty stomach; others take it a couple of hours after food. In the former case the effect is more rapid for obvious reasons. After the drink- er wakes from his sleep, if he is an habitual, he goes to work as usual, but if he is a mere begin- ner be feels heavy in. the head and still continues to be talkative. He often gets double-vision. The effects pass off in about five or six hours. With habitual drinkers beyond talkativeness there is no marked effect. They appear happy. They have not to lie down, or go to sleep after their usual drink. The habitual use of these drugs, even in a mo- derate degree, is looked upon as vice. It is, how- ever, not considered wrong by the devotees of Shiva to indulge in ganja or bhang on days held sacred to that divinity. 45. There are two classes of moderate habitual smokers of ganja and drinkers of bhang. There are some, for instance, who have a perfectly good physique and a healthy body whose mind is perfectly clear and active, and who lead a moral life, and indulge in their respect- ive practices before their day's work is begun or after they have finished it. There are others again who even after moderate use of bhang or ganja live a life of idleness and are unfit for any kind of work requiring mental or physical exertion. They may be otherwise healthy and perhaps mentally happy; they may also be moral; but they are persons who show that they are indulging in a practice which is doing them no good. These drugs lead to a little emaciation, es- pecially smoking, or when after bhang the required supply of food is not available. It is noted by ancient Hindu writers as a reducer of fat. Per- haps this emaciation is due to loss of appetite among ganja-smokers, and not to any direct pre- ventive influence on fat-formation in the body. As noted above, ganja-smoking impairs the power of digestion, and though it may actually cause loss of appetite, it staves off hunger. Hence it is that the bairagis and gosains look upon it as a stand-by when the collected alms of the day do not give them their full meal. I have not seen, nor have I heard from any re- liable source of dysentery, asthma, or bronchitis being traced to the use of hemp in moderation. European physicians use it for the cure of dysen- tery. To my knowledge, moderate use does not impair moral sense. It does induce laziness in some cases, especially where a person has not to earn his livelihood. But as a general rule with habituals, bhang sharpens the intellect, so does ganja. So far as I am inclined to believe, there is no- thing in bhang or ganja to lead to habits of im- morality or debauchery. I am not satisfied that either of these drugs acts as a direct aphrodisiac. Of course, when there is a general excitement of the whole system under the influence of smoke or drink, the sexual passions may be roused as often as not. The drug acts more on the sensory part of the brain than on the motorial. It acts as a distinct sedative on the cerebral centres and benumbs the sensory nerves. The theory of hemp acting as an aphrodisiac is not borne out by clinical investigation or expe- rience. I am not aware that moderate use causes insani- ty. On the contrary, European physicians of re- pute use the drug medicinally in cases of insanity. Table showing typical cases which came under my observation between 1881150 commencement. In such cases melancholia is absent in the initial stage. In cases which have come under my observation of any connection between insanity and ganja, it appears that ganja was resorted to originally for the relief of other affections than mental anxiety or brain disease, such as asthma, bronchitis, and painful bowel-complaints. In all these eases hemp drugs act as sedatives; hence the habit is formed, which might eventually lead to insanity. There is no evidence to indicate that insanity tends to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakned intellect. 47. I have no reason to suppose that the mode- rate use of hemp drugs is either due to or engen- ders a hereditary habit. Nor do I know of any instance where it has affected the children of the moderate consumer, in any way, either as regards health or morals. 48. Excessive ganja smokers are generally not men with families. They generally belong to the class of gosains and bairagis, who are not suppos- ed to marry. W here such ascetics have children by illicit intercourse, they are sickly and generally die of infantile diseases due to proverty of blood, insufficient nourishment, or congenital syphilis. 49. It is not used as an aphrodisiac so far as I know. The use of hemp does not tend to produce impotence so far as I know. 50. Excessive ganja smokers mostly show that they do net care for sexual intercourse, but their sexual power is not totally lost, as my answer to question 48 will show. Oral evidence. Question 1.151 I have referred, but they were not verified by post-mortem examination. I regard that experi- ence as putting the matter practically beyond doubt that excessive ganja consumption and such lesion are connected as cause and effect. In these cases I have the history of the case to guide me to the conclusion that the ganja caused the lesion, as well as the progress of the disease, as observed by me. During the time the man in each case was under my observation no Cannabis indica was given by way of treatment. I got the cases under my treatment with the history that the men were excessive ganja smokers. From the nature of their nervous symptom I was of opinion that they were due to excessive ganja smoking; and during the time these cases were under my treatment they were never given Can- nabis indica in any shape. Therefore I conclude that there were permanent lesions due to the use of the drug. The nervous symptoms to which I have referred were similar to sypmtoms which might have been caused by any of half a dozen other causes, e. g., (chiefly) syphilis and local tum- ours. I was able to exclude these causes from the former history of the cases I have mentioned. I know of no experiment on the lower animals leading to the conclusion that lesions are caused by hemp drugs. I am not prepared to go into these ten cases at present; for I have not brought my notes on them with me. These notes are not so complete as to enable me to state in each case whether all pos- sible causes have been excluded. The notes are not complete in regard to the questions put by this Commission: and besides I was not so parti- cular as to cause as I was in regard to the disease. I do not think I could give more information than could be obtained in the asylums. If a man were brought to me insane, who had been much under the influence of the sun and of malaria, and who had suffered from fever a good deal, and I were told of him that he smoked ganja, I should say that the exciting cause of the in- sanity was the fever if that immediately preceded the attack, but that the predisposing cause was the use of ganja. In some cases of excess insanity can be traced direct to ganja; in other (moderate) cases the ganja habit may make the operation of sun or malaria effective in producing insanity. That is, the man might have escaped otherwise. Given the habit of ganja smoking with the fact of insanity, however, I would not attribute the insanity to the ganja either as the predisposing or exciting cause in all cases. In some cases the insanity might be due to some cause unconnected with ganja. In the case above stated of the man suffering from sun and malaria and fever and smok- ing ganja, I should hold the ganja to be connect- ed as cause with the insanity as above stated, un- less I could find some cause that excluded it as a co-operating cause. This is a typical case from my part of the country owing to the malarious character of the place and the Tansa Water-works. And this explains my statement in answer 46 that " ganja smoking acts more as a predisposing than as an exciting cause." I would not call it a pre- disposing cause in cases of heredity and syphilis, but these are rarer in my experience. 74. Evidence of SURGEON-COLONEL D. E. HUGHES, Principal Medical Officer, Bombay, Deesa and Aden Districts, Bombay. 1. Fourteen years' service in a Native Regi- ment; Superintendent of Lunatic Asylum, Poona; private practice among better class natives. 27. Among the patients admitted into the Poona Lunatic Asylum whose insanity was ascrib- ed to hemp drugs, by far the greater number were Hindus who smoked ganja. 31. All habits are difficult to break off. 35. (a) I fear not. (b) and (d) Yes. (e) I cannot tell. (f) Most probably. 43. Apparently so. 45. To the best of my recollection many of the comparatively young sepoys (sixteen years' service), who appeared before Invaliding Boards were said to be addicted to ganja and charas smoking to which their early break-down was attributed. I think the smoking of charas causes bronchitis and asthma, as I well remember cases of these diseases in the 14th Bombay Infantry which were ascribed by the Hospital Assistant and the men's comrades to charas smoking, and which recovered in hospital quicker than cases due to ordinary causes. Smoking ganja induces insanity, generally mania, and, as far as my recollection goes, tem- porary in character. The symptoms may be re- induced by the use of the drug after release from restraint as shown by readmissions into lunatic asylums. Patients when asked whether they were ganja smokers readily admitted the habit. 47 and 48. Unknown. 49. I think so. Well-to-do and comparatively young patients, who have consulted me evidently with a view to obtaining a prescription for an aphrodisiac tonic, have in the course of examina- tion volunteered the statement that they smoked ganja, and appeared to blame that habit for their sexual weakness. 51. Those I have known as ganja smokers have generally been dissipated and disreputable-looking men. 53. Apparently. 54. Cases of the drug being used by criminals for this purpose are quoted in books of Indian Medical Jurisprudence. Oral evidence. Question 1.152 the facts. I have nothing to add on the subject which cannot be ascertained from the registers of the asylum. Question 45.153 fakir. The fact of his early cure, as shown by his exhibiting no signs of insanity in the asylum, would point to ganja smoking as the exciting cause, the symptoms having only lasted about six days. If there had been no history of ganja smoking in this case, the symptoms would have been consistent with the form of mania called transient mania. I have seen that form of mania. Without the ganja history, I could not have arrived at any diagnosis of the cause. Against head 12 in Form C of the case of Rangnath Trimbak is entered " unknown," and against head 6 of the same form regarding character is entered " drinks bhang." I cannot recall the facts of the case clearly, but think the entries were based on exa- mination of his brother, who was present. It is evident from the entry against head 12 that I did not attribute the insanity in this case to the hemp drugs. If I ascertained that the man used ganja I would attribute the insanity to ganja in default of other causes. It has not been my practice to make enquiry whether the patient was given to the excessive, as distinguished from the moderate, use. In the case of Rangnath, it is probable that the brother did not attribute the insanity to the drug. In the case of Trimbak Vinayak, all the entries in Form C are based on the father's statement. I don't remember in what condition the boy was, and the statement " abstinence from food" was probably based on the father's information. In the case of Laxman Nandram, it is stated opposite " character " head 6 of form C) that " he drinks country liquor and. ganja." The brother was present, and this statement was probably made by him. Against head 12, I entered the cause as " unknown." The insanity having lasted two and a half years (vide head 9) may have been the cause of my doubt as to whether liquor and ganja should be regarded as the cause. I have always looked upon Form C as a statement of which the entries might be modified by enquiry at the asylum, and I have thought it better to record the word " unknown," unless I was tolerably certain regarding the cause. If I had regarded the last case as one of toxic insanity, I should not have put it down to country liquor in preference to ganja, though the lunatic used both. If it is true, as stated in the asylum, that the man smoked ganja occasionally but not regularly, and that he drank liquor frequently for years, I should have been inclined to regard liquor as the more probable cause if the insanity could be considered to be toxic. I should class hemp drug insanity generally as acute mania. Acute mania may be due to many causes. I can't say that I have noticed any typical symptoms in acute mania due to hemp drugs. The diagnosis would rest on the appearance of the lunatic and on the temporary nature of the insanity. Other symp- toms would be redness of the eyes, violent excite- ment, and mental activity. I have not noticed anything peculiar about the pupils. These symp- toms would be present in transient mania. I would not go so far as to say that the diagnosis of hemp drug insanity depends entirely on history. There are appearances which one comes to regard as connected with such cases, but on which I should not venture to make a diagnosis without history of the hemp drug habit. All the symp- toms might be found in the form of insanity known as transient mania; but I should not diag- nose transient mania from them, because my ex- perience has led me to regard it as much more rare than hemp drug insanity. Transient mania might be brought on by mental shock, such as loss of money or exposure. I don't think dha- t urn poisoning, whose symptoms are well marked, could be mistaken for it. Up-country men and fakirs seem to furnish the majority of hemp-drug insanes, These classes of persons are exposed to vicissitudes of temperature and insufficient food. These would be causes of transient mania. The fakir class would be specially liable to an attack of transient mania from exposure to weather, want of food, and religious excitement. The solitary habit would be more likely to induce melan- cholia. 76. Evidence of RAO SAHEB BHICAJEE AMROOT CHOBHE, Brahmin, Assistant Surgeon, Poona City. Ganja is used for smoking; generally a little tobacco is mixed with it before use. It is also used in the preparation of majum, yakuti, gul- cand, and shrikhand, which are used for eating. Bhang is powdered and mixed with syrup and used under the name of ghota for drinking. Charas is used for smoking only. They are generally used by the idle and vicious of all classes; but bhang and the said prepara- tions of ganja are sometimes used even by persons of respectable position. Charas is very rarely used in this part of India, and I cannot assign any reason for this. Ganja and Charas are used for smoking, bhang for drinking, and the preparations of ganja for eating. Smoking of ganja is prevalent amongst the lower classes, and bhang and the preparations of ganja are used, though rarely, by the other classes for drink- ing and eating respectively. Bhang is, I believe, never used for smoking. The use of these narcotics is, I believe, on an increase in Poona, and this may perhaps be due to the cheapness of the drugs. They are cheaper than any of the other narcotics. Low company, idle habits, absence of mental work and poverty generally lead people to resort to these narcotics. A habitual moderate consumer requires per diem half an anna for ganja and one anna for bhang; while a habitual excessive consumer re- quires per diem two annas for ganja and four annas for bhang. Dhatura is sometimes mixed with these narco- tics in order to increase their intoxicating effects. The consumption of these drugs is chiefly con- fined to the male sex. The habit is contracted generally after twenty years of age; ganja is not at all used. by children and women. Some pros- titutes, however, are known to make use of bhang and the preparations of ganja. The habit is easily formed, and it is very diffi- cult to break it off. It is not quite feasible to prohibit the use of the drug, since its prohibition is likely to lead the persons habituated to its use to take to other more expensive intoxicants. vol. vii. z
154 Cannabis causes mirthful delirium, causeless fits of laughter, dilatation of the pupils and halluci- nations, whereas alcohol leads to contraction of the pupils, furious excitement and more marked unsteadiness of gait. By smoking ganja and charas, mental, diges- tive, and consequently the physical, powers of the body are impaired. In extreme cases it leads to melancholy, impotence and dropsy. Smoking is more injurious thin eating. European doctors prescribe extract and tincture of ganja in cases of diarrh155 Drinking bhang is considered a safer and more healthy practice than smoking ganja. 39. It is generally admitted, and I believe with much truth, that the habitual excessive smoking of hemp induces a tendency towards producing insanity, and this opinion is confirmed by some cases which have come under my professional observations. 40. In some cases of asthma and diseases of the lungs smoking of hemp is recommended as a great palliative of the attack. Amongst cattle, and especi- ally amongst buffaloes, it is given with the object of causing an increased flow of milk. Bhang leaves are used for fumigation in h156 statements about typical symptoms only on this case which is my only ganja case. The Mahi- kantha cases of 1860 were ganja cases, but none of them was a confirmed form of madness. I have never read of, or come across, any case of ganja insanity with these typical symptoms. I do not remember reading of such a case. From this case I also judge that confirmed in- sanity from ganja is incurable. Question 49.157 80. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR THAKORDAS KIKABHAI, Bania, Assistant Surgeon, Wadhwan Civil Station, Kathiawar. 1. (a) Bhang: (1) my own personal ex- perience as regards its effects when taken occasionally in moderate quantities; (2) experience derived from observing its effects on relatives, friends, religious mendicants, jogis, atits, fakirs and class of people who are votaries of the god Mahadev. I have seen people who are occasional moderate consumers as well as habitual moderate consumers. I have also seen occasional excessive consumers and habitual excessive consumers. (3) My coming in contact with different classes of people professionally is also one of the sources of information. (b) As far as charas is concerned, I have neither personal experience nor have I had any oppor- tunities of observing its effect on others. What little I know of its effects and uses has been derived from statement of others. (c) Ganja.158 composed of sugar, ghee, and bhang. It is prepared thus:169 by a large class of people, such as yogis, fakirs, atits, etc., and there is every probability that alcohol will be substituted if these drugs are pro- hibited to them. 37. The effects produced by charas-smoking are similar to those produced by ganja-smoking, ex- cept that the effects are intensified in charas-smok- ing. The nature of the effect of bhang-drinking is different from smoking ganja. Intoxication of ganja is stronger, more rapid and less lasting. In the case of ganja the intoxication lasts for about three hours. Ganja is considered hot. Bhang is cooling. The intoxication of bhang is milder, not so rapid and more lasting than ganja. In case of bhang the intoxicating effects are gradually de- veloped, while in case of ganja they develop imme- diately. The intoxication of bhang lasts for about six hours. 39. All the different preparations of hemp plants are not used both for drinking and smoking, and so it is difficult to determine the effects of the same preparation both when drunk and smoked. Ganja is generally used for smoking; in very few exceptional cases it is taken internally. Charas is generally smoked. I am not aware of its being taken internally. Bhang is generally drunk. Of all the three above preparations bhang is consider- ed the mildest preparation of hemp drugs. This appears to me to be true, because the active prin- ciple of the plant is less in quantity in the leaves than in the flowers of the plant. The resin is the active and intoxicating principle of the plant, and hence it is that chains, which is the resinous exuda- tion, and ganja which is the flower tops, contain more of the resinous principle than the leaves, and hence they are stronger and more intoxicating than bhang. The general effects of ganja smoking on the constitution are exhilaration of spirits, heaviness of head, which sometimes amount to actual headache, slight injection of eyes and dryness of the throat, increase of appetite, and sometimes burning at the pit of the stomach. The effects produced by bhang to persons not accustomed are exhilaration of spirits, dryness of throat, increase of appetite, sensation of flying in heaven, lengthening of time, concen- tration of the mind on a particular object to which he is inclined before taking it. As a rule all these symptoms are not noticeable in habitual consum- ers, except slight exhilaration of spirits, general vigour, and concentration of mind on objects to which they are inclined before taking the drug; thus persons of religious turn become more reli- gious under its use. Their ideas are concentrated on one true God. If persons not accustomed to its use indulge in these drugs excessively they do become insane, but to those who are habituated, the habit becomes a second nature; and the drug acts more as a food than a narcotic. No injuri- ous effects are produced to habitaual excessive con- sumers provided they take good nourishing food. 40. Yes. Native vaids do prescribe bhang as medicine. I do not know of its use in cattle disease. Different diseases in which it is used are shown below. According to native medicine bhang mixed with dried ginger, black pepper and long pepper is used in consumption. It is also used for bilious com- plaints, for increasing intelligence, for strength- ening sexual organs, for catarrhal ands skin diseases, for increasing appetite and knowledge, steadiness of mind, and flatulence. In short this drug is supposed not to give old age. For these diseases it is variously mixed with different drugs. Bhang is also used for reducing tin to the form of oxide, which goes by the name of "vang." This is used in gonorrh160 effect is more than that required for producing aphrodisiac effects, and also because, when taken for aphrodisiac purposes, it is generally taken mixed with other stimulating substances, such as musk, saffron, sugar, etc., etc., which counteracts its depressing effects. But there is another feature which must not be lost sight of, and that is when taken as an aphrodisiac, it is naturally followed by sexual intercourse, and there is every probability of its leading to excesses, which may thus indirectly weaken the constitution more than it would do when used simply for narcotic purpose. Even when taken as narcotic in moderate doses it will produce its effects on sexual organs, but the mind of the consumer, in this case being not inclined towards intercourse, he will not go to excesses, and then the evil effects of excesses will not result. The chief character- istic of hemp drugs is that the existing particular tendency is intensified and strengthened by their use, and his train of thoughts after indulgence runs in the same direction. Thus a man of reli- gious turn of mind becomes more enthusiastic in religious matters by using hemp drugs. People of immoral tendency are likely to hanker after females, and so on. 50. Excessive use of these drugs, as a rule, produces impotence, and even if he is inclined to sexual intercourse, he is physically unfit to gratify his desire. People accustomed to take excessive doses do not feel so much impotence as a beginner would feel when he takes it in excessive dose. 56. Dhatura, arsenic and such poisonous drugs when mixed with ganja, either in moderation or excess, intensify the intoxicating effects of ganja. Other non-poisonous substances are added to miti- gate its local irritant effects and to make it more delicious and pleasant. In the case of bhang, ingredients forming bhang massala are such that some of them act as stimulant, and some as cooling and refrigerating. When dhatura is added, the intoxicating effect become more marked. It is only mixed with dhatura when prepared for admin- isteration to others for criminal purposes. 57. No experience. 81. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON ABDUL GHANI, Hakim, in charge of Gadag Dispensary, Gadag, Dharwar District. 1. My experience as an Assistant Surgeon of nearly seventeen years' standing, and by informa- tion collected from some persons here. 2. Yes, all these names are accepted in this pro- vince. The plant of ganja does not grow here, nor is it cultivated. The drug is imported in this place. Flat ganja is generally used here. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking. Ganja is pounded and mixed with sugar and formed into bolus and eaten in this part as an exhilarant. Ganja is used both externally and internally as a medicine. Majum is a preparation like the above. 28. Ganja being smoked generally here, a habitual moderate consumer smokes ¼ anna worth of ganja on an average daily, and an excessive habitual consumer 1 anna per diem. 29. Ordinarily ganja is mixed with tobacco for smoking; exceptionally dhatura is mixed with it by excessive smokers, and by these smokers some- times nux vomica is added. The object of adding dhatura is to have exces- sive intoxication. Nux vomica is put as a nervine tonic, as excessive use of ganja brings on exhaus- tion. 1 have heard of persons smoking ganja, then eating after a time or smoking some prepar- ation of opium, and latterly drinking liquor (alco- hol). Ordinarily here no mixture or massala of bhang is sold, but the component ingredients are bought separately. Bhang or subji is made into a sherbet mixture. It contains sugar, poppy seed juice, almond pulp, cardamom seed, and milk. All these are pounded separately and mixed with water, etc., and drunk. 30. None of these drugs, especially ganja, is taken in solitude. Ganja is smoked in company and is used here by adult males, and neither by females or children. 31. The habit of consuming ganja or bhang is easily formed. It requires an effort to break off the habit. There is a tendency of moderate habit to develop into excessive. 32. Amongst the Hindu Brahmins " ghota " is used on Shivaratri. Ghota is prepared from ganja in this part. Ganja is cleansed, washed and is mixed with water, milk, sugar, almond pulp poppy seed pulp, cardamoms, and then drunk as sherbet. For the sake of mirth, green leaves or the whole of the plant of ganja is cooked with mutton and eaten. The use of bhang is not con- sidered essential socially. The use on such occa- sions is temperate and would not form into a habit. Bairagis or religious mendicants use ganja and develop the habit to excess for the concentration of their thoughts towards deity and induce impotence. 36. There is a slight increase in alcoholic drinks, but its substitution for ganja, bhang, etc., cannot he ascertained. Some persons or sects who are prohibited by their religion, etc., from using alcohol have only ganja or opium to resort to, and also that the latter two drugs are cheaper than alcoholic drinks. 37. The difference lies in the degree. Smok- ing charas has an instantaneous effect. Ganja smoked takes a longer time to have its effects, and bhang still more so than charas. 39. There is no degree; all the preparations have the same effects. It depends upon tempera- ment. Moderation in some will be excess in others. The first effects of any of the preparation are that it is stimulant, excites imagination, increases appe- tite and is an aphrodisiac. The worst effect of excessive use is that it produces dyspepsia, wast- ing body, cough, dysentery, impotency. It first produces illusions and then insanity. 40. Ganja is used by native doctors as refriger- ent, diuretic, narcotic, antispasmodic. It is used also externally. It is also used in cattle diseases, and also to promote appetite. 41. Moderate use of ganja and bhang is observ- ed to be beneficial in persons who have come under my observation. (a) In moderation ganja or bhang are observed to be beneficial by me as accessory to digestion. (b) Has also staying-power under severe exer- tion, and it alleviates fatigue. 42. Medicinally and in moderation the use of the drug will be harmless, but when this degree is broken, it is not beneficial, as the use, may develop into excessive habit, which will be very baneful. 44. The immediate is effect on a habitual consumer is that it is an excitant and refresher. In larger doses it intoxicates. It allays hunger and also creates appetite in moderate dose. The effect of moderate dose lasts for about 3 hours. The after-
161 effects are exhaustion, depression, etc. In habi- tual excessive smokers it produces uneasiness and longing. 45. The moderate habitual uses are not very perceptible in their effects physically, only that the smoker or drinker is very acute to receive obser- vation and pointed in his remarks, rather rash and quarrelsome. He is indifferent. It does not impair the constitution, nor loss of appetite, or cause dysentery, bronchitis. It in- duces laziness and a little indifference. I have personally known none who have become insane by moderate use. 47 and 48. None has come under my observa- tion under these circumstances, 49. In moderate dose it is an aphrodisiac. Pros- titutes here do not use. It stands in the same way for the above purpose as any other narcotic. If this drug is persisted in excess, it causes impo- tence. 50. In excessive doses it induces impotency, hence religious bairagis, fakirs, use it. 56. In moderation no admixture is done except of tobacco. In excess bairagis or religious mendi- cants use dhatura for having more intoxication. Dhatura is also used for criminal purposes, to facilitate robbery; it is added to majum or any other sweetmeat. 57. Ganja is eaten by mixing with sugar, " gur," jagri, and drunk in the shape of sherbet, or as it is called here " ghota" or bhang. 82. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON B. H. NANAVATTY, Parsi, and Teacher of Surgery and Midwifery, Medical School, Ahmedabad. 1. My knowledge of this subject is derived partly from personal observation, and partly from information received from a large number of habi- tual ganja smokers, 2. The definitions herein mentioned may be safely accepted for this district also. Bhang is usually known as bhang and is sometimes called sabji by the people, Charas appears to be hardly at all used in these parts, but the people know it by the same name. Ganja is the name given to the flowering tops of the female plant, these being usually compressed flat, and of a brownish-green colour. It is recognised by the same name in this district. 19. Ganja, as a rule, is used for smoking pur- poses only; but some ganja smokers tell me that when for some reason or another they can't get the same to smoke, they satisfy their craving for it by eating a small quantity of the powdered leaves which have been previously well washed. 23. Not to my knowledge. 28. A habitual moderate ganja smoker spends about a quarter or perhaps half an anna over it. A habitual excessive ganja smoker would neces- sarily spend a trifle more. 29. (a) Ingredients ordinarily mixed with ganja are162 are over, he would probably feel himself wretched and completely worn out and exhausted. (c) Ganja or bhang possess no febrifuge pro- perties, nor are they known as preventives of any other disease in any unhealthy tracts. (d) Broadly speaking, in no way can the habi- tual use of ganja smoking or the use of any of its allied preparations be said to be beneficial. 42. I cannot say that the moderate use of any one of these drugs may be considered to be harm- less; for every one of them is an excitant of great power, which may lead a man under certain conditions (e.g., provocation, vicious company) to indulge in them more freely than usual, and whilst under their influence to commit acts of violence or of murder. 44. The immediate effect of ganja smoking upon the habitual consumer is of a pleasing and exhilarating kind. I believe he becomes possessed of a feeling of happiness and contentment, whilst he notices all sorts of ideas, both pleasant and grotesque, rapidly passing through his mind. His eyes, which perhaps before were dull and listless, now become bright and shiny, and he feels himself now up to his usual work, and in this way the effects may be termed refreshing. Ganja smoking produces in the habitual con- sumer a slight heightening or exhilaration of the spirits, which can hardly be said to amount to intoxication in him. When the habit of ganja smoking is first formed, the appetite is said to be increased; but when the habit is long continued and confirmed, it, on the contrary, is lessened. The want of subsequent gratification produces a sense of discomfort and a longing for it; it makes the man peevish and irritable, and renders him unfit for the regular or full performance of his usual avocations for some time. 45. Yes, ganja produces injurious effects, both physical, mental and even moral. It impairs the constitution, for a habitual ganja smoker is a thin, somewhat emaciated man, with sunken eyes and hollow cheeks. He is seldom known to be fat or corpulent. It produces loss of appetite and strength, though its early use occasions in some a ravenous sensation, not even completely appeased by food. It is a popular belief amongst the ganja smokers that a long-continued habit produces diarrh163 Vedic mantras. Persons suffering from illness or calamities take vows to propitiate the god by means of the above religious rite. Moreover, Hindus drink bhang on the Shivaratri and other holidays, and Mussalmans drink it during the Moharram to make themselves merry. Bhang is said to be the the favourite drink of Siva. By occasionally drinking bhang it does not appear that injurious habits are formed. 36. As alcohol is now easily obtained in every town and village, some people substitute alcohol for hemp drugs. This is on. account of the open- ing of liquor shops all over the country. 37. Charas is more intoxicating than ganja. Bhang drinking is not so intoxicating as smoking ganja or charas. 39. The smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant is not less injurious than drinking or eating the same. In fact bhang is drunk or eaten, and ganja and charas are smoked. The preparations of hemp, when taken in moderate doses, impart at first a gentle reviving heat, and then a refrigerent effect over the whole body. They exhilarate the spirits, excite the imagination, increase the appetite and promote sexual desire. If habitually taken, they produce indigestion, wasting of the body, melancholia and impot- ence. Taken in large doses, and by those who are unaccustomed to their use, they lead to loss of memory, and in some cases charas and ganja smoking lead to insanity. By smoking or drink- ing hemp preparations the eyes become red. 40. Native doctors use bhang in cases of con- vulsions of children as antispasmodic. As far as I know, none of the drugs is used in cattle diseases. 41. (a) Yes, but not when habitually taken in large doses. (b) Yes. (c) Not to my knowledge. (d) They give temporary relief from anxiety or grief. 42. Yes. (Vide answers 39 and 41.) 44. It is refreshing. It does produce intoxica- tion. It allays hunger. After a few hours it creates appetite. The effects last from two to four hours. It induces sleep, at the end of which no effect remains. The want of subsequent gratifi- cation produces no longing or uneasiness. 45 and 46. I have no sufficient information to answer this question. 47. It does not become a hereditary habit or affect the children. 48. I do not think the excessive use of any of these drugs creates a hereditary habit or in any way affects children of the excessive consumers. 49. It is practised as an aphrodisiac. It is so used by prostitutes. As far as I know its use for this purpose is not more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. I do not think that its moderate use tends to produce impotence. 50. The excessive use of these drugs is generally not practised as an aphrodisiac. It serves as an antaphrodisiac. For this reason it is used by jogis and others wishing to curtail their sexual desires, but not by prostitutes. It tends to pro- duce impotence. 56. The admixture of hemp with other sub- stances used in moderation has a tonic, aphrodisiac and digestive effect. In cases of excessive use its effect is intoxicating, narcotic and productive of mental imbecility. 57. I am not aware of ganja or chains being oaten or drunk. 57. (a) Generally fakirs and sadhus, who pass an idle life, and lower classes, such as labourers, make use of hemp drugs as a relaxation from anxiety or fatigue, or to ward off exposure to excessive heat or cold. If these be prohibited, most of them will have recourse to alcohol, which is more mischiev- ous in its effects, physical, moral and mental, and at the same time more expensive than any of the hemp drugs. 84. Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT RAJANA LOKAJEE, Máli Telgu, Thana. 1. I have known the men who used to take the hemp drugs while I am in the Medical Depart- ment. 2. The hemp plant is not cultivated in the pro- vince I reside. The leaves of hemp are called bhang and the flowering tops are called ganja. Charas is not known. 19. Ganja is used as a smoke. Charas not known. No other use is known. Sind, North and Central India. 23. Not known. 28. Ganja.164 41. Bhang is said by the gosavis that it is digestive. (b) It is an excitant, and under the influence of the drug the persons of habitual use work without feeling fatigue. (c) and (d) Not known. 42. Not known. 44. The immediate effect is excitement. It is felt refreshing for the time being. It is not intoxicant to the habitual consumer, but it is so to a new person. While under influence of it the man may not feel appetite, but it does not allay it entirely. It has no particular effect in creating appetite, but men are seen to require greater quantity of food when they become habitual consumers than when they were not; but it has no immediate effect of this kind. Occasional consumer also takes greater quantity of food for one subsequent meal. On habitual consumer the effect lasts apparently for an hour or so and on occasional consumer for some hours and in propor- tion to the quantity taken. On the habitual con- sumer there are not apparently any of the so- called after-effects except that they are weaker, of changed complexion (sallow) and temper, but these are not immediate. On the occasional con- sumer there are depression of spirits, languor, melancholy, and disinclination to work, constipa- tion. To the habitual consumer such a want causes great uneasiness, craving and longing; but to any other man, who once has used it, would not necessarily like to take it again. 45. Using these drugs moderately is a very uncertain thing. However, those who are seen to use them pretty moderately are seen growing weaker and sallower; are easily excited and moved and become of weak and blunt intellect. So they impair the constitution. As it is seen to cause increase in the quantity of food required for a meal without in proportion causing the system robust, it must be regarded to interfere with the digestion and nutrition, though it does not cause loss of appetite. As it breaks down the constitu- tion it may predispose to these diseases. It in duces laziness. It has been observed to weaken the intellect. Many of the insane eases have a history of the habit; but still a number of persons use it through life without an attack of insanity. It is more of an exciting than a predisposing cause. The type of insanity is mania generally, of course preceded by melancholia; and as it pro- duces decrease of nervous power, this disease is more likely to be permanent, or if it has ensued after a recent habit it may be temporary. 47 and 48. Not known. 49. I have known people to make use of these drugs to increase sexual powers; but, as far as I am aware of, it is used by males only. People who resort to these drugs are generally in a weak state of health engendered by loose habits and excesses, and amongst such people even moderate use of such drugs produces injurious effects. I am not aware of the use of hemp pro- ducing impotence as a direct cause. 50. Excessive use of any of these drugs produces more disastrous results, in that the people who indulge in excess are always found in a state of moral weakness and thus become predisposed to organic diseases. 56. No opinion to offer. 85. Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT JAMIATRAM JEYASHUNKER, Nagar Brahmin, West Hospital, Rajkot, Kattiawar. 1. During my five years' (1879 to 1883) service in Sind and Afghanistan, I noticed, specially in Sind, that as hospitality people offer first to eat some sweet. thing, and over this instead of giving water to drink they give generally what is called " thandai," a liquid preparation composed of bhang, sugar, etc. Generally they use thandai daily after noon, with the intention to get pleasure in the evening by adding more quantity of bhang in their community also. 2. Yes, and is locally known by the name of bhang, ganja and charas in my province. 19. Ganja and charas are not only used for smoking, but also used for chewing (ganja chiefly). The Brahmin puravia (as of Agra, Delhi, etc.) who have some religious objection in smoking, use ganja and charas in the form of sweet prepara- tions, such as majum, kharek, fakki, yakuti, etc. 23. Bhang, to my knowledge, I have never heard used for smoking. 28. ALLOWANCE PER DIEM. COST PER DIEM. Bhang. Ganja. Charas. Bhang. Ganja. Charas. Rs.A.P. Rs.A.P. Rs.A.P. (a) One tola Half to one tola, 10 to 20 grains. 002 003 004 (b) Two to four tolas. One to two tolas, 20 to 60 grains. 009 006 010 29 (a) Ordinarily tobacco is mixed with ganja and charas while smoking, and (b) exceptionally dhatura seeds, opium, and sometimes betel-nut are also used. The object of mixing tobacco while smoking is nothing but to get clean smoke, as ganja and charas both required washing with water before use; and when wet they find sometimes difficulties to kindle, and by mixing tobacco the fire will take place to the substance easily, and. smoke will come from the chillum very freely as the wet part dried by adding tobacco. (b) Exceptionally, dhatura seeds, opium, nux vomica, betel-nut are also used by some and in joke to increase the nar- cotic properties, as well as making a fool of others or with some foul objects, as of stealing or of de- bauchery. Bhang massala's ingredients are as follows:165 all the three drugs for the moderate habit to de- velop into the excessive. 32. Bhang is generally used during hot season and on holidays in company as a cooling sub- stance. Charas and ganja are usually consumed in company of sadhu. It is a custom amongst the Brahmins to take bhang on the day of Maha Shivaratri. The custom amongst the sadhu of smoking charas and ganja and of taking bhang is considered to be essential, and it is likely to lead into the formation of the habit, and it proves sometimes injurious. 36. I cannot say that alcohol is substituted for any of these drugs. NOTE.166 23. No; bhang is never used for smoking. 28. SMOKING GANJA. DRINKING BHANG. Tolas. Cost. Tolas. Cost. (a) 1 to 4 ¼ to 1 anna. 1 to 2 ¼ to ½ anna. (b) 4 to 8 1 to 2 annas. 3 to 8 ¾ to 2 annas. 29. The following ingredients are mixed with ganja in smoking:167 in some eases, and produces insanity by smoking, but in drinking or eating it would not produce such harmful effects. It appears to me the pre- disposing cause of insanity, as well as exciting. It generally produces furious mania, dipsomania in the young, who have contracted the habit since a short duration and dementia affectata in aged, and generally temporary. The symptoms be re- induced generally by the use of the drug after liberation from restraint. Generally the typical symptoms are:168 four years. They said they had tried to stop him, but he went out and smoked. He smoked with bairagis. He was a cultivator. They said he had been mad two months continuously. I gave him some medicine. He was not brought again. I repeatedly made inquiry and have heard he is in the same state. He was under my observation for two or three hours. His relations told me that his insanity was due to ganja, and I found his conjunctivæ red. I did not notice the pupils. The man himself said he smoked. Again he denied it. I was told by his friends that he smoked five or six times in the day and two at night. His other habits were all right. He was a religious man; therefore he did not use liquor. His friends said so. His moral habits were not vicious. I inquired about whether his family drank, etc. But only one took opium. I made no inquiry about his family except whether they smoked. That was all I asked. Being reminded, I state that I also inquired about insanity and found no case of insanity in the family. I did not examine into the matter of dhatura. But I have been told that bairagis pretty often do use dhatura with ganja. I have seen two fakirs smok- ing it in a temple also. It did not occur to me to ask about this. The smoking of dhatura may produce effects, but the symptoms are quite different from those of ganja. I refer to smok- ing as well as taking internally. I saw two cases of smoking dhatura in my third year as a student. There were dilatation of pupils, attempting to catch imaginary objects, muscular exhaustion, great thirst, tendency to talk too much, and some symptoms of mania (unconnected talk). In Bhimji Pepji's case I am not sure whether I examined the pupils. I am not prepared to say that they were not dilated. His talk was incohe- rent. He was violent. In Naina Ghela's case, the man was brought to the dispensary by his brothers. He was about twenty-eight or thirty. He was mad, silly. He lay down by the temple and beat the drum. I have seen him since more than once at the temple. I had never seen him before. His brothers told me he had been smoking for seven or eight years, and had been in this condition for a year and a half. I never noticed him till he came to the dis- pensary. He only came once to the dispensary. His brother came twice more for medicine and then ceased coming. I have seen the man several times since. He is in the same state. He acquired the habit of smoking from his companions. They were low caste cultivators or coolies and mean servants. He was himself a cultivator. I did not inquire when he began to attend the temple. He does not cultivate now. He eats ganja and beats the temple drum when the time comes. I inquired about his family his- tory and heard there was no one addicted to vice. He alone took to ganja. No one else was insane in his family. He may have taken liquor; some of his companions took bhang or ghota, but not alcohol. I do not know whether the men were vicious. I did not ask about this man's habits in that respect. I never saw this man violent. The friends told me the cause of insanity was ganja. I believed them. It was natural for me to do so when several people told me. Although I believed them as to the cause, and although as belonging to a religious family he would not take liquor, yet I asked about liquor and opium. I made a very careful inquiry. His friends told me he took ganja and bhang, but no liquor or opium. I do not remember that I made any further in- quiry as to cause. I believed in my mind that the cause was ganja. I asked also about family insanity. I made no full inquiry at the time; but I made inquiry on receiving these questions. I do not think these symptoms would be due to alcohol. They could not, I think, be caused by alcohol. But it was natural for me to ask about liquor. The symptoms might have been caused by dhatura. I do not know about the pupils. There was no attempt at catching imaginary ob- jects. The dhatura patient could not walk: this man could. This man had thirst and tendency to talk. The general type of insanity was dementia: in the dhatura cases I had symptoms of mania. The type of hemp drug insanity is usually dementia, with generally the same symptoms. Violence, unconnected ideas, no recollection, con- gestion of the conjunctiva, dryness of tongue and throat. If I found these symptoms with a his- tory of the use of hemp drugs, I should ascribe the insanity to hemp drugs. I state that the type of hemp drug insanity is dementia from the study of Bhimji Pepji and Naina Ghela's cases, and also others which have come under my notice, but which I cannot detail. There is a tendency to rapid recovery. I devoted more time to inquiring as to cause than to trying to cure the men, because the people (though they came once) were superstitious and against English treatment. 87. Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT PHIROZSILAW D. COOPER, Parsi, in charge Dispensary, Ilao. 1. I am a medical officer in charge Ilao Dispen- sary for the last fourteen years, treating on an aver- age 4,000 to 5,000 patients a year. The following facts are gathered from personal experience of hemp consumers. 2. Bhang is known in my district under three different names, namely, bhang, sabzi, and maya, the names Patti and siddhi being quite unknown. Bhang is the name applied to leaves and seed cap- sules of female cultivated hemp plant. The definitions of charas and ganja can be ac- cepted for my district, and the same designations are current in my district. Ganja is also known here as " mal. " Charas is not generally used here. Flat ganja is the most common variety known; round ganja is quite unknown, while broken ganja is occasionally used, and is known as chur. 19. Yes, only for smoking. 23. No, never. 28. (a) Bhang, one pice. Ganja, one pice. (b) Bhang, three pice. Ganja, two annals. Chards is not used. 29. (a) Bhang is ordinarily mixed with poppy seeds, black pepper, ginger dry, sugar or treacle, almonds, pistachios, fennel, rose water, and water,
169 (b) Dhatura is used under exceptional cir- cumstances, probably with a view to increase its action. Opium, nux vomica, cantharides or betel-nut is not known here to have been so used. Ganja is (a) ordinarily smoked without any ad- mixture, but is (b) exceptionally mixed with dha- tura seeds, tobacco, and " garaku " (a mixture of tobacco and treacle). I do not know of any preparation called bhang massala, but if it be identical with " bhang majum," the ingredients are as under:170 months ago and came to the Ilao Dispensary. I remember a case of lunacy occurring fifteen years ago in the 20th Bombay Infantry at Baroda. I know no other cases. The Ilao case was of a temporary kind. I did not see the other case to its end, for the man was in hos- pital when I was transferred. I attribute the Ilao case in which moderate use has caused insanity. months ago and came to the Ilao Dispensary. I remember a case of lunacy occurring fifteen years ago in the 20th Bombay Infantry at Baroda. I know no other cases. The Ilao case was of a temporary kind. I did not see the other case to its end, for the man was in hos- pital when I was transferred. I attribute the Ilao The Baroda case was under my observation for l ½ months. The Ilao patient was brought to the dispensary by his relatives. He was talking nonsense and his relations said that he had become insane since he had taken the drug to excess. I did ask how long he had been in the habit of smok- ing and was told that he had begun a few months before. He had taken an excessive dose of ganja after drinking liquor two days before he was brought to me. He was in the habit of taking liquor. He would do so at festivals. All poor men drink. On the occa- sion when he was overcome he had taken liquor to excess and ganja to excess also. He was of the Talavia caste. I don't know whether he took either liquor or ganja in excess before that occasion. I attribute the case to ganja because he smoked that drug immediately before he became incohe- rent. I don't know if any of his companions suf- fered on the same occasion. He was not cured for 1 ½ months during which he was brought to my dispensary by his relations every third or fourth day. The last time I saw him he was im- proving. I made no further enquiry, but accepted the account given by his relations. 88. Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT SHAIK SURFRAZ HAKIM, Nasik. 1. I have been at many places in the Bombay Presidency, and specially at Yeola, Chikodi, Sholapur and Nasik for long time, where ganja and bhang consumers were under my observation and treatment. 2. These drugs are known by the same name in this presidency also. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking. Powdered ganja is mixed in sweetmeat to make it little intoxicating. It is also mixed in bhajias, which are fried and then eaten as luxuries. Majum also contains ganja or bhang. 23. As far as I know, bhang is not generally used for smoking. 28. (a) It is said that the average allowances of ganja is half an ounce in weight, and half an anna worth. (b) Ditto 3 ounces in weight, and of 3 ½ annas worth. (a) Bhang is used daily by habitual moderate consumers half an ounce in weight, costing half anna, (b) Ditto by habitual excessive consumer, one ounce in weight, costing I anna 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja; dhatura, opium and nux vomica are also mixed with ganja to make the effect more powerful by a few excessive ganja smokers, and especially by ascetics. I have not heard or seen cantharides and betel-nut so used. The following are the ingredients of bhang massala:171 89. Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT PURSON SINGH CHATTRY, Sholapur. 1. I am an Hospital Assistant serving in the Civil Medical Branch for nearly twenty-five years. I have served in Gujarat, Sind, and have had good association with the Punjabis in whom the use of this drug is general. 2. The same names are given here, and two kinds, namely, bhang and ganja, are sold here. One more form of bhang is sold and consumed in the form of sweetmeat (confection) called majum or yakuti. The bhang is mixed with several of the medicated confections called pak. 19. Yes. 23. No. 28. Bhang, up to tola. Ganja, up to tola. Habitual moderate consumer ½ 1 172 47. The habit is not hereditary. The children of these consumers are nervous, weak in stamina, and prone to convulsions and hydrocephalus. 48. The habit is not hereditary. The children of the excessive consumers are more nervous, more weak in stamina, and more prone to convulsions and hydrocephalus. 49. It is used as an aphrodisiac; but I have no information to answer on other points. 50. As stated in column 49. 56. Both in moderation and excess the admix- ture of other substances is made use for heighten- ing the effects. 57. I have no instances of ganja and charas ever being eaten or drunk. In conclusion I think if the Government pro- hibit the cultivation and sale of hemp and its pre- parations, the people who have caught the habit of these drugs may begin to use alcohol, which will be a bad substitute. The hemp drug and its preparations are in no way beneficial, but injurious to the system, even in moderation, which is almost impossible to keep. I fear alcohol is sure to come in substitution, and prefer to keep the matter as it is. Victims of these preparations want something to quench their thirst, and they must use anything that they may come across. They cannot control their minds, as the will power is already lost in these cases. Oral evidence. Question 1.173 I don't think any particular class has any pre- ferential liking as to any particular mode of using it. Some smoke some use it as a beverage, and others eat it in the shape of sweetmeat, such as majum, yakuti, etc., etc., just to suit their indi- vidual taste and convenience. Bhang is not smoked. The use of these narcotics does not seem to be on the increase in this district. Vicious habits of life, bad associations, imita- tions, urban life, indolence, want of other accus- tomed stimuli, etc., lead to the use of the drug. Minimum cost is a pice or two per diem for the habitual moderate consumer, and from 2 to 6 annas is the maximum cost for an habitual exces- sive consumer. I don't believe dhatura is ever mixed with it to enhance its effects. The male sex generally use the drug. A few females also use it. It is not given to children, especially in this part of the country. The habit is easily formed and when once formed, it is very difficult to leave it off. I don't think it feasible to prohibit the use of the drug. Moral instructions may have a prohi- bitive effect. Ganja smoker is generally quiet, while a drunk- ard is very boisterous, mischievous and smells of the liquor. Both are injurious to the health in like degree. I believe both the smoking and eating of the drug are injurious. The drug is used medicinally both by native and European practitioners. It is used also in cattle diseases. The moderate use of the drug when used medi- cinally does have a beneficial effect, but as a habit it is not beneficial. (a) Ganja increases appetite, and aids diges- tion to a certain extent when used medicinally. (b) It does have some staying-power under severe exertion. It may have prohibitive effect against exposure. (c) I don't think it is a prophylactic against malaria. (d) It is only good as a medicine. I consider even its moderate use is harmful, as it affects the brain and by degrees leads to its ex- cessive use. The moderate consumers are generally inoffen- sive to their neighbours. The immediate effect of its moderate use is intoxicating, exhilarating and refreshing. It ex- cites hunger. Its after-effects are laziness, erratic habits, mental aberration and cough. It does produce dry cough eventuating in bronchitis, asthma, but it does not seem to produce dysentery so far as my experience goes. Its long continued use diminishes the quantity of blood in the system, that it produces anæmia. It does im- pair moral sense, induce laziness, and leads to habits of debauchery. It does produce insanity of a permanent character to an appreciable extent. I have no data to say that the habit is inherited. It is used as an aphrodisiac. It does not seem to produce impotency, but a long continued and excessive use is likely to bring on impotence. Some prostitutes use it. Bad livers do use the drug, but its moderate use is not likely to lead to crime. To my knowledge the use of the drug has not produced, in any case, homicidal frenzy. 91. Evidence of GANESH KRISHNA GARDE,* Brahmin, Medical Practitioner, Poona City. 1. A medical practice extended over a period of fifteen years and a special study of the subject from botanical, pharmaceutical, physiological and sanitary points of view have afforded me many opportunities of obtaining the necessary informa- tion. 2. Yes, the same names are applied to these products in this province. 3. In many districts of this presidency the hemp plant is occasionally found growing spon- taneously, but not abundantly. 4. The female plant (called erroneously nar or male by people) is known as ganja, and the male plant (very rarely found wild and never cultivated in this province, and erroneously termed madi or female) is called bhange-che-jhad. These names always refer to the same plant. 5. Wild hemp is known to grow in all tem- perate and tropical regions with a moderate rainfall and from the level of the sea up to an elevation of 10,000 feet. 6. Scattered in this province. 7. It is cultivated chiefly in Khandesh, Ahmed- nagar and Sholapur districts of this presidency, and to a very small extent in Poona, Satara, Surat, Broach and Nasik districts for the produc- tion of ganja only. 8. Recently there has, been a considerable de- crease in the area under hemp cultivation on account of great restrictions placed on the cultiva- tion, preparation, and sale of the drug by Govern- ment. 9. The soil selected for the purpose is a light sandy loam or rich black soil free from the shade of large trees. It is ploughed eight or ten times in April, and after thus freeing it from all weeds it is manured with cowdung. After setting in of the rains the ploughing is again repeated and the soil thrown into ridges a foot high, the furrows being a foot in breadth. The seedlings, which are reared for the purpose in a nursery, are transplanted on the ridges prepared for their reception six or eight inches apart from each other. The preparation of the nursery generally commences at the end of May after the first shower of rain, and by the end of September the seedlings are six or twelve inches high and are then ready for trans- plantation. About four or five seers of seed are necessary for every bigha of land to be cultivated with hemp. The plants are trimmed in November. This operation consists in lopping off the lower * Was deputed as a delegate by the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha.
174 branches so as to favour the upward growth of the shoots. The ridges are again redressed and man- ured, the furrows ploughed and all weeds removed. At this stage the plants begin to form their flowers when the services of an expert are called in for cutting down all the male plants colloquially known as madi (female). This operation is most essential for he production of ganja, for the pre- sence of a single male plant in the field is sufficient to fertilize all the plants in the field, and the ganja yielded by theme is then very inferior and scarcely saleable. 10. No; the cultivators of hemp are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 13. Almost restricted to Khandesh, Ahmed- nagar and Sholapur districts. These were selected on account of the rich black soil free from shade, dry sunny climate, and moderate rainfall. Ganja is cultivated in other districts to a small extent. Ganja can be only produced on the plains of tropi- cal India with a moderate amount of rainfall, and a dry sunny climate from sea-level up to an eleva- tion of about 4,000 feet, the soil being a light sandy loam, rich black or greyish white. 14. Out of these three, only ganja is prepared in this province especially in Ahmednagar, Shola- pur, and Khandesh districts, and to a small extent in Broach, Surat, Poona, and Satara districts. 16. Bhang is not generally prepared by the people in their houses in this part of the presidency. It is said to be prepared from wild hemp in Cen- tral and North-Western Provinces, the Punjab, Madras and Bengal, and also from the cultivated plant in some parts of these presidencies. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown, although the narcotic principle is not developed to the same extent everywhere; ganja and charas are not known to be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 17. In this province the preparation of ganja is not restricted to any particular classes, but in Bengal the majority of the cultivators are said to be Muhammadans. With regard to the other two preparations I am not definitely informed. 18. Yes; all of them deteriorate by keeping. They lose a good deal of their effect in time. With ordinary care they keep good for two years. The causes of deterioration seem to be decomposition of the resinous principle and evaporation of the vola- tile oil which is said to be one of the active ingre- dients of ganja and bhang. I think deterioration can be prevented by keeping the drugs well pro- tected from air and moisture. It is probable that charas being the active principle of the plant may keep longer than either bhang or ganja. 19. Ganja and chards are used only for smok- ing in Northern India; but in this province, and probably in many other parts of Southern India, ganja is also taken internally in the form of majum, yakuti, shrikhand and gulkand, and as a drink called " ghota," which here takes the place of a similar preparation of bhang used in Northern India. The mode of preparing these forms of hemp confectionery in this province is as follows:175 But Mr. Hem Chandra, Kerr believes the state- ment to be incorrect. 24. In Northern India bhang is eaten in the form of a powder or confection by people addicted to sensual pleasures and taken as a beverage by all classes of people especially by the Sikhs in the Punjab and by a very large proportion of the population in the North-Western Provinces. Its use is said to be on a decrease in Bengal. It is also used both in eating and thinking in Central Provinces to a considerable extent. In Southern India it is very rarely used, the " chur " being generally substituted for it. The proportion how- ever of bhang-drinkers (whether they use chur or bhang) to the entire population in Southern India is extremely insignificant, and the number, small as it is, is almost confined to a few large cities in this presidency only. Here, as well as in Northern India, bhang drinking is not looked upon so disreputable as ganja or charas smoking and so it finds favour with higher classes. 25. It would appear from Government reports that the area of hemp cultivation for the produc- tion of ganja is everywhere on a decrease during the last decade as compared with the previous years. In Bengal the successive increases of duty since 1864 have resulted in reducing the consump- tion of ganja by 27 per cent., notwithstanding the increase of population since that year. The same may be said to be the case here. Besides Gov- ernment restriction by increased duty, another reason why ganja smoking shows a tendency to decrease is to be found in the fact that liquor is taking its place. Alcohol seems to attract people with intoxicating tendencies more than ganja. A. reference to the reports of the Abkari Department conclusively proves this by showing that there is every year an enormous increase in the revenue realised from toddy and country liquors. 27. Ganja and charas smokers are found generally among the lower classes, and bhang drinkers among all classes. The habits of life or circumstances which mainly lead to the practice may be summed up in the following few words:176 same conclusion will be forced upon our mind. We know from the history of cultured plants that the poppy plant is not a native of India and that its intoxicant juice was not known here or in China before the 10th century A. C. It further tells us that the Arabians first brought it from Greece, its native place, and cul- tivated it in Turkey in Asia, and that from thence the followers of Islam introduced it into the east- ern countries. It spread along with their religion and soon became acclimatised in India. The Muhammadans cherished it exceedingly, because in it they found a good substitute for alcohol, the use of which was forbidden to them by their reli- gion. It found favour with the Chinese for a similar reason, for their new religion Budhism more than even Muhammadanism condemned the use of alcohol. It was under these circumstances that the Chinese came to be possessed of that un- surpassed love for opium for which they are well known. We thus see that the prohibition of alcohol by religion among the Chinese and the followers of Islam was followed by recourse to opium in these two nations. Legislation, like the commands of religion, may prohibit the use of a particular intoxicant but it cannot destroy the passion for intoxicants, and consequently the pro- hibition of one kind of intoxicant always leads men to resort to another. 36. Yes; the reply to this question has been anticipated in the foregoing remarks. This change in the appetite of intoxication is partly at least the result of the fashion of imitation. 37. The intoxication of charas is more instan- taneous but less lasting than that produced by ganja. Its use is said to be less injurious than that of ganja. It is said also that its want never causes any longing or uneasiness. 38. If there be any difference at all, it must be one of degree and not in kind. Round ganja is said to contain more resin than the flat variety (if I may use the term), while the " chur " de- rived from it during the process of manufacture and packing is said to be, when recent, more powerful than the other two forms. It however soon gets deteriorated by keeping and hence is generally rejected by good smokers. 39. Taking the same preparation and the same dose, smoking may be said to be less injurious than eating or drinking, for the simple reason that a portion of the active principle is burnt up and decomposed before it reaches the blood. But if the effects of smoking one preparation in a particular dose be compared with the effects of drinking or eating any other preparation in a different dose, the result will vary according to the preparation and the dose. By way of illus- trating the first statement, I might say that the effects of smoking a drachm of ganja are less injurious than the effect of eating or drinking the same quantity of it, and so also with charas and bhang. To render the second statement more defi- nite and complete, I might say that the dose being the same, the effects of smoking ganja and charas are worse than the effects of eating or drinking bhang, and that quite the reverse will be the case if we compare the effects of smoking a small dose, say about 10 grains, of ganja or charas with the effects of drinking or eating a large quantity, say an ounce of bhang. 40. Bhang is prescribed medicinally by many native doctors, and both bhang and ganja are used in the treatment of cattle disease. Ganja is also prescribed by native doctors but not for internal use, but only as a fumigation to piles and inhalation in asthma. In connection with the use of hemp drugs by native doctors it would not be out of place if I say a few words regarding the history of the narcotic and when it came to be introduced into native medicine. I think it the more important to do so, because there seems to prevail a mistaken notionab out this subject. I find it mentioned by Mr. Hem Chunder Kerr, for instance, in his report on ganja in 1877, that the narcotic property of the hemp plant was known in India as early as 3,000 years ago. He cites some authorities from the Atharva Veda to fortify his statement. Led by his statement, perhaps, the Government of India in their letter to the Secretary of State for India dated the 9th August 1892 observe: "In India, on the other hand, the practice of ganja-smoking has existed from time immemorial, etc." A similar account is given by Dr. Watt in his " Dictionary of the Eco- nomic Products of India", under article Cannabis sativa. I have studied the question from a his- torical point of view, and after a careful research made in that direction by referring to the ancient medical literature of India and to such Vedic and post-Vedic passages as seem to refer to the plant, I have arrived at the conclusion that the narcotic properties and preparations of hemp, as they are understood to-day, were not known in India until a very recent date; that whatever interpretation be put on the words bhanga or bhangâ mentioned in the earlier works from the Atharva Veda down to the institutes of Manu, or the Ayurveda of Sushrut, one thing is certain, that even if the word did really refer to the true hemp plant, the latter was only cultivated for its fibre; charas and ganja were not known at all, and the hemp plant that was cultivated did not yield bhang, the nar- cotic principle developed in its leaves and capsules being too scanty to be noticed by the people as it is in the hemp plant of Europe to-day. The facts upon which I have based this conclusion are as follows:177 celebrated works on medicine is itself a great proof of the fact that it was not known in India in their time. (2) Although the word bhanga occurs in Atharava Veda, Kaushitaki Brahman, Sutras of Panini and the Institutes of Manu, there is not the least evidence to show that it meant the narcotic Cannabis indica. There is not the slightest reference, direct or implied, to the narcotic pro- perties of the plant in any of the passages of these works in which the word is found. In Atharva Veda it is simply mentioned along with Soma, Darbha and Yava. Panini refers to it as cul- tivated in fields (evidently for its fibre and seed). Manu and Kaushitaki Brahmana refer to it as a source of fibre. Later Sanskrit commentators and lexicographers interpret bhang as shana or Bengal sunn plant, Crotalaria juncea which has been known in India from times immemorial as a plant yielding fibre and cultivated for that purpose, and is, beyond doubt, a native of India. Now, whether those lexicographers are right in identify- ing bhang with Crotalaria juncea, or not, one thing is certain, that the plant referred to as bhang in ancient literature was a fibre-yielding plant (Cannabis sativa or Crotalaria juncea), and not the narcotic plant, the Cannabis indica of to-day; that, in other words, even if Cannabis sativa was cultivated in the times of the Atharva Veda or Panini, it was simply for the fibre or the seed, which, as will be shown elsewhere, was then used as food among the poorer classes, and that the narcotic element of the plant was in those days, and in those regions inhabited by the then San- skrit-speaking Aryans, was as little developed as it is to this day in the European variety of hemp. (3) This conclusion is further supported by the fact that there are no Sanskrit names for ganja or charas, and that all the words used by recent Sanskrit medical authors, such as Vijayá, Mádini, etc., to designate bhang and ganja, are newly coined, as they are not mentioned in any of the Sanskrit lexicons from Amarkosha down to Medini. They are not even mentioned by any of the medical Nighantus (lexicons) of an earlier date than that of Madanapal, who lived in the fourteenth century A.C. It is only in later medical works dating at most from the fourteenth century downwards, that the word ganja is applied to hemp narcotics (the leaves or bhang and the flowering tops being not distinguished). In classical Sanskrit the word means a liquor house. (4) The history of the hemp plant also points to the same conclusion. De Candolle says: " The species has been found wild to the south of the Caspian Sea, in Siberia, in the desert of the Kirghiz, beyond Lake Bâikal and in Dahuria." He thinks that its area may have extended into China, but is not sure about the plant being indigenous to Persia, Bossier mentions it as quite wild in Persia, and it appears to he almost wild in the Western Himalayas and Kashmir. Observ- ations of these naturalists together with the description of hemp given by Herodotus, who tells us that the ancient Scythians were acquainted with the narcotic properties of the hemp plant as well as with its fibre, and that they excited themselves by inhaling its vapour, would seem to fix the ancestral home of the plant somewhere in Central Asia. From thence the plant seems to have been introduced for its fibre and seed into the country occupied by the ancient Aryans to the north-west of the Punjab, where it became acclimatised at a comparatively remote date. I say it was first introduced for its fibre and seeds, because the grammarian Panini includes it under Dhânya, edible grains cultivated in fields (Pan. V. 2,4). The word used to designate it is bhanga. In his time the plant was similar to the Euro- pean variety on account of the mode of cultiva- tion and the nature of soil and climate. It would not be very difficult to understand how it could be so, when we consider that even to this day the Indian plant varies according to climate and soil in as marked a degree as it differs from the European. While on the Himalayas it yields a good fibre used by the hillmen for a coarse garment and for cord- age; in Kashmir and Ladakh it secretes charas. Cultivated on the plains, the same plant yields ganja, and growing wild on the lower slopes of the Himalayas and other parts of Northern India it affords bhang. The ganja produced in different parts of India also differs considerably in its narcotic property, the proportion of the resin in it ranging from 1.5 to 14 per cent. This varying character of the plant renders the supposition more than probable that the bhanga of ancient literature represented the European variety of Cannabis sativa, and thus accounts for its not being mentioned by ancient Sanskrit medical writers as a narcotic and for its being reckoned by Panini among edible grains. (5) Our conclusion is further corroborated by the fact that Hueu Tsiang, the Chinese traveller of the seventh century, in his description of the manners, customs, habits, food and drink, etc., of the people of India in those days, does not make the slightest allusion to the use of hemp narcotics among any portion of the population, although he refers to alcoholic drinks and some other beverages then in common use. We thus see that the statements made by various authors with regard to the antiquity of the use of hemp narcotics in India are incorrect. The date of introduction of these narcotics in India cannot, in my opinion, go back beyond the thirteenth century A. C. Even to this day these narcotics have not made their way to any great extent in Southern India, where charas is hardly known by name, bhang scarcely ever drunk, and ganja only smoked by a very insignificant portion of the population. 41. Yes, it is very likely to be beneficial in the several ways indicated, although the term food may be objectionable to any form of the drug. (a) Bhang is used as a digestive and cooling beverage by the people of Northern India in the hot season, and, in the form of powder as a digestive and stimulant in the cold season. In the hot season it counteracts the depressive and enervating effects of the parching heat of North-Western and Central Provinces and Ben- gal, and in the cold season it counteracts the effects of cold by stimulating the circulation and increasing nervous activity. It is used by baira- gis, gosavis and fakirs for purposes mentioned under (b) and (c), and also by labourers for those mentioned under (b). In all these cases the moderate habitual use of the drug is referred to. 42. Whether beneficial or not, the moderate habitual use of any of these drugs must be harm- less, because a moderate dose is not known to pro- duce any special deleterious action on any of the organs, all the bad effects which are seen among smokers of ganja or drinkers of bhang being vol. vii. 2 c
178 generally traceable to an excessive indulgence in their habit. 43. Yes, quite inoffensive. 44. The effect of moderate use on a habitual consumer is refreshing and slightly intoxicating. It is said to increase hunger. The effect of smok- ing charas lasts about an hour or two, that of ganja smoking for two or three hours and that of drink- ing bhang lasts from six to twelve hours. The only after-effects are thirst and dulness of spirit. The want of subsequent gratification does produce a little longing and uneasiness, but not in the case of charas. 45. (a) No. I have seen many moderate con- sumers of bhang and ganja in quite a good health, physical, mental, and moral. (b), (c), (d) and (e) No. (g) I do not think that sufficient consideration has been given to the fact under question. 46. The habitual excessive use of any of these drugs does produce all the bad effects indicated in the above queries. I have seen several cases of asthma and insanity produced by excess in ganja and a few cases of dyspepsia, dysentery and insanity by indulgence in bhang. Hemp insanity does not partake of any particular nature. I have seen melancholia, dementia, acute mania and some forms of monomania produced by ganja smoking. 47. The habit is very likely to be hereditarily transmitted to children. 48. Children of habitual immoderate consumers would be affected in various ways. But as I have no instances to quote, I can't say anything further upon this point. 49. Yes, all these are used for aphrodisiac pur- poses, but more especially the conserves of bhang, as majum, etc., are so used. Also by prostitutes. Thus used it is more injurious than as an ordinary narcotic, simply because it always leads to con- jugal excess and thus drains the system and is also a cause of impotence brought on by the excess. 50. The same remarks apply to the excessive use with greater force. 51. A certain number of bad characters are in this province habitual consumers of these drugs, but the proportion can't be said to be large when compared with alcoholic stimulants. The moder- ate use of these drugs cannot be said to have any connection with crime of any sort. 52. The same answer applies to the first part of the question. The excessive habitual use deranges the intellectual faculties, but I don't think that the moral faculties are specially affected so as to excite to crime. 53. As for the first part of the question, I don't think so, but with regard to the second part, I have read a case in Chever's Medical Jurisprudence for India in which a man was convicted of having murdered another by strangling him while in a state of intoxication from the effects of bhang. 54. Rarely. 55. Yes, they generally administer majum or some other hemp confectionery for that purpose. Complete stupefaction can be induced by a large dose of the drug without admixture. 56. Dhatura, nux vomica, and opium are some- times added to bhang in majum and other sweet- meats in some parts of Northern India. The virulence of the preparation is greatly increased by dhatura and opium; the former is known to cause loss of speech in some cases. Nux vomica increases the aphrodisiac power of the drug. Used in excess, these admixtures lead to grave conse- quences, in some cases even proving fatal. 57. I don't know that charas is used internally in any part of India. The internal use of ganja in this province in the form of majum and other hemp sweetmeats and that of broken ganja as a substitute for bhang in the preparation of the beverage called " ghota," has been already fully dealt with under question 19. The use of the broken ganja for preparing the drink is most injurious, producing insanity, diarrh179 flat and round kinds of ganja are manufactured in this presidency. Question 23.180 32. I regret to say that I have no experience of any such customs. 36. I believe alcohol is being substituted for the hemp drugs. The cause of the substitution may be the facility in obtaining the former. I can give no proof. I have known the class of Gorawallas, who were once consumers of bhang, giving up the habit and drinking spirits instead. 37. I have no experience of charas. 39. I have said above that I have known the class of Gorawallas drinking bhang. I have also known them to smoke ganja, and I think smoking is less injurious than drinking. I cannot go further than this. 40. I do not know. 41. Yes; in all four ways. 42. Yes; I have known Brahmins, Marwaris, Gorawallas and the class of halalcores, called also bhangis from their habitual use of bhang, who use these drugs in moderation and are useful servants, are not worse than those who drink spirits habitually in moderation. 44. I believe the immediate effect of the moderate use of these drugs on the habitual con- sumer to be refreshing, exhilarating, allaying hunger and creating appetite. Their effect lasts about a couple of hours. There are no bad after- effects, nor does their want produce any uneasi- ness. I have known individuals who have given up the habit with great facility. 45. I do not think so. 46. Excessive habitual use of these drugs is always injurious. I have known persons impair- ing both their body and mind by the habitual excessive use of the drugs. 47. I do not think so. 48. I believe it affects the children of the exces- sive consumers. 49. Yes; Garcia d'Orta also mentions. it, but does not believe in its efficacy. It is a false notion. I have heard of its producing impotence, but probably it was not the sole cause. 50. I have heard that the excessive use produces impotence, but have not observed any typical case. 56. I am sorry I cannot tell. 57. I have mentioned that a confection of hemp ganja called majum is eaten, called by Garcia d'Orta tetuario de maju, or majum electuary. I also know of a native beer, called bhoj, used in the Deccan. It is brewed from jowari grain malted to which bhang is added. My experience is extremely limited in this case. Of charas I know nothing. 93. Evidence of EDALJI NASHIRVANJI, Parsi, Medical Practitioner, Bombay. 1. Observation in medical practice. 19. Ganja and charas are mostly used for smoking. They are also used as medicine by vaids and hakims, and administered internally. 23. Not to my knowledge. 28. A moderate smoker smokes about 3 or 4 grains of ganja twice a day; an excessive smoker about 10 grains. About 20 grains of ganja cost a quarter of an anna. A moderate consumer takes about 8 grains of bhang, an excessive consumer about double the weight. 29. Ganja is often smoked mixed with tobacco. Bhang massala is said to contain bhang, almonds, pepper, rose petals, anise seeds, cardamoms, and poppy seeds. 30. Only the male sex uses them. It is not usual for childern to consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed in company. Some people keep on the same quantity for a length of time. Others gradually increase the quantity. 37. The effects of charas and ganja smoking are the same; perhaps a little different in degree. The effect of drinking bhang is at first a little stimulating. 40. Bhang and ganja are used as medicine by native doctors. Bhang is given to cattle as medicine for diarrh181 quently used, but not mixed with hemp drug. It causes also the exhilaration. 30. The two cases mentioned occurred in the males only. 31. From the limited observations it is not difficult to break the habit off. 39. The two cases referred in another place tend to show that ganja and bhang have a distinct weakening effect upon the mind or a tendency towards producing insanity. This is the opinion of many natives. 41. (a) Some people say that it excites appetite. (b) and (c) No, so far as my enquiries and observations go. 42. It appears from enquiries that moderate use of hemp drug leads in time to immoderate use. The young men, finding that the moderate use causes sexual excitement, increase the dose. 56. I have already stated why the admixture of opium and dhatura is given. 95. Evidence of BHALCHANDRA KRISHNA BHATAVADEKAR, Brahmin, Medical Prac- titioner, Bombay. 1. During the twenty years of my professional experience in Bombay and out of Bombay I have had opportunities of gathering information on this subject from books and from my contact with people of various shades of life, such as those who use these intoxicants either occasionally or habi- tually. 2. I believe these definitions may be accepted for this province. They are locally known thus:182 tempt. Both social and religious public opinion is against the use of these drugs, especially the sect of the Swami Narayen Pantha in Gujarat and Kathiwad. The ganja smoker is particularly looked upon with indifference. 34. I am strongly of opinion that it will be a serious privation to deprive the habitual consumers of the drugs, because it is a necessary of life with many and a luxury with others, which would ultimately lead to discontent. 35. I don't believe it will be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs. It will be consumed illicitly. The prohibition will, I believe, cause serious discontent amongst the consumers which may spread amongst the other class and may lead to undesirable results. The prohibition may lead to the use of alcoholic stimulant or to the use of opium, at least in the case of some of those who have no religious scruples. It would be impolitic to restrict the use. 36. I believe alcohol is now to a large extent being substituted for these drugs, especially bhang. I am not able to produce any proof in support of the statement, It is only my belief. 37. Charas is not so much in vogue as ganja in these parts; still some persons use it, and from observations it is known that the effects of charas smoking are to a certain extent different to those of ganja smoking. Ganja produces for a time a refreshing or exhilarating effect, and then drow- siness, while charas produces drowsiness immediate- ly and then insensibility. There is also a marked difference in the duration of the effect; that for charas lasts for several hours, while that for ganja is not much prolonged. 39. I don't believe the smoking of these drugs is less injurious; perhaps it is more injurious than the drinking. My reason for holding this opinion is that the smoking process is more rapid by the absorption of the narcotic principles of the drugs, and the poison is at once and directly brought into contact with the lungs, the blood and the nervous system; while the drinking process affects the system through digestive organs. 40. Bhang and ganja are often prescribed by the vaidyas and hakims in fevers, dysentery, diarrh183 96. Evidence of ISMAIL JAN MOHOMED, Khoja, Physician, Bombay. 1. During my practice of eight years I have come across several patients using the drug in one form or the other. 2. Charas is also known as bhongus ras (Guz- rati), and bhang itself is called thandai in Urdu. 4. Arabic184 97. Evidence of ARDESIR DADABHOY MODY, Parsi, J.P., Member, Municipal Corporation, Medical Practitioner, Bombay. 1. My practice is among the natives of Bombay, and especially among the Parsis. (My evidence is as regards the Parsis of Bombay only.) 2. Bhang, charas, ganja. 20. The Parsis as a rule do not smoke. I do not know of any Parsi who smokes ganja or charas. 23. Generally bhang is not used for smoking. 26. A very few Parsis used bhang occasionally in a very small dose made up into a sweet drink with milk, sugar, almonds, &c.; but that practice is much on the decrease. 29. Dhatura was never used by the Parsis to make up the bhang drink. 30. The bhang drink was used in company, and it was only by the male sex. Never given by the Parsis to children. 31. By taking bhang drink occasionally and in very small doses, no habit is formed. 32. There is no social or religious custom among the Parsis in which bhang is consumed. 33. The public opinion amongst the Parsis is very much against the use of bhang. 34. It would not be any privation to the Parsis to forego the consumption of the drug. 43. Occasional moderate consumers are inoffen- sive to their neighbours. 44. It produces intoxication. It does not allay hunger, except taken with milk, etc. The after- effects are laziness and inaptitude for work, and want of sleep and appetite. The want of subse- quent gratification produces longing and uneasi- ness. 45. (b) and (c) Yes. (d) It causes dysentery and other derange- ments of the bowels. (e) It induces laziness. (f) It deadens the intellect and produces insanity, as imbecility, which has a tendency to be permanent. 47. Not hereditary. The children are weak. 49. The use of hemp tends to produce impot- ence. 98. Evidence of UTTAMRAM JEEWANRAM, ITCHAPOORIA, Audesh, Brahmin, Native Doctor (Vaidya), Bombay and Surat. 1. My experience obtained as a vaidya. 2. The definitions of Dr. Prain may be ac- cepted. Round ganja I have never seen. I know broken ganja as " garda," and broken bhang as " bhuki." Ganja is known to me by the names of ganja and mala. Charas is known as charas. Bhang is known as vijaya, subji, maya, lillaghur, dyanvalli, and patti. 7. There is cultivation of the hemp plant in the Surat district, which is my home, (a) for ganja, (c) for bhang, (d) for seeds. At Bhatta, a village in the Surat district. I know also that the hemp plant is cultivated for bhang at Diva and Devi villages, near Anklesh- war in the Broach district. 9. The seeds are sown in the months of Shrawan and Bhaderwa. They are sown like jowari. The plant is ready in six or seven months after the sowing of the seed. The plants are not irri- gated. 10. No special class cultivates the hemp plant for narcotics in my district. 14. (a) Ganja is prepared and (c) bhang is pre- pared in Bhatta in the Surat district, and Dewa and Devi in the Broach district. 17. Kolis and Kunbis. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping. They lose some of their narcotic properties. In time they quite lose their narcotic effects. Ganja will keep good for about two years, and bhang for one year, with ordinary care. I attribute deteri- oration to the absorption of moisture from the at- mosphere. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smoking. I do not know whether either is used for any other purpose. 20. Ganja is smoked by Brahmins, Wanis, Kunbis, Ghanchis, and sadhus. It is also smoked by Muhammadans and fakirs. Some of the Burmese staying at present at Rander also smoke ganja. Charas is mostly smoked by Muhammad- ans, fakirs, and few sadhus and Kunbis. 21. Round ganja is not obtainable here. Flat ganja is used here for smoking. 22. I have no personal knowledge of charas, and I cannot say whether the charas used in Bombay is native or foreign. In the Surat district charas is very little used. 23. Bhangs is never used for smoking. It is, however, used as medicine, for vapour purposes in piles, and in the case of irritation of rectum and vagina. 24. Bhang is chiefly used for drinking. It is very rarely eaten. Hindus of almost all classes and Muhammadans drink bhang. Bhang is commonly used in Central Provinces, Guzarat, Marwar, Gokul, Mathura. 25. I think the use of ganja, bhang, and charas is on the decrease in the Surat zilla. I do not know whether the use of these drugs is on the increase or decrease in other provinces. I attribute the decrease in the consumption of these drugs here to two causes, firstly, the spread of education, and secondly, the want of company. 28. I am not in a position to answer this question. 29. Ganja is ordinarily smoked with or without tobacco. I have seen one man preparing cigarette of ganja and putting in it little opium and saffron. Ink bhang ordinarily pepper is mixed, and exception- ally cardamoms, rose buds, anise, poppy seeds,
185 saffron, musk, almond, pista, charoli, sugar, and milk. I know sometimes shaloo jowari roots (the roots of jowari cultivated in the cold season) are mixed with bhang to increase its narcotic effect; and in ganja, dhatura seeds are sometimes added to increase its narcotic effect. I know that a preparation, known as bhang mas- sala, is sold in the market, the ingredients of which are almost the same, which are exceptionally used in preparing bhang drink. 30. The consumption of these drugs is practised in solitude as well as in company. The use of these drugs is mainly confined to the male sex. Few of the women of sadhus and bawas use ganja. It is generally practised after 16 years of age. In childhood it is not practised. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. The jewellers give bhang, when specially prepared, to their children and women. In Navasari and in other parts of Gujarat and Central Provinces women on seldom occasions drink bhang. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs is easily formed. If the habit is of a long standing the man finds it difficult to break it off. The moderate habit is generally developed into exces- sive one. 32. There is no custom, social or religious, when the use of these drugs is essential. 33. The use of these drugs is in disrepute. The hemp plant is not worshipped by any people. 34. There will be no serious privation to the consumers to forego the use of these drugs. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. Consumers would for some time use the drugs illicitly. No doubt the consumers would be discontented, but such discontent will not amount to a political danger. Those who do not drink alcohol will not take to it, but will try to break off the habit. 36. I do not think that alcohol is substituted for these drugs to any extent. 37. The effect of charas is to stupefy the con- sumer. Ganja excites the man. 38. I do not know round ganja. The narcotic effect of fiat ganja is stronger than that of chur or broken ganja. 39. The smoking of ganja and charas is less in- jurious than drinking and eating the same. 40. I used bhang in pains, rheumatism, fevers loss of appetite, restlessness, burning symptoms in phthisis, dysentery, acute and chronic diarrh186 99. Evidence of KESHOWRAM HARIDAT, Chcepooria, Audesh Brahmin, Native Doctor (Vaidya), Render, Surat and Bombay. 1. My answers regarding the matters con- nected with hemp drugs are framed from the study of the medical books, from experience gained in the medical practice, and from the information obtained from the persons who use these drugs. 2. The definitions of Dr. Prain are correct, and may be accepted. I know bhang by the names of bhangro, vijaya, dyanvali, shankar priya, thandai, and patti. I know ganja by the name of shigra bodha. Charas is pronounced here as chadas. 3. The hemp plant does not grow spontaneously. The plant is required to be cultivated. The hemp plant is generally known by the name of bhang tree. Some of the bhang trees get flowers; these trees are called bhangro. These trees are pulled out from the field, as the existence of these trees spoils other plants. This flowering plant is male plant. 6. The growth of the wild hemp plant is scat- tered. Ganja prepared from the wild plant is known by the name of gurakh ganja. 7. Formerly there was cultivation of hemp plant in Bhattu and Kawas villages of the Surat district. At present there is no cultivation of hemp plant in those villages. These plants were cultivated for production of bhang only. Ganja and charas were not prepared. 8. I do not know anything about this ques- tion. 9. In May and June the land is ploughed, and at the beginning of the monsoon the seeds are sown, like jowari. After ten or twelve days after sowing, the plant comes out. After about one month the male plants begin to flower, when they are distinguished and pulled out; searching for the male plant lasts about three months. The plant is ready in six or seven months after the sowing of the seed. Then the plants are cut and dashed. The droppings then are cleaned and collected, which is then called bhang. 10. There is no special class of cultivators of the hemp plant for its narcotic properties. The ordinary cultivators who know the art cultivate hemp plant in the land fit for its cultivation. 11. The seed of the wild hemp is not used for cultivating the plant for the production of ganja. 15. I do not know whether different methods are adopted for preparing ganja, bhang, and charas from (a) the cultivated (b) and the wild plant for (A) smoking, (B) eating, and (C) drink- ing. 16. Hemp plant does not grow in the com- pounds of houses, and if at all any plant grows, bhang of that plant, if prepared, is not fit for drinking. Bhang cannot be prepared from the plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas are not prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 17. It is not prepared by all the cultivators, but those only who know the art prepare it. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping, and after one or two years they lose their narcotic effect and become quite useless. Ganja and bhang will keep good for two years, if stored air-tight, in a hot place. After two years, although kept in the above manner, they deteriorate. The causes of deterioration187 narcotic will take to alcohol, and those who could not take alcohol will leave the habit gradually. 37. The narcotic effects of charas are more than those of ganja. Charas is two or three times stronger than ganja. 38. Flat ganja has more narcotic effect in it than round ganja, and broken ganja has less nar- cotic effect in it than round ganja. 39. The smoking of ganja is less injurious than eating and drinking. 40. I use ganja and bhang on account of their medicinal qualities. Ganja is prescribed in colic pains and as sleeping draught. Bhang is prescrib- ed in venereal diseases and for passing urine, and in dysentery. 41. Ganja one-fourth of a tola, bhang one tola, and charas half wal, if taken, are beneficial as a food accessory. The use in such doses increases the strength, gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, and alleviates fatigue, and refreshes the consumer. In malarious and un- healthy tracts use of ganja protects the man from malarious attacks. The use of these drugs should only be practised for the above purposes, and should not be indulged in. 42. Ganja and bhang, though not beneficial, are not harmful to those who use them moderately. 43. The moderate consumers are not offensive to their neighbours, but when taken in excess, they become offensive. 44. The habitual moderate consumer of ganja feels refreshed after taking ganja. It produces very little intoxication on him. It increases appetite, and keeps the consumer in good humour. The intoxication lasts for about two to three hours, after which time want of subsequent gratification is produced, and if the man does not get ganja to smoke he feels uneasy. The consumers of bhang generally take bhang twice in a day, once in the morning and once in the evening. Bhang does not stop a man from his work. The intoxication of bhang lasts for about seven to eight hours. No longing for subsequent gratification is produced in the case of bhang. But the man feels dull after the intoxication is over. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja, bhang and charas does not for a long time produce any noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. 46. The habitual excessive use injures the di- gestion and causes loss of appetite. It causes bronchitis and asthma. It deadens the intellect and produces temporary insanity. Insanity is re-induced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. It spoils the moral character of the consumer. The typical symptoms of an insane from the use of these drugs are that he gets staring sight, his eyes become red, he gets forgetfulness and his voice is changed. 47. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not appear to be hereditary habit, or to affect in any way the children of the moderate consumers. 48. I do not know whether the excessive use of these drugs affects the children of the consumers or not. 49. Every narcotic is aphrodisiac, and I know these drugs are sometimes used for that purpose. 50. If these drugs are taken in excess as an aphrodisiac, they injure the constitution. 53. The excessive indulgence in these drugs does incite the consumer to commit unpremeditat- ed crime, and at times leads to temporary homi- cidal frenzy. 54. I know the criminals have used these drugs to fortify themselves to commit premedi- tated acts of violence. 55. The criminals do, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of these drugs and so stupefy them, and then rob them of their valuable things, and walk away leaving the victim on the spot. Complete stupefaction is brought on by these drugs without any admixture in the case of men who are not used to these drugs. 56. Tobacco is mixed with ganja to modify its effects. Nothing is added to bhang to modify its effects. Bhang, if taken in small doses, pro- duces but very little intoxication. Those who are excessive consumers, and when the drug does not produce intoxication, add dhatura seeds in ganja and old jowari roots in bhang to increase their narcotic power. 57. I have no information about this question. 58 to 70. The questions in this chapter relate to administration, taxation and control; and as I do not know the present system of administra- tion, I am unable to make any suggestion. 100. Evidence of MR. PURBHURAM JEEWANRAM, Nagar Brahmin, Native Doctor (Voidya), Bombay. 1. While practising medicine in the presidency of Bombay and the province of Kathiawar, accord- ing to the ancient Aryan system, I have had opportunities of gaining information in matters relating to hemp drugs. On many occasions I have used the drug in question in different medicinal preparations, and I have met with many patients of the class who use hemp drugs occasionally or habitually. 2. The definitions may be accepted. Hemp drugs are known here by the same names. We do not particularly distinguish between the different kinds of ganja. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated in many parts of the Bombay presidency. For use as bhang the plant is cultivated in Guzerat. Bhang is also imported from the Punjab. 9. The bhang plant is grown together with other grains. The seeds are sown broadcast. It is also grown in gardens and irrigated; this generally for personal use. 10. To my knowledge they do not form a special class. The plant is grown by the ordinary agri- cultural cultivators. 18. Hemp drugs do deteriorate by keeping, and in time they lose their effect. Bhang may be kept good for one year with care. I think the cause of deterioration to be exposure to air for a prolonged period. As far as I know, it is not possible to prevent deterioration taking place. vol. vii. 2 B 2
188 19. I do not know much about charas. Ganja is not only used for smoking, it is used also in medicines. A decoction of ganja, or sometimes an extract of ganja, is given to patients to induce sleep. It is used also in various preparations for nervine diseases. One of the preparations is made by mixing it with ghi, and it is then used as a tonic. 20. Sadhus and men of the lower class and poor men use ganja. The use is prevalent all over India. 24. Brahmins, Kshatryas and Vaishyas, both rich and poor, use bhang. People of the working classes also use bhang. Bhang is generally drunk; but it is eaten when it is inconvenient to prepare the drink. In the hot weather in hot climates all classes drink bhang. Scholars and priests, who are not allowed to use liquor as a stimulant, freely drink bhang. Dealers in precious stones, pearls and jewels drink bhang, as they consider the drink helps them in their examination of these articles. 25. With the advance of the natives of India in English education and ways of thought, and the influence of contact with Europeans, there has been generated amongst natives of the educated and lower class a taste for spirituous drinks. The inconveniences and trouble in preparing bhang, as contrasted with the ease with which liquor may be obtained and drunk, has stimulated the wide use of the latter, and decreased the consumption of bhang. I think the evil effects of spirit drink- ing are beginning to be felt, and that in the distant future bhang may be more extensively used than it is now. To vegetarians spirituous stimulants are altogether unsuitable. 27. In the Bombay presidency the jewellers and dealers in precious stones and pearls, who are mostly shrawak bauias, and originally from Surat, are habitual moderate consumers of bhang. Babus from Bengal and scholars and religious preachers, mostly high-caste Brahmins, are also habitual moderate consumers of bhang. Habitual exces- sive consumers of bhang will be found among the Brahmins, who perform religious rites in the temples and houses of the people. Occasional moderate bhang drinking is indulged in by men of all classes, high and low, rich and poor, with- out exception. 28. A moderate allowance of bhang is one- quarter tola, costing a quarter of an anna. This will serve for twice. An allowance of one tola of bhang or thereabout, costing about half an anna, is reckoned excessive. 29. In the ordinary preparation, which is generally used by habitual drinkers, black pepper and sugar are mixed, and the drink is made by mixing well rubbed bhang powder in water. When bhang is prepared by rich persons, and also when it is prepared on special occasions, sugar and pepper are invariably added, with almonds, pistachio nuts, chirongia-sopila, cinnamon, carda- moms, mace, nutmeg, saffron, musk, and conserve of roses. The ingredients added will depend on the means of the drinker and the occasion for which the drink is prepared. Dhatura, which is a strong narcotic, is not ordinarily mixed with bhang. 30. The habitual consumer of bhang and ganja uses these drugs when in company and also when alone. As regards bhang, it is generally drunk in the company of friends, and its use is not re- stricted to any sex or age. Women and children are allowed to use bhang according to their suit- abilities. Ganja is not used by women and child- ren. Bhang is not very commonly used by child- ren; but it may be given to them as a medicine in proper doses to their great benefit. 31. The habit is not easily formed; but much depends on the temperament of the man and his associates. The habit is not difficult to break off, except when of long standing. The moderate bhang and ganja consumer generally increases his allowance of the drug in time. It is always pos- sible for the bhang-drinker to check the habit at any time, unless it has taken very deep root. 32. Bhang is used on Shivaratri, a day consecrat- ed to the god Shiva, who is reported to be fond of bhang. It is also used on occasions when offerings are made to Baldeo, elder brother of the god Krishna, who, it is said, has an excessive partiality for the drug. The devotees of Baldeo divide the offerings made to the god among them- selves with great reverence, piety; and pleasure. Though the use of bhang in this manner cannot be said to be essential, as there are no strict scriptural injunctions for the same, yet, as these customs have acquired a time-honoured reference and religious belief, it would be most difficult to persuade men to the belief that the use is quite optional. In India, when foreign invasions by men of alien religions have resulted in the de- struction of many of the Hindu sacred works, cus- tom, strengthened by religious precept, has ob- tained such a strong hold on the minds of the people, that even the positive commands of the religious books are sometimes waived in favour of custom. I therefore think the use of bhang on such occasions is essential. Its use in this way is generally temperate, and not likely to lead to a habit with the consumer, and is never injurious to him. Offerings of bhang are made to the god Shiva, with a belief that it brings blessings to the offerer, and sometimes cures him of bodily diseases that he may be suffering from. In connection with ganja, such religious observ- ances as have been mentioned are not known to me. Its use, however, is thought to be essential to bairagis, to keep them from worldly thoughts, and to assist them in their contemplation of God. 33. Generally the consumption of bhang in mo- deration has no stigma attached to it, nor is the bhang drinker held in high respect. Its use is neither socially nor religiously prohibited in moder- ation, and public opinion is not averse to the prac- tice in this way. The use of ganja is held in dis- repute. The cause of this sentiment is that, ge- nerally, no great reliance can be placed on the man who makes himself senseless, and consequent- ly forgets promises that he has made. So far as I know, the hemp plant is worshipped nowhere. 34. It would certainly be a very serious priva- tion to all classes of consumers to forego the con- sumption of the drug they use. In India bhang is essentially necessary, both socially and medi- cally. People have, to their great advantage, used the drug till now, and a certain religious venera- tion on account of its being offered to the deities has caused them to regard it as a necessity which they can ill afford to forego. To merchants and jewellers, who are moderate consumers of the best sort of bhang, it would bring great mental trouble and vexation to forego the use of the drug which they have used for many generations, and which would prevent them from doing their business with ease and confidence. As bhang quickens the imagination somewhat, religious preachers, who
189 use bhang, would not be able to preach as well without it. Scholars and writers, who are in the habit of taking bhang before they set themselves to their work, would find themselves in grave difficulties without it. Bhang, when moderately indulged in, increases vigour and assists contem- plation. The use of spirituous drinks is not wholesome with the simple vegetable native diet. Only vegetable stimulants are best suited to our climate and diet. It would certainly be a serious affliction to the poor native to debar him from his native, uncostly, beneficial vegetable stimulant, which in some cases is a necessity to him. The continuous use of ganja by bairagis for several centuries has caused them to regard it as almost a necessity of their lives. At first it would be very hard for them to forego consump- tion, and they would regard it as a religious encroachment, not because they could not easily break off the habit, but because, without ganja, they would find it difficult to obtain a substitute to assist them in forgetting worldly pleasures and desires. 35. I do not think it would be possible to pro- hibit the use of ganja and bhang. People would most certainly do their utmost to get the drugs by any means. Illicit possession is not very im- possible, seeing that the plant is home-grown, and might easily be cultivated in enclosures about houses. If stringent measures of prohi- bition were adopted, there would be great discon- tent, as users of the drugs cannot well do without them. Prohibition could not be easily enforced, and, if enforced, those who are in the habit of using these stimulants would certainly try to obtain a substitute for them, and the consequence would be a resort to alcoholic stimulants, which are within easy reach of the people on account of the number of liquor shops in localities, towns, and villages. The using of liquor is socially and religiously prohibited, and it would at first be stealthily consumed; but sometimes exposure would follow, which would cause much dissatis- faction. 36. Natives with imperfect English education have begun to discard old beneficial usages, and, in imitation of the worst habits of Europeans, pride themselves in mistaken advanced views by using liquor, looking with disdain on the some what crude vegetable preparation of bhang. Many have been the premature decays of life and intellect on this account. 39. The smoking of a preparation of the hemp plant is not a less injurious form of consumption. Bhang is seldom or never known to be drunk in moderation with injurious effects. An overdose of bhang will simply cause a man to lie down, to experience a whirling sensation, to vomit, and to dream. A little acid acts as an antidote, or some- times a good dose of milk and ghi is an effectual cure. The individual is none the worse afterwards for his indiscretion. Excessive ganja smoking is bad and injurious; it weakens the nerves. 40. The use of these drugs has been prescribed, on account of their medicinal qualities, by the schools of native doctors. Madanpal and Nighanta have stated the properties and uses of these drugs in their medical books, as follows: 190 which often serves the consumer in ill-health as a valuable medicine, or prevents him from getting ill. Bhang is chiefly used by poor people, and to them every pie has its value. The tax, though not felt by the rich, is a burden on the poor. 68. In the city of Bombay there are licensed shops where bhang is prepared and consumed on the premises. The shop generally is in a small room on the road side, the furniture consisting of a mat, two or three lotas, and a stone slab on which the bhang leaves are made into a paste before the drink is prepared. The shopkeeper earns but sufficient for his maintenance. So far as I know, these shops are not known to have any ill name attached to them. The customers at these shops are not noisy or quarrelsome, and are seldom known to cause inconvenience to any one. These shops are not places resorted to by bad characters to concoct their plans; but this to some extent depends on the locality in which the shop is situated. 69. Local public opinion ought to be consulted. It would be beneficial to the people. Oral evidence. Question 46.191 28 As regards habitual moderate consumers192 41. The moderate use of ganja and bhang pro- duces an appetite for food, but constipates the bowels. This effect is produced both on the moderate habitual and moderate occasional con- sumer. 42. I consider the moderate use of these drugs to be harmful. Ganja produces headache and cough, and bhang pains in the stomach with con- stipation. 43. Moderate ganja and charas consumers are sometimes offensive to their neighbours by being noisy and abusive. Bhang drinkers are not offen- sive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of ganja and charas on the habitual consumer is refreshing; they produce slight intoxication; they create an appetite; and the effect lasts for about one hour. The immediate after-effects is a feel- ing of lassitude and dulness. The want of subse- quent gratification produces longing and uneasi- ness. As regards bhang, no immediate effect is produced. Intoxicating is produced after about one hour; the drinker feels refreshed; his appetite is sharpened, and the effect lasts about six hours. The after-effect is a slight lassitude, The want of subsequent gratification does produce a longing and uneasiness. The difference between bhang and garda is that the intoxicating effects of garda are greater than bhang. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja and charas produces noxious physical, mental and moral effects on the consumer to some degree. It impairs the constitution in time. It injures the digestion and causes loss of appetite in time. It causes asthma in time. The habitual moderate use of bhang or garda does not produce ill-effects like the smoking of ganja and charas. 46. The habitual excessive use of all hemp drugs is bad and harmful. The excessive use pro- duces noxious effects, physical, mental, 'and moral. 51 and 52. No large proportions of bad charac- ters in Bombay are habitual moderate or habitual excessive consumers of hemp drugs. 53. I do not know myself of any cases in which unpremeditated crimes violent or otherwise have been caused by the excessive indulgence in hemp drugs. I have known of a few cases of quarrel- ling, where the persons abused and struck each other with their hands in the ganja-smoking shops. I have never heard or known of quarrels in the bhang shops. 54. I do not know of any cases in which crimi- nals have made use of hemp drugs to fortify them- selves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55. I do not know of any cases in which crimi- nals have stupefied their victims with hemp drugs with a view to further their design in the com- mission of a crime. I do not know if complete stupefaction can be induced by any hemp drug without admixture with some other drug. 102. Evidence of RAMCHANDRA KRISHNA. KOTIIAVALE, Brahmin, Inamdur, Taluka Wai, in Satara District. 1. Having been an inhabitant of the district and having bad various opportunities of coming across people who are addicted to this vice and also knowing some of the cultivators of the hemp plant, I am to a certain extent in a position to record my experience before the Hemp Commis- sion. 2. Yes; the definitions above defined tally with the varieties known here. 3. None in the district I have been living in. None to my knowledge. 4. By the very names given in this pamphlet of questions. Yes; they do. 5. Dry climate, reddish black soil and ordinary rainfall are necessary to the growth of the wild hemp. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is somewhat scattered. 7. Yes; there is cultivation of hemp plant for production of ganja only in the district I live in. Hemp plant is cultivated in abundance in about ten villages in Khanapur taluka and in three villages in Khatav taluka and in isolated villages of Satara and Valva talukas. Lengre, Devikhind, Valet, Sangola and Bhad in Khanapur taluka are much famous for ganja. 8. There has been no large increase in the area under cultivation. In 1890-91 the area under cultivation amounted to about 41 acres of land. 9. Kind of soil.193 cal and about the size of mug seed. It is brought from Ahmadnagar traders. Method of sowing.194 in. the cities of Benares, Ayodya and Mathura is in its favour. There is bad social public opinion about ganja-smokers, and they are looked down upon by society. It is equally so by religions. Ganja-smoking is generally in disrepute, and it is because those people who smoke ganja get violent and often lose their heads and generally given up to one thing. Bhang or hemp plant is worshipped by one sect only, and it is people from Northern India and Nepal. 34. Yes; ganja smokers, if prohibited, lose their flesh, get emaciated and often get mad. They cannot do anything, work, mental or physical. They can never do without ganja smoke. But if Bhang-consumers are prohibited, it will not much affect their constitution; though for some time the want will be felt by them. But after a time they never feel for the prohibition. They get used. But it is not so with ganja. About 5 per cent. of the male population and 1½ per cent, of the female population smoke ganja. 35. Yes; it will be practicable to stop the use of any of these drugs, but it is not possible to consume the drug not illicitly. The prohibition can be enforced by making rules strict and getting the monopoly of the drug even from the Native States, just like alcohol and opium. It would cause discontent amongst the consumers, but it will not lead to any political danger. The pro- hibition would lead naturally to other stimulant drugs and to alcohol, but the alcohol would be expensive, and thus people would find difficult to use it, and so they will find out a cheaper drug, such as aconite, dhatura, arsenic, nux vomica seed, etc. 36. No; there is no reason for thinking that alcohol is now being substituted for any of these drugs; not only this, but it is said that a man accustomed to ganja smoke necessarily requires it though he takes alcohol. 37. The effects of charas smoking are different than those of ganja smoking. Charas is a strong- er drug to smoke than ganja. It is in its effect very obnoxious to system, more so than ganja. 38. Flat ganja is generally used for smoking purposes. Round and char ganja is used as bhang for drinking purposes. Pure bhang is not pro- duced in this district. Chur is merely the mixture of the two varieties and is not, as such, pure. It is less strong than the latter varieties. 39. No; the smoking of ganja or charas is not less injurious than drinking bhang. Drinking bhang has not that nasty and injurious effect on the constitution as smoking ganja or charas. Smoking ganja or chums produces constant con- gestive irritation of the throat. This later on leads to affection of the lung. Drinking bhang does not do it. 40. Yes: the use of bhang is prescribed by Indian hakims and even by English practitioners for medical purposes in many diseases; and the use of ganja is made for cattle-diseases, and parti- cularly for horses in massala as a tonic. 41. The moderate use of bhang, when drunk along with massala, is beneficial to one's constitu- tion, but ganja or charas, when smoked, is never conducive to health in any way. (a) It is not as food accessory, but it is used to give tone to digestive system. (b) It does alleviate fatigue. (c) It is used as a febrifuge in some malarial countries, but the use is not so well marked. It is the lower classes who use the drug for the above purposes. The proportion is very small. Yes; it is the moderate habitual use only that I allude to. 42. Yes; the moderate use of bhang drunk along with massala is beneficial to the system. It does no harm, but on the contrary tones the digestive sys- tem and rest as a mild stimulant in general. 43. Yes; they are inoffensive to their neigh- bours; they never get violent or troublesome. 44. The moderate use has the following effects: 195 drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. No case have I come across in which it has led to homicidal frenzy. 54. No; the criminals do not use the drug to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime as those who indulge in alcohol do. 55. No; the criminals do not use the drug to stupefy their victims. It does not produce com- plete stupefaction without admixture. 56. The effects of hemp used in moderation are modified by the massala, It renders the drug palatable and mild, and after-effects are not so bad as if the drug was used by itself. So with ganja when tobacco mixed before smoking modifies the action of the drug. It is never mixed with dhatura for personal consumption, but it is used to induce stupefaction of victims by criminals. 57. Ganja and charas are not eaten or drunk in this district. They are only smoked. 58 The present system of Excise Administra- tion in respect of hemp drugs is not satisfactory. It is capable of improvement. 59. The only chance of improving the present system is to make rigid rules like country liquor and opium. Monopoly must be made and the rates of the sale must be fixed by Government and not by the contractor, who has the option of increas- ing the rates as he chooses. Government store- houses should be built, where it should be allowed to be stored up by the planter, and a strict watch kept on this will prevent the illicit sale of the drug, 60. The cultivation is not under sufficient con- trol. Many people plant the tree for private con- sumption, and the cultivation of the plant is not forbidden, nor excess assessment is levied on the plantation. Licenses should be issued for such cultivation, and not mere permission granted as is now done. 61. Charas is not produced in this district, and nothing can be said to it. 62. The real bhang is not produced and culti- vated in this district, but round ganja or chur is used and sold as bhang, which is more injurious than real bhang. It may be controlled as stated in answer to the question No. 60. 63. The present system of wholesale or retail vend of ganja and other hemp drugs is not satis- factory. Planters of those drugs have only to ask for permission from local authorities to plant the hemp tree, and before cutting down they have to obtain permission also; but there is no special duty for the cultivation of hemp. The hemp plant after it is cut down is stored up for drying; when it is ripe for market, it is sold to the con- tractor of the district, or anybody else, who is licensed to purchase at the rate the owner chooses. There is no control over the preparation. There is every chance of smuggling. The planter stores up the whole in his house and can keep away some out of the products, and sell the same where the market runs higher, illicitly. The rate of sale must be fixed by Government. 64. Export and import of these drugs from and into this province must be governed by more strict rules than now existing. There is so much of illicit sale now going on, and that can only be stopped by making uniform rates; and taxation should be made upon the quantity sold and not as now given to the contractor for particular fixed sum 65. Bhang should be a little more taxed than ganja, and charas still more than either ganja or bhang. The taxation on alcohol may proportion- ately be increased; otherwise there will be more consumption of alcohol, and many consumers of ganja, bhang and charas would go in for alcohol. 69. The wishes of the people are never consulted or considered in any way before opening a shop. There is no necessity of local public opinion in opening such shops. 70. Yes; there are some grounds to think that there is smuggling going on. People in Native States grow the plants and sell the same to the shopkeepers privately from the British parts. There is no taxation or rules for growing the plant in Native States. In my opinion Government must take the whole and sole right over these nar- cotic drugs, even from the Native States. This will make the matter safer. The rate should be made uniform and thereby illicit sale will be put a stop to. Oral evidence. Question 1.196 temporary insanity occurred three years ago. They were all resident in my village. The permanent case was that of the son of a Brah- min landholder. He was about eighteen years old, and went to a party of ganja smokers com- posed entirely of Brahmins. They were well- to-do persons, not priests or mendicants. One of the party invited the boy. Though he fre- quented this company, the boy did not smoke for a whole week. He gradually acquired the habit, and, after indulging and increasing the habit for three years, he went mad. He has property, but wanders about, careless of everything. He still smokes in that company. I say he is mad because he neglects his property and his ablutions. He is sometimes coherent and sometimes inco- herent. It is possible the boy was originally invited to join the company because he had means. His property has suffered since he. joined the party. It has been mortgaged. The company get nothing from him but ganja. The company was composed of men from twenty-five to thirty-five years of age. They were none of them drinkers of liquor. They were not of loose or vicious habits. The company was composed of some fifteen men. The village contains about fifteen hundred inhabitants. The young man in question was very strong and healthy before he began smoking ganja. I knew his father, who was a man of good physique. His relations are strong men. None have gone insane. I don't remember the grand-parents. It is a family of good standing, and I know of no mad men in it. I can say that the company did not indulge in anything but ganja. Some of the company were well known to me. I never sat with them when they smoked. The drugs I have mentioned in answer 35 could have been procured by them. They smoked daily. There is a ganja shop in my village. The company used to smoke together in a temple or in one another's houses. They are all fairly well-to-do and of respectable families; but they are all regarded as disreputable. The houses were used by the young men for their meetings without the knowledge of their parents. These meetings were therefore, as far as possible, secret. Their families and their caste-fellows regarded their smoking with great disapprobation. I am personally acquainted with half of the company of smokers. They smoke in secret, and therefore their relations with their elders are not honest in that they involve con- cealment. They are none of them related to me. I know their habits, because I watched their actions. They have spoken to me about ganja, and therefore it is unlikely they have concealed other habits from me. The boy's father must have been dead when he first joined the company of smokers. He was a friend of my father. I am forty-two years of age. I have lived in my village for thirteen years, and I never saw the father during that time. I was away from my village ten years before that. The boy used to attend the village school. His uncle was in charge of him. His property has nearly all been mortgaged. About one-fourth has been mort- gaged by his uncle or his elder brother. The uncle and brother were not ganja smokers. It must have been the boy's want of money that made them mortgage the property. The boy actually stole money from them. The boy was not a liquor drinker or frequenter of prostitutes. The answer I have given under 49 is what I have been told. It is said that the sons of well-to-do people begin by taking the drug for this purpose, and the use of it grows upon them until bad results eventually ensue. In the case under notice, the boy did not, as far I know, take the drug for this purpose. I did not know this young man better than the other members of the company. The bad repute of the company pre- vented my becoming intimate with them. A man would not necessarily confess all his habits, such as the frequenting of prostitutes, because he confessed the use of ganja, I possess little medical knowledge. The scientific language used in my answer 46 is borrowed from a doctor to whom I related my experiences. I don't know physic enough to state how insanity is caused or what its symptoms are. None of the company of smokers but the boy went mad. The other members of the company did not go to excess like the boy did. The madness came upon the boy gradually, and showed itself first by occasional neglect of his meals, until finally he became altogether careless of his food and every- thing else. One of the temporary cases went into the lunatic asylum. In that case bhang had been used to excess. Question 48.197 often. I noticed more and more that there was something wrong about his physical condition that affected his mind. At times he was exceed- ingly restive. His eyes had a strange brightness and spittle ran from his mouth. I advised him to visit the hospital. I went with him in order to know about his case. Dr. McConaghy, the Civil Surgeon, examined him but could not deter- mine what his trouble was. He gave him some medicine and asked me to bring him the next day. The next morning he again examined him and was still uncertain as to his difficulty. He gave the man medicine and requested him to come again the next day. That day I heard that the man used ganja. When we met the doctor the next day, I told him that the man smoked ganja. He replied with emphasis198 quently it is the lilavo kind of ganja which is drunk like bhang. It is also eaten by chewing. 22. Charas, gardo, and baluchar are produced in Kashmir and Yarkand. They are used by people from that northern side of the country. Being considered capable of imparting great vigour and warmth to the body, the greater the severity of the winter and cold of the country, the greater is their use. Charas, which is at the head of the intoxicants produced out of the hemp plant, is collected and prepared as follows: 199 milk. The latter is then turned into curds, and this when ready is churned like ordinary curds to take out butter and make ghi (clarified butter) out of it, Then chasni (syrup) of sugar or sugar- candy is prepared, chasni being the Gujarati name for sugar boiled in preparation for conserves or sweetmeats. The ghi prepared as above is then thrown into it, and along with it all the spices used in preparing the yakuti of ganja as mentioned above are added. This when allowed to cool down and cut into square or irregular pieces is the majum of bhang. 30. The use of all these three drugs is the result of company, and it always takes place in company, It is hardly practised in solitude, except in the case of sadhus and other people who are habitual excessive consumers; but in their case also now and then a company of smokers gathers together. In Gujarat I know of no females who use ganja or charas in any form. Charas being hardly in use here, it is only ganja which is also totally confined to the male sex. It is above the age of fifteen that among common people ganja smokers are to be found. Among sadhus, young men below this age might be found smoking ganja. Female sadhus and bairagis sometimes smoke ganja. Bhang as a drink is sometimes given to children above seven when in company of their male relations or friends. But that is rare and in very small quantity. Female sometimes take bhang as a drink during the hot season when offered by their male relations, but seldom of their own accord. The majam of bhang is sometimes used by uncared for or vagabond children above the age of ten, and perhaps by females; but that is very rare, Except the use of bhang before dinner parties and in the hot season, and by sanyasis, zaveris, shastris, and a few habitual consumers, the use of the other two drugs cannot be said to be prevalent in Gujarat to a considerable extent, except among the sadhus, etc., at centres of pilgrimages, and in their places and resorts wherever they be. 31. The habit of using bhang as a drink is not difficult to be formed. The drink preparation being delicious is liked, and may very soon grow into a habit. But the use of it for a day or two does not dispose a person to have it the next day. A long use of it does form the habit. Intoxicants when once formed into a habit are always difficult to break off, because when once habituated the person feels a sense of depression without the particular intoxicant used by him. But the diffi- culty does, indeed, differ in degree. Opium, for instance, is very difficult to leave off. Charas might come next, then ganja, and then bhang. The latter, however, can be left off when the habit is moderate without any great sense of depression. With a little more effort ganja can also be left off. Yes; all these drugs when once habitually used in a moderate degree develop the habit; and when they are assimilated with the system, the person habituated must increase the dose in order to have the same amount of intoxication. 32. It is not customary in Gujarat to supply any of these drugs at the two important occasions of life, marriage and death, when friends and relatives assemble together. As said above, some- times in marriage feasts some friends meet to- gether and prepare the bhang drink; but that is hardly supplied by the host, Being taken by a select company, it is never excessive, but always temperate, But these are not the occasions when the use of Chang as a drink ever develops into a habit. On the great Hindu holiday of Shivaratri, the followers of Shiva consider it to be an act of great merit to prepare the bhang drink and pour it over the Shiv Ling (the idol of Shiva), and then it is considered allowable and meritorious to drink it. Bhang taken as a drink is never injurious to the health if it is moderately used. To habitual moderate or excessive consumers of it it causes flatulency, but it is considered to be strengthening the semen virile. 33. Among the three higher classes200 sionally on occasions of dinner parties and feasts are much fewer. Habitual drinkers of bhang all round the year cannot be more than 200 in the whole of Gujarat. If the number of zaveris (goldsmiths) and shastris who drink it, perhaps habitually, for brightening their perception and memory, be added, the whole number would stand at about 400 in the whole of Gujarat. Ganja smokers other than sadhus, etc., cannot be more than 5 per cent. Charas is hardly to be had in Gujarat. Consequently, there is no appre- ciable number of men who smoke it. 35. It would neither be feasible nor advisable to totally prohibit the use of these drugs, because they are in that case sure to be consumed illicitly. And I am sure among the sadhus, bairagis, etc., the prohibition of ganja would occasion serious discontent, because besides being used as a pas- time, it is looked upon as a necessity by the con- ditions of their order of life, and especially as curbing the carnal desires. I cannot exactly say whether total prohibition of ganja would or would not cause political danger if it were extended to the whole of India. But I can say for Gujarat that the number of consumers is so small and ever changing 201 taken from the common people are also inoffensive to their neighbours. The moderate use of these drugs never tends to make the consumer trouble- some and offensive to his neighbourhood. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of all the three drugs on the habitual consumer is indeed refreshing. Being habitual, it doss not produce intoxication, but it infuses vigour and strength in the system. It would never allay hunger, but would whet appetite and help diges- tion Comparatively the effect of bhang lasts for a longer time than that of ganja. So long as the effect of bhang continues, it acts as a digestive, but after it has gone down it produces windiness. The use of charas and ganja necessitates the use of milk, sugar or sugarcandy, and ghi (clarified butter), for without them health would be under- mined. But if they are taken, strength of body would increase. Similarly, if proper food be not taken, health would be seriously undermined, and blood would consume away. Those who use these two drugs like very much to eat sweetmeats, and believe that without the latter the body would be wasted away. 45. The moderate habitual use of charas or ganja makes the consumer easily irritable and impatient of contradiction. It also impairs his virile powers seriously. The use of bhang, on the contrary, makes the consumer of a very quiet and considerate disposition, and his virile powers get stronger. As said above, ganja and charas impair and undermine the health if proper food be not taken after their use. The food should be necessarily cooling in order to counteract the effects of these drugs. Ganja and charas do neither injure diges- tion nor cause loss of appetite, but, on the contrary, whet it. Bhang, so long as its effect continues, creates appetite, bat after it is over it produces flatulency and loss of appetite. 46. The habitual excessive use of chains and ganja totally destroys the virile powers and makes the mind irritable and defiant at the least provoca- tion. Ganja causes strong constipation of the bowels. 47. I can say that even the moderate habitual use of charas or ganja produces certain perma- nent effects on the system of the children. The child becomes irritable and constipative; its eyes get weak; the growth of hair on the head is very small; it does not grow vigorous, and it.s limbs do not develop so much. Toe form remains diminutive. 48. The habitual excessive use of ganja or charas produces similar effects in a proportionately greater degree. But in both these cases, if proper and cooling food be taken, the effects are counteracted. 49. As has been more than once incidentally stated in answers to some previous questions, the effect of ganja and charm tends to produce im- potence; and greater the use, the greater the tendency to that end. Bhang strengthens the virile powers and makes the consumers disposed to it. 51. A good percentage of bad characters may be habitual consumers of ganja, moderate or excessive; but the use of this is not the cause of their committing crimes. Neither are all ganja and charas consumers criminal classes or bad characters, nor do all criminal classes or bad characters use them necessarily. Crime has no connection with the use of these drugs. 55. Sometimes I have heard of cases in which the smoking of ganja, or the drinking of bhang, or the eating of the majum of bhang, has been the preliminary, whereafter the victims of it were made to do things which in their consciousness they would never have done, e.g., of signing a document detrimental to the signatory's interests, or the parting with of an ornament without knowing its consequences. 105. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR GOVINDRAO RAMCHANDRA GARUD, Pleader Dhulia, Khandesh. 1. From enquiries and general information. 2. The only products known in this district of the hemp plant are bhang (leaves of the plant) and ganja (the flowering top). The definitions given in question may be accepted for this district. 3. The hemp plant does not grow spontaneous- ly in the district of which I have knowledge. 4. It is known by two names, i.e., bhang and ganja as mentioned in answer No. 2. Yes; they refer to the same plant. 5. I have no personal information on the point. 6. It does not grow wild in this district, so I can give no information. 7. Yes, in some villages, particularly in the Jalgaon Taluka. (a) For the production of ganja. (c) For the use of bhang. Reliable statistics of the area under cultivation can be obtained from the Collector of the district. 8. I hear there is no considerable increase or decrease in the area of cultivation. 10. There is no special class which cultivates hemp for narcotic properties; so far as I know it is cultivated by ordinary agriculturists. 11. It is not produced from the seed of wild hemp. 12. No, so for as I know. 13. Yes, it is restricted. It cannot he culti- vated without a license from the Collector of the district. 14. Ganja and bhang. In the Jalgaon taluka to a small extent. 15. Cultivated hemp plant is used for smoking, eating and drinking, and prepared in the following methods:202 is used for drinking. The preparation is made strong or mild as required. 17. There is no particular class of people to whom the preparation of the hemp drug is re- stricted. 18. They do deteriorate, but do not quite lose their effects. They keep good for not more than a year. Weather causes deterioration. I cannot suggest any measures to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja is used here only for smoking. 20. A small portion of the poorer classes smoke ganja. There is no particular locality to which the use is confined, but it is used more in places where the climate is damp and malarious. 21. Ganja prepared for smoking is generally flat and round. 22. Chains is not to be had here or used. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking in this dis- trict. 24. Marwadi and pardesi classes more generally eat and drink bhang, but even among them the proportion is not large. The use is not restricted to any particular locality or portion of the district. 25. I do not think the use of these drugs is on the increase. 26. In this district among the consumers of bhang and ganja the number of habitual moderate consumers is pretty large; (c) the number of occa- sional moderate consumers is not very large. (d) Oc- casional excessive consumers are also, I think, rare. (b) The number of habitual excessive consumers is very small. 27. I cannot give definite information on the point. 29. In the case of ganja tobacco is invariably mixed, and that of bhang the mixture is usually of pepper and some massala and sugar. Some- times milk is also used to give flavour to the drink by well-to-do persons accustomed to drink bhang. Dhatura is very rarely used and only by exces- sive smokers of ganja with the object of get- ting more intoxicated. Yes, the bhang massala is sold by grocers, The more usual ingredients of bhang massala are as follows:203 68. There are no houses and shops, as far as I learn, in this district licensed for the sale of these drugs on the premises of which they are consum- ed. 69. No; wishes of the people are not consulted (not even for the vend of liquor) before a shop is opened. No, I don't think. 70. I think the duty is fully paid. I think not. 106. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR HUCHRAO ACHUT HARIHAR, Deshast Brahmin, Pleader, District Court, Belgaum. 1. The answers to the questions below are framed from several investigations made by me with regard to the hemp drugs, my chief sources of in- formation being the ganja contractor and the per- sons who habitually use the hemp drugs, and others. I have had no sufficient and detailed informa- tion before I received these questions. I had some general information, by the light of which I made careful inquiries on the receipt of these questions. 2. The narcotic articles referred to in the ques- tions are locally known by the following names: Ganja, bhang or subji, and charas. The plant which produces these above things is locally known as the "ganja plant." Ganja plant does not grow in this district, but it is said that it grows in the Satara, Ahmednagar and some other districts. Ganja is not manufactured here. Only the flat ganja is imported here from some other districts, where it is grown and manufac- tured. Bhang is seldom used. Round ganja and charas are not at all used, nor are they sold here. But a very few people possess a very small quan- tity of charas obtained directly from the place where it is manufactured. Ganja plant produces three things, viz., ganja, charas and bhang. Ganja consists of dried flower- ing tops of female ganja plant. It is made flat by being trodden under foot and also pressing it under a heavy weight. Bhang consists of dried and broken leaves of the ganja plant. Charas consists of the sticky substance or resinous matter which sticks to the palm of the hand while re- moving the leaves of the ganja plant, and which substance is shaped into small pills. 3 to 6. I have no information. 7. No; but there is a species of hemp plant known as "ambada" in the Marathi language and " poondi" in Canarese, which is used for cordage or fibre; but it is quite different from the hemp plant which is referred to in the questions. 13. It is not cultivated in this district, but in the Satara, Ahmednagar and other districts. Its cultivation is not common to all districts. They say it does not require a heavy and constant rain- fall, so its cultivation in some parts of this district is not impossible. But I cannot exactly say why its cultivation is totally neglected in this district. 14. No. 18. Ganja and bhang (don't know about charas) deteriorate by keeping long. Yes, it loses in quality in time. With ordinary care it will be kept good for about a year. The special measures to keep it from deterioration consist in exposing it to air and not allowing it to have any contact with dampness or water. (1) Statistical return for the year 1892-93 showing the revenue of the whole district of Bel- gaum: 204 stage of life. But the female sex also in lower classes, for instance, bowas and bairagis, use the drug. 31. The practice is easily formed by keeping com- pany with habitual consumers, It is difficult to break off this habit. Moderate use of it has a tendency to develop into an excess. 32. Though the use of these drugs is forbidden by religion, it is a custom among some Hindus to take bhang in the form of ghota (drink) on some religious occasions, viz., Durga Puja, Kojagar, Shivaratra, etc. 33. People of some position in this part of the country never use ganja or bhang. They regard it as a disrepute, and the society also looks down. upon those who use these drugs with contempt. I am not aware of any custom of worshipping the ganja plant, as it is not at all cultivated here. 34. To forego the consumption of the drug would be a privation to the consumers. Ganja smoking and ghota drinking keep the consumers in humour and easy. Its absence would neces- sarily create uneasiness; the consumers would seem to miss an important thing and they would even rave like mad men; without it they always seem to labour under some anxiety; their diges- tive power is also greatly impaired; they grow weaker and weaker day by day. Probable number cannot be ascertained. 35. Regard being had to questions 40, 41 and 44, it would not be feasible to prohibit the total use of any of these drugs. If it is prohibited totally, there is every probability of its being consumed illicitly. Such prohibition should be en- forced by raising taxation by legislative enact- ments. Such prohibition would for some time produce discontent amongst the consumers. Such discontents have not the slightest tendency to in- volve political danger of any sort. The total pro- hibition of ganja and bhang is likely to be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 36. Can't say. 37. Charas is not at all used here, but from in- formation received I learn that it is more intoxicat- ing than ganja smoking. 38. Only flat ganja is used here. Chur ganja is used by the poorer classes of consumers. The chur is less intoxicating than the flat ganja. 39. It is said that the smoking of ganja and charas are less injurious than eating ganja and drinking "ghota " of bhang. 40, Ganja is prescribed by native doctors for piles and fistula. It is also used for fomentations externally for the same diseases; also used as sti- mulant and tonic for cattle and also for cattle diseases with some admixtures. 41, Yes, the use of ganja and bhang is beneficial in its effects205 sold to the customers in retail, should, in view of discouraging excessive use, be fixed as in the case of opium and alcohol. The rates also should be regulated. 64. I see no objection to the existing Regula- tions governing the import of these drugs. 65. The present taxation on ganja and bhang is consistent and just with reference to each other, but as compared with other intoxicants (alcohol, etc.) it is very low. It would therefore be expe- dient to raise the present taxation on the drugs. By so doing its wide use would be discouraged. 66. There should be no different rates of taxa- tion on the three different kinds of ganja grown in Bengal and in different localities, because the equality of taxation is to be maintained, and the Government will not be put to trouble in inves- tigating the different qualities of the different kinds of ganja. 67. As the consumers do not seem to murmur to pay the present tax, I see no objection to the present method of taxing ganja and bhang. 68. There are no such shops or houses here. But there should be such, and those too should be situated in markets and other public places. 69. At present the wishes of the people are not consulted before a shop is opened. Local opinion ought, I think, to be thus considered. 70. For the better administration of excise, and to remove all doubts of smuggling, it would be reasonable to purchase from the Native States their rights of selling ganja and bhang by giving them adequate compensation as in the case of toddy, etc. 107. Evidence of NARO DHAKADEO, Brahmin, Pleader, Jalgaon, District Khandesh. 1. I have had no special opportunities of ob- taining information regarding the matters con- nected with hemp drugs. I have, however, framed the following answers from the experience of those who are engaged in producing ganja and who deal in it, and from local information. 2. As far as my knowledge goes about these things, I can safely answer that Dr. Prain206 the sun and trampled. This process is repeated for three days, and the ganja gets ready. Nakhi ganja is reduced to chur, and the other two kinds get flat. The ganja thus prepared is used in this district for smoking only. 16. Bhang is not prepared by people in their houses. There is no wild ganja in this district, so we do not know whether bhang, ganja or charas is ever produced from the wild hemp. 17. The preparations of ganja and bhang are made by farmers. 18. Charas is not prepared in this district. Ganja deteriorates by keeping for one year after its preparation, whether ordinary care be taken or not. I am not aware of any measures to prevent deterioration. It quite loses its intoxicating pro- perties after keeping for one year. 19. Charas is not prepared here. Ganja is used for smoking only. This use of it is prevalent in this district as well as throughout India. It is also used for medicinal purposes. 20. Almost all the gosavis, bairagis, fakirs, and others of the like class smoke ganja at their lodg- ings; but among other class of people the propor- tion is 1 or 2 per cent. As Charas is not produced here, I cannot give any information about it. 21. Flat and round ganja are generally pre- ferred for smoking. Chur is used for smoking generally by the poor. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking in this district. 24. Almost all the gosavis, bairagis, and others of the like class eat and drink bhang and also a few of the other classes. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is neither on the increase nor on the decrease. 28. In the case of the habitual moderate con- sumers the average allowance is 2 tolas per day, which costs 2 annas; and in others the allowance is 5 tolas, costing 5 annas. 29. Men who drink bhang ordinarily mix with it milk, sugar, rose buds, saffron, cardamoms, opium seeds, and pepper; because such mixed drink is tasteful and fragrant. And this is called bhang massala." Dhatura is not so used. 30. The consumption of ganja and bhang is generally practised in company. Respectable and great men, if they have got this habit, practise it in solitude. It is mainly confined to the male sex. The children do not consume it in this district. It is not confined to any time of life. 32. In some parts of Northern India, in which the hot season is rigorous, males, females, and even children drink bhang moderately, simply as a means to lessen the effect of the season, and not owing to its narcotic properties. The occasional drinking of bhang in hot season does not lead to the formation of the habit nor produce injurious effect. 33. Respectable men of this district generally detest the practice of drinking bhang, much more that of smoking ganja. The consumption is held in disrepute on account of its narcotic injurious tendencies and not on the ground of any religious principles. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant in this district. 34. It will be a serious privation to the habi- tual consumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use. They will be uneasy if they will not get it. 35. It will not be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs. The drug will be consumed illicitly. To enforce prohibition will not be advisable. The prohibition is sure to occa- sion serious discontent among the consumers. Such discontent will not amount to political danger in this district. The prohibition will not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. Alcoholic stimulants and other drugs will not serve its or their purpose. 36. There is no reason for thinking that alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for any of these drugs. 37. Charas is not smoked in this district, and therefore no answer can be given to this question. 38. Ganja, flat or round, produces more intoxi- cation than " chur." 39. The smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant is more injurious than drinking or eating the same. 40. Native doctors use these drugs in medicines on account of their medicinal qualities. These drugs are also used in the treatment of cattle-dis- ease. 41. Moderate use of bhang and ganja is bene- ficial in its effects (a) as a food digestive if mixed with other articles; (b) to give staying-power under severe exer- tion or exposure, or to alleviate fatigue; (c) as a preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts; (d) to prevent diseases from dirty water. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is bene- ficial for those who get the habit; and I consider the moderate use of any of these drugs to be harmless, as intoxication produced from the use of these drugs is not so strong as in the case of alcohol. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The habitual consumers of bhang and ganja get themselves refreshed immediately if they use these drugs moderately. They can give strength to them only who can get sufficient milk and ghee. They do not produce intoxication in habitual moderate consumers, but produce in those only who use it but seldom. It does not allay hunger, but increases appetite. The intoxication lasts for about three hours. Afterwards they are consumed again; and the want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not produce any noxious effects, physi- cal, mental, or moral. The constitution is somewhat impaired if milk and ghee are not taken in sufficient quantity; but if the man gets milk and ghee, his constitution becomes strong. It does not injure the digestion, nor cause loss of appetite, but, on the contrary, increases it. When they are not well digested, they cause asthma and not dysentery. It does neither impair generally the moral sense nor induce lazi- ness or habits of immorality, nor produce debau- chery. It does neither deaden the intellect nor produce insanity, except to a very small extent in those who cannot get substantial food. This in- sanity is likely to cease as soon as the habit of smoking ganja or drinking and eating bhang is given up. The symptoms of insanity may be re-induced by the use of the drugs after liberation from restraint. The insanes who have no recorded ganja history confess the use of the drugs.
207 I am of opinion from local information that the use of these drugs by persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease will not give them real relief, although it is popularly supposed that it alleviates pain to a certain extent. The insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drug by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. 46. The habitual excessive use of any of these drugs is very harmful. One becomes weak. 47. Use of any of these drugs does not appear to be a hereditary habit. It does not affect in any way the children of the moderate consumer. 48. Please refer to the answer to question 46. 49. The moderate use of any of these drugs is not practised as an aphrodisiac. Prostitutes do not use it for that purpose. The use of these drugs for this purpose is not more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. The use of hemp does not tend to produce impotence. 50. The excessive use of any of these drugs is not beneficial to health. It is a danger to one's occupation. The habitual excessive consumer is always in the state of intoxication, and conse- quently unable to follow his ordinary pursuits. 51. There is no large proportion of bad characters of habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs. The moderate use has no connec- tion with crimes in general or with crime of any special character. 52. There is no benefit from using any of these drugs excessively. An immoderate consumer is always in the state of intoxication. That is a bar to his occupation and loss to his profit. The consumers spend large sums of money in buying these drugs, and consequently come to want. 53. The excessive indulgence in any of these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. The man who uses the drugs sits silent or sleeps, and I don't know any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. These drugs are not used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or otherwise, because they do not create strength in them if used. 55. Criminals, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs, and so stupefy them. Complete stupefac- tion can be induced by these drugs without, ad- mixture of any other substance in the case of those who are not habituated to smoke, eat or drink ganja or bhang. 56. Intoxication is produced in a greater degree when the hemp is used with dhatura seed, whether used moderately or excessively. 57. I do not know about charas, nor I know whether ganja is used for drinking or eating purposes. 58. The present system of excise administra- tion in this district is well enough with respect to hemp drugs and does not require improvement. 60. Ganja is produced in this district. I think the cultivation of the ganja-bearing plant and the process of its preparation are sufficiently controlled, and the system requires no modification in any respect. 61. Charas is not produced in this district. 62. I think that the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang is sufficiently controlled. 63. I have no objection to the present system of (a) wholesale, (b) retail vend of (1) ganja, (2) bhang, or preparations of them, 64. I have no objections to the existing regula- tions governing the export and import of these drugs, or of their preparations from and into your province or their transport within the district. 65. The taxation of (1) ganja, (2) bhang, is in my opinion reasonable, and does not require any alteration. I do not know anything about charas. 66. In my opinion it is not necessary that there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja, because the different kinds of ganja are produced from the same plant, and no significant difference is noticed in their effects. 67. I have no objection to the present method of taxing (1) ganja, (2) bhang. 68. In this district shops are licensed for the sale of these drugs and not for consuming them there. And I think that such shops or houses should not be permitted for the latter purpose. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted or considered in any way before a shop is opened in any locality, and measures are not taken for the purpose. Local public opinion should be considered on such occasion. 70. Ganja is not smuggled in this district. 108. Evidence of DAJI ABAJI KHARE, Honorary Secretary, Bombay Branch, East India Association, Bombay. Referring to the subject in connection with the hemp drugs, the Branch Association have no special objections to offer, but they respectfully observe that no liberal-minded people would ever apply to the Government for the entire prohibition of the use of hemp drugs or preparations made therefrom because they are injurious. It is true that hemp drugs and preparations made from these drugs are much more deleterious to health than opium, but notwithstanding, these, drugs are in common use by a very large part of the native population of this country and to which some of them are attached. It is also true that these drugs have good qualities as well as bad. The only good and wise measure, which our good Government should adopt for the benefit of the people, is to impose more stringent precau- tions and restrictions upon the sale of these drugs than they have on the sale of opium, and to increase the severity of the punishment for the adulteration of liquor and other beverages with hemp drugs.
208 109. Evidence of SEWAR LAL KARSONDAS, Secretary, Arya Samaj, Bombay. The Arya Samaj fully sympathises with the objects of the Commission referred to, as the principles and tenets of the Samaj enjoin on its members total abstinence from all kinds of intoxi- cating drugs. The Samaj, however, is of opinion that any governmental action in the direction of further restricting the preparation or sale of the drugs will be productive of very little good. The Samaj believes that education of the masses is the only proper and effective remedy for correcting such baneful habits, and fears that any compulsion in this matter is likely to drive the consumers of these comparatively innocuous drugs to the use of more injurious intoxicants that are plentifully supplied to the people like the various preparations containing alcohol. The Samaj, therefore, prays that the Government, actuated as it seems to be in taking these steps by high moral motives, would be pleased to devise measures for the restriction of the sale of European liquor in India, which is per- petrating a great havoc on the morals and the physique of the Indian people The Samaj fervently hopes that the compara- tively less injurious drugs of Indian origin may be left to themselves, until the strong hand of Government is able to cheek the rapidly growing diffusion of European liquor in India. 110. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR VISHWANATH KESHAWA JOGLEKAR, Brahmin, Sowkar, Karajgi in Dharwar District. 1. I have had no special opportunities of studying the question of hemp drugs. My desultory read- ing of the literature on the subject, my casual intercourse with the people using the drug, as well as the remarks made to me by others in con- versations or observations noted by me whenever I came across persons affected by the over-indul- gent use of the drug, are the only sources of the information contained in these replies. 2. Though I have once toured through parts of Northern India, I have confined my answers to the six districts of the Southern Division of the Bombay presidency, namely, Kolaba, Ratnagiri, Kanara, Bijapur, Belgaum and Dharwar, for the main reason that I can speak for them with greater confidence as to the accuracy of my statements than for any other portion of India. All the varieties of ganja are more or less known in this part of India, but only two of them are sold, or in other words commonly used, i.e., flat ganja and broken ganja; the latter is also called bhang. The definitions given by Dr. Prain accord with the description given by persons who during their long residence in Northern India were personally acquamted with the cultivation of hemp and the preparation of its numerous varieties for eating or drinking; but in these parts '' chur," powdered gauja, is called bhang. it is used in the preparation of drinks and sweetmeats and not for smoking 3 In none of the districts embraced in these replies does the hemp plant grow spontaneously, and the questions 4, 5 and 6 under this chapter require no answers. 7. Two varieties of hemp are more or less widely cultivated in the division for the sake of fibre. They are known as toga and ambada, the botanical equivalents respectively being " Crotalaria juncea," " Hibiscus cannabinus," and the approximate area of their cultivation from the latest published re- turns are as below:209 10. Cultivators in Bijapur do not belong to any particular class. 11, 12 and 13. I have no answers to give to questions 11, 12 and 13. 14. The only product prepared in Bijapur and Jat is ganja broken and flat. Bhang as defined by Dr. Prain is not produced in Bijapur. There is nowhere a demand for it in the six collectorates I am writing about, and I have satisfied myself in more districts than one by personally enquiring at the retail shops that bhang as defined by Dr. Prain is never sold in these parts. The " chur," broken stuff, which sometimes passes under that name and which is used in the preparation of drinks, answers to the description of broken ganja and is sent herewith as a sample. What is, however, bought as bhang by consumers is simply " chur " or broken ganja. The process beginning with the reaping of the crop to its final stage, when marketable ganja is produced, may be briefly described as follows:210 "mantras." The preparation is also used in a very diluted form in respectable society on the occasion of " Shivaratra," " Shimaga," or the " Kojagari," full moon night. The favourite haunts of ganja smokers are temples, " masjids" or " dargas." It is here that Hindus and Muham- madans or people of indifferent character can freely meet and smoke together. The wandering gangs of "bairagis" and " fakirs " also will be found not only themselves engaged in smoking, but offering the " hooka " to those frequent visitors amongst the poorer classes of people who hover about such places for the very purpose of smoking. There are no other public places or club-houses where ganja is smoked. Neighbours and friends may meet and. smoke together without an appoint- ment; but except on the few occasions when the so-called " ghota" or dudhiya is prepared, there are no parties held, and ganja, like tobacco, is smoked individually and not in company. Neigh- bours do meet at night and smoke, but this is not an invariable habit. Charas is nowhere used in any of these six districts of the Southern Division, and so it is not available in any of the shops licensed to sell the intoxicating drugs. It is only ganja which is (either flat or chur) smoked or drunk or mixed in sweetmeats. 20. The consumption of ganja is not restricted to any particular class of people, but the bulk of the smokers will be found amongst the lower classes. It is very difficult to state accurately what pro- portion of people smoke ganja and charas, as there are no statistics available on the subject. Much depends upon local peculiarity. The proportion of consumers to be met with in large towns and cities does not exist in villages. Again, while the Lingayats in the above Ghat districts are under a religious prohibition, the lower classes in the Kon- kan fearlessly take to alcohol. All circumstances considered, I am of opinion that of the hundred male adults using ganja or liquor only 5 per cent. or even less will be found to belong to the former class. 21. As already stated, flat and broken ganja are the two kinds preferred for smoking in this part. No other kinds are used. 22. No charas is used in this part. 23. Bhang properly so called is not consumed in this part. 24. Same as answer to question 23. 25. I have no reliable information to enable me to answer this question, even with approximate accuracy. However from what I have heard or seen, I am morally convinced that the use of ganja has not perceptibly increased. The slight increase observable in the area of cultivation or the imports or exports, etc., may be due partly to the increase in population and partly to greater accuracy of returns. It is as a matter of fact losing its place before the spread of alcohol. If it still exists on this side of India, its main cause is to be found in the comparative cheapness of the article for the labour gatherings at mills, factories and railway workshops. The hard work the labourers are put to, the consequent necessity for some relief, the comparative facility with which consumers of ganja can carry the drug with them, and the ease with which it can be smoked anywhere even on public roads are, amongst others, the principal causes which still obtain amongst some people a preference for ganja before liquor. 26. By far the larger number of ganja-smokers will be found to belong to the class (a), habitual consumers. It is very difficult to draw the line between moderate and immoderate men. Those who consume the drug for intoxication it brings about and not for its medicinal properties are, when once at it, generally immoderate. If a smoker has the means and the necessary time at his disposal, he will not place down the "hooka" or chillum until he is so intoxicated that lie is unable to take care of himself. Some people will be found to drink occasionally preparations of ganja, but there are no occásional moderate smokers, as smoking requires a habit which drinking does not. 27. As has been more than once told, all castes of Hindus, from Brahmins to Mahars, and all classes of Muhamadans will he found to contribute more or less to the number of ganja-consuming people. Time habits of life or circumstances which mainly generate this vice, are a life of disappoint- ment and dejection, a life of asceticism, a life of ease and affluence associated with habitual con- sumers of ganja, and a life used to a kind of labour which at the close of the day requires some stim- ulant to bring about relief to lighten the effects of the day211 degrees than one addicted to the use of opium. Every intoxicant predisposes the consumer to run to excess; such a tendency is to be observed in the case of ganja smoking also. Ganja like to- bacco is smoked by the consumer according to his convenience and not necessarily in company. The second, third, and fourth rounds which are inevit- able in the case of parties or companies, do not exist, and in spite of the tendency to run to excess the aggregate result is moderate. 32. In the parts of which I am speaking there are no customs, social or religious, which necessi- tate the consumption of ganja. 33. The consumption of ganja is universally re- garded with disfavour, if not contempt. It is true that there is no religious prohibition of it. On the contrary, from its mention in the Veda and " Brahmans" and the virtues attributed to it, its use would seem to find an encouragement. It has been from time out of mind associated with that large class of ascetics and fakirs who avowedly use it, not for the sake of pleasure, but for enabling themselves to concentrate their mind on the worship of their favourite deity. This was at least the original purpose for which it began to be used. It still passes under the name of dyan- wali. It is associated with god Shiva, one of the Hindu Triad, and, as a rule, the majority of those who practise yog philosophy from the old lines indulge in the use of ganja. Hindu religion, at any rate, may therefore be said to countenance the use of ganja. In the case of liquor, it lays down a hard rule of prohibition. Opium it does not so expressly prohibit. In society devotees of liquor are less feared or despised than those of ganja or opium. This may be due to the circumstance that ganja on account of its comparative cheapness and accessibility to the lower classes, is found associated with what may be described as the dregs of society. Liquor, on the other hand, though as injurious, is more costly and is associated with the ruling and the superior race, and its scent and sight to which seventy-five years have familiarized the native races, have ceased to repel even orthodox persons. But in the case of ganja, instead of prohibiting, religion does encourage its use by describing it in favourable terms, such as those mentioned be- low:212 the difference between the effects of the three different drugs, round ganja, flat ganja and chur or broken ganja. Some however say213 any medical treatment and died after about four months of complete lunacy. In this case, no one would have ever considered the man to be an immoderate consumer, and it was believed that it was because he was ill fed and insufficiently fed that the drug produced its evil results. B. In this case the man was in Government service. He was a habitual smoker for fifteen years, and during all his time he never gave his superiors any reason to reprimand him. He also used occa- sionally to drink. On the full moon night of Aswin, the well- known kojagari night, ghota, otherwise called dudhiya (i.e., drink of ganja prepared with milk and sugar), was prepared. There was a party in which all but this man were persons who never smoked nor drank ganja and who had all consented to have the drink as a curiosity. They had, as is usual on this night, kept up throughout and drank each a cup more than once. The one man B alone drank about three cups at each time. At about 7 A.M., the man was off his brain; he continued to be so about eight months and had again a lucid interval of six months; he continued thus about for sixteen years and died at last of consumption. He used to smoke to the last. He was deprived of the indulgence when he was insane. The only important feature about him was that he was never dangerous even when he was stark mad. His wife, children, neighbours and friends were never afraid of him. C was first a student in the school. He was the most clever and bright in his class. Every- body liked him. He made his progress up to the 5th Standard in the vernacular school. Unfor- tunately at the age of 18 he contracted the habit of ganja smoking. The effect of the drug was so speedy in this case that within a few months since his initiation he became completely mad. He was married, but he never cared for his wife and mother, and he never lived with them. The man who was once very intelligent, and in whom his relatives had good hopes, was found quite useless for his family. He did not care so much for the food as he did for the drug. He used to do the duties of water-carrier. When people employed him, they paid him some remuneration for his services. But he never demanded more than what he required for buying the drug for his consumption. He was never offensive. He con- tinued mad till his death, about the age of 35. D. Here the victim is a schoolmaster. He was led to the use of this accursed drug ganja by his association with the "Vedanti Club." They told him that he could never be able to contemplate the image of God unless he had a steady and undis- turbed state of mind, and they recommended him their holy stuff as a sure means of concentration of mind. Evidently with the object of making him- self incapable of being stirred by the worldly con- cerns, he began to use the stuff, the result of which was that he shortly appeared with all the signs of insanity. He is out of his service now. I know of half a dozen more cases; in none of them was a man looked upon as dangerous. If the use of alcohol, even when it is occasional is added to a habitual consumption of hemp drugs, insanity is almost certain. 47. I know of instances in which the father smoked and the son did not. But I have not come across instances on this side of India where ganja was habitually used for two or three genera- tions. I cannot therefore offer any remarks on this question as to the transmission of the vice by heredity. 49. It is said that the drug is sometimes used as an aphrodisiac. I have not much faith in the as- sertion. A drug which, if moderately used, sharp- ens appetite and gives tone to one's health. But the drug has been a favourite with the class of people like bairagis and fakirs, whose object is the very reverse of vice. In these days, at least when every vernacular newspaper mentions about half a dozen patent medicines which are specially termed aphrodisiacs, I do not think the demand for this drug, for that purpose, exists on this side. There may be a few prostitutes using the drug, but I do not know of any such case. It is be- lieved that the ultimate effect of long use of the drug in immoderate quantities is impotency. 51 and 52. There is not the least connection between the moderate and immoderate use of any of the narcotic drugs of hemp and the perpetration of crime. 53 and 54. No indulgence in the use of the drug ever incites the consumer to commit unpremedi- tated crime. I do not know any case which led to homicidal frenzy. Criminals, however, very naturally fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act. Even a tobacco-smoker or a snuff-user takes a pinch if he wants to refresh himself for an action. There is therefore nothing extraordinary if ganja is used by criminals who are about to proceed with their criminal act. It is generally said ganja does not make a man desperate and rash as liquor does. The consumers of ganja are generally nervous when they are under its influence. 55. Ganja sweetmeat mixed with dhatura is supposed to bring about complete stupefaction. This is practised very rarely. 56. Moderate smokers, of which however the number is comparatively very small, smoke ganja mixed with tobacco. Those who want to make it strong ( of this class the number is largely to be found amongst " bairagis, " "fakirs " etc.), mix it with a part of the seed of nux vomica, dhatura, bachnag. I am not in a position to give the exact proportion. 57. As I have said before, few people habitually eat or drink ganja on this side, because the habit is comparatively very costly. The occasion on which drinks are prepared by occasional and habi- tual consumers are too few and far between to afford any basis of any general deduction. 58. I think the excise administration as regards the hemp drugs is working well, and neither the contractors, nor the consumers, nor the people in general, whom I have questioned have any griev- ances to complain of. 60. The cultivation of ganja in these parts is on a very small scale and is well controlled. 62. I do not think what purpose can be gained by checking cultivation unless and until the demand for the drug diminishes. It is the cheap- est intoxicant. Six pies a day is not a heavy charge. The temptation for smuggling is not so great, and no particular arrangements are needed to control the cultivation. 65. I am not at all of opinion that, compared to alcohols, the hemp drug is unreasonably taxed, and no complaint in that direction exists as re- gards ganja, bhang, etc., etc. 67 I have no objection to the present method of taxing.
214 68. None. 69. Local opinion is no doubt necessary, and at present shops are allowed to be opened irrespec- tive of the wishes of the people. But I must at the same time state the number of shops is few, and no complaint on the subject exists. It is the liquor shops to which the complaint refers. Oral evidence. Question 1.215 any form of the narcotic is generally in disrepute, because it makes the man victim to it and makes him maniac and unfit for work. There is no such custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. It is a serious privation. A ganja smoker will be very much excited and could not work when he does not get it. The same ease with the bhang drinkers and charas smokers. 35. In British India it may be feasible to pro- hibit the use of these drugs, but it may be impossible in Native States. Prohibition can be enforced by restricting the sale. It will occasion serious discontent among the consumers. It may perhaps amount to a political danger. The prohibition might be followed by recourse to alco- holic stimulants. 36. There is no reason. 37. The charas is stronger than ganja. 39. Smoking is more injurious to health than drinking bhang. Smoking injures lungs and brings on bronchitis and other lung diseases; while drinking bhang is less injurious because it is mild in its effects. 40. Ganja smoking is advised by native doctors for neuralgic pain and idiopathic tetanus. Ganja is used in cattle disease in order to give tone to the stomach and to make them work longer with- out fatigue. 41. Ganja and charas are not beneficial, but bhang may be beneficial in hot climate if taken moderately, (a) It sometimes increases appetite. (b) It sometimes alleviates fatigue. (c) It is used with that idea in some malarious districts. (d) It is used by some as an aphrodisiac medicine. 42. Moderate use of any of these drugs is not harmless because it will form a habit and gra- dually it will lead him to use it excessively. 43. Ganja smokers are as a class inoffensive. 44. A moderate consumer is exhilarated and little intoxicated and is always with ready wits. It is sometimes refreshing and it is followed by depression. It creates appetite. The effect lasts for an hour. Nervousness and depression are the after-effects. It does produce longing. 45. (a) None. (b) to (d) No. (e) It induces laziness. 46. It does. 55. Yes (sometimes). It can stupefy com- pletely. 112. Evidence* of NAWALCHAND HEERACHAND, Jeweller, Bombay. 1. Personal experience in connection with bhang. 2. I know bhang by the name of bhang only. 18. I know bhang deteriorates after six months and loses half of its narcotic effect, and it quite loses its effect after one year, and becomes useless for human consumption. Dampness and humi- dity of climate causes bhang to deteriorate. The deterioration can only be prevented by keeping it in an earthen jar closed air-tight and to bury the said jar in the ground. Bhang will remain good for one year if kept in that manner. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Hindus of almost all castes use it more or less. 25. I think the use of bhang is neither on the increase or decrease. 28. The habitual moderate consumer will require one-ninth of a tola of bhang, the cost of which will be about one-third of a pie. The habitual ex- cessive consumer will require about half a tola, and the cost will be about one pie. 29. Habitual consumers mix ordinarily with bhang black pepper. Exceptional consumers mix almonds, dried rose flowers, sugar, poppy seeds, cardamoms, and milk. Dhatura is not used with bhang so far as I know. These ingredients are put into bhang with the object of making it more palatable, and for the purpose of cooling the brain. There is no special preparation, such as bhang massala, that 1 know. 30. Bhang is generally drunk in company. The drinking is confined to the male sex. Men com- mence to drink when they are 20 years of age, and they continue doing so to old age. It is not customary for children to drink bhang. 31. A person who drinks bhang occasionally will form no habit, but if he drinks daily for six months, he will form a habit. The habit of drink- ing bhang can easily he broken off. The moderate habit of drinking bhang does not develop into the excessive habit. 32. I know that Hindus who are followers of Shiva pour bhang water on the ling of the god Shiva on Mondays and on Shivaratra days. I do not know whether the worshipper or any- body else drinks the bhang water poured on the ling of the god Shiva after it has been offered. 33. The habitual excessive use of bhang is generally considered a bad habit. I do not know whether the hemp plant is worshipped or not. 34. The habitual consumers would for some few days feel the want a slight deprivation. 35. In our religion the use of alcohol is strictly prohibited, and at times we are inclined to take bhang, and it would be a hardship for Govern- ment to prohibit the use of bhang; and if the use of bhang is prohibited, it will, I think, be con- sumed illicitly. 36. I do not know whether alcohol is now being substituted for bhang. 41. If bhang in very small doses is taken, it acts as a food accessory and digestive. It alle- viates fatigue; but I do not know whether it gives staying power under exertion or exposure. Hindus who do not use liquor make use of bhang for the above-mentioned purposes. 42. The moderate use of bhang is, in my opinion, harmless. It acts as a food accessory and diges- tive, and is refreshing. 43. The moderate consumer of bhang is not offensive to his neighbours. 44. There is no immediate effect on the con- sumer of bhang. The effect is felt after an hour or two. It is refreshing. It produces exhilaration. It creates an appetite. The effect lasts for about two or three hours. The moderate habitual consumer feels no ill after-effects. The want of * Translation.
216 subsequent gratification produces a longing in the case of a habitual moderate consumer. 45. The habitual moderate use of bhang pro- duces no noxious effects of any kind. 46. The habitual excessive use of bhang pro- duces no noxious effects. It is true, however, that a consumer in such a case loses the time during which his intoxication lasts. 47. I do not know of any case in which the habitual moderate use of bhang has appeared to be an hereditary habit, or affect in any way the children of the moderate consumer. 48. Same reply as to question No. 47. 51. So far as I know, no large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of bhang. The consumption of bhang has no connection with crime so far as I know. 52. Same reply as to question No. 51. 53. The excessive consumption of bhang does not incite to unpremeditated crime of any kind. I do not know of any case in which the drinking of bhang has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. It is not the case that bhang is drunk by criminals to fortify themselves to commit crime of any kind. 55. I have heard of no case in which criminals, in order to further their designs, have induced their victims to drink bhang and so stupefy them. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced by drinking bhang. 56. As regards bhang, narcotic effects are not modified by any of the substances added to it which I know of. These substances are added to bhang to make it more palatable, and to prevent it causing stomach-ache and wind. I have never heard of dhatura being added to bhang. Usually bhang is drunk in the evening at about 4 P.M after finishing business, when neither pearls nor precious stones are valued. The saying that jewellers make use of bluing for the purpose of better ascertaining the real quality and value of pearls and diamonds has, I think, no foundation. My brothers and myself never partake of bhang during business hours. We take it after business is closed. It is true, however, that jewellers believe that the drinking of bhang has the effect of relieving the strain on the eye-sight caused by the keen and continuous examination of pearls and precious stones. 113. Evidence of JAMSEDJEE NASSERWANJEE GINWALLA,* Shenshai Parsi, Abkari and Opium Farmer, and proprietor of cotton-ginning factories, Ankleswar. 1. I have had personal interviews with con- sumers of hemp drugs as well as the farmers of bhang, ganja, and pak for the districts of Surat, Broach, Kaira and Ahmedabad, the shopkeepers of those drugs and some native doctors (hakims or vaids), from all of whom I have selected my information. 2. The province of Gujarat to which my investi- gations are restricted does not grow any ganja or charas. Flat ganja is the only drug imported for retail sale, chiefly from the Ahmednagar dis- trict. Charas is neither imported nor consumed in Gujarat. Even the farmers are not permitted to import and sell charas in Gujarat under the present license. Only bhang is grown in the Surat, Broach, Kaira, and Ahmedabad districts in small quantities, sufficient for local consump- tion, which is rarely exported, except from one district to another in Gujarat. Under the circumstances the definitions for bhang, ganja and charas may be accepted for my province of Gujarat, wherein these intoxicating drugs are known by the name of bhang, ganja and charas. There is a fourth intoxicant, name pak, manufactured from bhang, ghi or clarified butter, and sugar in the shape of sweetmeats by the farmer of intoxicating drugs, who is licensed to sell bhang, ganja and pak. Pak is prepared by boiling 4lb of bhang, 10lb, of water, 2lb of ghi or clarified butter, till the whole mass is reduced to about one-half, when the decoction is rubbed and strained through a cloth into a large plate or pot and allowed to be cooled down and freeze. The ghi so saturated with the intoxicating property of bhang and frozen on the top of the decoction is removed. Fifteen pounds of sugar mixed with water is boiled down to the con- sistency of thick syrup, mixed with the above ghi, and the whole mass is again boiled to a thicker consistency, put and spread into a large plate or pot, allowed to settle, cut in square pieces, and removed in the shape of sweetmeat called pak, which intoxicant is apparently left out of this inquiry by the Commission. 3. There is cultivation of the hemp plant in my province of Gujarat. (a) None for production of ganja. (b) None for production of charas, (c) There is some grown for use of bhang. (d) None for production of fibre or seeds especi- ally. The hemp plant is cultivated in the districts of Surat, Broach, Kaira and Ahmedabad in the pro- vince of Gujarat for use as bhang only to a very limited extent. As regards the Broach district, the average area under bhang cultivation is about three-fourths of an acre during the last ten years, which is restricted only to the village of Bhore- Bhata in the Broach taluka. I have no access to the records of other collectorates to obtain similar information. 10. The persons who cultivate hemp for its nar- cotic properties do not form a special class, but they are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 13. Ganja is not at all cultivated in Gujarat. 14. The following products of the hemp plant are prepared in my province of Gujarat: 217 vated hemp plant for (A) nil, (B) eating, and (C) drinking in the province of Gujarat. (b) The wild hemp plant is practically unknown in Gujarat. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their houses for private consumption; however, some people prepare and sell bhang to customers for drinking without a license at Surat. Bhang is prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown by cultivation in Gujarat, but I am not aware of the mode of preparing ganja or chains also from the wild plant wherever grown, as its cultivation or preparation is unknown in Gujarat. Ganja is only imported from the Ahmednagar district for sale by the farmers, which consumers buy from licensed shops and prepare it for their own private consumption with the admixture of tobacco. 17. Bhang is prepared by Hindus and Muham- madans for private consumption or sale in their respective castes owing to religious prejudice, under which a Hindu would not drink bhang prepared by a Muhammadan with his water; however, a Muhammadan shall have no objection to drink bhang prepared by a Hindu with his own water. In a similar manner ganja is washed with water, mixed with tobacco and smoked by Hindus and Muhammadans separately owing to religious prejudice. 18. Bhang and ganja deteriorate by keeping for a long time. They do not quite lose their effect within two years. They keep good for nearly one year with ordinary care, but commence to deteriorate in their intoxicating properties gradually to the end of the second year, and be- come useless towards the end of the third year, when they are usually destroyed. The causes of deterioration are exposure, dampness, and long keeping; no special measures can be taken to pre- vent deterioration, except keeping them in dry vessels and places for the above periods. As charas is neither imported nor allowed to be sold by the farmers or licensees in Gujarat, I am un- able to answer this query with respect to that drug. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking, and charas is practically unknown in Gujarat. 20. Hindu and Muhammadan religious mendi- cants, such as fakirs, sadhus, &c., residing in burial grounds, temples218 34. It would perhaps be a serious privation to Muhammadan and Hindu religious mendicants to forego the consumption of bhang and ganja, which help professional beggars to while away their time in intoxication. Ganja is especially considered to produce bodily heat, and help those poor wretches against inclement weather and want of sufficient clothing. In the absence of any reliable statistics the probable number of each class of such people cannot be ascertained. 35. It would neither be feasible nor justifiable to prohibit the use of bhang or ganja in British territory without the co-operation of the surround- ing and intervening Native States, whence the drugs would be smuggled and consumed illicitly. If all the Native States in India consent to co- operate with the British Government, the prohi- bition could be enforced. The prohibition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers in general, and such of the religious mendicants in particular. Such discentent would not amount to a political danger, because the consumers of bhang and ganja form only a microscopic minority as compared to the population of India, and who cannot expect any support from the masses. (a) The prohibition of bhang and ganja would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants amongst people who have no religious prejudices against the use of alcohol, provided that they could incur increased expenditure; but non-drink- ing Hindus and Muhammadans would not take to alcoholic stimulants owing to the prohibition of bhang and ganja under any circumstances. (b) The prohibition of bhang and ganja may some- times be followed by recourse to opium in rare cases amongst non-drinking classes. 36. There is no reason for thinking that highly excised alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for cheap intoxicants like bhang and ganja, but, on the contrary, bhang and ganja are substituted for alcohol by poor drinking classes of people, who cannot afford money to indulge in costly alcohol, and the increased consumption and revenue of the intoxicating drugs is a proof of its reality. 40. The use of ghi or clarified butter saturated with the intoxicating property of bhang prepared in the manner described in the. answer of question No. 2 regarding the preparation of the pak is prescribed by native doctors, called hakims and vaids, in certain medicinal preparations. No ganja is so used in medicinal preparations. Bhang is also used in the treatment of cattle disease, but not ganja. 41. (a) The moderate use of bhang and ganja is considered beneficial in their effects as a food accessory, or digestive, as could be ascertained from the consumers only, which statement could be taken for what it is worth. (b) The moderate use of bhang and ganja are said to give staying power under severe exertion or exposure, or to alleviate fatigue, as could be as- certained from the consumers only. (c) Bhang and ganja are not considered bene- ficial in their effects as a febrifuge or preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. (d) Bhang is supposed to be beneficial in its effects as a food accessory or digestive, to give staying power under severe exertion or exposure, or to alleviate fatigue in cattle and horses when mixed with bajri, flour, jagri, pepper, alum, ginger, turmeric, and garlic. No ganja is used for the purposes indicated in clauses (a), (b) and (d). Muhammadan and Hindu religious mendicants use bhang and ganja for any of the above purposes, whose proportion cannot be ascertained. I refer to the moderate habitual use in clauses (a) and (b) and moderate occasional use of bhang in clause (d). Charas is not used in Gujarat. 42. Although I am not inclined to believe in the beneficial effects of the moderate use of bhang and ganja, I consider their moderate use to be harmless from what I could gather by personal interviews with moderate consumers and a glance on their constitution. 43. Yes; I think so. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of bhang and ganja on the habitual consumers is said to be refreshing, producing moderate intoxi- cation, and creating appetite. The effect of bhang lasts for about six hours, and that of ganja for about three hours; the after-effects of bhang and ganja are unpleasant feelings of lassitude. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing or uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of bhang and ganja does not apparently produce any noxious effects, physical, mental or moral; does not impair the constitution in any way, injure the digestion or cause loss of appetite, cause dysentery, bron- chitis or asthma, impair the moral sense or induce laziness or habits of immorality or debauchery. It does not deaden the intellect or produce in- sanity. 46. The habitual excessive use of bhang pro- duces noxious effects, physical or mental, impairs the constitution, injures the digestion or causes loss of appetite, induces laziness, deadens the in- tellect to some extent, but it does not produce insanity. The habitual excessive use of ganja pro- duces noxious effects, physical or mental; impairs the constitution; injures the digestion, or causes loss of appetite; causes dysentery, bronchitis or asthma; induces laziness; deadens the intellect or produces insanity, temporary or permanent. The symptoms of temporary insanity may be re-in- duced by the use of the drug after liberation from restraint, Insane who have no recorded ganja history confess to the use of the drug. There is a Brahmin named Ravisankar Gunpatram, aged about 22 years, inhabitant of Anklesvar, au insane from the effects of the habitual excessive use of ganja, at present confined in the lunatic asylum at Ahmedabad. There are other semi or temporary insanes named Vanmali Morar, a tailor, aged about 30 years; Jelu Manishankar, a Brahmin, aged about 25 years; Aju Gulab, a Muhammadan, aged about 32 years, at Ankleswar; and many others elsewhere. 58. I am acquainted with the present system of excise administration in my province of Gujarat with respect to hemp drugs, and I do not consider it to be working well, which is capable of im- provement. Under the present excise administra- tion of hemp drugs, the exclusive privilege of import, manufacture and retail sale of hemp drugs is granted to the highest bidder on a lump sum of an annual guaranteed minimum revenue. The farmer is allowed to purchase bhang from local cultivators free of duty at any prices, or import from other districts covered under permits on payment of Rs. 5 for the first 10 maunds and Re. 1 for each subsequent 2 maunds. The "pak" is manufactured locally by the farmer as described in the answer for question No. 2. Since no retail price is fixed in the license, the farmer can
219 sell bhang, ganja and pak at his own prices. At present bhang is sold from 5 to 6 annas per lb, ganja from Re. 1 to Re. 1¼ per lb and pak from Re. 1 to Re. 1¼ per lb. The retail sale accounts kept at shops are unsatisfactory. The actual con- sumption may be disguised, as deteriorated bhang and ganja destroyed and accounted for in the column of loss from deterioration and destruction, thus rendering actual statistics of consumption unsatisfactory. 59. The manufacture of pak, local purchase of bhang, and import of bhang and ganja should be sufficiently controlled, and stocks to be kept in a central district depot from whence each drug to be issued to retail shops covered under permits, proper accounts kept, deteriorated drugs destroyed in the presence of responsible officers, retail price of each drug fixed in the license, and the limit of retail sale and possession by any one person on any one day to be reduced from 40 to 10 tolas. The farm for each district should be given on " the central depôt, annual guaranted minimum vend, and definite duty system." The farmer should be restricted to the sale of such quantity of the drugs as may be covered under the annual minimum revenue guaranteed under his license, and calculated at a certain rate of duty fixed per lb of each drug sold, as is the case with the country spirit farms at present, and was the case with the opium farms before the guaranteed mini- mum vend system was abolished. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should be controlled by granting licenses for cultivation, registering the area under cultivation, collecting, weighing and storing the produce under Government supervision which may be issued and transported, covered under permits granted by competent authorities for local consumption "at the district central authorized depot" for the farmer, or transported to other districts as may be necessary, and proper accounts kept of each transaction. 63. Yes; I have objection to the present system of (a) wholesale, (b) retail vend of (1) ganja, (2) charas, (3) bhang, or preparations of them, which I have fully described, and indicated the im- provements I suggest in the answers for the questions 58 and 59, which I consider unnecessary to repeat here. 64. Yes. The existing regulations governing the export and import of these drugs or of their preparations from and into my province or that transport within the province are unsatisfactory, because the farmer may import, export or trans- port the drugs from one place or district to another place or district, under permits which are never scrutinized, or the storage kept under Gov- ernment control, and satisfactory accounts of each transaction are not kept. Illicit drugs could not he distinguished from licit or the mischief traced. 65. Yes; in my opinion the taxation of (1) Ganja, (2) charas, (3) bhang is not reasonable with reference (a) to each other, (b) to alcoholic or other intoxicant. I would suggest an excise duty of Re. 1 per lb. bhang, Rs. 3 per lb. on ganja, and Rs. 5 per lb, on charas, Bhang is the least noxious out of the three drugs. Next to bhang is ganja, and the worst is charas. These are my reasons for the different rates of taxation of the three drugs I suggest. 66. No. 67. Yes; the ultimate incidence of the tax on the consumers of ganja, bhang and charas is quite insignificant, and out of all proportion to that on the consumers of alcohol and opium when the relative intoxicating property of each drug is considered along with its price. 68. There are no houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs, or their preparations, where they may be consumed on the premises in my province of Gujarat. However, some unlicensed sale of prepared bhang is practised at Surat which may be suppressed. 69. The wishes of the people are seldom con- sidered in any way before a shop is opened in any locality. The revenue and police authorities are only consulted before the opening of a shop is sanctioned. I think it would be advisable to con- sider local public opinion in such matters. 70. There are cases of illicit import or smug- gling of hemp drugs from the Native States of Baroda, Rewa Kantha and Mahikantha, which surround and interlace the province of Gujarat, although the actual offences on record are few. These drugs are so small in bulk and easy to trans- port that detection is very difficult and sometimes impossible. There is use of untaxed drugs to a certain extent which may be greatly aggravated by enhancing the duty on them for licit import and sale. The only remedy would be the co- operation of the Native States concerned with the British Government in maintaining an uniform system of taxation, import, sale, and transport as in the case of opium at present; otherwise the Native States will gain in revenue at the cost of the British Government if they may be pleased to raise the taxes on the drugs as suggested in the answer for question No. 65. The proportion of habitual moderate and excessive as well as occa- sional consumers of these drugs could. only be ascertained by actual enumeration through the village officers in each district under the directions of the Collector any time, or on the occasion of the census. During the tenure of my opium farm for the Broach district for the years 1890-91 and 1891-92, I have induced the Collector at Broach to order the preparation of a list of opium-eaters residing in each village through the mamlatdar and village officers in each taluka, with the quan- tity or value of opium consumed by each person per diem. These lists were scrutinized and cor- rected by my private preventive Inspectors on personal inquiries at each village, and they proved to be greatly instrumental in calculating the actual consumption of opium in each village, and tracing the illicit import, sale and consump- tion of the drug from the surrounding and inter- vening Native territories of Baroda and Rajpipla. In the same manner lists of consumers of each intoxicating drug may be prepared and corrected from time to time, which may be very useful in deducing the requisite statistics. 114. Evidence of KISAN DULICHAND, Licensed Vendor of Ganja, Nasik. 1. I have been a dealer in ganja for the last thirty years and cultivator of the same for the last seven or eight years. 2. The definition of ganja stated in question 2 will serve the purpose of the inquiry. 7. I cultivate the hemp plant for the production vol. vii. 2 H 2
220 of ganja and bhang only. According to my knowledge there are some 30 acres of land under cultivation where hemp is grown. 8. There is no increase or decrease in its culti- vation in this district for the last eight years. 9. The land is first prepared as for other agri- cultural purposes and the seeds are sown at the distance of 2 ½ feet in rows. When the seeds come above ground, all male plants are from time to time detected and destroyed. This goes on from four to five months, when the female flower stalks are removed and dried. This forms ganja, while bracts and some other leaves form bhang. 14. In this district (Nasik) bhang and ganja are only produced. 16. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from plants wherever grown, for the substance is spoilt if the male plants are not destroyed. 18. Bhang and ganja deteriorate by keeping. It quite loses its effect in time. With good care it may be preserved from two to three years. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smoking. In rare cases people eat ganja or charas. 20. In this district charas is very rarely used. Men from all classes smoke ganja. Consumers of the drug are, however, to be found in large majority in the bairagi and gosavi class. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Men from all classes drink bhanga. 28. (b) Nearly five tolas, cost 1½ annas. (b) Double the quantity. 29. Ordinarily tobacco is mixed with ganja, which is first moistened by washing. Dhatura is used with ganja in order to produce extraordinary intoxicating properties. Like punch there is a preparation of ganja consisting of five in- gredients: 221 the plant. At Broach and Nadiad hemp is grown for use as bhang only, but not to such an extent as in Surat. 8. There has been a continual decrease in the area under cultivation every year owing to the worry and trouble the cultivator is put. In the first instance, before putting the seed into the ground he must apply to the mamlatdar for a pass; secondly, while the plant is growing he is generally watched by abkari officers and the con- tractor; and thirdly, when the crop is ready he must remove it under a pass and give it to the con- tractor for what he chooses to pay, i.e., he is at the mercy of the contractor, who generally has the contract for the whole province as at present. 9. The cultivation of hemp is generally com- menced from the middle of the rainy season till the cold season or till December in Gujarat and in July or August in Sind. The soil necessary for hemp cultivation is loamy or sandy. The ground is first levelled and cleared of shrubs, etc. It is then flooded and ploughed up, the seed is then put in by means of phatke (tubular vertical in- strument). Too much water is injurious to the growth of the hemp. If there is no sufficient moisture the field is watered once or twice. The low, sandy, clayish banks of rivers are overrun once or twice with water, like the Indus or the Tapti, known as katcho in Sind and bhata in Gujarat, is best suited for the growth of hemp. 10. In Sind and other places and in Surat the cultivation of hemp is confined not to one class. The cultivators are of the same class as other cultivators; any cultivator having land suitable for the growth of hemp may cultivate it. 11. In Sind, in the territories of His High- ness Mir Ali Murad Khan, ganja is raised from the same seed as bhang. The plant intended for ganja becomes generally stunted on account of harder and rocky nature of soil underneath it. The leaves get shrivelled. This is the distinguish- ing feature of the plant which is left for ganja, which is a female plant. The flowers and tops of the branches assume the same form. The flowery tops of the wild hemp plant known in Sind as Kohi or Kohistani possesses even without their being made into flat or round ganja, the properties of ganja and much searched after by fakirs and sadhus visiting those regions. 12. No. I have no reason to suppose that wild hemp is specially cultivated anywhere for the production of ganja. 13. No; on the contrary in Gujarat, i.e., at Surat, Broach and Nariad, the cultivation of the hemp plant is restricted for bhang. It might be so restricted in Sind for aught I know. The cultivation of hemp for ganja alone is also pos- sible in Gujarat. The conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, etc., are the same as for the cultivation of hemp; for bhang, a little richer soil, mixed with rotten leaves manure, is perhaps necessary. 14. Yes; only bhang is prepared from the hemp plant in the province of Gujarat, i.e., in the Surat, Broach and Kaira districts. In North- ern India, Sind and the Deccan ganja is produc- ed from the hemp plant. So far as I know, charas is made at Yarkand and North Afghani- stan. The extent of the cultivation of hemp plant for bhang only in Surat is about 30 bighas, yield- ing about 300 maunds of bhang. 15. From the cultivated hemp plant the follow- ing two articles are made in the province of Sind: 222 25. In Sind and Gujarat the use of ganja and bhang is on the increase, as they kept the per- sons using or consuming them in good humour, produce appetite, digestion and rest, and are not so heating as other intoxicating drugs and drinks are. 26. Amongst the consumers there are223 effect on their health. In Sind about 60 per cent. of population use the drugs, specially bhang moderately. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is harmless for reasons given above. 43. Moderate or even excessive consumers of any of these drugs are harmless and inoffensive to their neighbours. They are never aggressive. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of any of these drugs on the habitual consumer is refreshing. It produces slight intoxication. It allays hunger and creates appetite, Its effects last for five or six hours, and the after-effects are not bad. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not produce any noxious effects. It does not impair the constitution nor does it injure the digestion or cause loss of appetite. It is said to prevent dysentery, bronchitis, or asthma. It does not impair the moral sense or induce laziness or habits of immorality or debauchery. Moderate drinking of bhang and smoking of ganja does not deaden the intellect and produce insanity; and I have no personal knowledge of any moderate consumer becoming insane or suffering from any mental anxiety or brain disease. Nor can the fakirs or sadhus whom I have consulted lay their hand on a particular person by way of example. 46. Habitual excessive use of these drugs is simply injurious, but personally I do not know any habitual excessive consumer becoming insane, nor have I been informed of any case by the fakirs and sadhus with whom I have been meeting and dis- cussing this matter. To such consumers the drugs are harmless, but to novices it is very harmful. 47 and 48. It is not hereditary, nor does it affect the children of moderate consumers so far as I know and I am informed by the fakirs and sadhus. 49 and 50. I do not know; but Persian medical books, mentioned in paragraph 40, recommend use of bhang and majum (bhang sweetmeat) for excite- ment of passion and sexual intercourse. 51. There are not many bad characters I know of who are habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs the use of which discourages crimes. 52. Excessive use of any of these drugs will make the consumers afraid of doing any such thing. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. I do not know of any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. From what I know, these drugs have the advantage of discouraging any act of violence or crime. There is a Sindhi proverb that a bhangi (bhang drinker) may boast of high deeds, but when he is once drunk he is powerless to do any- thing. The defeat of the Sindhis at the battle of Miani near Hyderabad is always attributed to the effects of bhang. 55. Criminals, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs. Complete stupefaction is produced with the admixture of dhatura. 56. The effects of hemp used in moderation or in excess, mixed with dhatura, greatly increase intoxication. 57. Ganja is said to be eaten in Faizabad on the Gomti. In a company of fakirs or bairagis, a basket or box of ganja is passed round. It is said to be very intoxicating. I have no personal ex- perience of this. 60 and 61. No. 62. No. It is quite feasible. The practice of obtaining a license before hemp is cultivated is quite sufficient. 63. No. 64. The present restrictions are quite sufficient. 65. The present taxation on bhang, charas, and ganja is excessive. If it is reduced, it will not affect alcoholic or other intoxicants. 66 and 67. No. 68. There are shops for the sale of these drugs, also of their preparations. These are harmless places 69. No; the wishes of the people are not con- sulted when a shop is opened in any locality; I think people should be consulted. 70. I am not aware. 116. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR VENKAT RANGO KATTI, Pensioner, Dharwar. 1. My personal experience and information from two friends who have served long in the Abkari department, and intimacy with persons using hemp drugs. 2. Nothing but seed is produced from the male. Ganja, bhang and all varieties come from the female. Round ganja is not sold in this district. 3. Hemp neither grows spontaneously nor is cultivated in the Dharwar district. The Jath State is the nearest tract to Dharwar where the plant is cultivated. I have, however, seen the male plant spontaneously grown singly in my garden once or twice. 7. No. 14. No. Ganja and bhang come from the Satara district, especially from a town named Lengre. Charas is never sold in the bazar, and scarcely any man knows it. 15. Preparations for eating and drinking: 224 tola of mace, ¼ tola of saffron, ½ tola of almonds, 4 or 5 cloves, all powdered together are put together with the cream of ganja, and the whole is poured on a smooth board and slices cut as above stated. Habitual eaters take about a tola of this majum for a dose. Dudhia.225 number addicted to ganja and bhang would not be less than 20 per cent. in this district. 35. Ganja and bhang cannot be prohibited easily. Serious discontent among the consumers would be the consequence. Still no political dan- ger need be apprehended, at any rate in Southern India, as most of the consumers are poor people having no influence in society. They will proba- bly take to drinking. 36. So far as I have known, no such person can be found. A person addicted to either ganja or alcohol may contract the habit of the other and continue both. A person having both the habits occasionally substitutes ganja for liquor for want of sufficient money, but he then tries to get liquor as soon as possible. Liquor is a more costly luxury than ganja, and this explains why one addicted to ganja would not take to liquor. The influence of liquor is stronger, but of a shorter duration, while that of ganja is milder, but of a longer duration. This also explains why a person addicted to either would not leave it in favour of the other. 37. Charas is believed to produce narcotic effect about twenty times more than common ganja. See answer to question 19. 38. I have stated under question 21 that chur is much more effective than flat ganja, 39. Smoking is more injurious than drinking any preparation of hemp; and eating the same is least injurious of all. Inordinate smoking makes the eyes smoky or red and the lips black, burns the blood and causes cough and constipation. Moderate smoking with nourishing food is least injurious, and proves tonic in some cases. Drink- ing is not known to cause any of these in- juries, even though the food is not nourishing. Eating ganja or majum is equally harmless. All smokers of ganja are required to take a prepara- tion of fowl's meat at least once in six months to avoid these diseases. Those who do not take animal food take butter, milk, or ananas for the same purpose. 40. The properties of hemp or vijoya given in the Vidya Nighantu are as follows: 226 51. The term "bad character" seems rather am- biguous. A. moderate consumer of hemp in any form becomes irritable and raises quarrel at the slightest cause. Quarrelsomeness may lead to causing injury to others. Besides this I am not aware of any other crime which a moderate con- sumer of hemp is prone to commit. 52. The above character is more marked if the consumer does not become insane. 53. A Lengayet trader of this place, who was much addicted to smoking ganja, killed his own brother in sleep at night. He denied the charge in his trial, but was ultimately hanged. Some other persons using ganja, who pass for respect- able men, are suspected of the same crime for the sake of money and other causes. 54 to 56. I have no knowledge of the matter. 57. I have not known ganja used for drinking. As to its being used for eating, see answers to questions 15, 45, etc., where its effects are also stated. 117. Evidence of GURAPPA RACHAPPA, Lengayet, Office of Shetti (Revenue and Police), Dharwar. 1. As I have been serving as Shetti (Revenue and Police) of the town of Dharwar for a long time, I have had ample opportunities to deal with matters in connection with the hemp drugs. The information which I attempt to submit is conse- quently based on my long experience of the mode of living of the people addicted to the use of the drugs, and also on hearing the cultivators of the plant, contractors of farms, and traders dealing in them. 2. The definitions, as given in No. 2 of the questions, being equivocal, may be accepted for our province. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in the districts of Dharwar, Belgaum, Bijapur, Satara, and Ahmednagar. The plants grow wherever the seeds happen to fall down on the ground in back yards or in other open places; but they do not yield ganja and die away as useless vegetables. 4. Ganja is also known by the following names: (1) Green tobacco, which is called in Kanarese " hasara lambak;" (2) Ascetic leaf, which is called in Kanarese " shiddha patri "; and these terms refer exactly to ganja. The consumers of ganja are looked down by the public in general, as they are generally called in Kanarese "bhangi mukka, ganji mukka." They cannot claim respect in society. They have preferred calling it by different names from that of ganja, which is odious and detestable. 5. the wild hemp grows wherever the seeds get into the ground, but does not yield any crop; therefore no special conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, etc., can be prescribed to be necessary. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily scattered like tobacco plants. 7. The hemp is cultivated in our province for the production of the ganja alone and and not for charas, which is the natural yield of the plants, and also not for bhang, which is obtained in course of the process of the preparation of the ganja and while packing it up for export. It is not cultivated for fibre or seeds. It is cultivated in (1) Lengre and Devikhindi, and in their surrounding villages in the Vithe taluka of the Satara district; (2) in Savalgi of the Jamkhandi State; (3) in Surdi in the Barsi taluka of the Sholapur district; and (4) in some villages of the Ahmednagar district. It is cultivated in fields of which the soil is best fitted for the pur- pose. The produce in these places suffices for the requirements of the district comprised in the Central and Southern Divisions. 8. From the information obtainable, it is ascertained that the cultivation covers a larger area than before. The increase in the area has been gradual, because the number of consumers is gradually increasing and the price of the hemp drugs is rising. 9. The land in the first place is turned up, clods broken, and the soil prepared by putting manurial matters for cultivation. The seeds, consisting of male and female and mixed up, are sown from Ponarvasu to Pushya, Nakshatras in the Hindu month of Shravana (corresponding English month August) in coulter drills. When the plants grow to the height of a foot or so and are dense, the male plants, which do not yield ganja are rooted out, to leave the female ones sufficient space between. If all the plants in a line are female, some of them also are rooted out to allow the rest sufficient space between. The space between the two plants should ordinarily be not less than a foot. If the plants are dense they do not thrive, and the yield is poor and deterior- ated in quality. The leaves of the female young plants are nipped off to invigorate their growth. It is harvested in December. 10. The persons who cultivate hemp are not necessarily of any special class. They are of the classes from which fields are cultivated for agri- cultural produce. 11. The plants cultivated for the production of ganja are never raised from the seed of the wild hemp, but from those grown by cultivation. The seeds of the preceding year are preserved for sowing for the ensuing year. 12. The wild hemp is not generally cultivated for the production of ganja anywhere. The male plant should in either case be extirpated. 13. The cultivation of the hemp plant for ganja is restricted in our province. It is restricted to the districts of Satara, Ahmednagar, Sholapur, and to the State of Jamkhindi, because ganja grows only in these districts. The hemp plant is not grown in the other districts, therefore they are not restricted there. It is cultivated in the above Ghat districts only. The soil for its culti- vation should be whitish-black (halyeri) or red soil (masari) with no stones in it. The rainfall required should be a little more than that required for the growth of wheat and a little less than that required for jowari. The climate should be cold. Its cultivation is impossible in Mallad tracts, where the rainfall is generally heavy and the soil is red and stony, and also in rich black soil, where the rainfall is untimely and generally insufficient. There are some places where the soil will be fit to cultivate the hemp plant; but the people there ; being quite ignorant to cultivate it, it is not
227 undertaken, as it is restricted by Government, and is attended with inordinate agricultural labour. 14. In our province ganja, charas and bhang are prepared in places enumerated in answer No. 7 to meet the requirements of the consumers in the Central and Southern Divisions. 15. The wild plant is nowhere grown in our province, therefore no description of the products therefrom can be given. I describe the methods of the preparation of the three products of the cultivated hemp plant. When the plants are full-grown and wide-spread, the tassels shoot out at the top; resinous or sticky substance is found over the stems and the tassels when the ganja is said to have been ripe and the harvesting season approached. Then the tassels are cut or nipped off. The resinous matter which comes in contact with the fingers while cutting or nipping off the tassels is rubbed against an edged thing, and when the matter is sufficiently thick it is collected and formed into small pills. These pills are called charas. The length of the tassels (or ears) varies in length from two to eight inches. The tassels so removed from the plants are spread over a matting in three layers, one over the other, and covered by another matting, and they are trodden. The tassels stick to one another. The upper matting is then taken away, and the tassels are exposed to open air till they are dried and then deposited in a place. This is called ganja. Pieces of ganja tassels or powder found lying underneath the tassels trodden under foot and also at the time of packing up are called bhang. In North Hindustan, towards Benares, the bhang-producing plants are said to be of quite a different kind from the hemp plants known here. The pieces or powder of the leaves of the plants are used in smoking, eating, and drinking. The particulars as regards the preparation of the ganja, charas and bhang for the purposes of smoking, eating and drinking are given in detail in answer No. 29. 16. Bhang is not prepared generally by the people in their houses. It cannot be prepared from the wild hemp plant, because it does not yield ganja, but only seeds. Ganja or charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 17. The cultivators of the hemp plant prepare the drugs. There is no particular class which is specially set to work at it. 18. Ganja, charas and bhang deteriorate by keeping. They quite lose their effect in course of time. With ordinary care they retain their natural properties for one year; thereafter they gradually lose them. After two years they quite lose their qualities. By exposure to wind and sun the drugs are spoiled, and by moisture and dampness they give out a bad smell. To prevent deterioration the drugs must be kept in a warm and unwindy place, and should not be exposed to open air. The use of the deteriorated ganja is said by its consumers to be burning in the stomach. 19. Ganja is used for smoking, eating and drinking, while charas is used exclusively for smoking. The former, being obtainable in all places, is used for such purposes; but the latter only in places where it is produced. 20. Ganja is used for smoking by all classes of people, except Europeans and Parsis, to the pro- portion of about 1 to 400 Lengayet and Brahmins, 1 to 100 other Hindus and Musalmans. It is generally so used in all localities. Charas is produced to a limited extent; there- fore the class of people which consumes it and its proportion cannot be satisfactorily ascertained. 21. Round ganja is most preferable for smoking, next to it is flat ganja, and lastly chur ganja. The supply of flat ganja is sufficiently procurable in all localities, therefore it is generally used. 22. Charas is produced in the Central Division, and used only in that division. It is not imported in the Southern Division, as it is not customary among the consumers here (Southern Division) to use it. Foreign charas is not imported into our province. 22. Bhang is used for smoking in all localities by all classes of consumers, except Europeans and Parsis, when ganja is not available. The use of bhang being exceptional, the extent cannot be ascertained. 24. Consumers of all classes of Hindus and Musalmans and in all localities eat and drink bhang. The proportion of eaters is 1 to 1,000 and of drinkers 1 to 500. 25. The use of ganja, charas and bhang is increasing. The reasons for the increase are as follows: 228 mgs of their sickness in the use of the drugs. (d) The lunatics, whose lunacy has been brought on by excessive use. 28. The average allowance and cost of each of these drugs per diem are as follows: 229 their neighbours, because they do not lose their temper. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of smoking on the habitual consumers is satisfac- tion, and they are intoxicated for about an hour and free from all cares. By eating and drinking the effect of intoxication remains for about six hours. This intoxication is looked upon as a relief. It is refreshing. It produces intoxication. It does not allay hunger. It does not create appetite. The after-effects tell upon the health of the consumers. The want of subsequent gratifica- tion produces uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs produces noxious effects on body and mind, but not on morality. It burns the blood and im- pairs constitution. It injures the digestion and causes loss of appetite. It causes dysentery, bron- chitis, or asthma. It does not impair the moral sense. It induces laziness, but not habits of im- morality or debauchery. It deadens the intellect, and does not produce insanity; therefore further queries need no explanation. 46. By habitual excessive use of any of these drugs the following are the effects: 230 67. None whatever. 68. None. 69. The wishes of the public in general are not consulted at present in any way before a shop is opened in any locality. The opinion of the Taluka Revenue Officer (mamlatdar) is asked by the Collector, and the mamlatdar consults the village officers. Local opinion is desirable, so that the respectable and well-behaved persons in the village or town should have a voice in the welfare of the village community in general. 70. There are no such facts to which I should draw attention. Duty is paid in respect to the ganja and other hemp drugs used. It is likely that there may be some people who may be using drugs bought from the Native States and re- moved to others within the limits of the British Government; but it is impossible to detect such illicit transactions inasmuch as the Native States are, I think, not bound by the regulations in force in British India. General information. Boja is prepared as follows: 231 30. Ganja is usually smoked in company; bhang is also drunk in company. Both ganja and bhang are, however, used by individuals when alone. Ganja is usually smoked by males and the same may be said with reference to bhang. In the course of my experience I have seen only about three females smoking ganja and drinking bhang; and these women were not of good character. The consumption of ganja and bhang is seldom begun before the age of sixteen, and the use is continued to all ages. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming ganja and bhang is easily formed if the individual associates with persons who use these drugs. If the habit of consuming ganja and bhang becomes habitual, it is difficult to break it off. There is some tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. I know that offerings of bhang are made to the god Shiva in the months of April, May and June. During August and September these offerings are made also. Bhang mixed with water or milk is poured over the ling of Shiva. These offerings are made with a view of gaining favour of the god. It is a very common custom with ganja smokers, before beginning to smoke, to make offering by using the words " Lena Shankar " or " Lena Babulnath " or " Lena Bhuleshwar " or " Lena Babulnath tekariwalle, najar lagave chat mar jave."After making the offering to the god the ganja smoker sometimes says: "Jine nahi pi ganje ki kali o ladkese ladki bhali.232 does not even smoke tobacco. He has passed his matriculation examination and now assists me in my office as Assistant Managing Clerk. He is physically a fine young man and a good cricket player. 49. I have heard that some people smoke ganja as an aphrodisiac. It is said when the drug is used for this purpose it must be used in conjunc- tion with good food. I do not know that prosti- tutes use hemp drugs as an aphrodisiac. In moderation and with good food the use of a hemp drug does not tend to produce impotence. 51. No large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of hemp drugs. There is, so far as I know, no connection between the moderate use of a hemp drug and crime. 52. There is no large proportion of bad charac- ters habitual excessive consumers of hemp drugs. I do not know that there is any connection be- tween the excessive use of hemp drugs and crime. 53. Excessive indulgence in hemp drugs does not, so far as I know, incite to unpremeditated crime of any kind. On the contrary, the bhang drinker is rather timid under the influence of the drug, and the same may be said of the ganja smoker to a lesser degree. I know of no instance in which the excessive indulgence in hemp drugs has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. I know of no instance in which criminals have fortified themselves by using hemp drugs to commit a premeditated act of violence or crime. 55. I know of no instance in which criminals to further their designs have induced their victims to partake of a hemp drug with the object of stupe- fying them. I do not think complete stupefac- tion could be induced by the use of a hemp drug alone. 56. Tobacco is mixed with ganja so that it can be smoked easily. Spices are mixed with bhang to make it cool and pleasant in taste. I know of no case in which dhatura has been mixed with hemp drug for personal consumption or for administration to others. 57. Ganja when eaten or drunk is much more powerful in its intoxicating effects than bhang. It is, I think, injurious to use it in these forms Ganja is very seldom eaten or drunk. Oral evidence. Question 1.233 boys, of three and five years of age, when I made his acquaintance. The children died after his wife had died. They all thus died at intervals of one and a half years. He lost his business perhaps two years after his wife's death. He became bankrupt through bad debts. I noticed the first change in his character two or three or four years after he lost his business. He began to talk foolishly. He talked much and without meaning. I thought he was becoming mad from excessive smoking. There was nobody to look after him then, and there is no one now. He got his food by begging, disregarding caste and creed. Since he became quite insane his caste-fellows gave him food. He bad a house of his own, but was fed by charity of others. Sometimes he got plenty of food, and sometimes he was in want of it. Before he became insane he got his ganja and his food by the profits of his business of folding turbans. He never suf- fered from want until he became insane. I have occasionally had to give or receive instructions connected with insane persons in the course of my business. Similar symptoms to those which I observed in this case might be induced by grief, anxiety, or through loss of business. I can't speak about injury to the head or epilepsy or syphilis. Injury to the head could not have caused insanity in this case, because he never received a blow on the head. I cannot say whether sexual excess could lead to insanity of the kind which characterized this case. Such cause would produce a different sort of insanity, in that the insane would not talk so foolishly as this man did. I am aware that in- sanity can be caused by sexual excess. There was not such excess in the case I have described. I knew the man's character, and no enquiry on the point was therefore necessary. I can distin- guish between insanity caused by grief, and in- sanity brought on by excess of ganja. In the latter case the man would be more foolish than in the former. The difference is only a matter of degree. In attributing the insanity in the case described partially to the loss of family and busi- ness, I bear in mind the interval which elapsed between those events and the onset of the insanity. I have noticed among sadhus and fakirs some cases of insanity caused by ganja smoking, but they were not so completely insane as the bania de- scribed above. There were cases of temporary fits of insanity, and I know no case of permanent in- sanity but that described. I think I know these people well enough to say that their insanity was due to excessive use of ganja and want of proper food. The fits would last for two or three hours at the longest. In these fits they would abuse people regardless of the persons they were address- ing. I have even seen them abuse policemen. I cannot be sure that these fits were not mere fits of irritation or excitement or rage. Having had my statement read over to me, I state with regard to the intervals between the main facts, that as a considerable time has elapsed I cannot speak accurately regarding them, but my impression is two years elapsed between the last of his troubles and the first symptoms of in- sanity. I am quite positive that the troubles all occurred before the insanity began.
235 EVIDENCE OF SIND WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of MR. H. E. M. JAMES, Commissioner in Sind. 25. The consumption in Sind of ganja, charas and bhang is not increasing to any appreciable extent amongst classes not hitherto accustomed to the drugs, according to the best of my belief; based on enquiries from Natives well able to judge. The population has increased in round figures from 2,200,000 in 1872 to 2,870,000 in 1891. In 1878 through communication by railway was opened between Sind and the rest of India. Partly then, owing236 travel long distances and undergo severe expo- sure to sun and frost alike, in an almost nude condition, do find that the use of ganja and charas alleviates fatigue and gives staying237 matter of much greater urgency, e. g., agri- cultural indebtedness, religious animosities, the growth and repression of crime, the extension of communications, and irrigation, all of which are a never-ending source of anxiety. I do not go so far as to say that the bringing of the consumption of hemp drugs under stricter control would be impossible, but in my opinion, the game would not be worth the candle. 68. We have licensed houses in Karachi for the sale of bhang ready made, in addition to the ordinary shops licensed for the sale of the raw materials. But we have no ganja or bhang " dens" where the stuff must be consumed on the premises. 69. No concession of" local option "in the matter of hemp drug shops has been made nor is it necess- ary. Where there is sufficient demand, the farmer applies for a shop and retailers are all grocers, and the drug forms a small addition to their ordinary stock of groceries. The farmer's self-interest no doubt might be supposed to induce him to stimulate sales. But in three out of five of the Sind districts, the shops are actually fewer in number than nineteen years ago. Even in the large district of Shikarpur also, where (I imagine, owing to the advent of people from across the border, for the construction of railways, and also to the Afghan War ) shops increased from 179 in 1873 to 265 in 1881-82, the figure has receded to 246 in 1892-93. And in Thar and Parkar, where the shops have also increased, the present figure of 29 is only 5 more than it was fifteen years ago. A farmer does not, like a pub- lican at home, stimulate sales by accessories calcula- ted to make his shops attractive. He simply de- pends on the demand. The Collector and District Magistrate, after consulting the local officials, is able to judge whether a shop should be opened or not, and local residents other than the con- sumers of the drug take no more interest in the matter than a tailor in an English country town in the question whether a particular grocer down the street should have a license to sell claret or not. The subordinate officials whom the Collector would consult before deciding, e. g., the Revenue and Police beads of the taluka, no doubt ask the local zemindars or Hindu Mukhi their opinion upon this as upon most matters affecting the peace and comfort of the village. But the matter is too insignificant for any formal rule to be made or to be necessary. 70. We occasionally catch a load of hemp drugs being run across from Cutch, but all told, the smuggling, especially across the desert, is of no importance to the revenue. We may have a treaty some day with Khairpur which will prevent any little smuggling there may he from that State, but there is no hope of such a measure during the lifetime of His Highness the present Mir. Letter from MR. JAMES appended to his evidence. In continuation of my answer to question 35 (c) I have the honour to inform you that on a recent, visit to the Khirthar range of mountains, which separate Sind from Baluchistan, I there found the so-called wild hemp alluded to, growing freely in different localities within the hills. Mr. Woodrow of the Poona Botanical Gardens, to whom specimens were sent, identifies it as Hyoscyamus muticus, Linn., a henbane, closely allied to the poisonous English plant of that name, which is used in medicine. The Baluchis stated that if small quantities were mixed with bhang and an infusion drunk it created intoxication very rapidly, and that too large a dose produced absolute madness. Not long ago three men indulged too freely, with the result that they stripped off all their clothes and danced and rushed about nude, being temporarily quite out of their senses. This wild plant is, therefore, quite different from the common wild hemp that grows freely in Kashmir and the Tarai, and has the merit of being much more injuricus. 2. Evidence of MR. R. GILES, Collector, Shikarpur. 1. As a Revenue Officer of twenty-three years' service, all of which has been spent in Sind, I have had some opportunities of forming an opinion as to the working of our present system of excise administration, of talking to the farmers who pur- chase the right to retail hemp drugs, and of ob- serving in the towns and villages the classes who consume them, and their effect on the consumers. I have not, however, any special knowledge on the subject, but I have utilized my present position to secure from others the best possible information regarding the matters specified in the questions. 2. Charas and ganja are not manufactured in Sind. I cannot, therefore, speak for the accuracy of the definition. They are, however, imported in small quantities, and known by those names. Bhang includes the seed and also the small stalks when broken up and dried of the hemp plant. 3. Wild hemp is said to grow in the Sind hills, I have never seen it in the plains. 4. It is spoken of as kohi bhang, i.e., hemp from the hills. 5. I do not know what special conditions are necessary for its growth. 6. I do not know whether its growth is dense or scattered; but in the Sind hills the latter may safely be inferred, as the hills are for the most part bare and barren. 7. Hemp in Sind is cultivated for use as bhang only, Lever for ganja or charas; and as those pre- parations of the drug are not prepared in Sind, and only imported into it to a very limited extent, to be used chiefly by foreigners, I have for the most part withheld any remarks regarding them, thinking that such would be far more reliably obtained in the provinces where they are prepared and in common use. Sometimes, but very rarely, the thick stalks of the plant are placed in water to rot, and with great. labour rope or twine is made from them by individual persons for special purposes; but the plant is never grown for the use of its fibre or of its seed only. 8. There has been no considerable fluctuation in the area under hemp in recent years. The land- holder cultivates it with the sole object of getting a larger profit from it than from other crops; but he is in reality the slave of the licensed farmer who can buy his crop or not if he likes. Cultiva-
238 tion, therefore, never, increases beyond the farmer's requirements. 9. Being dissatisfied with my subordinates' reports on the methods of cultivation, I sent for two landholders who regularly cultivate, small areas with hemp. Their accounts varied very slightly, and were as follows:239 most part fakirs, beggars, scavengers, and men of low caste. A few well-to-do people also drink to excess; but such instances are rare. Idleness is the chief cause which leads to drinking. 28. Habitual moderate consumers of bhang are said to consume a quarter of a tola daily on an average, and excessive consumers 10 tolas, the respective prices being one pie and two annas. It is said, however, that as much as a seer has been consumed by an habitual drinker in the day, and an instance has been reported to me of a man who, having drunk bhang habitually for ten years, took three-fourths of a seer of ghundyun mixed with sugar and spices, and having smoked charas also from his pipe, collapsed and lost the use of one eye. He is now to be seen in the city of Shikarpur a complete wreck. 29. Habitual moderate consumers mix as a rule nothing with the bhang, but drink it in a large quantity of water, when it is known as "pango" or " sukho." The preparation is about 3 tolas to a gallon. They also drink it mixed with spices of all kinds, when it is known as " thadal," i.e., a cooling drink, the spices used being aniseed, pepper, almonds, sugar-candy, saffron, cardamoms, poppy seed, coriander, petals of the holly hock, succory, purslain, etc. Excessive consumers drink it as a rule with water only, but parched grain is sometimes added in order to intensify the intoxicating power. Sometimes before being mixed with water, the bhang is placed under the hot ashes of a fire, as this also is said to increase its strength. Ordinarily bhang is pounded up with a short stick which answers to a pestle, and then put in the water, the mixture being strained through a cloth. The spiced mixture is specially used at festivals, such as the Holi or Shivaratri. Dhatura is not used with bhang, nor do I know of the preparation " bhang massala." Tobacco only is mixed with charas and ganja. 30. Bhang is generally drunk in company, and especially at social meetings, those who drink it in solitude usually doing so in order to escape the notice of their relatives or others who disapprove of the habit. Women never drink it until they are growing old; nor do children as rule. Young men acquire the habit, but as a rule the consump- tion increases with age. 31. The habit of drinking bhang is easily ac- quired, and relinquished with difficulty if once it is used to excess. Probably bad company is the leading cause why people become excessive drinkers. The second landholder whom 1 ques- tioned is himself a consumer, but said, and I be- lieve truly, that he used to drink it to excess; but, finding how injurious it was, had for some time drunk it in moderation only, and once a day instead of twice, i.e., at evening, in the proportion of about 2 tolas to a pint. He used the expres- sion regarding his former excessive drinking that he could not stand it, as he lost his head, and it led to his being cheated by the banias, so he had reduced his quantity to half an anna, i.e., 2 ½ tolas per diem. 32. On certain Hindu festivals, such as the Holi, Shivaratri, Chetichand, and Vaisakhi, a large quantity of bhang is prepared, especially in the temples, and offered to all comers as a part of the religious ceremonies. If any one is unwilling to drink, he puts a drop on his tongue in token of acceptance. The bhang so used is very weak, and, the custom is one which is not likely to lead to the habit of drinking. This was Mr. Naval- rai's view, and he adds: "I have drunk it myself several times and found it very refreshing: " yet he was the leader in Sind of a crusade against all forms of drinking of intoxicants. Hindu gold- smiths, and possibly other mechanics, regard the drinking of bhang on Tuesday as essential on religious grounds, and call the drink "Shiva jo sukho " i.e., " Shiva's sukho." This, no doubt, is due to the fact that bhang is looked upon by the followers of Shiva as sacred, because their god is reputed to have been very fond of it, and drunk large quantities of it. The Muhammadans on Friday (which answers to our Sunday) consume more of it on that day, as it is their weekly holi- day. 33. I am convinced that the excessive drink- ing of bhang is universally regarded as disreput- able even by the very men who have become habitual drinkers. A common term in discredit- ing a man is to say that he is a " bhangi; " i.e., one who drinks to excess, and even the drinking of pango is liable to be cast in a man's teeth. Thus people who habitually drink pango will with- out hesitation deny that they do so if I ask them, but this is no doubt partly due to their imagin- ing that the sahib will look upon them less favourably, and not distinguish between their moderate and the bhangi's excessive use of the drug. Still I myself believe that all respectable natives, Hindus and Muhammadans, in their hearts look upon bhang, as they do upon opium and liquor, as bad. Charas and ganja are in disrepute with Sindhis, who consider that they produce asthma and impotence. 34. The moderate consumer would, no doubt soon take to other cooling drinks if the use of bhang was interdicted, but I do not think that it would be a serious privation to him. To the excessive drinker the privation would undoubtedly be great, and might also lead to his taking more injurious intoxicants, i.e., preparations of dhatura, aconite, opium, country liquor, etc. 35. As long as bhang could be procured else- where, it would inevitably be smuggled if prohib- ited here, and the same remark applies to the other drugs in so far as they are consumed in Sind. Its prohibition could be enforced by legis- lation only. Discontent would undoubtedly be caused by it, but I do not think that in Sind such discontent would amount to a political danger. I certainly think, however, that other intoxicants would be substituted, viz., liquor by the rich and other deleterious drugs by the poor. Charas, being prepared in Afghanistan and other parts of Cent- ral Asia, could always be smuggled into India. 36. There is no reason whatever to suppose that alcohol is taking the place of the hemp drugs. 40. Bhang is used by native doctors in the treatment of many complaints. Thus in a diluted form it is used to cure costiveness of the bowels, and also in cases of temporary stricture, dysentery, coughs, colds, and venereal diseases. For external application it is said to be mixed with butter and applied to boils, piles, ear-ache, and sore-throats. In cases of asthma the stalks are broken up with the flower of the dhatura and smoked. It is also used as an aphrodisiac. The ashes of burnt charas are said to be used for sciatica and worms. 41. Bhang used in moderation is beneficial240 ing been a man of very unusual ability and sound- ness of judgment as well as the leader in Sind of a crusade against intoxicants of all kinds. I spoke to him on the subject when he was collect- ing information for me, and found that he was strongly of opinion that bhang drunk as a mild refreshment was beneficial, while he was opposed to the use of opium or alcohol in any form except as a medicine. Bhang is used for the above purposes by all classes of the people. 42. Mr. Navalrai's reply to question 42 is241 Rs. 3-15-0) from the cultivator, and sells at Rs. 50 to 60 per maund. This seems a very loose system, and one which must often result in the farmers reaping an excessive rate of profit, especially as combinations at the auction sales to prevent com- petition are still not uncommon, and used to be frequent. 62. The quantity of cultivation is now suffi- ciently controlled, not by its price, but by the fact that if the cultivation exceeds the farmer's demand, the produce is unsaleable. I myself remember very well a year when some bhang which was forfeited to Government in default of payment of rent was absolutely unsaleable because the farmer had got all he required. The farmer gives the cultivator what he pleases, and just enough to induce the men who ordinarily cultivate it to supply the quantity he wants. There is consequently little fear of any excess in the area of cultivation. Even now a cultivator requires a license to possess and manufacture his bhang, and can only sell it wholesale to the licensed farmer. The simplest method of control would be a Gov- ernment monopoly as of opium. 63. With the above exceptions, I do not object to the present system of vend. 64. Nor do I object to the regulations govern- ing the export, import and transport of the drugs. 65. I think that the amount of taxation should be fixed by Government, and not left as it is at present in the farmer's hands, the taxation being the prices realised at auction. In the case of opium and country liquor Government first levy a duty, and this should be done for bhang in such a way, however, as not to lower its present price. The statistics previously sent demonstrate what is well known to be a fact that the price of bhang has been raised immensely in the last twenty years by the farmers. Thus five toles used to be purchased for three pies, whereas only one is now obtainable. Yet the average area cultivated in the five years ending 1877-78 was 164 acres, and in the last five years l65 acres, i.e., only one acre more, while the revenue per head of taxa- tion has risen from 5 annas to 1 rupee. 67. Whether ganja and charas pay any Govern- ment duty in the Punjab or elsewhere I do not know. But their price also should, I think, be fixed by Government, and a duty levied on them, if not already done. 68. There are no houses or shops where hemp drugs can be sold and consumed on the premises, and I certainly do not want to see such opened. 69. A retail shop for the sale of the drugs is only opened when there is a boná fide demand, although no regular system of local option exists. The matter must, I think, rest with the Revenue Officers to decide, because any rule that a shop should only be opened when a certain per- centage of the inhabitants signed an applica- cation for it would not be of much value, signa- tures being obtainable for very little even when the bribe is one of words only. Revenue Officers should, however, be very careful not to sanction any new shop until clear proof of substantial demand has been given. 70. There is no reason to think that bhang is much smuggled into this district. Bahawalpur indents on us for its supply; Khairpur grows its own; but as it is sold there at a much cheaper rate, petty acts of smuggling may be carried on. There is no tax on importation. 3. Evidence of Mr. C. E. S. STAFFORD STEELE, Officiating Deputy Commissioner, Thar and Parkar District. 2. Yes. Bhang, ganja, and charas. 3. A plant resembling the hemp plant is said to be found growing wild in the hills along the Khirta range and on the western border of Sind; it is called "Igoi." It operates quicker, and its effects are more pronounced than in the case of bhang. 4. The ordinary hemp plant does not grow spontaneously. 5. Unknown. 6. Scattered. 7. Practically none in this district; not an acre in all. 8. Vide above. 9. Grown both as a kharif and rabi crop. Fur- ther particulars not known. 10. Not a special class. 11 and 12. No information available. 13. ride query 7. 14. The plant, as already stated, is not grown in this district. 18. Bhang deteriorates after twelve months, and becomes worthless after two years. Ganja the same. Charas is said to improve by keeping, but it has to be kept so that the air may be excluded, and even so it will not retain its properties after five years. 19. Only for smoking. 20. The inferior orders and ascetics, both Hin- dus and Muhammadans, mendicants and fakirs. 21. Flat preferred. 22. Foreign. Imported directly from the Pun- jab; principally from Amritsar. It is said to come from Yarkand. 23. Those addicted to ganja and deprived of the drug at times mix bhang with tobacco; but this is said to he infrequent, the result being unsatisfac- tory. 24. The sweetmeat majum is eaten by the higher classes, but it is not met with in this dis- trict. 25. Increased, but with the population and not in consequence of greater consumption by in- dividuals, except in the case of charas, the imports of which have increased during the past two years. 26. Bhang. Charas. Ganja. (a) 40 per cent. 60 per cent. 70 per cent. (b) 40 242 consumers are to be found in all classes and among both sexes. (a) Charas.243 47. No. 49. The lower classes of prostitutes are addict- ed to bhang. Ganja and charas are supposed to act at first as an aphrodisiac, but their continued Use is said to inevitably cause impotence. 50. Vide above. 51. Such has not proved to be the case in this district. None so far as can be locally ascertained. 52. Persons claiming to be addicted to ganja and charas have been known to plead. irrespon- sibility for their actions. 53. It appears that those who indulge in bhang are easily provoked and become exces- sively irritable, and that insanity results from the immoderate use of ganja and charas. Se- rious crimes are most undoubtedly committed by persons addicted to. these drugs, and are mostly ascribed either to provocation or frenzy. 54. These drugs are not taken by those un- accustomed to their use with a view. to fortify themselves in the commission of premeditated crimes. Criminals addicted to ganja and chorus are believed to gather Dutch courage by forti- fying themselves with a smoke prior to starting on their nefarious expeditions. 55. No such case has been heard of here. 56. Sugar, poppy-head seeds, til, i.e., gin- gelly, and parched gram are mixed with bhang, and are supposed to enhance its intoxicating properties. The baking of the leaves prior to their being pounded up is believed to. increase the effects of the drug. Pickles, sour fruit and ghee are the antidotes resorted to in case of prolonged intoxication. 57. They are only smoked here. 58 and 59. The system appears to work well, but, in view of the baneful effects produced by ganja and charas, I am disposed to recommend that their sale should be restricted to a greater extent than is now done. In terms of the pre- sent form of license, a retail vendor is permitted to sell 40 tolas or half a seer of these drugs to any one person on any one day; he is also per- mitted to sell the same amount of bhang, which is a much cheaper commodity. I think in the case of ganja and charas the maximum vend might well be fixed at 10 tolas. 60. Not produced in this district. 61. Not produced. 62. It is already sufficiently controlled. 63. Vide answer to paragraphs 58 and 59. 64. No. 68. No. 69. Merely in so far that shops are only opened where required. None seem called for Unnecessary. 4. Evidence of KHAN BAHADUR KADIRDAD KHAN GUL KHAN, C.I.E., Deputy Collector, Naushahro Sub-division. 1. I have served in all the districts of the prov- ince for a little more than thirty-four years, and have had to deal with those who sell and consume hemp. 2. The drugs which are consumed and sold in Sind are the three, viz., bhang (hemp), charas and ganja. Hemp is locally produced, but charas and ganja are imported from Yarkand and Panveli of Thana district, respectively. They are not manufactured from hemp plant in this province. Ganja imported into this country is of the flattened shape, i.e., the flat ganja. So the definitions given by Dr. Praia may be accepted. In this province hemp is known by the name of bhang, and charas and ganja by their original names. 3. In no district of this province does the hemp plant grow spontaneously. 7. Hemp is cultivated in this province only for use as bhang and for its seed, but for no other purposes. 8. There is a gradual increase in the cultivation of bhang owing to the increase in population, but the increase is not very great. 9. I have served in Sehwan taluka, zillah Karachi, for about seven years, where in one of its villages, called Bubak, hemp is grown consider- ably and brought to perfection. In order to raise a good crop of hemp, it is necessary that the land should be well ploughed and manured and copiously watered. The seed is sown about October or November and the crop is. reaped about April. The crop is then allowed to dry in the sun and then removed to warehouses or godowns. 10. Persons of the same classes as other agri- cultural cultivators grow the hemp. They form no special class: but as a rule a Hindu agriculturist takes more pains with the crop than a Muham- madan does. 11. I do not know anything about this. 12. I cannot answer this. 13. As ganja is not manufactured from hemp in this province, I cannot answer this question satis- factorily. I can only add this much, that as hemp is raised to its perfection in this province, there is no reason why ganja could not be made out of it locally, if the cultivators knew how to manufac- tureit. 14. Ganja and charas are not prepared in Sind; but only bhang is used. Bhang is the leaf of the hemp plant and gene- rally the seeds are mixed with it. In this state it is pounded in a mortar, made into liquid, and drunk. Bhang is not imported from any other province or native territory; but whatever is raised in the province is sufficient to supply the demand of consumers. Very little of it is grown in this district. The area brought under hemp cultivation during the last three years is as follows: 244 15. I cannot give the method of the preparation of charas and ganja, as they are not manufactured in Sind. But as far as the habits of the people are concerned, charas and ganja are smoked, bhang is drunk in a liquid state, and a preparation of the bhang, called majum, is eaten. The way in which majum is prepared is as follows: 245 drinkers had begun by moderate smoking or drinking. 32. In the case of charas and ganja it is not obligatory by any religious or. social custom to smoke the stuff on any particular occasion; but in the case of bhang among the Hindus during the Holi holidays it is a part of the religious ceremony to take a little of " panjtulo" (five ingredients) when attending the tikana (a place of, worship). This panjtulo is composed of bhang, sugar, cardamom, dry leaves of roses and succory (or kasni); but there is no religious or social obligation on the Muhammadans to take the drink on any particular day. On the occasion of religious holidays such as Mohurrum those who do not drink it have no objection to take a little of it if offered; but this drinking is gene- rally temperate and is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit, nor is it otherwise injurious. 33. As far as public opinion of this country is concerned, the smoking of charas and ganja is considered as not a respectable habit, and the moderate drinking of bhang is not regarded as disreputable. On the contrary, there are certain verses in Persian, Sindhi and Urdu, praising the drug. The hemp plant or its leaves or seeds are never worshipped on any occasion by Muhammadans. In the Sindhi months of Asu and Chet, when Hindu males and females observe fasting (called Ekana), the section of the Hindus who are the followers of Devi worship hemp in liquid before it is drunk. 34. Certainly it would be a serious privation to charas, ganja and hemp consumers to forego the consumption of these drugs, as it would be in the case of a European labourer if he is prohi- bited from his glass of beer. Once a man gets into the habit of taking certain intoxicating or narcotic drug, he feels the want of it even if he were a moderate consumer. It is very difficult to give the probable number of each class of con- sumers. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs, just in the same way as all governments in Europe would not find it feasible to prohibit the use of wines and beers. If the licit consumption of these drugs were pro- hibited, people would find ways to use them illicitly. The consumers will be seriously discon- tented if prohibition were enforced, and the dis- content will certainly amount to a political danger, as all classes of people from the most influential spiritual leader to the lowest beggar will say that British Government, while not interfering or pro- hibiting the use of alcohol in their own country, are stopping them here from the use of less intoxi- cating drugs which they have been using from time immemorial and which is also religiously respected, and the prohibition will naturally be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants and other drugs. 36. From the enquiries that I have made, I learn that alcohol is not substituted for any of these drugs; but if the consumers of hemp drugs find themselves in better circumstances, they begin to use alcohol in addition to hemp drugs. 37. In my opinion the effects of charas smoking are as bad as those of ganja. From a teetotaller's point of view one is as bad as the other. 38. I cannot answer this question, as we have got only one kind of ganja used in Sind. 39. In this province every body will share with me in saying that smoking of any preparation of the hemp drug is more injurious than drinking it or eating the same in the shape of majum, because smoking has more stupefying effects than drinking and eating. 40. The use of charas and ganja is never pre- scribed by any school of native doctors as a medi- cine, or as an ingredient in a medicine, but on several occasions the drinking of mild liquid of old hemp is prescribed by native doctors as a medi- cine in the case of bleeding piles, dysentery and stoppage of urine. I have not heard that hemp is ever used in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. The moderate use of charas, ganja or bhang will not prove beneficial in the case of those who have never used it; but those who consume it confess that the moderate use of these drugs makes them in good mood for hard work and exertion, and the use of hemp liquid is considered as a preventive of disease in malarious and un- healthy tracts. It is difficult to say regarding the classes minutely; but I refer to the moderate habitual use of these drugs. 42. The moderate use of all the three drugs is harmless, because I have never observed the moderate consumer of any of these drugs inferior intellectually or physically to those who do not use them. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 1 have exercised magisterial powers for more than 26 years and no cases have come to my notice showing that because a man happens to be a moderate consumer of any of these drugs, he has been offensive to his neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of any of these drugs on the habitual consumer is that he finds himself to be refreshed, and it pro- duces a little intoxication, creates appetite and the effects of intoxication last for a few hours. The habitual moderate consumer feels himself very uneasy if he does not get his smoke or dose at his usual times. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs is not proved to produce any noxious effects 246 48. In the case of habitual excessive consumers of these drugs, the habit does not become heredi- tary, and their children are not affected, because in this country, with the exception of prostitutes, no female is an habitual excessive consumer of these drugs, and one of the parents of the child, being free from the habit of the excessive use of the drug, is probably the cause of the children not being affected. 49 and 50. I cannot answer these questions. 51. Large proportion of bad characters in this country are those who do not use any of these drugs. The crime in general or in particular has no connection with the moderate use of these drugs. I give this opinion from my own experience as a Magistrate who have had to deal with bad charac- ters and criminals for more than a quarter of a century. 52. On the other hand, the excessive use of bhang produces cowardice and timidity. An excessive bhang drinker is never violent. He is not expected to commit any daring deed. If he has no funds to purchase his daily bhang, he might resort to pilfering. The excessive smokers of ganja and charas get into fury and violence and in that state do commit the crime of taking the law in their own hands against the persons of other indi- viduals, if provoked. 53. The excessive indulgence in these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime or violence. I know of no instance in which the excessive indul- gence of these drugs may have led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. I answer this in the negative. 55. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced by any of these drugs without some strong admixture, such as dhatura or opium soaked in oil, and the criminals in order to further their designs always mix some other strong intoxicating drug with hemp drugs, when they administer it to their victims. 56. I am not in possession of accurate information to enable me to answer this question correctly. 57. Ganja and charas are not known to be eaten or drunk in Sind. They are only smoked. 58. I am acquainted with the system of excise administration in this province in respect of hemp drugs. I think it is capable of improvement. 59. In my opinion the administration requires the following improvements: 247 to consumers in that territory at the rate of Rs. 4 or Rs. 5 per maund, and in times of scarcity at the rate of Rs. 9 or Rs. 10 per maund. It may safely be said that the retail rate prevailing in the Khairpur territory is Rs. 5 per maund, while that in the British territory of the Hyderabad district is Rs. 50 per maund. The difference between the prices in the two adjoining countries is so great that people have strong temptations in their way to illicitly import hemp from the Mir's terri- tory into the Hyderabad district. The Political Agent has further informed me that the retail sellers pay only one rupee per maund to the State. The Khairpur territory is bordering along the Shikarpur, Hyderabad and Thar and Parkar dis- tricts, and as long as this great disparity of rates continues, there is a great danger of illicit im- portation of the drug. The number of patrols, who have to guard the borders of the Mir's territory for the purpose of suppressing and detecting crimes against the salt and excise laws is far from sufficient. 60. Ganja is not produced and manufactured in this province. 61. Charas is not produced and manufactured in this province. 62, 63 and 64. In answering question 59 I have answered these questions. 65. I would adhere to the present system of selling the right of bhang, charas and ganja by public auction, but would insist on a maximum price for retail sale being fixed by Government, as is done in the case of opium, and I think the present retail rates at which bhang, ganja and charas are sold are very high. 66. I need not answer this question. 67. I have answered this question while answer- ing question 59. 68. There are shops for the retail sale of these drugs; but the drugs are not consumed on the premises. 69. The wishes of the people are consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. The Collector has power to determine how many shops and in what localities are to be opened, and before fixing their number and locality the wishes of the people are consulted through the mukhtiarkars of the talukas. I think that local public opinion should always be considered on this point. 70. While answering question 59, I have point- ed out the different rates at which bhang is sold in this district and in the adjoining native terri- tory of Khairpur, and as long as this disparity of rates is not removed, the danger of illicit import- ation of hemp cannot disappear. Otherwise duty is paid on all these drugs. I may further say that in some instances the excise and salt estab- lishments have succeeded in detecting cases of illicit importation of bhang from the Khairpur territory into this district, and the offenders have been dealt with according to law. 5. Evidence of S. SADIK ALI SHERALI, Deputy Collector and First Class Magistrate, Frontier District of Upper Sind. 1. My own personal experience, gathered by the use of hemp in its liquid form on three or four occasions, from personal association with consumers of bhang and charas, from my rational age, and also from inquiries made from persons who drink bhang and smoke charas, from contractors in this district and in Shikarpur, Sukkur and Rohri, from observations made during the time I was on three mouths' leave from 3rd August to 2nd Nov- ember 1893, and from inquiries made in Saharan- pur district, and also during the course of my service extending over a period of twenty-one years. 2. In Sind bhang is not known by the name of siddhi, but is called by the following names:248 Details of Cultivation of Hemp Drugs (Bhang) in the Jacobabad Taluka. YEAR AREA UNDER CULTIVATION A. G. 1873-74 2 22 1874-75 4 0 1875-76 1 4 1876-77 2 24 1877-78 0 1 1878-79 No details available. 1879-80 0 6 1880-81 0 0 Details not available from 1881-82 to 1883-84, and there was no cultivation in 1884-85 to 1892 93. Note.249 Ganja is not kept in stock by the farmers. The above prices being prohibitive, the consumption of the two drugs has been restricted to a great extent. It may be noted that farmers buy bhang ordi- narily at an average rate of one rupee and eight annas per maund, i.e., 33/5pies. per pound. The fluctuations in rates of sale depend upon the price the farmers pay to Government for the mono- poly of the farms, and raise or reduce rates accord- ing to the amounts they pay. Towns and cities. Per cent. Outly- ing villages. Per cent. 26. (a) Of bhang250 as alcoholic stimulants are not considered to be cooling and refreshing in their effects. 36. Alcohol is not being substituted to any extent for any of these drugs. Alcohol is used by people for its own sake. 37. Do not know, as ganja is rarely smoked in Sind; and I could not get hold of a ganja smoker to describe its effects. 38. Do not know. 39. Do not know, as there is no preparation of hemp, the smoking of which is considered to be less injurious than drinking or eating the same. The smoking of all the known preparations of hemp are considered to be more injurious than those which are drunk or eaten. 40. The answer to this question will be found in Appendix A. All Native Doctors are guided by the instructions given in Makhzan adviyah and use all the medicines according to their properties as expounded in that book. I do not know whether any of them are used in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. (a) As a food accessory, the moderate use of bhang is beneficial, and of charas, it is not beneficial. As a food digestive both bhang and charas are not beneficial; bhang in the cold season and charas always. (b) Bhang and charas do not give staying- power except under exposure to heat and cold. I know from my own experience that a bowl of preparation of bhang in its light liquid form gives staying-power under severe exposure to the heat of sun, and it is a common saying that a drink of bhang has the effect of making the sky look over- cast and weather cloudy. The use of bhang alleviates fatigue in hot season. Persons addicted to the use of bhang and charas take their accus- tomed allowance generally after they are free from work requiring manual labour. Ordinarily their time is about 10 o'clock in the morning and 5 o'clock in the afternoon, A smoke of charas is al- so taken at the time of going to bed in the night in order to get sleep. Only beggars who sit " Dharna" that go on smoking charas without taking food and thus deaden their feelings and appetite until they are paid alms. Smokers of charas and drinkers of bhang, specially those who take them in excess, are notorious for their sluggishness after they take these drugs. When the intoxication comes on, they feel sleepy and cannot exert much, as their bodies become heavy for them to drag about and lose their wonted lightness. (c) No; on the contrary, the presence of too much fluid in the system of drinkers of bhang subjects them to constant attacks of fever and other diseases in malarious and unhealthy tracts. Please see also Appendix A on this point. (d) The moderate use of the thin liquid prepar- ation of bhang alleviates thirst, refreshes the drinkers and stimulates their appetite in the hot season. All classes use the watery preparation of the bhang and their numbers have been given in paragraphs 24 and 26. I refer to both moderate habitual as well as to moderate occasional use of the drug. 42. In the hot season in the Upper Sind dis- tricts, where the heat is intense and weather dry to the extreme degree, the moderate use of the light watery preparation of bhang is both beneficial and harmless, It acts as a diaphoretic, stimulant, diuretic and refrigerent. Its moderate use throughout the hot season from the middle of March to the middle of October does not in any way tend to the engendering of any of the diseases and disorders described in Appendix A. In this respect 1 differ from the conclusions arrived at by the author of the Makhzan adviyah, as in this country in the strong heat and dry climate we find natural antidotes for counteracting any ill-effects likely to arise from the use of bhang in its liquid form. Even in the cold season there is sufficient heat and dryness in the climate to counteract to a certain extent the evil consequence of using the preparation in its light watery form. The effects of charas, on the contrary, are most strong, and combined with intense heat and dryness Of the climates, its moderate use even cannot be considered to be harmless. 43. Yes; they are inoffensive. 44. (1.) Bhang.251 I know only of one case of temporary insanity. In the year 1880, I was Head Clerk and Head Munshi in the Office of Assistant to Agent, Gover- nor General in Baluchistan, stationed in Jacob- abad. One Havildar and a number of Police sepoys guarded the office and treasure placed in it. The Havildar was given to the moderate habit of using bhang in its liquid form and smoking charas. One day when I went to the office I was informed that the Havildar had become mad; I saw him myself; he was talking incessantly and quite incoherently, but was otherwise harmless. I learnt that he had been indulging some days previously in the excessive use of bhang and charas, which had produced the insanity. Knowing hot and dry effects of charas, I ordered some sepoys to seize him and pour over his head a few vessels of cold water morning and evening, as it was, I think, the month of July or August. The process was repeated for two or three days and the man became quite sane again. 47 and 48. Do not know. 49. The moderate habitual use of any of these drugs is not practised as an aphrodisiac by males or prostitutes, as its habitual use does not excite the sexual powers. It is the occasional moderate use of bhang which is used as an aphrodisiac in its watery form both by males and females. But male persons who wish to enjoy the pleasure of sexual intercourse use bhang in its preparations of majums. Bhang and majums are used also for the cure of spermatorrh252 66. Ganja is not used in this part of the coun- try, and I have no suggestions to offer under this head. 67. No. 68. There are no houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs or their preparations where they may be consumed on the premises. If such shops are licensed and the consumption is allowed upon them, the consequences would be mischievous, as the shop-keepers for the advantage of effecting sales of large quantities of these drugs in order to gain large profits would tempt the consumers to their habitual excessive use beyond proportion. 69. The wishes of people are considered, and very often consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. If people object to the opening of a shop in their neighbourhood, their objections are considered, and the question decided on its merits. 70. I have no facts regarding the importation or smuggling of hemp drugs from Native States to which I wish to draw attention. Duty is really paid in respect to the charas used in this district as it is imported from the Punjab. But in respect to bhang, please see remarks under paragraph 62. Appendix A. Description of the bhang or hemp plant as given in the Makhzan-Adviyah (meaning Trea- sury of Medicine or Materia Medica,. in Persian). Qanab.253 are used as snuff for discharge of matter from the head, their liquid as a wash for the destruction of lice in the hair of the head, their liquid and oil for the cure of pain in the ears and destruction of worms in them. Eating its leaves absorbs watery substance in the abdomen, produce costiveness, is diuretic, checks spermatorrh254 crushed there with the hand. Some water is then poured over it, the drug is then washed three or four times until all the dirt passes out of it in water, which is put in it afresh every time the dirty water is thrown out. It is then very minu- tely ground with a heavy pestle of wood. When it becomes very fine, water is poured in it accord- ing to the requirements of the drinker. The liquid is then passed through a moderately thick piece of cloth three or four times until no thick particle remains in it. The preparation is then drunk in bowls of earth specially made for the purpose called " jamni," or in any bowl made of earth or metal. By habitual excessive consumers as many as 10 or even 15 bowls of the liquid are drunk gradually at one time. An ordinary bowl would bold about half a pound of water. Some persons prefer it in a thick liquid form, and others in its thin watery form according to their taste and the amount of intoxication they desire. Thick preparation is supposed to be very strong and affects the brains. 6. Evidence of K. B. MAHOMED YAKUB SHEIK ISMAIL, Deputy Collector and Sub- Divisional Magistrate, Schwan, Sind. 51. There is not a large proportion of bad cha- racters who are habitual moderate consumers of bhang, charas, ganja or any other preparation thereof. There is no connection of moderate use of these drugs with crime in general, or with crime of any special character. 52. With regard to excessive use of these drugs, my reply is the same, viz., in the negative. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs does not incite to unpremediated crime, violent or otherwise. I don't know of any ease in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. These drugs are not used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. General remarks on the above four questions.255 in their houses, but it could be prepared wherever it is grown. 17. These is no particular class of people by which bhang preparation is made. 18. These drugs do deteriorate within four years although kept with care. Their intoxicating properties are lost by dryage. 19. For smoking only. 20. Only few people and generally mendicants and bad characters smoke these. 21. Flat ganja is preferred. 22. Charas imported form Khorasan is used in Sind. 23. No. 24. Fifty per cent, of the people in Sind drink bhang. 25. There is no perceptible increase or decrease. 26 and 27. I cannot answer this. 28. (a) One pie per diem. (b) Half anna per diem. 29. No. Yes; I know bhang massala. Some people mix sugar, almonds and saffron with bhang. 30. Generally in company and is confined to the male sex and not to any time of life, but it is hardly given to children. 31. Such habit is not easily formed, but it is very difficult to break off. Yes, there is a ten- dency for the moderate habit being developed into the excessive. 32. The use of all these drugs is generally in- jurious. 33 and 34. I cannot answer this. 35. (a) and (b) No. (c) It will be difficult to enforce prohibition, and it will occasion serious discontent, but it will never amount to any political danger, and I do not think it would be followed by recourse to other drugs. 36. No. 37. Charas-smoking has stronger effect than that of ganja. 38. Not to my knowledge. 39. Charas and ganja are smoked and are never used for drinking, and bhang is drunk. 40. Bhang is sometimes advised as a cooling thing and is also given to horses. 41. I do not think so. 42. I do not think so. 43. Yes. 44. I cannot say. 45. (a), (b), (c), (d) I cannot say. (e) It may do so. (f ) and (g) I cannot say. 46. I cannot discuss this. 47 and 48. Not as a rule. 49 and 50. To some extent I believe. 51 and 52. I believe so. 53. I do not know. 54. I do not think so. 55. I cannot say so. 56. I do not know. 57. Not to my knowledge. 58. I think it is working fairly. 59. I cannot give reasons. 60. Ganja is not produced in Sind. 61. Charas is not produced in Sind. 62. I do not think so. 63. I have no objection. 64. I have no objection, as the present regula- tions are working very well. 65. No alteration is needed in my opinion. 66 and 67. No. 68. Licensed charas shops for smoking chandu, which were really a source of misery, have been done away with, but shops for the sale of these drugs are in existence, and there is no objec- tion to their existence. 69. Yes, the mukhtiarkar always enquires from the townspeople before a shop is allowed to be opened, and I think this is a right course. 70. No. 8. Evidence of MR. C. MACIVER, District Superintendent of Police, Karachi. 2. Yes; charas, bhang, and ganja. 14. Yes; bhang is. 51. Most Sindbis take bhang, it is not specially consumed by bad characters. None as far as I am aware. 52. Some criminals have been known to take bhang four times daily, but this does not cause them to commit crime. 53. Very rarely. I know of only one instance. 54. I should say not. Most Siudhi criminals take bhang, and sometimes before committing offences. 55. In the few cases I remember the offenders were chiefly foreigners to Sind, and the victims were not completely stupefied. 56. I know no case in which hemp was mixed with other substances. Dhatura is used alone. 57. 1 have no personal experience on this point. 9. Evidence of RAHMATALA KHAN, Police Inspector, Shikarpur. 1. I make this statement based on the oppor- tunities of seeing and hearing which I had had in police service. 3. I do not know where the hemp plant grows spontaneously, but the hill plant called akoi is said to be grown in Tando Rahimkhan in the Karachi district. It is cultivated in abundance at Bubak near Sehwan. 4, It has no different name, but the hill plant is called akoi and grows spontaneously.
256 5. The hemp plant akoi grows in the hills on account of the heavy rainfall there and is more intoxicating. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated near Sehwan257 will not leave him as long as he lives, provided he does not renounce the habit. If he makes it a habit again insanity will attack him again. The following are the symptoms: Irritability, foolish- ness, and talkativeness. Consumers do not admit their insanity. No; but the use of bhang pro- duces mental anxiety and cares, and on account of the weakness of the brain the consumer gets no sleep. Thus he falls into excess. 46. Some persons get into habits of excessive consumption by using it either when alone or when in company with others. 47. It is not hereditary, and it does not affect the children. 48. I have given replies above in question 46. 49. It is used as an aphrodisiac. The use is a temporary gratification. The ultimate result is that it weakens the power of copulation, i.e., it impairs manly power. It is used by prostitutes also. 50. I have given replies in question 46. 51. Bad characters use it moderately. Its moderate use has no connection with crime in general. 52. The offenders themselves do not use these drugs excessively, but they sometimes induce others to smoke or drink to excess in order to get opportunities of easily committing offences upon them. 53. The excessive use of these drugs incites to unpremeditated crime. In 1870, in Mirpurkhas, in Hyderabad Zilla, one bhangi (a drinker of bhang) committed a murder in a scuffle about plucking berries. 54. No; criminals, when intending to commit a serious offence, would not themselves use any intoxicating drug to excess, for intoxication de- prives one of sense. 55. Yes; but those persons who are not in the habit of taking any intoxicating drug, and who are called sufis, will be completely stupefied if they are made to drink bhang or smoke ganja and charas to excess. Habitual consumers can only be stupefied by bhang mixed with dhatura, etc. But 'akoi,' the wild bhang, if administered to any one, even without admixtures, will bring on stupe- faction. 56. In both cases the effects are modified by mixing dhatura. In 1891, 31st May, accused Sheikhal, Mohmadali and Shah Mahomed adminis- tered bhang mixed with dhatura to Suchal, who was thereby suffocated, so that he died. This offence was committed in Shikarpur. 57. It is not customary to eat ganja and charas in this province. 68. There are licensed shops. 10. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR LAKSHMANSING MATTHRAJI, Police Inspector, Hyderabad, Sind. 1. have passed my life in Sind, and have visited many parts of it as a Police Officer. I have come in contact with consumers of ganja, charas and bhang, and have thus acquired ex- perience. 2. These definitions are correct. Bhang is also called the humble plant in Sind other names are same. 3. I do not know. It does not grow in this province. 4. (1) bhang, (2) sawai, (3) saee, (4) the humble plant, (5) bubkain, (6) sabzi, (7) nangin, (8) sukho. All these names refer to the same plant. There is another kind which is called akoi which is more intoxicating than others and it grows in hills on rainfall. It is never used as bhang, for it is very intoxicating and brings on unconsciousness. 5. I do not know. It does not grow in this province. 6. It does not grow in this province, hence I do not know. 7. Yes. (a) and (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) Not for fibre, but for seeds. It can be cultivated anywhere in Sind, but it is cultivated in the following places:258 is then used for eating. Roaming fakirs eat raw bhang. (c) Dry bhang is soaked in water, washed, pound- ed, mixed with water, sifted and then drunk. Dried or wet bhang covered over with 4 or 5 folds of cloth is buried in hot ashes. It is left there for about half an hour. Then it is taken out and after undergoing the above process is drunk. This is called Popo. Bhang is parched on an earthen pan, and then drunk as above. 16. It is not prepared in houses. It can be prepared wherever the hemp plant is cultivated. The wild plant is not produced here, hence nothing can be said. 17. In this country only Hindus and Mu- hammadans, but a larger number of Muhammadans use it. 18. Yes; it deteriorates, i.e., it loses its intoxi- cating effects. It keeps good for one year, after which it gradually deteriorates. Ganja and bhang can keep good for two years. As regards charas I cannot say how long it will keep good with ordinary care. It loses its effect in time. I do not think any measures can be adopted to prevent deterioration. 19. They are used only in smoking, and are put to no other use. 20. Hindus and Musalmans about three-fourths of them. In otaras, tikanas, madhis, and on shops of some bakers. No special places are appointed for it. 21. Flat ganja is preferred. No special places are appointed. 22. No native charas is produced. It is import- ed from Yarkand. 23. Bhang is not used in smoking. 24. No one eats bhang except in exceptional cases mentioned under No. 15. It is drunk by Musalmans and Hindus, about half of each of the classes. No special places are appointed, but it is drunk in otaras, madhis, tikanas, but these are not specially appointed for the purpose. 25. The use of charas and bhang is increasing, for these drugs are liked by people. The use of ganja is decreasing, for it is less intoxicating. Charas-smoking produces heart-burning, makes the semen thin, and sometimes weakens the manly power, produces cough, asthma and dimness of sight. The consumers of bhang mostly like it, because it creates appetite, and gives prolonged pleasure in copulation. The consumers of bhang, after drinking it, smoke charas which gives them great pleasure and then they are gay and merry. 26. I cannot say anything about it. 27. The consumers are chiefly taken from the following classes259 44. The immediate effect is intoxication. The effect of bhang is that it is refreshing. The other drugs produce intoxication. The use of any of these drugs does not allay hunger. It creates appetite. The effect of bhang lasts for five or six hours, that of charas for one hour or two at the most, and that of ganja for about an hour. No other immediate effects are produced. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing to an habitual consumer. It produces uneasiness, irri- tability, loss of appetite, sleeplessness, dysentery and restlessness. 45. (a)The use of charas alone, particulars of which are given under No. 25, produces noxious effects, physical and mental but not moral. (b) Nothing else, except the diseases mentioned under No. 25. (c) No. (d) No, but it produces asthma. (e) It does not impair the moral sense, produces laziness and habits of immorality and debauchery. (f) It deadens the intellect, but produces no insanity. I cannot give any more account, but doctors would be able to do so. 46. The same as under 45. 47 and 48. No. 49. Bhang alone is used as an aphrodisiac. Prostitutes use it so. The use of the drug for this purpose and its use as an ordinary narcotic pro- duce the same intoxicating effects and do not differ. It does not produce impotence. 50. The same as under 49. 51. Yes. No connection. 52. The same as under 51. 53. It does not incite to unpremediated crime, but it will not be surprising if the consumer him- self falls a victim to it. I do not know of any such case. 54. Never. 55. Criminals do so; but if the victim is a man not habituated to its use, he will be stupefied. But criminals generally mix dhatura or akoi bhang with the ordinary bhang, or with charas, or with ganja, and induce their victims to partake of it. Complete stupefaction can be induced by the drug without admixture, if the victim be a man not habituated to its use. 56. The effects of hemp are modified by mixing the stimulating ingredients mentioned under No. 29, likewise by mixing dhatura or akoi (detailed under No. 55) or other narcotic. Dhatura is not mixed with bhang for personal consumption. 57. Ganja and charas are not eaten or drunk, but are only smoked. 58. The system is working well. But the hemp cultivators secretly use bhang for personal consumption. This requires to be remedied. 59. The hemp cultivators are bound to sell their bhang to contractors, but frequently they reserve a little quantity for their own use. 60. Ganja is not produced in this province. 61. Charas is not produced in this province. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant should not be freely allowed. It should be strictly res- tricted. Particular plots should be marked out where the cultivation should be allowed. It should be under the control of the zamindar and the tapedar. 63 to 66. I cannot say. 67. I see no objection. 68. There are licensed shops, but no houses. I can give no further opinion upon it. 69. Sometimes the consumers, when they meet in otaras, madhis or such other places where these narcotic drugs are generally taken, consult each other, and then subscribe to the purchase of the drug. Their wishes should be considered. 70. It is not necessary to modify the existing regulations. Such a drug is not used without the duty being paid on it. These accidents are rare, but there are sufficient safeguards against them. Consumers sometimes use untaxed drugs. Note. The akoi bhang grows spontaneously in hills, and does not grow in this district. Its growth depends on rains, and is not taken care of. It is called akohi because it grows in hills260 18. The consumers of bhang say that it loses its intoxicating effects after twelve months. It loses its effects in time. 19. They are smoked only. 20. About one-tenth of the Hindus and Musal- mans of Sind. In tikanas and otaras. 22. The charas imported from Khorasan is used here. 24. One-fourth of Hindus and Muhammad- ans drink bhang. In houses, tikanas and otaras. No one eats bhang. 40. Bhang is prescribed by native doctors for those suffering from heat, for free urine, and for stopping dysentery and diarrh261 13. Evidence of MR. GEO. J. BARKER, Abkari Inspector, Karachi. 1. As an Abkari Inspector visiting and inspect- ing the ganja shops during the last eleven years or more. 2. Yes. Bhang, sahi or subji, ganja, and charas. 3. The wild hemp (i.e., bhang) plant is said by the ganja contractor to grow at a place called Gondrani in Lus Beyla, bordering on the Karachi District. 4. Known as kohi bhang. 7. The hemp plant is grown for use as bhang in the province, chiefly at Buback and Thatte (Karachi District), Khaiber in Hyderabad District and in the Shikarpur District. 8. These particulars supplied in statistical returns to Commissioner in Sind. 10. Cultivators262 Moderate consumers of ganja and charas (arti- sans, carpenters, dyers, stone-masons, etc.) would feel inconvenience. About one-third of the con- sumers, I should think, were addicted to ganja and charas. 35. It would not, I consider, be feasible to pro- hibit the use of bhang on account of its universal use. Ganja could with difficulty be brought under control by restricting cultivation and the quantity the contractor is allowed to import and sell, and gradually reducing the same yearly, and fixing the prices (high) at which it would be sold. Charas263 to those of the poorer classes, travellers, etc., coming on business to Karachi and who have not the vessels or the time to prepare their drinks of bhang. 69. The numbers of shops are regulated accord- ing to the demand for them. No new shops are opened without the actual necessity for such. 70. Ganja is sometimes imported illicitly in small quantity at a time into Karachi from Cutch ports and from Lus Beyla, both foreign States. The ganja used in Lus Beyla and, I think, in Cutch also is brought from Panwel, Kolaba district, Bombay, on payment of a nominal duty of 8 annas per maund, and being sold cheap in these States it is smuggled across here. If these States paid a higher duty and raised the prices of ganja, smuggling could be reduced considerably. 14. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR ALUMAL TRIKAMDAS BHOJWANI, Deputy Educa- tional Inspector, Karachi. 1. Enquiry from dealers in the drugs and per- sonal inspection. 2. The leaves of the hemp plant are locally known by the name of bhang or subji, and the definition of Dr. Prain may be accepted. Neither (1) charas nor (2) ganja are manufac- tured or grown in the Karachi district, to which my experience and knowledge are confined. Charas is imported by the Karachi Government farmers from Amritsar, which is said to obtain it from a place called Ladak and from Yarkand. The vulgar notion will not endorse the definition of charas as given herein. Ganja is obtained vid Bombay from Panwel and Barsi and other places; and Dr. Prain's defi- nition of the drug would appear to correspond with the popular notion, and to be supported by the general appearance of the article. 3. I am not aware of the spontaneous growth of the hemp plant in any part of the Karachi district. 4. The hemp plant cultivated for bhang is locally known as bhang, subji, Sivaji buti (Shiva's plant). According to colour, bhang is divided into kaki ( brown) and saye (green). 5. As regards the wild hemp, the conditions are unknown. 7. (a) and (b) None. (c) and (d) Yes, at Bubak in the Sehwan taluka; and I believe it used to be cultivated in the Tatta taluka about the Calri canal and in the vici- nity of the Fakirjo gate. 9. The ground intended to be sown with bhang is first watered and made soft. It is then fur- rowed twice over and the seed thrown broadcast. The earth is then turned over once more with a plough and levelled with a roller. All the fur- rowing, ploughing, and sowing must be done and completed in one and the same day. When the seed shoots up to the height of about two inches the ground is watered for the first time and the weeding commences. It is usual to separate the shoots also from one another to the distance of a span at least, and hence all intervening shoots from the seeds thrown broad-cast are rooted out. When the plant grows to the height of a foot and a half, or even earlier, and as soon as its leaves spread out and overshade the ground, the weeding is discontinued, and this is generally after the third watering. The watering operations continue until the white seeds change colour and turn blackish or brown. After the plant grows to the height of over a foot the ground is well manured and then watered over. Before ploughing and sowing no manure is, as a rule, put in the ground for fear of a white kind of worm which is generated in the ground and eats up the sap of the plant, which consequently dries up. At Bubak it is not usual to manure the ground more than twice before the plant reaches the height of a foot and over. In the majority of cases, however, one good manuring at one foot height is held to be sufficient for all ordinary purposes, unless greater height in the plant and heavier weight in the final produce be sought for. When the plant reaches the height of about five feet the male plant, which is distinguished by its blossom or its small-sized pale green flower, is rooted out to provide more growing space for the female plant. The male plant is held to cause giddiness when used, and this is another reason for its extermination as a precaution against the mixture of its leaves with those of the female plant. When ripe, as judged from the changed colour of the seed and absence of moisture when pressed, the plant is reaped, dried in the field itself, and thrashed when dry. The stalks are then separ- ated from the rest of the produce, which is carried away. A part, and a very small part, is winnowed in order to separate the blackish seed useful for sowing. The whiter seeds and the blackish not wanted for future sowing are left mixed with the leaves and the thinner twigs. Hemp fibres, or fibres like the hemp fibres, are grown from "sihato," which is a kind of hemp plant also, but locally known as "sihato" against "sireen," which is the local name for the hemp plant proper. Similar fibres are pro- duced from the leaved "Ak" plant or "milk bush," not the thorny "Ak." The "Ak" and the "sihato" stalks are soaked in water for two or three days, and when sufficiently soft they are thrashed, when the outer coating, or the upper- most thicker skin, is separated from the fibres. Such outer covering of the "sihato" stalks was, and I believe is still, used in the preparation of country matches, being so ignitible. Hemp fibres are also prepared from the thicker part of the stalks of the bhang hemp plant. But the bhang plant stalks are usually buried in soft wet mud for a few days instead of being soaked in water, as in the case of the "sihato," the regu- lar hemp, or the "Ak." 10. At Bubak it is the Hindu Haris who in the main cultivate the hemp plant for bhang. Elsewhere, too, I believe, it is the Hindus who cultivate it. The bulk of the agricultural culti- vators are Muhammadans. 13. In the district with which I am convers- ant the hemp plant is not cultivated for ganja. 14. Yes. The bhang (c). Extent not known. For where, please see answer to question 7 under chapter II 15. A.264 ganja and charas when they are not able to pro- cure either of the latter drugs. The leaves are washed thrice, then wrapped up in a wet cloth and baked in hot ashes. The leaves so prepared are mixed with tobacco and smoked. The residue of the bhang used for drinking, the ground hemp (bhang) called "jog" (locally) is smoked in place of ganja or charas. B.265 (d) Ganja and charas are said to be (a) anti- dotes against flatulency and enlargement of the liver. 44. (a) As regards charas and ganja: intoxica- tion is followed by refreshing silence immediately after the inhalation of smoke, but it is accom- panied by a sensation of heaviness in the eyes. Appetite is created in the case of moderate smokers at stated times. The effect lasts for an hour or two. (b) After-effects, excessive yawning, languor, lassitude and thirst. Want of gratification produces all the effects mentioned above under (b), and diarrh266 It causes chronic bronchitis and emphysema of the lungs, resulting in an asthmatic condition. It causes at first hyper267 Appendix to Dr. Bainbridge's evidence. PARTICULARS OF LUNATICS CERTIFIED AND SENT TO A LUNATIC ASYLUM FROM THE CIVIL HOSPITAL, KARACHI, FROM THE YEAR 1883 TO OCTOBER 1893 No. Supposed cause. Number of cases. Total Cases. OCCUPATION. Medicants. Shop-keepers. Labourers. Cultivators. Miscellaneous. Unknown. Married Single. Unkown. H. M. Ch. 1 Alcoholic intemperance 1 1 1 3 ... ... 1 ... 2 cooks ... 1 2 ... 2 Indulgence in hemp drugs 9 8 ... 17 8 1 1 ... 7 ... 2 2 13 3 Ditto opium 1F. ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 Ditto ganja and opium ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 butler ... ... ... 1 5 Ditto alcohol, hemp and opium 3 ... ... 3 2 ... ... ... 1 carpenter ... 1 1 1 6 Ditto narcotics 1 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 cook ... ... ... 2 1 baker 7 Fanaticism and religious excite- ment ... 2 ... 2 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 8 Mental disappointment 1 2 2 5 1 ... 1 ... 3 ... 2 ... 3 9 Climate ... 1F. ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 wife of tailor. ... 1 ... ... 10 Congenital 1 4 ... 5 ... 1 1 ... 3 ... ... 5 ... 11 Hereditary ... 2 2 4 1 ... ... 1 2 ... 1 widow ... 3 12 Cause unknown 8 28 3 39 9 ... 5 ... 11 14 5 10 24 25 50 8 83 23 2 9 1 34 14 14 21 48 16. Evidence of BRIGADE-SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J.F. KEITH, Superintend- ent, Lunatic Asylum, Hyderabad, Sind. 1. I have been a resident in Sind for over four- teen years, aud Superintendent of the Lunatic Asylum for over five years. 2. Yes. They are known in this province as bhang, ganja and charas. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing as far as I can make out in Sind. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking in Sind as far as I know. 28. Habitual moderate consumers minimum268 It is confined generally to the male sex. Very few respectable persons indulge in ganja and charas, or the excessive use of bhang; and I think it is not far from the truth to state that few or no respectable Sindhis, women or children, indulge in any of these drugs. The period the moderate use of bhang is commenced is amongst men after 40. 31. Nobody forms these habits alone. They are begun in imitation of the habits of companions and are formed with ascending degrees of diffi- culty. The habit of drinking bhang is easily formed, as it is not disagreeable, but one must inure one- self to the habit of ganja, and especially to charas, as their fumes are strong and disagreeable, and at first it is almost impossible for the novice to in- hale their fumes into the lungs, especially charas; at first on entering the larynx it produces a violent fit of coughing, and even amongst mawa- lis a full inhalation will sometimes end in a paroxysm of coughing. A man with powerful lungs will learn the habit sooner, therefore, than one with originally delicate lungs; or than those whose lungs are irritable or are debilitated by disease. I know a mawali who cannot on this account inhale ganja or charas. As a rule, for a healthy man it takes forty days of persistent effort to acquire the habit. It is the society that is difficult to break off. Divorce a man from the society and occupy his time with different motives and objects, and the habit of meeting his companions and the mere craving for the stimulant soon passes away. The practice of these habits is formed and continued in company, where the spirit of rivalry as to who will stand the most of these drugs is always present more or less amongst differently constitut- ed individuals. There is no general tendency of the moderate towards the excessive use; for all Sindhis use bhang in moderate quantities; but the proportion of mawalis to the population would, I should think, be a very small one. 32. Not that I know of. There is a holiday called Shivaratri in honour of the marriage of the god Shiva on which the Pardeshi and Sindhi Hindu fakirs who are his followers use these drugs in excessive quantities. But the Hindu population in Sindh do not indulge to excess on this day. They prepare a ling of Shiva; if they have not got one of stone, they make one of clay to which they present flowers and wash it with bhang, re- peating the following prayer: "Oh God, accept this bhang from thy faithful followers," and then they drink of the bhang. Those who are smokers of ganja and charas (viz., mawalis) indulge always to intoxication on this day. 36. No. But many respectable Hindu Sindhis take a glass of brandy or whisky or country liquor before supper, from the idea that it excites their appetite, and in imitation of the ruling race, as they imitate the cut of their clothes, etc. 37. The difference is purely of degree and not of kind; bhang is the weakest and charas the strongest. Charas produces immediate intoxica- tion and goes off sooner; bhang, on the other hand, produces intoxication, but is much slower in its action; ganja may be said to be midway between the two. 39. The answer to this question is implied in the answers already given. Bhang is used moderately to stimulate the appetite and as a cooling drink. In a general debauch bhang forms, so to speak, the first course, and is drunk to the degree of excitement. Ganja forming the second course, advances this degree to a state of intoxication. Charas forms the "last straw," making them either temporarily insensible or raving mad, a condition which sometimes, under the continued excessive use of these drugs, becomes permanent, especially in cases where the nervous system is originally week or predisposed from hereditary weakness to insanity. 40. Bhang alone is prescribed in Sind, as a rule, to men over 40, as a stimulant to the appetite, refreshing drink and gently soporific. The "Vet." here uses the extract with carbonate of ammonia and belladonna for cough amongst horses. There was a prisoner admitted into the jail with profuse salivation; the usual remedies had no effect on him. He asked me to give him a little bhang; I did so and it acted like a charm, curing his salivation almost at once, which cure remains permanent. 41. (a) Only bhang is believed to be disgestive and refreshing in its moderate use. (b) Never. (c) and (d) No. 42. Here it will be well to define what is meant by the moderate use of these drugs. It means in all cases in Sind short of intoxication. It is difficult with ganja and charas to stop here (short of intoxication), as a full inhalation is quite enough to cause temporary giddiness in the strongest. No respectable Sindhi would ever entertain the idea of indulging moderately in ganja and charas. The idea prevalent in Sind is that the use of ganja and charas "consumes the body;" it is called "but jo khát " (the body's house-breaker). 44. It has been already pointed out that the consumption of bhang is habitually used in modera- tion not approaching to intoxication amongst all classes. It is said to be refreshing and as an appetiser; it cannot, therefore, allay hunger. As an appetiser (which it is generally believed to be) it might cause a little more food to be taken than necessary, which would tend theoretically to cause drowsiness and would, therefore, be considered as a soporific. The secondary effects on digestion might last therefore a considerable time. There is no physiological data concerning the length of time bhang remains in the system. The popular belief is two or three hours. The gratification is more the indulgence of the habit of having something at a given time of the day to break the monotony of idleness. Ganja and charas pro- duce very rapid intoxication; but, as has been pointed out, none but mawalis indulge in ganja and charas; and they always indulge with a view to intoxication. If the old man does not get his bhang at the usual time, he feels the longing for it produced by habit, and is uneasy and per- haps fretful if he is disappointed, as he believes his night will be spoiled, fretfulness being a means itself of rousing him up, and not the want of the bhang. 45. It has been several times pointed out that in Sind the moderate use of bhang, as far as effecting the integration or disintegration of the animal tissues is concerned, does neither good nor harm. It is merely a sort of pastime for the idle. Ganja and charas are always used by mawalis with a view to intoxication, which always does
269 harm physically, mentally and morally. A maw- ali is a man no one relies on. If he does, he will certainly repent his folly. To the other questions under this head a gene- ral negative reply may be given. Mental anxiety or brain disease (the latter being a rather vague term) is never treated in Sind by resort to bhang, ganja and charas; it is usually liquor, either Native or European, which is resorted to as the Hindustani and Persian quotations show: 270 with its hemispheres removed. Sarandas Anandas may be taken as an example of the exalted inco- herent period. When he was last admitted into the asylum, he went on during his examination in the most extraordinary way, until the veins of his neck were swollen, his face blue, and his mouth dry from the pressure on his lungs, uttering a perfect Babel of automatic phrases in the shape of prayers, denunciations, and threats; frowning, laughing, crying, and going through all the varied gesticulations, and intonations almost in the same breath in a perfect whirlwind of incoherence and inco-ordination of ideas. Now he is quite sane. Soba, No. 5, may be taken as an example of the other extreme of the period of aphasia, or perhaps a better diagnosis would be amnesia. When he was admitted into the asylum, he could not speak a word of any known language. On the 1st October 1893, on his examination, it was found that he could now speak Hindustani. But he had no ideas of space or time. With difficulty he said he came from Madanpur, and he knew how to prepare ganja and smoke it; but beyond a few automatic answers to every-day questions, his mind is a complete blank. Perfect destruction of brain tissue could not have more effectually removed all traces of the education, ideas and language con- structed by a life-time of human intercourse. He may be said to be in the permanent position of the mawali who has figuratively fallen " beside his chair." It need scarcely be mentioned that between these two extremes there is every grada- tion depending upon the age, the physical, mental and moral characteristics of the individual, and the length of time and extent of indulgence in the habit. This parallelism kept for some time possession of my mind until Makka, wife of Fazul, a young woman about 18, was admitted on the 12th June 1893. The police took her husband away from her, charged him with theft, and he was impri- soned for 12 months. This so preyed upon her mind that she lost her reason; and she was sent to the lunatic asylum. On her admission she behaved exactly like those suffering from insanity from the excessive use of hemp drugs. No abso- lute diagnostic feature could be shown from the most careful examination of her symptoms as indi- cating a difference between the two types of insanity but the history of the cause. But it may also assume the morose melancholic type as in Metho, No. 6. The indulgence in hemp drugs may be said to be both temporary or permanent. Jehangir alias Parashram may be cited as an example of the permanent effect of the drug on the brain. Mattadin, No. 8, and Bux Ali, No. 10, may be shown as having suffered from its temporary ef- fects. The symptoms may be re-induced after liberation from restraint, as in the case of Metho, No. 6, or Sarandas Anandas, who has been four times in the asylum suffering from the effects of hemp drugs. There are no typical symptoms. Although I have tried to draw a parellel between intoxica- tion in the sane and insanity produced by hemp drugs, I do not think there is a great difference between intoxication produced by the latter and wine or spirituous liquors drunk to excess. More- over, anything which would injuriously affect the grey matter of the convolutions of the brain in a similar way (such as grief, loss of honour or pro- perty, or fear; or ureemia, sapticeemia, etc.) would, â priori, produce like results. Insanes who have no recorded ganja history confess to the use of the drug if they know what they are talking about. Persons deficient in self-control through weak- ened intellect, no matter from what cause, espe- cially if they have no friends to keep them straight, as a rule, gravitate towards the company of the idle and vicious, viz., the mawalis. 47. No. 48. The idle and the vicious gravitate towards the society of mawalis, and they are the dregs of society, the lowest classes in physical, mental, and consequently in moral development; the idea, therefore, that these people would have high- ly developed offspring is incongruous. They pro- pagate, on the contrary, recruits for our jails and lunatic assylums271 Does it injure the digestion or cause loss of appetite? Yes. Does it cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma? There is no reliable data. Hemp drugs patients in this asylum do not seem to suffer more than the others from these affections. Does it impair the moral sense or induce lazi- ness or habits of immorality or debauchery? Yes. Does it deaden the intellect or produce insanity? Yes. In cases known to you when it has produced insanity, has it appeared to you to be merely the exciting as distinguished from the predisposing cause of the insanity? The exciting cause. If it produces insanity, then of what type, and is it temporary or permanent? The types are mania or melancholia, and they may be both temporary and permanent. If temporary, may the symptoms be reinduced by the use of the drug after liberation from restraint? Yes. Are there any typical symptoms? Not to toxical insanity. Do insanes who have no recorded ganja history confess to the use of the drug. Yes. In such cases of the alleged connection between insanity and the use of hemp as are known to you, are you of opinion that the use of the drug by persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease to obtain relief has been sufficiently con sidered in explaining that connection? And do you think there is any evidence to indicate that insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect? Answered under 45. Yes. Give an account under each of these points of any cases with which you are acquainted. A full account of each case admitted in 1892 has been supplied. Oral evidence. Question 1.272 the cause of insanity. In the majority of cases therefore the cause is entered as unknown. The only ground, as far as I can remember, on which I would enter cause would be the information of friends or the statement of the insane after he had recovered his wits. If no other cause of insanity was given, and the friends told me that the patient consumed hemp, or he himself admitted the habit, I should certainly enter hemp as the cause. I think it is only the excessive use and not the moderate use of hemp which may, and often does, cause insanity; and I have not, as Superintendent of the Asylum, hitherto distin- guished between the moderate and excessive use in these enquiries, because that information has not been called for, and because for my purposes as Civil Surgeon I should accept the statement that the hemp was used as implying the excessive habit. In regard to case No. 7 of the asylum cases of 1892, after having read question and answer No. 4 of the statement of Jatanand, the lunatic's father, I should still hold to the view that bhang was the cause of insanity, because I should not believe that the use was moderate, i.e., to say, having this evidence only and no other history of cause, I should be inclined to consider bhang the cause. In regard to case No. 6 of the asylum cases of 1892, I see that the evidence collected at the recent enquiry is clearly to the effect that the in- sane did not use the drugs; but in view of the fact that in the asylum the insane showed himself quite familiar with the mode of preparation of the drug, and actually smoked it in my presence, I reject the evidence and accept the insane's state- ment though he is still a lunatic and clearly in- correct in his arithmetic in regard to the quanti- ties of the drug he used to consume, and attri- bute the case to hemp drugs. Hemp-drug insanity is diagnosed from the cause. There is no type of such insanity. The hemp drug may be the predisposing or exciting cause of insanity. I should not be disposed to say generally whether the predisposing or the excit- ing cause was the more important. Heredity is the most important predisposing cause. If I had the history of heredity and the evidence of the hemp-drug habit, I should record it; and it would appear in my returns as a hemp-drug case. Heredity is the predisposing, and hemp drugs the exciting, cause in such a case, but hemp drugs only would appear in my returns. If I had a history of the hemp-drug habit and grief, I should record it as a case of toxic insanity. In case No. 11 of the asylum cases of 1892, regarding which a further enquiry was made, ac- cepting as true the statement of Ailmal, as record- ed by me, I should find it difficult to say which of the two causes, hemp drugs and grief, was to be regarded as the more potent. I should consider hemp drugs as the predisposing, and grief as the exciting, cause. I should record the case as one of toxic insanity. When the hemp-drug habit is admitted, I see no reason to seek for any other cause. 17. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR W. A. CORKERY, Civil Surgeon, Sukkur. 1. Since receipt of this report, I have been con- versing with and interviewing some of the natives who are addicted to the use of these drugs, and my evidence is based on what I could gather from them. 2. The definitions of the three plants correspond with those enumerated in the margin, viz., bhang, charas, and ganja; but only one variety of ganja seems to be known in this town. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking in this district. At times they are mixed with tobacco. 23. Bhang is never smoked by Sindhis. Tra- velling fakirs and banias from Hindustan smoke it, but very rarely. Travellers also occasionally chew it and drink water over it. This is done only occasionally, when the usual pot and mash stick are not available on a journey. 28. Charas.273 36. Alcohol is not considered to be now used as a substitute for any hemp drug, although it is partaken of in winter, as bhang, which is a cooling mixture, is reserved for the summer months. 37. Charas is admitted to be the most injurious form in which hemp is consumed, and is said to bring on cough. Asthma will prove injurious to the lungs. Ganja, which is very rarely used in these parts, is said also to give rise to chest affec- tions; but its action is much slower than that of charas. These two drugs are, as a rule, used by fakirs in Sind more than by any other class. Bhang.274 ing in its effect than bhang, and charas more so than ganja. 39. As the stronger products of hemp are smoked, smoking would seem to be the more in- jurious form of consumption. Of the effect of either towards producing insanity I am not in a position to give an opinion. I believe the effect of drinking or smoking in a person unaccustomed to it would be intoxication merging into frenzy. 40. Hakims have long been in the habit of prescribing it for tetanus both in man and cattle. It was also in use, as stated before, as an anti- spasmodic, also externally as an anodyne. 41. I do not think so. Those who are in the habit of using them put forward the plea that they increase the appetite, give staying-power under severe exertion or exposure and alleviate fatigue. They do not act beneficially in any way, not even as a febrifuge or antiperiodic. 42. I consider the use of hemp cannot be said to be harmless. The intoxication produced by it in beginners may be of so violent a character as to lead the person under its influence to the perpe- tration of acts of crime. 44. It is said to be refreshing and does not pro- duce intoxication. It is said to allay hunger and to create appetite. The effect is only transient. There are no after-effects. Yes. 45. (a) Not perceptibly, but the tendency is towards an impairment of these faculties. (b) and (c) Not perceptibly. (d) No. (e) Yes; it does induce to laziness and habits of immorality. (f) As a cause of permanent insanity I am not prepared to express any opinion as I have not seen any cases. I have met with a few cases of frenzy induced by it, which might be classed under temporary insanity, but the symptoms passed off after prolonged sleep induced by medicines. The latter is more probable. My opinion is that the habit of using hemp preparations is to be reprobated, as it is not bene- ficial in any way. On the other hand the first use of hemp is often accompanied by deeds of vio- lence and those long addicted to it suffer from im- pairment of the physical, mental and moral powers, and evidence is to be found of its being a potent cause of permanent insanity. 46. Habitual excessive use may impair the moral sense and lead to insanity. 47. Not perceptibly. 48. The offspring of the habitual excessive con- sumer might be weak-minded or idiotic. 49. I believe it is by males. I am not aware that prostitutes use it. Used for sexual purpose, the habit would be more injurious. Impotence might result from it. 50. As an aphrodisiac the excessive use of these drugs would not be resorted to ordinarily. 56. Not used in the form of an admixture in Sind, nor do I think it is a common practice any- where. Dhatura, for the commission of theft, is sometimes mixed with hemp to ensure a victim being rendered unconscious, and opium is some- times taken with it as an aphrodisiac, but I have never heard of its being mixed with nux vomica, betel-nut or cantharides. Nux vomica may enter the bhang drink of the regular moderate consumer on account of its tonic properties. 57. They are not eaten or drunk in Sind nor have I any knowledge of their effect when eaten or drunk. I should suppose the effects would be much greater, these preparations being more active and powerful than those of bhang. 19. Evidence of Assistant Surgeon, G. M. DIXON, Medical Officer and Superin- tendent, Nara Jail. 1. I have been in Sind in charge of this jail for upwards of two years, and during this period, while the jail was in the outlying district of Thar and Parkar and Khadi in Shah Bunder subdivi- sion, Karachi, I have come in contact with many cultivators and free labourers who use bhang (one of the products of the Indian hemp plants) in moderate doses. After the receipt of an intima- tion from the Assistant Commissioner in Sind selecting me a medical witness to give evidence before the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, I have tried to obtain information regarding these drugs from some of my subordinates and some of the town population. I have also received some in- formation from some prisoners who have been trans- ferred to this jail from Karachi, Shikarpur, and Hyderabad districts. Such being the case, the information applies mainly to the desert districts of Sind. Besides Sind, I have been in other parts of the Bombay presidency, viz., some parts of the Deccan, Conkan, and North Canara, and I have therefore added any information I possess regarding these parts of the presidency. 2. Subzi is the term used by a majority of people for the first product. The lower orders call it bhang. The high class detest to call it bhang, because bhang consumers are called bhangis, and a bhangi also means a sweeper. Ganja.275 while in Hyderabad bazar at Rs. 1276 milk, ghee, sugar, reduced copper, silver, gold, and musk, nux vomica and opium. Not known to be so used by prostitutes. 50. Excessive use of hemp is said to lead to dropsy. 56. The effects of moderate uses of subzi are said to be very salubrious to the general consti- tution by the cultivators. Dhatura is said to be used for to be admixed with hemp by some thugs in some parts of Upper India. 57. Ganja and charas are said to be eaten by a sect of religious mendicants called Aghorees or Agorpanthees. They are said to live in the vicinity of Benares, the holy city of the Hindus, and in the Girnar hills in Kathiawar. Some say Aghorees eat charas prepared in human fat. Ganja and charas are also eaten by a sect called Nangas, who live somewhere in Cutch. General remarks:277 Comparative Statement showing the Effects and Medicinal Uses of Subzi, one of the Indian Hemp Drugs, and Alcohol (in its various forms). Subzi. Alcohol. Subzi. Alcohol. 1. Moderate doses act as a digestive before food. 1. Stimulates appetite in moderate doses before food. 9. Very little effect on general tissue change. 9. In small and moderate doses lessens and in large doses increases tissue change. 2 In small doses habitual- ly taken does not lead to in- creased craving desire. 2. Moderate doses habit- ually taken lead to increased craving for alcohol. 10. There is but little ex- citement of circulation. 10. Excites cerebral circu- lation then begins to paralyse various parts of the brain in the inverse order of their de- velopment (Brunton's Phar- macology, page 200). 3. Not known to produce abscess of the liver. 3. In many cases liver ab- scess can be traced to alcohol. 4. Used as a diuretic. 4. Acts as a diuretic in large doses. 5. Used for curing gonor- rh278 season. The fluid obtained by the maceration of these ingredients in cold water is known as "thadul," i.e., a refrigerant. The first drug of this group of ingredients is employed on account of its carminative action, serving to relieve the flatulence which bhang not unfrequently produces; the rosebuds and melon seeds act as mild laxa- tives, and kasni (seed of the Chicorium intybus), being a diuretic and a mild hepatic tonic, is anti- bilious in its action and confers upon the drink additional refrigerant properties. The ingredients mentioned in group (c) are em- ployed only on very special occasions, e.g., religious festivals, marriage feasts, etc., and then only by the well-to-do classes of people. In such instances the process of maceration is effected either in pure milk, or first in water, and the milk added subse- quently. Ganja is generally smoked with tobacco, some- times by itself. Charas in combination with tobac- co always. 30.As a rule, in solitude a larger quantity of bhang is consumed by each individual than in com- pany. I should think, to judge from my cases, on an average, about double the quantity. Gener- ally "ghata bhang," i.e., a strong mixture, is used in private, while "panga," i.e., a weak and dilute mixture, is distributed in company, e.g., daily in the tikhanas or places of workship, at the various bhang shops, and at home gatherings. Both males and females (adults) partake of the potation; males in the majority by far. Young men over 18 sometimes, young women under 25 never. It is not usual for children to consume either of the three drugs. Ganja is used in larger quantities in solitude than in company; its use is generally con- fined to adult males, with the exception of prosti- tutes and the wives of certain classes of fakirs. Charas is more largely consumed in company than in solitude, and is almost entirely limited to the male sex. 31. No, provided the consumer is not naturally of dissipated habits. Yes, as regards ganja and charas. Moderate consumers of bhang can easily break off the habit, as is seen in cases where the drug has been employed for medicinal purposes, or taken as a refreshing draught during the hot season only and disconti- nued in the cold. Even confirmed bhang drinkers can break off the habit, but, of course, with diffi- culty. No; so far as bhang is concerned, I have found from careful enquiry that individuals who have used the drug over periods varying from ten to fifty years have done so without making any appreciable difference in their daily amount of consumption. A case which came under my notice of a man fully 80 years of age, and habituated to taking daily only a pice worth of bhang for forty-three years conti- nuously, bears out my statement; and this is not the only instance of its kind. 32. I have simply been able to ascertain that the hemp being a plant sacred to Shiva, on Shiva- ratri day the followers of Shiva drink bhang as a matter of custom. The followers of Dheria Lal, the god of waters, use bhang with sugar-candy as a matter of religious principle once a week, namely every Tuesday morning. In both cases the drink is regarded as essential. The quantity depends on what the individual is in the habit of consuming usually, which is seldom exceeded. The habit being already formed, and never broken or relaxed, may eventually damage the constitution, especially if the individual is also addicted to ganja or charas. I know of no custom where ganja or charas alone is concerned. Hardly any. Those consuming any of these drugs are, I find, not satisfied if alcohol be substi- tuted for them; and indulgence in alcohol does not destroy the craving for bhang when once the habit of taking it has been formed. Preconceived ideas of the beneficial effects of bhang, especially as being a "quiet" intoxicant as compared with "boister- ous " alcohol, militate against the substitution. 37. Yes, the effects of bhang drinking differ materially from those of charas and ganja smoking, and the effects of the latter also differ from each other in certain particulars. Careful observations of many cases have helped me to record the follow- ing notes of their effects, and the points which distinguish one from the other. The effects of ganja and charas might be compared as follows: 279 The effects of bhang, as contrasted with ganja and charas, are seen in the following description, which I have endeavoured to classify under four heads or stages:280 patient and the strength of the solution used. The average period, I should say, would be two hours. Force of habit, too, has to be taken into considera- tion. Of the cases recorded by me some are in the habit of using the drug twice a day, morning and evening, others, once a day only, and then gene- rally in the evening; in either case, the draught is usually taken two or three hours before meal-time. A Sindhi generally takes two principal meals in 24 hours, one between 10 and 12 A.M., the other between 8 and 10 P.M. With bhang, none of any importance. Ganja and charas, especially the latter, give rise to a dull frontal headache, singing in the ears, weakened mental power, much thirst, they also impair the appetite, constipate the bowels and concentrate the urine. No. I am aware of many instances where in- dividuals have used bhang only during the hot season, and discontinued its use altogether in the cold season, without a craving for it. I can quote about 25 cases where the drug was taken daily for medicinal purposes, and given up after a few months, without any difficulty. An habitual con- sumer misses his draught not on account of a natural longing for it, but simply because of the necessity of retrieving his nervous tone, which is invariably lessened directly the stimulating effects of the drug have passed off. The energy of an habitual bhang-drinker for work depends almost entirely upon his draught. There is no longing or uneasiness, even in the case of ganja or charas; smokers of the latter drugs will take them when they can get them. 45. I cannot say this of bhang, but charas and ganja, even in moderate doses, tend to weaken the bodily frame, diminish corpulency, deprive the individual of any capability to much physical exer- tion, blunt his memory, and make a coward of him. They also impair the constitution, and injure diges- tion. As regards causing the diseases mentioned, I have not a single case on record to warrant such a conclusion, so far as bhang is concerned, but several of my cases indicate that the continued use of charas and ganja do cause dysentery and bron- chitis. I have no history regarding asthma. Whether it impairs the moral sense, or induces laziness, etc., are questions difficult to answer in the affirmative in reference to Sindhis. It must be noted that the Sindhi is, by nature, a slow, indolent, apathetic race and subservient to a lax moral code, whether habituated or not to the use of these drugs. Bad example of the elders, and the evil influences of society, are, therefore, im- portant factors in these questions, and must be considered. Hence the deviation from a correct moral code, as it should exist, cannot be directly attributed to the use of bhang in the relation of cause and effect. Without a predisposing tendency, bhang cannot be said to induce laziness or conduce towards evil ways, and the remark is equally ap- plicable to the moderate use of ganja or of charas. No, not when used by itself, or when free from admixtures, especially dhatura; also, not unless venereal excesses or self-abuse pave the way; fur- ther, a predisposing cause, such as a naturally weak intellect, must also exist. Bhang of itself, except if used in excess, is innocuous to the brain, and of all combinations, that of bhang and dha- tura is the most harmful in this respect. Bhang with the simultaneous use of ganja or charas may give rise to insanity, but a predisposing cause must also exist. This question is further discussed under section 46. 46. Bhang, employed in excess, and its use ex- tended over a long period of time, debilitates the system and brings on emaciation; also causes digestive disorders leading to piles and chronic dysentery. Chronic bronchitis is common with bhang-drinking in excess. Of asthma, I have no cases. That it impairs the moral sense, deadens the intellect, and leads to evil ways, I have no doubt. It does not produce insanity, unless pre- disposing causes exist. Ganja and charas may cause insanity, but I have no evidence to adduce. I have On record one case of a young man, at. 19, a bhawa, who was habituated to the moderate use of bhang, and once partook of ganja in excess. He had a temporary attack of acute mania, became violent, noisy, and abusive, would run into the streets naked unless restrained. His delusion was that all his friends were conspiring to kill him. The attack, which occurred some three months ago, and which subsided under treatment, has not re- curred since, but I learn that the individual has not again given cause for it. Possibly the symp- toms may be re-induced should cause be given. Among the class of bawas and fakirs, who lead a life of indolence and ease, cases of dementia adven- titia or of chronic melancholic mania, are some- times seen. In two cases of this nature, I had good reason to suppose that self-abuse played a promi- nent part, rather than the abuse of bhang or ganja. I have on record three cases of mental excitement bordering on insanity in the class of Muhammadans known as the "mawalis" (men habitually addicted to the use of intoxicants of all kinds, but especially bhang and charas, opium and chandul, and sunk in the depth of the intoxicating effects of these drugs), caused by the combined use of bhang and charas. In each case, however, the friends of the patients have asserted that the partial mental aberration was due entirely to the excessive use of charas, and not of bhang. The following case, the only one of its kind I know of, may indicate that a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect may become insane by falling into the use of hemp. He is a young Sindhi (Amyl), aged about 20 years. Though born of sane parents, he was from birth a simpleton. He spent the greater part of the day in the tikhanas in prayers and serving God, as his friends supposed. He there became habituated to taking bhang, in moderate quantities, it is said. On one occasion he took a strong dose of physic (jamalgota) which moved his bowels some sixteen to twenty times. This gave him a severe pain in the abdomen for which he was advised to take a big dose of "ghata" bhang. He did so, and on waking up from the stupor induced by the drug, he was found to have gone out of mind completely. At first he manifested signs of acute mania, was very violent, and had to be restrained by main force. His delusion was, and still is, that there is some one coming to kill him, and is in constant dread of being throttled. The boy is yet insane, but is not now violent either to himself or to others. There is no history of syphilis in the family, but his friends are not able to tell me whether the boy was addicted or not to self-abuse, a vice common among the youths of Sind. I would here record also a case of paraplegia which came under my notice some time ago, and which was attributed to the excessive use of bhang. The patient is now dead. He was a man of about 35 years, with no history of syphilis or venereal excesses as far as I could ascertain from the other members of the family, and no habit of taking any other narcotic than bhang, except tobacco in moderation. He used "ghata" bhang of his own preparation twice a day regularly, and sometimes
281 even three times, besides what he happened to consume with his friends in the tikhanas. I learn that he died from exhaustion and bed-sores after three months' lingering illness. 47. No, for in the family history of many of the cases recorded by me, I find that, although the parents are habitual consumers, the children have not acquired the habit, and, further, I can say from personal observations, that the children of moderate consumers are in no particular way affected by the habit. 48. Enquiry in this direction has been met with very puzzling results. In the excessive consumer, the history of the possibility of an inherent syphilitic or scrofulous taint had always to be con- sidered, which invariably tended to mar conclusions. I mention this because while in some cases the children have appeared to me to be tolerably healthy, in other cases, where a comparatively small amount of the drug was consumed daily, the offsprings were of exceedingly weak bodily constitu- tion, pigeon-chested, thin-haired, flabby little mites. In four cases that came under my observation, the children were decidedly rachitic. Such condi- tions as bad feeding and insanitary surroundings add no little to the difficulties in solving this question. Generally speaking, it appears that even the excessive use of the drug does not exert any material influence upon the health of the children. 49. No, but prostitutes use it largely as a stimulant, with the object, it is said, of being able to bear the strain of their nefarious practice. Hemp, no matter in what form, used in moderation, does not tend to produce impotence. The history of many of my cases helps me to entertain this opinion. In some of my cases, more children had been born, within a given period, after than before the time the father had taken to bhang drinking. 50. Yes, by those in advanced age, generally, and by the young of dissipated habits. In the form of majum, the native doctor prescribes it for this purpose. Prostitutes use bhang only, but not ganja or charas, and then only in the day to procure sleep. Yes, more injurious, because, with the general breaking down of the constitution, impotence may follow, and possibly insanity, or at least a mental weakness bordering on insanity. Not directly; in a few of my cases where impotence had occurred, the lowering of the general health from venereal excesses seemed primarily at fault. 56. Among my cases I have met with seven of dhatura admixture, but none of the other drugs specified. Opium, employed not as an admixture, but as an additional narcotic to the use of hemp, is of pretty frequent occurrence. The former drug is combined with bhang, in moderation, in order to increase its intoxicating effects. My observations lead me to suppose that opium imparts to the sys- tem tolerance to resist the influence of bhang and ganja, for I find that opium-eaters always consume and bear well these drugs in moderate quantities, especially bhang. These admixtures refer to personal consumption. With regard to bhang or ganja used in excess together with an admixture of dhatura, I have but two cases, and in both the latter drug was employed to strengthen the potation. Employed for the purpose of administration to others, I have only hearsay evidence to give. I am told that dhatura is sometimes thus clandestinely added either to bhang or ganja, but not to charas, and generally from mischievous or criminal motives, to procure that fanatical excitement as witnessed in some individuals during the Moharram or Holi festivals, or that mental disturbance tantamount to insanity constituting the cases known to medi- cal jurists as "running amuck." In the middle of 1887 a number of such cases occurred, and I am informed that in all of them dhatura was employed as an admixture with bhang, and that the mental excitement produced, under which the individuals were ready to perpetrate the most atrocious crimes, was entirely due to dhatura. 57. I know of no such cases. The conclusion I have arrived at with regard to the uses and effects of hemp is, briefly, as follows:282 no doubt, possessses valuable medicinal properties, which might, with profit, be taken advantage of, but the method in which the officinal preparations, extract and tincture, are made, is, in my opinion, unsatisfactory, and accounts for the disappoint- ment in the expectations of those who have given the drug a trial. In both these preparations, the resin occurs in abundance. This should not be. The draught as prepared by bhang drinkers would be a better form for therapeutic administration. It is made by maceration of the bhang in cold water and repeated strainings, the fluid thus ob- tained being merely a watery solution of the leaves and capsules, with but little or no traces of the resin, which, being insoluble in water, is precipi- tated. In this dilute form it might advantageous- ly be used as a stimulant and stomachic tonic and carminative, serving to invigorate the system, increase the appetite, and relieve temporary abdo- minal pains and flatulency. When its anodyne and hypnotic powers are required, the preparation should be made from ganja or charas (pure), and not from. bhang, as these forms of the drug, em- ployed in their natural state, seem to possess soothing and depressant effects rather than stimulant. A poultice of ganja, or of the capsules of hemp, makes a good anodyne application to painful piles (external) and ulcers. Ganja, in proper doses, would, I think, if used in the form of cigars, or burnt in a pipe, prove serviceable for the relief of certain forms of asthma, especially those complicated with bronchial catarrh and a weakened heart. In severe types of asthma unattended by such complications, charas smoking might, perhaps, prove invaluable in cut- ting short the spasms, but the drug being a power- ful sedative will have to be employed with great caution. The uses of hemp as above described are put forward merely in the light of suggestions. Definite and careful experimental researches are necessary to ascertain the real value of hemp as a medicinal agent in the conditions and diseases speci- fied. I regret to say, I was unable to accomplish this in any part, on account of the shortness of time allowed for the getting up of this report, and the want of convenient opportunities. I will add, in conclusion, a few notes on the popular notions and ideas of the effects of hemp in one or other of its various forms, and I cannot do this in a more striking and interesting manner than by quoting verses of folk-songs on the subject. Of the three forms of hemp, bhang is regarded by the people as the least noxious and the most beneficial. The following verse illustrates the ideas as they emanate from a Sindhi mind, of the beneficial effects of bhang:283 and, ganja consumers than in those of bhang. There is a tendency, in the case of all these drugs, for the moderate habit to develop into the exces- sive. This is specially marked in the case of bhang. Much, however, depends upon the pecuniary cir- cumstances of the consumer. 32. I am not aware of any religious custom according to which any of these drugs is used. Amongst Hindus the bawas (religious head) keep a very weak solution of bhang in temples for the people who go there, and on certain days, for instance the new moon day or some holidays, they get prepared a larger quantity of such solution. There is nothing religious about this. They by doing so, get more customers, so to say. Again, on festivals amongst Hindus, the head of the family who gives the feast, sometimes gets a weak solu- tion of bhang prepared, and distributes it amongst the servants and cooks who are engaged on those occasions. It is not essential that the head of the family should so entertain his servants. He does so either because he wishes to please them, or because he is asked by some of them who happen to be in the habit of using it. Again, in Hydera- bad, Sind, there are certain families the members of which never use alcohol in any shape. They, on their festivals, entertain their guests with a sweet and flavoured solution of bhang. There is no reli- gious binding upon them to do so. They have been doing so for generations, and the use of bhang in this way has become more or less a social custom amongst them. The use of bhang in the ways indicated above is always temperate, and is not likely to lead to the formation of a habit, except amongst those who visit the temples and partake of the solution daily. I am not aware of any custom, religious or social, in regard to the consumption of charas and ganja. Amongst Muhammadans there are otaras, where a religious mendicant lives, and where he keeps bhang ready for his customers. Such places are generally resorted to by habitual excessive con- sumers. Here charas and ganja are also smoked freely. There is nothing religious about it; but as charas and ganja are generally smoked in com- pany, consumers find it convenient to meet at such places and indulge in these drugs. These otaras are almost always situated by the side of a tomb of some Pir or holy man. 33. I have no reason to think that alcohol is now being substituted for any of these drugs. 37. The effects of charas smoking last longer than those of ganja smoking, and those of bhang drinking the longest of all. The effects of charas and ganja are observed immediately after smoking and last a short time only, while those of bhang are noticed some hours after it is taken and last for many hours. Charas and ganja do not increase appetite. Bhang does. All produce sleep but bhang is the most effective in bringing it on. 39. I can give no opinion on this point. 40. Bhang is used internally by native doctors in dysentry and gonorrhoea, and locally as a poul- tice for boils and abscesses. 41. The moderate use of bhang is said to be beneficial as a food accessory. It also gives staying- power under severe exertion. It has no effects as a febrifuge. It is used as a cooling drink in sum- mer. The moderate use of charas and ganja is not beneficial in any of these ways. 42. I consider the moderate use of any of these drugs to be harmless. Reasons.284 57. I have never seen nor heard of any one eating charas or ganja. In conclusion, charas is imported into Larkana from Amritsar, ganja from Karachi and Hyderabad, Sind, and bhang from Sukkur and Shikarpur. Ganja is known as ganja Rajapuri. A kind of sweetmeat containing bhang is also sold by ven- dors of these drugs under the name of majum. It is prepared in the following way: 285 practised as an aphrodisiac and by prostitutes also, and it is not more injurious than its use as an or- dinary narcotic. No. 50. The excessive use of any of these drugs is practised as a great aphrodisiac by prostitutes, but its use for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic, since it causes nervous ex- haustion, mental derangement and impotence. The admixture of other substances with hemp used in moderation changes slightly the effect of dryness which the hemp would produce if taken by itself, and if it be used in excess the effect will be modified to a great extent. I have said in reply No. 29 that the admixture of dhatura and opium with hemp in an exceptional case for personal consumption and object is already noted, but in many cases the dhatura and opium are administered in hemp to others, in order to commit theft and murder through malice. 57. I have not come across any case of the kind. In conclusion, in my opinion the use of all these drugs should be discouraged and resorted to only medicinally. The prohibition of the sale of these drugs will save many persons being nipped in the bud and prevent the perpetration of offences and be instrumental in promoting the health and wel- fare of the public at large. 23. Evidence of SHAIK ALI, First Class Hospital Assistant, Jacobabad. 1. During my medical career. 2. Yes. Bhang, charas, and ganja. 19. To the best of my belief, I have known ganja and charas used only for smoking. 23. Bhang is very seldom used for smoking; but at a push ganja and charas smokers will sub- stitute bhang when others are not to be had by both poor classes, especially Hindus and Muham- madans. 28. (a) About 1 pice worth, the weight of 2 pice per diem. (b) About 2 annas worth, or 4 oz. per diem. 29. Ganja and charas are both mixed with tobacco and then smoked. The heavy bhang drinkers who find bhang by itself weak, generally add opium and dhatura; but many are in the habit of swallowing a pill or bolus of solid opium and drinking the bhang on the top of it. The object of these admixtures is to increase intoxication; but the preparation known as bhang massala used among Hindus, contains a little bhang, to which is added poppy seeds, pepper, cardamoms, almonds, and aniseed, and the whole sweetened with batashas or sugarcandy, and by those who can afford it milk and cream are added and the mixture used as a cooling beverage. 30. To an equal extent. It is chiefly taken by the male sex, mostly adults, and it is not usual for children to consume these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed but very difficult to break off. Beginners start with a very small quantity about the weight of one-twelfth of an anna, and gradually increase it until they arrive at that quantity which they find sufficient to intoxicate. Yes. 32. Especially among Hindus, those who are not even in the habit of taking any of these drugs will partake of bhang on their holidays and on the occa- sion of a marriage. On Shivaratri in particular, they do consider it essential to partake of bhang, and on this day, in addition to the poppy seeds, pepper, cardamoms, and aniseed, they add dhatura and arsenic, also a leaf of the akra plant, that is half a pod of dhatura, and with the arsenic they draw a line on the bottom of the pot. Hindus, especially in Sind, do consider it necessary to make them happy. It is generally temperate. It is not likely to lead to acquiring the habit, as many who drink bhang on Shivaratri don't touch it again for the remainder of the year. I do not consider bhang so used injurious. 36. Unknown. 37. Yes, charas is far stronger than ganja. The effects of charas are almost immediate, while ganja takes longer to act, the intoxication coming on after a time, and lasting a shorter period, say half an hour, while that of charas lasts about an hour or more. Bhang is far milder in its effects, but its intoxication lasts from 5 to 6 hours and is far less injurious. 39. The smoking of ganja and charas are far more injurious than drinking bhang or eating majum, which is a sweetmeat prepared from bhang. I find that ganja and charas smokers generally waste away, getting thinner and thinner as they continue in the habit, which is not the case with bhang drinkers; charas and ganja act on the brain, nervous, and respiratory system, which in time brings on constitutional derangement, such as bronchitis, shortness of breath, and seldom bleed- ing piles. It also causes sometimes temporary insanity. 40. Yes, hakims do prescribe it for its medicinal properties and prepare a sweetmeat called majum, which is used for aphrodisiac purposes. Bhang is also used in the treatment of cattle. Horse condi- tion powders and boluses are prepared from bhang only. 41. I do not know any beneficial properties ex- cept medicinal. 42. Charas and ganja, although used in modera- tion, will, in my opinion, leave injurious effects in the end. Bhang, on the contrary, if indulged in in small doses is harmless. 44. The immediate effects of charas and ganja are on the nervous system; they do not refresh, but certainly produce intoxication. They do allay hunger, but do not create appetite. The effect of charas lasts about an hour or more, but that of ganja is slower to act, and lasts a shorter time, say half an hour. Yes, headache and a peculiar un- easiness, which is only relieved by another smoke, after the effects of which have passed away there is the same longing. Bhang is refreshing at first, but, when it commences to act, its intoxication causes a frightened feeling or timidity, but is far milder in its effects. The intoxication lasts from 5 to 6 hours. It does not allay hunger, but on the contrary creates appetite. A person under the effects of bhang will eat more than usual. There are no after-effects, so to speak, resembling those of charas or ganja; but if the bhang drinker does not take his usual quantum at the stated hour, he does feel an uneasiness and a longing, and he can- not eat his food properly, as it seems distasteful. 45. (a) The habitual moderate bhang drinking produces no noxious effects, but smoking charas and ganja makes a man physically and mentally feeble. It has no bad effects morally.
286 (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) Cause bronchitis and shortness of breath. (e) Yes, it does impair the moral sense or induce laziness. (f) My idea is that it does deaden the intellect, and it will produce temporary insanity in very excessive smokers. To me it appears the exciting cause. No such case has come under my observa- tion. Unknown. 46. The excess quantity impairs the constitu- tion. It does ruin the digestion. The ganja and charas smokers generally suffer from bronchitis and shortness of breath. It does impair the moral sense, and does produce habits of laziness and im- morality. No such case of madness came under my notice. 49. Bhang is used by the hakims as such. It is seldom used by prostitutes. 50. Unknown. 56. To increase intoxication in both, i.e., (a) and (b). 57. Unknown. 59. I questioned a man who came to me for treatment suffering from nyctalopia, and the cause was traced to ganja and charas smoking, which he was addicted to some three years back. There is no doubt that these drugs have a baneful effect on the human system and that they derange the con- stitution generally. It is, in my opinion, a useless and expensive habit, acquired to no purpose. Among the labouring classes especially, the habit of bhang drinking and ganja smoking is the means of, robbing many families of the little neces- saries of life, and often the means of depriving them of food. If a coolie, for instance, who is given to this practice, earns two annas in the day, he will, come what may, spend the half of it on charas and bhang. Then, on the remaining anna I ask, how is he to feed his hungry little ones. Therefore it is my belief that a restriction put on sale of these drugs, allowing a man to purchase them for medicinal purposes only, or by raising the price so that it will not come within the reach of the poor will benefit the masses. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is doing more harm than good to the people of India, and it has come under my notice that in very nearly every case of murder, rape and robbery these drugs have been employed with the admixture of dhatura and ad- ministered to the victims before the deed, and it is my opinion that the free sale of these drugs is an accessory to crime. 24. Evidence of DR. S. M. KAKA, Medical Officer of Health, Karachi. 1. As a medical practitioner of eleven years' standing and as medical officer of health, I have had some opportunities of becoming acquainted with hemp drugs and their effects, especially in Karachi. My answers will mainly have reference to the city. 2. These definitions may mainly be accepted as correct: flat variety of ganja is the most common, bhang is known as subzi, chilti, thandai or thadul (cooling drink), sai, abo, booti, punga (weak bhang). Charas is spoken of as bharaga. Ganja is, so far as I am aware, known as ganja. 16. Bhang may be prepared by the people in their houses. I fancy it can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. I do not think ganja and charas can be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 19. Ganja and charas are smoked generally. Religious fakirs, gosains, and persons following in their wake often eat a powder made of ganja and rock-salt or sugar. This method of eating ganja is very common, I believe, throughout the province, the fakirs carrying a certain amount of powder during travelling, or when they pass from one district to another to worship their shrines. 20. Hindus mainly smoke ganja, Muhamadans charas. Roughly speaking, 1 in 1,000 smoke charas and 1 in 2,500 ganja. 21. Flat ganja is preferred. 22. Foreign charas is used, imported from Cen- tral Asia through Amritsar and Loodhiana. 23. I do not know if bhang is used for smoking. 24. Hindus are the chief consumers of bhang. It is, so far as I know, only drunk. Roughly, 1 Hindu in every 250 drinks bhang. The propor- tion in the case of Muhammadans is 1 in 1,000 or more. PER 1,000 CONSUMERS. Habitual moderate. Habitual excessive. 26. Bhang 800 200 Charas 750 250 Ganja 750 250 27. The consumers of all the hemp drugs are derived from the poorer classes mainly. Bhang is indulged in by the rich. Low company mainly leads to the practice. 28. Habitual moderate consumers287 ganja are mainly if not invariably, smoked in company. The drugs are chiefly consumed by males. The proportion of consumers appear to be greatest between the ages of 16 and 30 than at other ages. Females and children do not usually indulge in them. Prostitutes may use the drugs in one form or another. Females in the interesting condition and children are given bhang by their relations to induce sleep. I have seen a few children 7 and 8 years old and boys from 10 to 14 smoking charas and ganja. 31. The habit of consuming the drugs is easily formed. It is difficult to break off the habit in the cases of ganja and charas chiefly. There is a greater tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive in the case of young adults moving chiefly in bad company. In the case of bhang and ganja the habit develops into the excessive after a comparatively greater length of time than in the case of charas. 32. During the hot weather months the Hindus leave in various parts of the city earthenware pots containing weak bhang. Bhang is also called Shiva booti, because it was the favourite drink of Shiva, and on the holiday Shivaratra the above practice of allowing people to drink bhang from pots placed in various parts of the town is usually followed. The custom is not a strictly religious one. At Hindu weddings it is usual to offer visit- ors and friends bhang; but it is quite optional for them to drink it or not. The consumption can be generally regarded as temperate. It is usual for those who have already acquired the habit to con- sume bhang at such times and places. 33. The better class of Hindus and Muham- madans regard the consumption, especially of ganja and charas, with great aversion and disgust. They consider the indulgence a vice, knowing that the drugs will be the ultimate ruin and degradation of the individuals consuming them; and if they have a friend or relation, they will feel ashamed to have any connection with him, and try to dissuade him from indulging in any of the drugs. 34. It would not be a serious privation to the consumers, even in the case of bhang, to forego the consumption, except perhaps in the case of habitual excessive consumers whose minds and bodies are enslaved to either ganja or charas. They might suffer from mental excitement if the drugs were completely withheld. In a population of 100,000 there would be roughly 4,000 bhang drinkers and 1,000 each of ganja and charas smokers. 35. It might be feasible to prohibit the use of charas and probably ganja. The former can be pre- vented from being imported. The growth of the plants can be restricted. The sale of the drugs, ex- cept by chemists, can be rendered penal, and the con- sumers, except under medical advice, can be made liable to punishment. The prohibition I do not fancy would cause any serious discontent; neither do I think that any discontent would amount to a political danger. I do not consider that prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 36. I have no reason to believe that alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for ganja and charas. The better class of Hindus who have of late taken to alcohol may give up bhang for brandy. 37. Charas smoking produces almost instan- taneous effects, ganja smoking some time after- wards; whereas the drinking of bhang produces effects gradually and after a greater length of time. 39. The smoking of ganja and charas I con- sider more harmful to the system than the drink- ing of bhang or even the eating of ganja, for the reason that there is absorption, both rapid and in large quantities, of the deleterious cannabis into the system. 40. Yunani hakims generally prescribe bhang to alleviate pain as in orchitis, in which bhang soaked in water and mixed with nux vomica is applied to the testes. In neuralgic affections of the eyes bhang is both applied and instilled. Weak bhang is given internally in gonorrhoea. It is also prescribed, mixed with curds, in dysentery. Bhang and a pill containing ganja and black pepper are also given to prolong coitus. I do not know if charas is prescribed, by any class of native doctors. I cannot say that any of the drugs are used in cattle disease. 41. I do not consider the moderate use of ganja and charas to be beneficial in any way. Bhang may be taken as a digestive, a cupful of weak bhang being taken immediately or a little before meals by moderate habitual consumers. 42. I certainly consider the moderate habitual use of ganja and charas to be harmful.288 does it by fits and starts, and ultimately leaves it off. Persons of the labouring and artisan classes turn beggars and fakirs, infesting mosques, burial grounds and the like. Thorough physical and mental debasement ensues. Excessive venery and prolonged sexual intercourse, leading to ultimate impotence are common. Religious mania and dementia may follow. There is also evidence to show that hemp drugs produce acute mania with homicidal violence, acute melancholia with attempted suicide, and chronic dementia. Persons have also been known to have run amuck with or without motive. The insanity is temporary in the case of acute mania generally. I know of a young Muhammadan who had to be kept under restraint, having be- come the subject of acute mania from habitual excessive indulgence in the drug. He is now well; but still infests burial grounds to indulge in the poison in large doses. In cases where dementia supervenes recovery is not probable; both my cases are still dementic. I do not know of any typical symptoms when persons become insane from indulgence in hemp drugs. In the cases known to me, so far as I was able to make out, there was no mental anxiety or brain disease leading to indulgence in charas. I do not know of any evidence to indicate that insanity may often tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. 48. I know of only one instance in which the whole family (sweeper caste) indulge in charas in large doses. 49. Hemp drugs are used for their aphro- disiac properties. Prostitutes also use them for this reason. Often the drugs are indulged in because they prolong sexual coitus. The strain upon the nervous system is sure to increase the evil effects of the drugs. I cannot say that the moderate use of hemp drugs tends to produce impotence. 50. Habitual excessive use tends to produce impotence. 51. The habitual moderate consumers, chiefly of charas, are bad characters, loafers, vagabonds, thieves, shop lifters, etc. 53. Yes, cases have been recorded. 54. Yes. 55. Yes, complete stupefaction can be induced without admixture. Oral evidence. Question 1.289 He resumed his old habits and had a relapse five days before I left for Bombay to appear here. He had apparently purposely lighted his mattress and burned himself in a fit of madness on the Sunday before my departure (which was last Thursday). I saw him the next day. He was then incoherent and confused. I saw that both his legs were burned. My Sub-Inspector knew he had been mad six months, as stated above. I don't know whether this company, in which this man was, had other vices or not. They were associated because they were all bad characters, birds of a feather; but I cannot say that it was an association for charas smoking. They are not spirit drinkers. They may have been given to sexual excess; very pro- bably this man was. I have never seen any one smoke dhatura. I did not ask whether they used it. The man's father is dead. I do not know what he died of. The mother said there was no insanity in the family. I don't know what was the condition of the boy when he began the drug; but I was told he was healthy. That information is reliable, I think. This is a case of mania. He was introduced to me as a case of insanity which had occurred eighteen months ago; and I enquired into the case from him and saw the mother as well. I did not enquire into heredity in the sense of go- ing back any generations. I simply asked the mother if there was insanity in the family; and she said "no." The use of the drug in this case may have been both the exciting and predisposing cause. That is, the effects of the drug predisposed the patient to the insanity which was subsequently set up by the drug. I have had no experience in inquiries into in- sanity. I think it may have been a defect in my inquiry not to go fully into heredity; possibly also not to enquire into dhatura, which I believe may cause insanity. I also think that sexual excess may be a cause of insanity; but I had not consi- dered this. I had not excluded all other causes; but I still think that charas smoking was the cause of insanity. This is the case of the Muhammadan referred to in the sixth paragraph of my printed answer. The inquiries into the other three cases are simi- lar in their conditions. I could hardly obtain as full information in them as in this case; for there were no relatives. 25. Evidence of MAKHDUM DOST MOHAMMED MAKHDUM FAZUL MOHAMMED, Zamindar, Bubak, Karachi. 1. I have no personal experience. I do not take bhang, etc. I make the following statement from inquiries made from other persons. 2. The names given here are the same as those which I am accustomed to. 3. Bhang is cultivated in abundance in Bubak, taluka Sehwan, district Karachi, but does not grow spontaneously. 4. In this province this name alone is known, and no other name. 5. This question is not applicable to Sind. 6. The wild plant does not grow here. Nor have I seen it. 7. Bhang is cultivated in Sind. (a) Ganja is not prepared in Sind. (b) Charas is not prepared in Sind. (c) The hemp plant is used for bhang in Sind. (d) It is not cultivated for its fibres, but for its seeds and for the drink which is made from it. It is abundant in Tapa Bubak. 8. The cultivated area is neither increasing nor decreasing. It is stationary. 9. The land is first irrigated, then ploughed, then seeds are scattered over it; when the crop grows to some height, it is cleared of weeds and manured. This procedure continues till it grows knee-high; afterwards, before it grows to its complete height, the male plants are cut off. After arriving at its proper height it produces seeds. The stalks are then reaped and spread out to dry. The stalks are beaten, and then they are separated from the leaves by winnowing. The seeds are reserved for planting again and the bhang is sold to farmers. 10. Hemp cultivators form no special class. They are of the same class as other agricutural cultivators. 11. This is not applicable to this province. 12. I know nothing about this, and no one in this province knows where it is prepared. 13. There is none in this province. I do not know anything of it in the place where it is pro- duced. 14. About 4,000 maunds of bhang only are pro- duced in Bubak, taluka Sehwan. 15. The mode of cultivating bhang is shown in my answer to question 9, but the wild hemp plant does not grow here. It is neither smoked nor eaten in Sind. So I cannot give the required difference. 16. It is prepared in houses and fields and can be prepared wherever it is cultivated. I know nothing about the wild bhang. 17. Hindus cultivate and prepare bhang. 18. I know nothing of charas and ganja, but bhang deteriorates by keeping long. It loses its effect in course of time. It keeps good for twelve months, after which it gets weak; after two years it loses all its effects. There is no special measure taken to prevent deterioration. 19. Note.290 27. Generally fakirs use intoxicating drugs. Bhang is the root of all hemp drugs. First people learn bhang drinking, thence they are led on to take other drugs. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers of bhang spend ½ anna daily, and excessive drinkers drink bhang 1/16 to 291 bhangro is produced from the hemp plant. Dr. Prain's words "whether cultivated or not culti- vated" are not applicable. The words "standing or fallen" should be substituted. The mode of preparing charas, as described by Dr. Prain, is correct. The active principle of the hemp plant, when distilled, forms charas. The manufacturers of charas distil bhang, ganja and flowers very dexter- ously, and prepare charas out of it. Charas is formed in balls, but it is not prepared in Sind; but prepared charas is imported into Sind for use here from the Punjab and Kandahar. Merchants send for it for trade purposes. It is correct. Ganja consists of the dried flowering tops of cultivated female hemp plants. The female hemp plant does not produce seeds. Dr. Prain is wrong in saying that the formation of seeds is prevented by the destruction of all the male plants, that is to say, the cultivated male plant does not produce seeds. The varieties of ganja as manufactured from the hemp plant, and the modes of their preparation and their varieties as given by Dr. Prain, are correct. These varieties are made in the manner described. But all these varieties are not prepared in Sind, but are imported into Sind for consumption here from Cutch and Sholapur, Barsee, and other places. Merchants send for them for trade purposes. In addition to the above, another variety of ganja is prepared from the hemp plant in Sind. The tops are called ghundis. These ghundis in size are equal to small ears of corn. These ghundis are smoked as ganja by many people. Their intoxicat- ing effects are the same as that of ganja, but a little less, and they are called ghundi ganja. The different names by which these products are known in Sind are given above. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously only in the Kohistan part of Sind. It grows there because of the heavy rainfall. Kohistan is a mountainous tract on the western side of the districts of Karachi and Shikarpur. But in Kohistan the wild plant grows in certain tracts only and not everywhere. Moreover, in any damp place or on the edges of hollows, where rain water lodges, and in other places seeds of the hemp plant accidentally thrown or left there by bhang drinkers, who may have pounded the leaves and drunk it there, spring up when any rain falls on them; but these scattered plants are often eaten by cattle. 4. (1) Bhang, (2) patti, (3) sabzi, (4) sai, (5) siddhi, (6) Shiva plant, (7) akoi292 and thick in appearance is called pounded bhang, and bhang so prepared is then called panga. Pounded bhang mixed with water and sifted, whether thick or thin, is by Hindus called sukho. The Mussalmans also call it by the same name; some call it sai; others call it pounded plant. This is the process which is most commonly adopted. The seeds and leaves of the plant are used as medicines in many diseases. It would be tedious to enumerate all; but suffice it to say that majums (stimulating preparations) are made from it. (2) Ganja.293 drugs are given in question 28. The sukho drink, which is made from bhang, is used by all Hindus294 44. It is refreshing. It does not allay hunger. It creates an ordinary appetite. The effects last until it is time to take the drugs again. Want of the drugs produces many ill-effects, such as sleep- lessness, yawning, loss of appetite, uneasiness, and longing. 45. If taken for its benefits, it produces no noxious results, physical, mental or moral. It does not injure the digestion, does not cause dysentery, bron- chitis or asthma. It does not impair the moral sense, and induces no laziness, does not produce habits of immorality or debauchery. It does not deaden the intellect. It does not produce insanity. 46. It injures the digestion, produces bronchitis and asthma (charas and ganja, but not bhang); charas and ganja impair the moral sense, but not bhang. The two, if excessively used, produce laziness and habits of immorality and debauchery, but not bhang. All the three deaden the intellect. They do not produce insanity, but loss of consciousness during the time the intoxication lasts. Persons do drink bhang in order to obtain relief from mental anxiety. It is not insanity; but it is loss of con- sciousness that often tends to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs. 47 and 48. It does not appear to be a hereditary habit, nor does it affect the children. 49. Bhang is used as an aphrodisiac. It gives prolonged pleasure during copulation; similarly charas and ganja are used, but their effects are not prolonged, and after a short time they impair manly power. Prostitutes do use it. The use of bhang does not tend to produce impotence. 50. Excessive use of bhang produces impotency, and excessive use of these drugs prevents all those benefits which ordinarily result from their moderate use. 51. Some bad characters use these drugs moder- ately, others use them excessively, some habi- tually and others occasionally for their benefits. The moderate use has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character; but the excessive use has some connection with crime, in so far as intoxication deadens all moral sense and incites to the commission of offences. 52. Answers to this question have been given in question 5. 53. The excessive use of charas and ganja incites to unpremeditated crime, sometimes violent and sometimes otherwise. It cannot incite to murder. Excessive consumers, when provoked while intoxi- cated, are incited to commit violent crime. But this is not applicable to bhang drinkers, for bhang induces quietness of temper. 54. Some, very few, criminals do so. 55. Criminals do so, but their victims are not so much stupefied as to give the criminals oppor- tunities to commit offences; but if the drug is given in excessive quantities the victims will be stupefied. If the victims are habitual drinkers or smokers, they cannot be stupefied without mixing dhatura; but occasional consumers will be stupefied by moderate as well as excessive quantities. 56. Bhang pounded and drunk, unmixed with others, would produce dry and cold intoxication; but if mixed with massalas, such as almonds, kernels, cardamoms, aniseed, succory, sugarcandy, and pepper, will produce wet and oily intoxication, that is, it will not produce dryness in the mouth, and, if mixed with ghee and milk, will strengthen the constitution. If dhatura is mixed with it, it would produce an unconscious state, in which one would prattle foolishly. I speak this from expe- rience. 57. It is not usual to eat or drink ganja or charas in Sind. But in exceptional cases ganja is eaten and drunk. Particulars regarding the above have been given in questions 19 and 38. But Aghorees, a sect of fakirs, eat ganja and charas, dhatura and other poisonous drugs and tobacco with- out any visible effects being produced on them. 58. I cannot reply to questions from 58 to 70. Questions under this chapter can well be answered by Government officers and other interested persons. 27. Evidence of the REV. A. E. BALL, Missionary, Church Missionary Society, Karachi. 1. I have completed thirteen years of service in Sind, but till within the past few weeks I have not taken advantage of any opportunities I might have had to inform myself regarding matters con- nected with hemp drugs, and the information I now give, such as it is, has been gathered by per- sonal enquiry from natives, Christian, Muham- madan and Hindu. 2. Bhang only is prepared in Sind. Ganja, charas, bhang or bháng. 10. No, they are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 18. All three deteriorate by keeping. No. For six months bhang keeps well, after which time it begins to deteriorate. After a year it loses its good appearance, and nearly but not all its effect. If kept well corked in a bottle or jar, it will keep good for a longer time. 19. For smoking only. 20. All religious mendicants, sanyasis, bawas, bhagats, jogis, etc., smoke ganja and charas, and many Brahmins, and all Muhammadan fakirs and the lower classes of Muhammadans, such as coolies, etc. Nearly all Pathans smoke charas. 21. Flat is preferred. Chur is also used, but not the round ganja. 22. Foreign. From Yarkand. 23. No. 24. (a) During the holidays such as the Dewali, Holi, etc., bhang is eaten in a sweetmeat called majum, and it is also sometimes mixed with the flour used in making a kind of food called "pakora." (b) Nearly all Hindu shopkeepers are moderate consumers of bhang, and all Hindu mendicants use it; many of them I fear, to excess. Nearly all low classes, Muhammadans and fakirs also drink it. As a rule, so far as I can learn, the higher classes do not drink bhang except on special occasions. 25. So far as I can judge, from the information I have gathered, I should say there is no increase in the use of these drugs, except such as may result from increase of population. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers295 (b) Habitual excessive consumers296 Bhang drinking produces appetite. The effect lasts about half an hour. In the case of the moderate habitual consumer, and more so in the case of the excessive habitual consumer, the want of gratification produces a longing and uneasiness, such as aching in the limbs and disinclination to talk or work. 45. I have never known a case of insanity produced by the use of these drugs, but one of our Christians, a native of Ahmedabad, tells me that he knew a native Christian who died mad through smoking ganja and charas. 47. An experienced native doctor whom I questioned on this subject gave it as his opinion that habitual moderate use of these drugs does not affect the children of the consumer. 49. The sweetmeat majum in which bhang is mixed is eaten by some as an aphrodisiac. I ques- tioned a native doctor and others on this subject, and I gather that prostitutes use bhang for this purpose. An English official of high standing and long service in Sind told me that he is quite convinced that the use of these drugs makes the increase of population less rapid than it otherwise would be. 50. From native sources I gather that the excessive use of any of these drugs does produce impotence. 52. From what I gather from native sources, I should say that a large proportion of bad char- acters are excessive consumers of these drugs. 55. Yes, I am told that they sometimes do so. Yes, a native doctor told me of the case of a young man, unused to bhang drinking, who had been completely stupefied by bhang and whom he had been called to see a few weeks ago. 56. Mawalis (drunkards) use dhatura with these drugs to induce greater intoxication, and very poor people sometimes mix dhatura with these drugs, as they can get it (dhatura) for nothing, and can thus become intoxicated cheaply. 68. So far as I can gather, there are no houses or shops licensed for the sale of these drugs where they may be consumed on the premises. 28. Evidence of MAHOMED LAIK, Mukhtarkar of Hyderabad. 1. I have seen the cultivation of bhang plant. I have made enquiries from bhang cultivators, as, for instance, from Fazul of Jam Tanda and other cultivators, and from tapedars and bhang mer- chants. 2. These definitions will do for my province. Each of these products is known here by the names given in the question. 3. I do not know in what districts the hemp plant grows spontaneously; but I hear that it grows in abundance spontaneously in the Punjab and Baluchistan, owing to the fall of snow and rain. 4. It is known by five names:297 ed, and why there is no restriction here, because no hemp is cultivated for the production of ganja. I hear that ganja is cultivated in Bombay, Panvel, and in Cutch. If it were cultivated here it can be done; but people do not know how to cultivate it. 14. The following products are prepared from the hemp plant:298 would go on increasing it gradually, and would fall into excess. Such men would not satisfactorily discharge their ordinary duties, and would always be lazy, dull, and timid, and would lose all their energy and pluck. 34. It would be a serious privation to consumers to forego the use, i.e., fakirs, suthrias, nangas, sanyasis, bhagat, and the Mussalmans of otaras and the Hindus of tikanas. Habitual consumers are so habituated to them that they cannot eat with any good appetite, nor get any sleep, nor get free motions until they use the drug. If such men were to forego their use they would fall ill. I cannot give any idea of the probable numbers of each class. 35. It would be difficult to prohibit the use of bhang at once. It is probable that the drug would be illicitly used. It would be difficult to enforce prohibition. The prohibition would cause serious discontent among the consumers; but it is not likely that the discontent would amount to political danger. It is possible that people would think of resorting to alcohol or other drugs. As for charas and ganja, I am of opinion that they can be prohibited, and there would be no difficulty in so doing; but in that case bhang would be consumed to a larger extent. 36. There is no reason to think so. 37. I do not smoke ganja and charas, and neither have I any experience of them; but from enquiries made from smokers, it appears that the effects of charas smoking are in no way different from those of ganja smoking, except the smoking of charas produces instantaneous effects, for which reason it is preferred to ganja. 38. The difference cannot be known. 39. I cannot answer this question, as I have no experience. 40. Bhang is often prescribed in syphilis and in piles. No further particulars can be obtained. I have not heard any of these being used in the treat- ment of cattle-disease. 41. I do not know that the use of charas is in any way beneficial in its effects. But bhang is sometimes beneficial in (a). I cannot say anything as to (b), (c), and (d). 42. They are not harmless, and I have given particulars under answer to question 33. 43. They become offensive to their neighbours if they do not get the drug at their proper time. 44. It is refreshing. It produces moderate in- toxication. It does not allay hunger. It creates appetite. The effect lasts for one hour or two. There are no after-effects. The want of the drug produces longing. 45. The habitual moderate use will produce noxious results. If the moderate habit develops into the excessive, all the effects given in answers to question 45 are produced; and if the drug is not used at the proper time, it is in every way injuri- ous. Therefore, it is not good to make it a habit. But, if not otherwise necessary, the moderate use will not produce any bad effects. Further parti- culars under this question can better be given by doctors or physicians. 46. It would produce more noxious effects. 47 and 48. No. 49. Yes, these drugs are used as an aphrodisiac. Prostitutes do use them as such. The use of the drugs for this purpose is undoubtedly more injuri- ous than its use as an ordinary narcotic. Reasons.299 29. Evidence of PRIBHDAS SHEWAKRAM ADVANI Secretary, Band of Hope, Hyderabad, Sind. 1. I have visited the hemp drug shops, and made enquiries on the subject. 2. The definitions appear to me to be correct. Charas and ganja are not manufactured in Sind. They are imported. The former from Yarkand viâ Amritsar, and the latter from Cutch and other places. Bhang, charas, and ganja. Bhang is also locally called sai, sabzi, Shiva-ji-buti (root), pani, bijaya, nanigan, and bahakain. 3. It grows on the hills west of Sind (Beluchis- tan) and in the Punjab. 4, 5 and 6. I cannot say. 7. (a) and (b) No. (c) and (d) Yes. Mostly in Bubak in the Sehwan taluka (Karachi district) near Manchar lake; also in the village of Khabra and Mahra, (Hala taluka, Hyderabad district), and in the taluka of Nowshero Abro (Shikarpur district). 8. I am informed that in the Karachi and Shikarpur districts there was increase owing to favourable inundation last year. In the Hydera- bad district there has been considerable decrease in the area under cultivation. 9. The ground is at first cleared of jungle; then manured, watered, and ploughed. Hemp seeds are then sown broadcast, and when they germinate and the plant reaches maturity, it is reaped, and then dried in the sun. After it is dried, it is thrashed and used as bhang. 10. No; they are of the ordinary agriculturist class. 11. Ganja is not produced in Sind. 12. Not in Sind, as far as I am aware. 13. Hemp is not cultivated in Sind for the production of ganja. 14. (a) and (b) No. (c) Yes. About 3,000 maunds of bhang in the Karachi district; about 500 maunds in the Hyderabad district. About the Shikarpur district I do not know. 15. Vide answer to question No. 9. Bhang is only drunk. Very few persons when they cannot get charas and ganja smoke the dried flowering top of the hemp plant grown in Sind for use as bhang with tobacco. In some exceptional cases the tops are eaten also. 16. (a) No. Generally by the cultivators in their fields. (b) Yes. (c) We import ganja and charas into Sind from other places, and therefore we have no in- formation about its production. 17. By the agriculturists. 18. Bhang will not deteriorate by keeping for three years if proper care is taken and exposure prevented; charas for two years, and ganja for three years. 19. Yes, for smoking. 20. Charas and ganja are used by both Hindus and Muhammadans, but chiefly by nomadic fakirs, jogis, etc., in (Hindu) Shivite temples, and (Muhammadans) otaras and baithaks. 21. Flat ganja is generally used in Sind for smoking. Poor persons use chur ganja because it is cheap. 22. Foreign. It is imported from Yarkand viâ Amritsar. 23. Vide answer to question 15. Not as a rule. A few use it, especially fakirs when they do not get ganja in time. 24. Hindus and Muhammadans use it. They drink it about 80 per cent. Hindus and 50 per cent. Muhammadans. 25. Ganja on the decrease and charas on the increase. Ganja takes more time to produce the necessary effect than charas, and hence it is not smoked by many. 26. Bhang300 33. There is no public opinion in regard to the use of bhang. The followers of Shiva (Shivites) look upon bhang as sacred, because their god (Shiva) was, they say, fond of it, and took large quantities of it. Charas and ganja is in disrepute with the Sin- dhis because it produces cough, asthma, and some- times impotency. 34. Yes, to habitual excessive consumers it will be a privation. 35. If prohibition be ordered, other poisonous drugs, such as dhatura, etc., would be used by the excessive consumers, or the drug would be used illicitly. It would cause discontent, but not such as to amount to political danger. The well-to-do will use liquor, and fakirs dhatura, aconite, etc. 36. No. 37. I cannot say. Ganja takes more time than charas to produce the necessary effect. I am in- formed that charas and ganja smoking has injuri- ous effects on the nervous system. 38. I do not know. Round ganja is not import- ed in Sind. 39. Bhang is generally drunk. When it is smoked, it serves the purpose of ganja and charas (vide answer to question 15). Ganja and charas are smoked. Some fakirs eat charas, and it is said that it is not less injurious in that form. 40. Yes, bhang only. The twigs are also used with other medical drugs, and given in piles and to check diarrh'a. Yes, bhang only. 41. (a) Yes; bhang only. (b) I do not know. Charas and ganja are, however, stated to give the staying power. Moderate use of bhang beneficial, but not that of charas and ganja. (c) No. (d) I cannot say. Vide answer to question 27. I refer to moderate habitual use of the drugs. 42. Yes, of bhang harmless, but not of charas and ganja. 43. Yes. 44. Bhang is used as a refreshing draught, as a tonic to help digestion, and by old persons to bring on sleep. Bhang, charas, and ganja produce in- toxication. The effect lasts from one to three hours. It varies according to constitution and temperament. The after-effects of charas and ganja are cough and asthma, produces longing, and in some cases uneasiness as well. 45. (a) I think not. (b) and (c) No. (d) The use of charas and ganja causes bron- chitis and asthma. (e) and (f) No. (g) I do not know any case. 46. (a) It causes loss of strength, trembling and mental weakness, and enfeebles the constitution. (b) Yes; it causes loss of appetite. (c) No. The use of charas and ganja causes bronchitis and asthma. (d) It induces laziness. (e) It has in some cases produced insanity. Reliable information on the point can be had from the returns of the Lunatic Asylum, Hyderabad, Sind. (f) I do not know any case. 47. No. 48. Not as a hereditary habit. 49. In regard to charas and ganja only. (a) and (b) Yes. (c) Yes; it produces more weakness. (d) No. 50. (a), (b) and (c) Yes. (d) Yes; it enfeebles the system. 51. (a) and (b) No. 52. (a) They are as a rule habitual excessive consumers. 53. I think it does. Some years ago a sepoy at Hyderabad ran amuck, and it was believed that it was owing to his having indulged in the excessive use of bhang. 54. I think they are. 55. (a) Sometimes a preparation of bhang called majum is used for this purpose. (b) I have been told that complete stupefaction can be induced by administering any of these drugs without admixture in sufficiently large doses. 56. (c) Dhatura is sometimes used as one of the ingredients in the preparation of majum (bhang preparation). 57. Not in Sind, as far as I know. 58. The present system is based on Bombay Abkari Act V of 1878 and the rules framed there- under. 59. It is capable of improvement only in one direction. There should be local option. No shop should be allowed to be opened until the wishes of the people living in the neighbourhood are consult- ed, and there should be also supervision over the kind of hemp drugs used by the retailers. 60. Ganja is not produced in Sind. 61. Charas is not produced in Sind. 62. If it can be arranged, cultivators should sow hemp seeds and reap the crop after getting the necessary permit from revenue officers, which is not the case now. 63. Perhaps it will be as well to fix the maxi- mum price for one tola of each drug, and to bind the retailer not to sell more than 5 tolas of bhang, 1 tola of charas, and 1 tola of ganja to one person in one day. 64. No. 65. The privilege is put up to public auction. The system as regards the levy of duty on alco- hol is different. There is a distillery at Kotri, and the duty which is levied on all liquor manufactured there varies according to strength. 66. No. 67. None, but the alterations proposed may be considered. 68. There are no such shops, but where they exist they should be closed. 69. No, but they should be. 70. I do not know any. Appendix. BY A MEMBER OF THE RAND OP HOPE, HYDERABAD, SIND. I am not aware that charas and ganja are prepared anywhere in Sind, but they are used for smoking, though their use is confined to the lower
301 orders of the people, especially fakirs, both Hindu and Muhammadan. Both these are very de- leterious, and injuriously affect the system. Habitual smokers of ganja and charas lose their energy and become useless drones. I have even heard of cases in which the immoderate smoking of ganja has led to insanity. I think more restric- tions on the consumption of both these things will lead to very salutary results. Bhang is in common use among the people of Sind. All classes of people, both high and low, indulge in it; but most people drink a weak, watery preparation of it called pango. This is taken as a cooling drink, and persons subject to piles take it either with or without some other medicine. Bhang is said to have soothing and digestive properties. In the case of habitual drinkers the craving for it is so strong that until it is satisfied nothing on earth would give them any pleasure, and they become irritable and even violent without it. The excessive use of it weakens the system and emaciates the body. Bhang is largely grown in Bubak in the Karachi district and in the Mir's territory, and in small patches in many parts of Sind. The cultivation of it should be confined to particular localities which may be favourable to its growth, and its growth elsewhere, even in very small quan- tities, strictly prohibited. The rate at which it is sold by licensed retail vendors should be uniform, and should be fixed by Government, and not left to the option of the vendors as at present, as the practice of selling it at different rates to different persons results in discontent. The privilege of possessing bhang up to half a seer by any one person is very often abused; for instance, a person going to a fair and finding that bhang can be had there at a cheaper rate than in his own village buys two seers of it, and as he cannot carry more than half a seer, he induces his three companions to carry half a seer each for him as far as his village, and thus he successfully evades the law. The rules as regards possessing and carrying bhang should be so modified as to preclude the possibility of abusing this privilege. I agree in the opinions expressed in the above. PRIBDHDAS SHEWAKRAM ADVANI, Secretary, Band of Hope, Hyderabad, Sind. 30. Evidence of TIRITHDAS HASRAJMAL, Member of the firm of Denmal Sachanond, Karachi. 19. So far as I know, ganja and charas are often smoked by fakirs, nangas in tikanas and by roam- ing fakirs and other low class Mussalmans and Hindus. 20. Sudras, low class people, Suthrias or fakirs, and wandering fakirs, and Mussalmans smoke ganja and charas in otaras and three-fourths of Hindu awaghars and jogis smoke them. 21. Round ganja is preferred. 22. Foreign charas in used. It is imported from Amritsar, Yarkand, Ladak and Bokhara. 23. In my experience bhang is smoked only when charas or ganja cannot be had, and then it is smoked with tobacco. 24. Half Hindus and Mussalmans drink bhang. If the habitual drinkers cannot get bhang pounded and sifted, they eat it raw and drink water after it. Often low class Mussalmans in otaras and illi- terate Hindu fakirs in tikanas do this. 25. The use of bhang, charas and ganja is in- creasing. 26. (a) Bhang, 25 per cent. Ganja 7 per cent. Charas, 5 per cent. (b) Bhang 5 per cent. Charas, 2 or 3 per cent. Ganja 3 or 4 per cent. (c) Bhang, 10 per cent. Charas and ganja, 1 or 2 per cent. (d) Bhang, 5 per cent. Charas or ganja, 1 or 2 per cent. 27. Sowcars, merchants and retail shop-keepers and pensioners use bhang in moderation. Wandering fakirs and low class men use bhang, charas and ganja in excess. 28. (a) Bhang drinkers302 It is thought by some that the moderate use of bhang is beneficial. Some think that it should al- together be abandoned. Ganja and charas are dangerous both to life and health. 34. If the use of bhang were foregone, it would cause much inconvenience and difficulty. Several persons think that it is necessary to use bhang as a cooling drink. It aids the power of digestion and creates appetite. 35. In my opinion the prohibition of bhang would occasion discontent. The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants, but on the contrary alcohol consumers often forego alcohol in favour of bhang. All the three can be prohibited without any fear of political danger, although it will at first occasion discontent. Ganja and charas consumers can give up these two drugs in favour of bhang drinking. I know this from experience. 36. No; on the contrary, the use of alcohol is to a certain extent foregone in favour of bhang drink- ing. 37. The effects of charas smoking are more in- toxicating and more injurious than those of ganja smoking. 38. Round ganja is preferred to the other two kinds, for it is more intoxicating. 40. Bhang is prescribed by native physicians along with poppy seeds as an antidote against cold in the head, and bhang unmixed with other ingre- dients is also prescribed; and it is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Bhang is beneficial in aiding the powers of digestion. Charas and ganja give staying-power in cases of severe exertion and of exposure. This is because of their intoxicating effects. 42. The use of charas and ganja should be put a stop to, for moderate use leads to excess. Hence cough and asthma are produced, and the eyesight is affected and the manly power is weakened. Even moderate consumers suffer from cough, asthma and heart-burning. The moderate use of bhang is not at all injurious. 43. If the ganja and charas smokers do not get the drugs at their usual time for taking them, they will prattle foolishly. 44. The immediate effects of ganja and charas are as follows. The smoker gets perfectly silent and his eyes become red. If the habitual smoker takes the drug at the proper time, it creates appetite. The effect lasts for about one hour or two hours; after the effects are gone, he falls into yawning and laziness and gets thirsty. Bhang drinking has an intoxicating effect which produces appetite, which lasts for two or three hours. 45. Bhang drinking produces no noxious effects, but ganja and charas produce asthma and cough, etc.; the eyesight is weakened and the manly power is diminished. Charas.303 of land. It is cultivated in large quantities in Bubak and Arazi, taluka Sehwan, district Kara- chi, and in talukas Naushahro Ahro and Sukkur, district Shikarpur. It is cultivated with the object of being used as bhang and for seeds. Ganja is not manufactured in Sind, and is im- ported from Panvel and Cutch. Charas is not prepared in Sind, but is imported from the Punjab. 10. The bhang cultivators do not form a special class, but belong to the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 14. Bhang and hemp seeds are prepared from the hemp plant in the fields where it grows. 15. The cultivated plant is cut, dried and beaten, when the leaves and seeds are separated. The leaves and seeds are made into bhang drink. (A) Aghoris (i. e., persons very much addicted to the use of drugs), who are in the habit of smok- ing ganja, smoke bhang instead, as ganja, if they cannot get ganja at the proper time. (B) Excessive bhang drinkers eat raw leaves if they cannot get bhang drink at the proper time. (C) Bhang drink is made in the following way. It is first cleared of weeds, soaked in water in a vessel, washed and pounded in a mortar with a pestle, and made into balls. Water is then mixed with it. After which it is sifted through a piece of cloth and drunk. Ganja and charas are mixed with tobacco, and then smoked. 16. Yes. It is prepared and kept in tikanas and madhis for free distribution. Yes, it can be prepared. 17. In Sind bhang cultivators prepare bhang leaves and bhang seeds. 18. Yes, charas, ganja and bhang retain their intoxicating effects for twelve months, after which period they lose their effect by degrees, and quite deteriorate after the lapse of three years. But bhang and ganja, if kept in bags, will not lose their effects for three years. If charas is allowed to remain in the original bags in which it is imported, it will not lose effect for two years; but if trans- ferred to other bags and exposed, it will commence to deteriorate after twelve months, because the original bags in which it is imported are made of double leather. There is probability of bhang and ganja deteriorating, as it is grown from earth, and, like corn, it will lose its effect as time passes. There are no means to prevent deterioration. 19. Yes, they are used for smoking only. 20. Hindus and Mussalmans. Among Hindus, Brahmins, sanyasis, bairagis, jangams, udasis, shatrias, jogis and other fakirs; three-fourths of the above Classes smoke ganja and charas; of other Hindus one-fourth only smoke them. Among Mussalmans half of lower classes of people and fakirs, and half of these smoke in large quantities in tikanas, madhis and otaras, and in very small quantity and rarely in their houses. 21. Flat ganja is used in Sind. Only one sort is used. 22. Foreign charas is used. Formerly Pathans used to bring it. Now it is imported from the Punjab. 23. Not generally. But aghoris, i.e., persons very much addicted to the smoking of ganja, do smoke bhang when they cannot get ganja. Some poor persons, coolies, Bhils, who are in the habit of smoking ganja, use the ghundis of bhang as ganja, for the price of ganja is seven times more than the price of ghundi. 24. Hindus and Mussalmans. All classes of Hindu fakirs drink bhang, and 75 per cent. of other Hindus drink bhang; the rest have no objection to drinking. Among Mussalmans 60 per cent. of all classes except Kazis drink bhang. It is drunk mostly in tikanas, madhis, otaras and dairas, and occasionally in houses. Excessive drinkers of bhang eat it off in cases where they cannot get the drink. 25. The use of all three is on the increase. The reasons for it are: - (1) The farmers of bhang in Sind sell these drugs at very high rates. As, for instance, in Karachi bhang is sold at Rs 2-8-0, in the Hydera- bad taluka at Re. 1-10-8, and in the Hyderabad district at Re. 1-4-0, and in the Thar and Parkar district at one rupee per seer, while its original price is from anna one to annas two per seer. On account of these high rates, cultivators cultivate hemp plant secretly, which they use themselves and give to others, and consequently such persons who can get it drink it in excess. If the selling price were cheaper, the cultivators would never think of planting it secretly. (2) People learn to drink bhang in bad company. This reason is equally applicable to ganja and charas. 26. (a) For habitual moderate consumers vide answers to questions 20 and 24. (b) One-fourth of the number, vide answers to questions 20 and 24. (c) 25 per cent. of those whom I have excluded in the answer to questions 20 and 24. (d) Rarely any. 27. As regards classes, see answers to questions 20, 23 and 24. Hindu and Mussalman fakirs use them themselves, and have inherited the habit from their elders and transmit it to their chelas (disciples). Among the laymen, bad company or the want of proper care by parents leads their children into these habits. 28. (a) Bhang, one tola, cost 4 pice; charas, ½ tola, cost 3 annas; ganja ½ tola, cost one anna. (b) Bhang, one chatang (5 tolas), cost one anna and eight pies; charas, 1 ½ tolas, cost 9 annas; ganja 2 tolas, cost 4 annas. 29. No massalas or ingredients are mixed with ganja and charas. Ordinarily no massalas are mixed with bhang too, but in the hot weather some consumers mix cooling ingredients with it, and in the cold weather certain stimulating in- gredients are added to it. Dhatura is not ordi- narily mixed with it. The object of the mixture is that in cold season it is used as a tonic and in summer as a cooling beverage. I know the pre- paration called the bhang massala. The following are the ingredients:304 31. Yes, the habit is easily formed. Yes, it is rather difficult to break off. Yes, there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive in the cases of charas and ganja, but not in the case of bhang. 32. There are both religious and social customs in regard to the consumption of bhang, but not ganja or charas. (1) On Shivaratri (the night of Shiv god) his worshippers offer the bhang drink to his linga. (2) In the hot weather most Hindus keep vessels full of bhang drink and water for free dis- tribution to all. (3) In all religious assemblies the bhang drink is prepared and distributed to all. (4) On the death of a big saint or sadhu vessels full of bhang drink and water are kept all along the way by which the funeral procession proceeds. (5) Worshippers of Vishnu (god), who are pre- vented from using liquor, prepare bhang and drink it in Holi holidays and on other gatherings. On the above occasions and at other times, the use of bhang forms a religious or a social duty. On all these occasions it is used very moderately. Such a use cannot lead to the formation of a habit. 33. The moderate use of bhang is not considered by people to be bad; but even the moderate use of charas or ganja is not taken to be good. There is a social opinion that the use of bhang is not bad, but that it is not good with respect to charas and ganja. The moderate use of bhang is not disreputable, but the use of charas or ganja in any form is disreputable. Reasons. The charas or ganja smoker generally suffers from asthma and heart-burning, loses the colour of his face. More- over, he appears miserable and gets a bad smell in the mouth. If he has no money, he is tempted to commit small thefts in order to procure the drug. But the use of bhang, called neinani buti (humble plant), is quite free from the above vices, and often aids in the remembrance of God. I know nothing of the hemp plant being worshipped. 34. It would be no privation to a moderate con- sumer of bhang to forego its consumption, but a moderate consumer of charas or ganja or the exces- sive consumer of bhang, charas or ganja cannot forego their consumption without serious privation. Reasons. They would fall ill, grow lazy and lose appetite. About 50 per cent. of the consumers would be thus inconvenienced. 35. The use of all these drugs cannot be prohibit- ed at once; but if the use of charas and ganja be gradually put a stop to, it would be feasible, but the use of bhang can never be prohibited. If the use of charas and ganja were prohibited, they would not be imported, and hence they would not be illicitly consumed; but bhang would be illicitly used if its use is prohibited, for it is produced in the country. If the importation of ganja and charas be prohibited, the prohibition of its use here can be enforced. The prohibition would occasion a temporary discontent among the consumers. It would not be a serious one. The discontent would not amount to political danger. The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to alcoholic sti- mulants or other drugs. 36. No alcohol is now used in place of any of these drugs. 37. Charas is doubly as intoxicating as ganja is, because the ganja is not so heating as charas is. 38. Only one sort of ganja is used in Sind, hence I cannot give my opinion about it. 39. Ganja and charas are never used in drinking. but are specially used in smoking. Bhang is specially used in drinking, and its smoking is more injurious than its drinking, for the smoking of bhang will produce all the evils of ganja smoking. 40. Charas and ganja are never prescribed by native doctors, but bhang is prescribed in certain cases as a drink and is used in majums. It is also used as an application on piles and other wounds. It is also used in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. (a) Bhang aids the powers of digestion. (b) Yes. (c) Bhang is used. as a febrifuge. (d) Old bhang is used by persons suffering from syphilis. Old persons use bhang for aiding the powers of digestion. Labourers and poor men use these drugs to give them powers mentioned in question (b). Fakirs and godly persons use bhang for concen- tration of their thoughts. Fifty per cent. of the classes mentioned above use the drugs. I refer to the moderate use of the drug. 42. The moderate use of bhang is both bene- ficial and harmless, but even the moderate use of charas and ganja is not only not beneficial, but it is not harmless. Reasons. Moderate use of bhang to a certain extent is a necessity for its medicinal properties, for the religious and social customs connected with it and for the fact that it creates fear of God. But ganja and charas in the begin- ning are taken as a luxury, and are not beneficial, but end in misery and wretchedness. They have heating properties, but that very heat of theirs destroys all manly power. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. It is refreshing and keeps the man in good health. It does produce intoxication. The drink- ing of bhang does not allay hunger. It creates appetite. The intoxication of charas lasts for one hour, that of ganja for half an hour, and that of bhang for four hours. Ganja and charas produce intoxication immediately, while bhang produces in- toxication after some time. The want of sub- sequent gratification of bhang does not produce any longing in a moderate consumer. The after- effects of ganja and charas are wretchedness and misery, and perhaps death. There are special after-effects of bhang. 45. The habitual moderate use of all these drugs excepting bhang does produce noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. The use of ganja or charas impairs, but the mo- derate use of bhang does not impair the constitution. The use of ganja or charas injures the digestion and causes loss of appetite. It causes dysentery, bronchitis and asthma. It impairs the moral sense, induces laziness and habits of immorality and debauchery. It deadens the intellect, but it produces no insanity. 46. The excessive use of bhang, charas and ganja produces all the evils produced by the moderate use of charas and ganja, as detailed in the answer to question No. 45. 47 and 48. It does not appear to be a hereditary habit, nor does it affect the children of a moderate consumer. 49. Yes, bhang is, but not charas or ganja. Yes, prostitutes do so use bhang. The use of bhang
305 for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic, for its constant use as an aphrodisiac will bring on debility. The moderate use of hemp does not tend to produce impotence. 50. The answer given in 49 holds good, but the excessive use will prove more injurious. 51. Yes. It has no connection. 52. Men of bad character use these drugs ex- cessively and often commit offences relating to por- perty and human life. 53. Yes. Unpremeditated violent crimes are com- mitted, but I do not know any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. No. 55. Yes. Bhang alone cannot induce complete stupefaction, nor can charas or ganja alone. 56. The effects of bhang used in moderation and in excess are so much increased by mixing dhatura, parched grams, sesamum, that it produces uncon- sciousness, temporary insanity, and sometimes death. The effects of bhang used in moderation and in ex- cess can be lessened by mixing coriander, succory, anissed, and mainly by adding more water than usual to the drink. 57. Ganja and charas are not used in eating or drinking, but they are only used in smoking. 58. The present system is not working well, and is capable of improvement. 59. The practice now in vogue is that one zilla or two zillas are farmed out to one man or to one company, which results in the following evils: 306 orders should be issued that no drugs should be sold at higher or lower rates than the rates fixed. (5) In consequence of the uniform rates every- where, no drugs will be illicitly imported and exported. (6) On account of low rates, there will be no illicit growth of the hemp plant. (7) On account of cheap rates, the poor pur- chasers would be relieved of their present troubles and grievance. (8) On account of there being many licensees in the whole district, no complaints of the insuffi- ciency of the stock of any of the drugs will likely be made by District Officers. (9) The rich and the poor will have equal treatment. (10) The evils, which are the results of the transfer of the farm to another at the end of the year, will disappear. 64. The quantity covered by a permit should be transported all at one time, and not in instalments; and if the whole of the quantity covered by such a pass is not procurable and after the portion procurable is transported, the permit covering the quantity should expire, for the transport of the quantity covered by a permit in instalments gives many opportunities of committing crime. 65. In my opinion the taxation of ganja, charas and bhang is unreasonable, both with reference to (a) one another, and (b) to country liquor and opium. Per seer. R a. p. 1. Country liquor, manufac- ture expenses 0 6 0 Selling price (including royalty) i.e., the selling price including royalty is four times its cost price 1 8 0 2. Opium, original cost about 6 0 0 Selling price, i.e., the sell- ing price including royalty is a little more than four times its cost price 25 0 0 3. Bhang, original cost 0 2 0 Selling price including royalty, etc., i.e., the selling price is thirteen times the cost price 1 10 0 4. Ganja, original cost, etc. 0 8 0 Selling price, i.e., the sell- ing price is twenty times the cost price 10 0 0 5. Charas, original cost, etc. 2 0 0 Selling price, i.e., the sell- ing price is fifteen times the cost price 30 0 0 The rates which are reasonable in my opinion have been given in the answer to question 63, and will be found to correspond with the present rates of opium and country liquor. 66. Only one king of ganja is used in Sind, therefore the question cannot be answered. 67. I have objections, but I am not in posses- sion of sufficient information. 68. There are no such shops. 69. The wishes of the people are nor consulted, but they should be consulted and considered. 70. Ganja is illicitly imported from Cutch, but the smugglers, if apprehended, are punished. General Remarks.307 (3) It aids the powers of digestion. (4) Moderate use of bhang makes a man medi- tative and intelligent for the time he is under its influence. (5) It aids in the meditation of God and creates fear of Hari. (6) The consumer of bhang grows timid, and never commits any offence under its influence. (7) It is used as an application in piles and wounds. (8) It is used in syphilis, pox and other diseases. (9) It is used in the treatment of cattle diseases. (10) Followers of Vishnu (who do not take liquor) use it on Holi holidays and on other religious and social gatherings. (11) The selling of bhang at cheaper rate will decrease the number of liquor consumers, who would willingly take to bhang drink. (12) Bhang is not such a narcotic as to induce the consumer to commit an offence volun- tarily. It is taken solely as a beverage and makes the consumer humble and quiet. The above are the results of my observation and experience. 32. Evidence of AMRUMOL PRITAMDAS, Farmer of Bhang, Charas, Ganja and Opium, Karachi. 2. Ganja and charas are not produced in Sind, but bhang is. It is called bhang. There is one sort called pani and another called ghundi. 4. There are two kinds of bhang; one is called. kaki, the other is called sale. 5. The wild plant grows wherever there are seeds on the ground and rain falls on them. 6. Its growth is scattered. 7. Yes, bhang is cultivated in my province. It is pounded and drunk. Majum is also prepared from it. It is produced in Shikarpur, at Bubak, taluka Sehwan, Khebar, zillah Hyderabad, and in Fattu. 8. It grows in abundance in Bubak, taluka Seh- wan. It grows to a limited extent in Shikarpur, and in small quantities in Khebar, zillah Hyder- bad, and in Fattu. 10. Yes, they are zamindars who cultivate bhang among other kinds of crops. 13. No ganja is produced in Sind. 14. Nothing else is prepared from bhang in Sind, except majum. 16. Bhang alone can be prepared from the plant, wherever it is cultivated, but ganja and charas are not prepared. 18. All these three drugs deteriorate by keeping long. The effects are weakened by time. They can be kept good for twelve months. They deteri- orate by exposure. No especial measures are taken to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking. 20. Hindus, Mussalmans, sanyasis, fakirs, and Marathas. 21. Round ganja is much preferred. 22. Charas is imported from Amritsar. I un- derstand that it is the produce of Yarkand and Ladak. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 25. It is not on the decrease. It keeps sta- tionary. 29. Dhatura, is not mixed with bhang, but other kinds of massala are mixed, such as poppy seeds, cardamoms, hemp seeds, almonds, sugarcandy, dried rose leaves and other cooling ingredients. 31. Some persons gradually acquire the habit by keeping on smoking it occasionally. The habit is very difficult to break off. 34. It causes inconvenience to many persons to forego it. 35. It would be difficult to give up any kind of intoxicating drug. 37. The effects of drinking bhang are not injuri- ous, but it is injurious to smoke ganja and charas to excess. 38. Round ganja is more intoxicating, but flat ganja and " chur " are less intoxicating. 40. Bhang is often used in treating human diseases and cattle disease. 41. (a) Bhang is used as a digestive. 42. In my opinion moderate consumers will not be injured. 43. Consumers of ganja, charas and bhang are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. Bhang gives an appetite to those who drink it. Ganja and charas produce heat, and therefore ganja and charas consumers are healthy and hale. If they cannot get the drug they will be greatly inconvenienced. 45. A moderate use of the drugs causes no injury to consumers. 55. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced by any of these drugs. 56. The effects of bhang are cooling. If bhang is drunk mixed with massalas, its intoxicating effects are considerably weakened. If drunk to excess, its intoxication can only be counteracted by the use of pickles and ghee. It is not customary to mix dhatura with bhang. 57. Ganja and charas are used for smoking. 58. In my opinion the system is working well. 60. Ganja is not produced in Sind. 61. Charas is not made in Sind. 62. When bhang is cultivated over one or two jirebs, it is cultivated under a license and is under the control of Government. Occasionally hemp plants are sown by cultivators in their fields. If Govern- ment controls this occasional planting and puts a stop to it, it will do well. 63. I have no objections to the present system. 64. I have no objection to this question. 65. In my opinion the present taxation should be continued. 66. In my opinion the present system should be continued. 67. I have no objections. 68. In my opinion the present system should be continued. 69. In my opinion shops should be opened where necessary. 70. Those who import larger quantities than those allowed by law are punished, but no duty is paid in respect of the drugs. vol. vii. 2 T 2
308 33. Evidence of MANGHANMAL ALUMAL, Bhang, Ganja and Charas, and Opium farmer, Karachi. 1. I am acquainted with the subject myself. I have managed a hemp drugs business for many years. I am acquainted with men who take bhang, charas and ganja. I am therefore able to answer the following questions. 2. Ganja and charas are not produced in Sind, but bhang is. One kind is called pani and another ghundi. 3. Bhang does not grow wild in Sind. 4. Bhang, is called bhang or the plant of Shiva. There are three kinds of bhang, kaki, sall and ghundi. 6. The wild hemp ordinarily grows scattered. 7. Bhang is cultivated in my province and is used for drinking; and majum is also made from it. In Shikarpur, Bubak, taluka Sehwan, Khebar, zilla Hyderabad, and in taluka Tatta bhang is culti- vated. 10. The cultivators are zamindars, and among other crops cultivate bhang. 13. Ganja is not made in Sind. 14. Nothing else is made from bhang except majum309 56. The effects of bhang are cooling. If bhang is drunk mixed with massala its intoxicating effects are lessened. If drunk to excess, its intoxicating effects are weakened only by taking pickles and ghee. It is not usual to drink bhang mixed with dhatura. 57. Ganja and charas are used in smoking. 58. The system in my opinion is working well. 60. Ganja is not prepared in my province. 61. Charas is not prepared in Sind. 62. When an acre or two of bhang is cultivated, the cultivation is undertaken after obtaining a license and is under Government control. Sometimes cultivators sow a plant or two on the ridges of fields, or seeds fallen by chance on the ground spring up. If Government were to control this growth and order it to be put a stop to, it would be well. 63. I have no objection to the present system. 64. I have no objections to the regulations. The Government orders allowing every man to trans- port 40 tolas are not objectionable, if transported within the same zilla; but it is objectionable to transport from one zilla, to another. 65. The present taxation should continue in my opinion. 66. In my opinion the present system should continue. 67. I have no objections. 68. In my opinion the present system should continue. 69. Shops should be opened where necessary. 70. Those who import quantities exceeding the prescribed limit are punished. No duty is paid in respect to them. 34. Evidence of DAYARAM KISHUNCHAND, Bhang, Charas and Ganja, and Opium Farmer, Hyderabad. 1. I give the answers from my personal know- ledge and experience, as I have managed the drugs farms for many days. 2. All the drugs are known in my province by the same names which are given in the book. 3. I hear that the wild hemp plant grows spon- taneously in the Punjab and Quetta, where it springs up aided by snow. I cannot, however, give any positive information about it. 4. It is known by the names of sai, subzi, Shiva's plant, nangin and bubakain. These names refer to the same plant. 5. The wild hemp does not grow in my province, hence I cannot give the special conditions of climate, etc. 6. I cannot say, as the plant does not grow here. 7. It is cultivated310 after the expiry of two years, and those of bhang after the lapse of three years. After twelve months it changes its colour. Yes; they lose their intoxicat- ing effects in time. They can keep good for two or three years. They deteriorate if kept for a long time, for they are products of soil. I believe there are no measures which can prevent their deteriora- tion. 19. Yes; they are used only for smoking in this province; they are put to no other uses. 20. All classes of people smoke them, except Europeans, Parsis, Boras, and Akoli Sikhs. The smokers will form about one-fourth of these classes. They are smoked mostly in madhis and otaras. No special places are fixed for them. 21. Flat ganja is preferred. Chur is smoked only by poor persons, for they get it cheaper. No special place is appointed for them. 22. No native charas is prepared, but foreign charas is imported from Yarkand, called Yarkandi charas. First it is imported in Amritsar, and thence it is ordered by merchants here. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking, but excessive smokers smoke the ghundis of bhang in place of ganja, if they do not get it in time. No place is fixed for them, and ghundis are so used on very rare occasions. 24. Awadhoot fakirs occasionally eat bhang when they get no time to pound it. People of all classes drink bhang, except Europeans, Parsis and Bhoras. It is drunk in otaras, madhis, houses, etc. I cannot give the exact proportion of the bhang eaters, but of bhang drinkers there may be 6 out of 16. 25. The use of ganja is decreasing, but that of bhang and charas is increasing. The reasons are that ganja does not produce intoxication immedia- tely, hence its use is decreasing. Charas produces an instantaneous intoxication, hence it is extensively used. Bhang is cooling, hence it is more resorted to. 26. These preparations cannot be accurately given, but the following are estimated to be the numbers: 311 this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic, for it would produce weakness and debility. The use of hemp does not produce impotence. 50. The excessive use of the drugs is injuri- ous. 51. Yes; no connection. 52. There may be very few bad characters who use these drugs in excess, but they are not bold enough to commit offences such as affray. 53 and 54. No. 55. Yes; complete stupefaction can be induced by mixing ganja and bhang; and if a consumer uses it in excess, there is every probability of his becoming unconscious. 56. The intoxicating effects of bhang are les- sened by mixing coriander and aniseed with it, and this mixture is cooling. Dhatura is not mixed. 57. Charas and ganja are not drunk, but are smoked. 58. The system is working well. It is not capable of improvement in my opinion. 59. I do not think that there is any necessity of making any improvement in it. 60. Ganja is not cultivated in my province. 61. Charas is not cultivated in my province. 62. Bhang prepared from the hemp plant is well prepared, but it requires to be controlled over. It is not in Government custody as other narcotics are, and people cultivate it without a license and reap and take it home without permission. This encourages smuggling and leads to increase the use of narcotics. 63. I have no objection. 64. I have no objections; but the quantity, i.e., 40 tolas, allowed to each man to take from one place to another, i.e., from one taluka to another, without a pass, is excessive. He cannot use so much. If allowed to take the above quantity, there is great probability of illicit transport and of the increase of the use. Therefore the possession of bhang should be reduced to ten tolas and ganja and charas to five tolas each. This is my opinion. 65. The taxation is reasonable, and there ap- pears to be no reason for making any alterations in it. 66. There appears to be no reason for making any alteration in it. 67. I have no objection. 68. There are no such shops, and it is not ne- cessary to have such shops in this province. 69. The wishes of the people are consulted and are considered. 70. There are no such facts. Restrictions and measures against importation and smuggling are in force, and they are sufficient. If any drug is so imported, immediate measures are taken to bring the offender to justice; and I can offer no further remarks in the matter. 35. Evidence of DIN MAHOMED, Contractor, Shikarpur. 3. In the Shikarpur district. 4. In Sind it is called bhang and is known by no other name. 6. The wild plant generally grows dense, but its growth is scattered if the soil is poor. 7. Bhang is cultivated in my province; bhang is produced here, but ganja and charas are import- ed from foreign countries. 8. Particulars under this question can be obtain- ed from Government records. 9. The process of cultivation is as under: 312 28. The cost of bhang per diem to customers can- not be fixed. Some spend 3 pies, some 1 pie, some 2 pies, some 2 annas, and some 4 annas; but there are very few excessive consumers. The cost of charas per diem is from 1 pice to 4 pice or 2 annas, and very little ganja is used in this province. 29. Aniseed, cardamoms, cummin seeds and almonds are sometimes mixed and pounded with bhang, and sugarcandy is also added. Dhatura is mixed by some persons to make the bhang more intoxicating. Few persons mix dhatura with bhang for the purpose of committing crime. No ingredient is mixed with ganja and charas. 30. Some persons consume 1 tola, some ½ tola, some 5 tolas, and some 2½ tolas. If it is drunk in company, the quantity sufficient to meet the wants of all is ordered. It is used both by men and women. In Sind boys are also in the habit of drinking bhang, but in a less quantity than men. 31. Long practice leads to the formation of a habit. It is difficult to break off. The moderate habit does not develop into the excessive. 32. It is forbidden by Muhammadan religion to use these drugs. More information about the practice of using it among the Hindus can be obtained from them. The use of bhang, charas and ganja leads to the formation of a habit, and is also injurious. 33. The use of these drugs is considered to be a habit. It is forbidden according to the Muhammad- an religion. There is no religious opinion in regard to it. But the Hindus worship it and it is not in disrepute. But the use according to the Mussalman religion is disreputable. 34. It would be a privation to consumers to fore- go its use. Men of all classes use them. 35. Government can prohibit the use, but gra- dually. The drug would be illicitly used. It would occasion discontent among the consumers. The discontent will not amount to political danger. People will have recourse to the use of a little quantity of alcohol. 36. Alcohol is not substituted for any of these drugs. 37. The intoxication of ganja is keener than that of charas. 38. Ganja is not used in this province. 39. It is not injurious. 40. They are prescribed by physicians, and are used in the treatment of cattle-disease. 41. It is beneficial. 42. Even the moderate use will be injurious, but after a long time. 43. No. 44. It produces intoxication. It does not allay hunger. Its intoxicating effects last four or five hours. The want of it produces longing. 45. (a) No. (b) It impairs the constitution. (c) It injures the digestion. (d) It does not cause dysentery, but causes asthma in the end. It induces laziness, but does not induce habits of immorality. (f) The excessive use deadens the intellect. It does not produce insanity. Ganja will not produce insanity, nor will insanes confess to the use of the drug. (g) They obtain relief. The excessive use of bhang leads into too much indulgence. 46. They are used both in moderation and in excess. 47. The use of bhang leads to the formation of a habit, but it has no effect upon the children. 48. Each of the drugs can be consumed in excess. 49. These drugs are used as aphrodisiac. Pros- titutes use them so. The excessive use of bhang produces impotence after a long time. 50. Answers are given under No. 46. 51. Bad charcters use these drugs moderately, and habitually, but their use has no connection with crime. 52. Their use has no connection with crime, as is said above. 53 and 54. No. 55. Persons are not stupefied, but sufis (persons not habituated to the use of narcotics) are stupefied even without admixture. 56. Dhatura is mixed with bhang to make it more intoxicating for personal consumption and also for administration to others, but this is done on rare occasions. 57. Ganja and charas are not used in drinking, but are used in smoking. 58. The system is working well, but the rates are dear, which give immense profit to the farmer. 59. The agreement of the farmer should contain a condition that he will sell the drugs at a fixed rate. 60. Ganja is not prepared here. 61. Charas is not prepared here. It is mostly imported from Khorassan and other countries. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang is sufficiently taken care of by the cultivators. 63. The farmer sells these drugs at high rates. These should be improved. 64. I have no objections. 65. The practice of drinking bhang prevails chiefly in Sind. The taxation of the same is rea- sonable, but the farmer sells it dear. 66. I have no objections. 67. No. 68. There are shops in my province. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted. 70. These drugs are not smuggled from Native States; the smugglers, if any, are detected and punished. Duty is really paid on such drugs; these drugs are bought from the shops and used as usual by certain people of all classes, and not by any particular class.
313 EVIDENCE OF BERAR WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of MR. A. ELLIOTT, Deputy Commissioner, Wun District. 51. During my service of more than twenty- four years in Berar, I do not remember any case in which the accused person was supposed to have committed the crime as a result of use of these drugs; nor does the moderate use of these drugs convert the consumers into bad characters, nor, vice versa are bad characters, as a rule, consumers of these drugs. 52. The excessive use of these drugs is injurious to the health of the consumers, and, I believe, affects their mind and intellect, but does not, as far as my experience goes, tend towards crime. On the contrary, the excessive use of these drugs so completely undermines the health, nerve, and mind of the consumer as to leave him almost incapable of committing premeditated crime. 53. I do not know of any such case, but it is quite possible that excessive indulgence in any of these drugs, particularly bhang, might lead to temporary frenzy, during which unpremeditated crime might be committed. 54. Not that I am aware of. 55. Certain classes of criminals do use drugs of various kinds to stupefy their victims, or even to kill them; this type of criminal was more common in old days than now. Whether ganja, bhang, and charas were, or are, more frequently the drugs used for this purpose than dhatura or other drugs I do not know, but as far as I am aware the action of these drugs would not be sufficiently rapid to suit the purposes of the criminal in most cases. I have never seen any experiments made with these drugs, and do not know whether complete stupefaction can be induced by them without admixture. 2. Evidence of KHAN BAHADUR SHAMSUDDIN ALI KHAN, Officiating Deputy Commissioner, Basim District. 51. No. None so far as has come to my notice in this district. 52. Not come under notice in this district. 53. Probably would, but I cannot speak from personal observations. No. 54. Not so far as I know. Liquor is generally taken on such occasions both before and after committing the offence. 55. I have not come across any such cases. I believe it can. 3. Evidence of C. SHAM RAO, Attachè to the Resident at Hyderabad, now at Pusad, Basim District. 1. I obtained the information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs from ganja smokers and opium contractor of this taluk, who sells ganja. 2. Yes. Siddhi, bhang, subji or patti, charas; only flat ganja is known in this part of the pro- vince. 3. So far as I can ascertain, the hemp plant does not seem to grow in this part of the province except near Khamgaon in Akola district. It is cultivated there to a small extent. 4. It is known as the ganja plant. 5. As it is not grown here, so I cannot give answer to this. 6. There is no growth of wild hemp in this part of the province. 7 and 8. As it is not cultivated in this district, I am unable to answer to this question. 9. It is sown like jawari and cheena by means of plough with ganja seeds. 10. Agricultural cultivators, in order to sell it, cultivate ganja by obtaining license from the authorities. 11. Without cultivation ganja is not grown. In this taluk no ganja is either cultivated or grown. 13. So far as I know, there is no restriction. It is only cultivated in Khamgaon. Ganja could be grown if cultivated here. No special condition of climate, soil, etc., is necessary. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared here, but charas is not manufactured here. Bhang is used for drinking purposes as beverage, and ganja is used for smoking. 15. The compressed flower tops of leaves are washed with cold water and a little tobacco is added to it and used for smoking. Ganja leaves devoid of flower tops and seeds are pounded with rich spice (such as cardamoms, nutmegs, cloves, saffron, sugar, black pepper) and drunk as beverage in summer. This preparation is called bhang. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the well- to-do people in their houses. Hemp grown every- where may be used for the preparation of bhang. Charas is prepared from ganja plants. 17. Bhang is used. by rich classes, and ganja by sanyasis, gosains, fakirs, etc. 18. Generally ganja does not last more than a year. Bhang should be prepared and taken at vol. vii. 2 u
314 once. Charas lasts for four years. Ganja should be ærated, but not exposed to sun or rain. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking purposes. Tobacco is mixed with ganja when smoking and goodakhoo (a preparation of tobacco and jagri) while smoking. Charas is used in Hindustan. In this province only ganja is used. 20. Rich classes and Kayaths in Hindustan greatly make use of charas. It is a costly thing. As ganja could be procured cheaply, so mendicants, such as fakirs, gosains, largely make use of it. 21. Only flat variety of ganja is procurable here, and so it is used here. Round variety is not procurable here. 22. No charas is used here. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking, but only for drinking purposes. 24. Well-to-do people use bhang for drinking. This is a cooling beverage and generally used in the hot season. 25. It is neither on increase nor on decrease. The use of these depends on the means of persons who are addicted to their use. 26. (a) 25 per cent. of the consumers. (b) 5 per cent. of the consumers. (c) 69 per cent. of the consumers. (d) 1 per cent. of the consumers. 27. Habitual moderate consumers, habitual excessive consumers and occasional excessive con- sumers are mostly gosains, fakirs, ascetics, etc. Middle class men, when they accidentally approach the smokers, partake of it out of fancy. Gosains, fakirs, and ascetics smoke ganja to make them- selves impotent, and to forget other worldly plea- sures by being partially or wholly stupefied by the influence of these drugs. 28. (a) One anna per diem. (b) Four minas per diem. 29. (c) Tobacco is ordinarily mixed; (b) excep- tionally arsenic, nux vomica, and dhatura are mixed. In Berars bhang massala is not prepared for sale. It is procurable in Hindustan. Carda- moms, cloves, sweet almonds, and sugar form the ingredients. 30. Ganja is smoked in company, and so also is bhang drunk. It is generally used by the male class. In Hindustan children are given bhang in the form of a beverage. Those above ten years generally use the drug. 31. It is easily formed by society, but difficult to break it. There is a tendency to develop into the excessive use. 32. There is no custom in this part of the pro- vince, social or religious, in regard to the consump- tion. 33. Hemp plant is not worshipped by any class of men here. But on occasions of religious cere- monies, such as the feast of "Khandoba," "Maha- sheo Ratri," it is offered to the persons addicted to use them. The social opinion is in favour of moderate use of ganja and bhang. Excessive use of the said narcotic substance has made it to fall into disrepute. 34. If persons accustomed to the use of the said narcotic substance are deprived of the use of it, they will lose their energy and behave like a mad man. This is applicable in the case of moderate and excessive consumers. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. It can be consumed illicitly. The prohi- bition can be enforced by the strict regulation of the law. In this taluk there would be discontent to a small extent among the consumers, but that would not result into any political danger; the prohibition of that substance would not be followed by the use of other alcoholic substance. 36. Alcohol is not used for these drugs as a substitute. 37. Charas is not used here, but the intoxication produced by smoking charas is very strong and lasts long, namely, for a couple of hours. 38. Chur and round ganja are never sent for and used in this taluk. 39. Drinking the preparation of hemp plant is less injurious than smoking the same. The drink- ing bhang keeps the body cool and healthy. 40. Native doctors prescribe it for medicinal purposes, chiefly for persons suffering from vene- real disease. They also prescribe ganja smoking to persons bitten by venomous reptiles. 41. Moderate use of ganja and chards is bene- cial to digest food, to alleviate fatigue, and to prevent disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. The labouring classes, gosains, ascetics, and fakirs make use of these drugs in large proportions, while persons belonging to higher class make use of it in a very small proportion as luxury. Moderate occasional use is better than its habitual use. 42. Smoking is not beneficial nor harmless if they do not use substantial food. 43. They are quite inoffensive to their neigh- bours. 44. It has got refreshing effects immediately on the habitual consumers by its moderate use. It allays hunger in case of habitual consumers, and in case of occasional consumers it creates appetite. Its effects last about two or three hours and bring on jolly temper. It produces longing and unea- siness on the minds of habitual consumers if their want is not sufficiently gratified. 45. It produces noxious effects, namely, mental, moral, and physical. It impairs constitution. In case of habitual moderate consumers it causes loss of appetite. It produces asthma, but I do not know about dysentery or bronchitis. It impairs the moral sense, induces laziness, and to acquire habits of immorality. It deadens intellect and makes a man dull. It produces a sort of madness. 46. It impairs the system very much. The consumer becomes very weak and exhausted, and he cannot manage without an excessive dose, and his power of intellect suffers. 47. It does not affect the children in any way, and it does induce hereditary habit. 48. The children of the habitual excessive con- sumers are very weak. It is not hereditary even in this case. 49. Moderate use of bhang is practised by males as an aphrodisiac. Prostitutes do not use bhang as an aphrodisiac, but smoke ganja as a vocal stimulant. It is more injurious when taken as an aphrodisiac because it taxes the sexual organs more than under ordinary circumstances. Moder- ate use does not produce impotence. 50. Excessive use of ganja is practised by gosains, fakirs, etc., as an aphrodisiac and to avoid cold and fatigue, etc. It tends to produce impo- tence. 51. Some of the bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of ganja. Some other ganja smokers when they are short of money pick pockets
315 and commit minor thefts. It has no connection with crime of any special character. 52. Bad characters are not generally habitual excessive consumers of any of these drugs; and there seems to be no connection between excessive use of any of these drugs and crime, because when they are once fully under the influence of these drugs they are quite incapacitated even to move about. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated crime. I do not know of any case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. These drugs are not used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55. In this part of the country criminals do not use any of these drugs for the purposes noted in the question. Complete stupefaction may be pro- duced by this drug without admixture. 56. The effects of hemp are intensified by the admixture of dhatura, but lessened by mixing with tobacco. Very few of the excessive habitual con- sumers of ganja smoke it mixed with a small proportion of dhatura. 57. Ganja is sometimes fried in ghee mixed with sugar and spices, all well pounded into a mass, and eaten. It produces slight stupefaction and agreeable dreams. 58. I consider that the present system of excise administration in this part of the province is work- ing well. 60. Ganja is not produced in this part of the province. 61. Charas is neither produced nor used here. 4. Evidence of RAO BAHADUR VAMAN NARAYEN BAPAT, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Amraoti District. 51. I cannot say that any large proportion of bad characters of Berar are habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs. I would say that only a very small class of bad characters is addicted to smoking of ganja, and the majority of them are given up to liquor and opium. There is not apparently much connection between the moder- ate use of ganja and crime in general, or in parti- cular. As a general rule, it may be safely asserted that people who habitually commit crime, are given up either to liquor, opium or ganja, the pro- fessional classes of criminals perhaps being excepted. The reason of this general addiction of offenders to some intoxicant or other is that they almost always belong to degraded classes of society. Their morals are very low, and they have no public opinion as such to restrain them from such evil habits. Thus even boys take to ganja, opium, or liquor from their boyhood,in which they find no small encour- agement from the examples of their elders, Thus brought up, they naturally are averse to all man- ner of serious work, which alone can secure for them their bare living. Added to this is the sharp and irrepressible craving for the stimulants which cannot wait. Hence they are disposed to commit small thefts, more for the acquisition of the stimul- ants than for that of the means of livelihood. So I think that any of these stimulants do not stand as cause to effect towards commission of crimes. The ganja smokers' crime is generally petty thiev- ing. I have no reason to believe that bhang eating or drinking leads to crime. 52. The excessive use of ganja smoking is believed to lead to insanity. Of course crimes may be committed in this state for which the of- ender cannot be held responsible. Ganja smoking in excess leads to crimes of personal injury even amounting to murder. 53. Excessive indulgence in ganja smoking is known, in a few cases, to have incited to unpre- meditated crime of violence to person even up to murder. I know of no case in which it had led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. I know of no instances in which criminals used any of these drugs to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. But it is just possible that criminals in very rare cases may be doing this. 55. I have heard criminals inducing their vic- tims to partake of some preparations of hemp drugs, and thereby to stupefy them, so that the intended crimes may be easily and safely committed. As to whether complete stupefaction can be induced without admixture, I am not in a position to say. 5. Evidence of N. P. JOSHI, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Wun District. 51. The bad characters in Berar are not habi- tual moderate consumers of hemp drugs. There may be but very few among the bad characters that are addicted to the smoking of ganja or drink- ing of bhang. I do not think moderate use of ganja has any connection with the commission of crime in general. The consumer of ganja is some- times prone to pick up quarrels and commit crimes such as petty assaults, but I had not before me up to date any case in which an offender was found guilty of a crime which he had committed while he was under the influence of ganja or bhang. 52. The excessive use of ganja or bhang brings on insanity. In some cases it is temporary, and the discontinuance of the use and proper treatment restore a man to his proper senses after some time; but in some cases the insanity brought on by excessive use is almost permanent. 53. The excessive indulgence in ganja smoking may in rare instances incite to unpremeditated crime of violence, but I know of no case in which it had led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. I know of no case in which it was disclosed that the offender used ganja or bhang to fortify himself to commit any premeditated crime. 55. I have heard that criminals sometimes induce their victims, boys and women especially, to partake of hemp drug sweet preparation to further their designs. This is done in large fairs where thieves distribute the preparation as sharni or sweetmeats in the name of goddess in the evening, and after fall of night freely rob the women and the children of their property. vol. vii. 2 u 2
316 6. Evidence of MR. J. R. O'GRADY, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Badnera. 51. I do not think that any very striking dis- proportion exists, although habitual moderate con- sumers of ganja and its several preparations are, I believe, somewhat more numerous amongst bad characters than amongst men of the same caste or class who are law-abiding subjects. This is due, as far as I am able to judge from the cases that came within the range of my own observation, to the downward tendency acquired by men who take to a course of bad livelihood. The loss of self-re- spect thus suffered, especially after a conviction and the loosening of the ties of caste or family, or the restraints of society, make it easier for an indivi- dual to take to a habit which is looked upon by the generality of his countrymen as low and degrading. The term ganjeti, I might here state, is one of re- proach, and usually carries with it a great deal more than its literal meaning of a smoker of ganja. 2. I do not believe that habitual moderate con- sumption of the drug has any connection, or per- haps only a very slight connection, with crime of any kind. I have known good charactered police- men, railway porters, sepoys, sadhus, sanyasis, and other Hindu asectics and religious mendicants, Marwari bankers and merchants who were con- firmed consumers, and who, by long habit, had acquired the ability of taking astonishingly large quantities of the different preparations without any apparent ill-effects, morally or physically. 52. The same remarks apply, only less forcibly, to the excessive indulgence in the habit, excessive being understood to mean in unaccustomed quan- tities. I believe that the general tendency of the habit, when indulged in to an excess, which the means of the persons indulging do not permit, is to make him take to such types of crime as afford him the facility of adding to his income to meet the extra expense. The drug, considered in its relation to crime generally, occupies, I think, the position rather of an agent or tool than its primary cause; Indian criminals using it in the same way that a " Bill Sykes," or a " Moonlighter " would use gin or whisky at home, to work up "Dutch courage" for the commission of acts which had been determined on beforehand, and which they would put into execution, ganja or no ganja. 53. Excessive indulgence does, to my know- ledge, so incite some people. I believe this depends upon the natural temperament of the person indulging in the drug, in the same way that liquor affects different people differently, putting some into a frenzy and making others better tempered than when sober. It is my opinion that weak-minded people who are morose and given to brooding are more likely to be led into some act of violence or homicidal mania by the use of ganja than others who are stronger physically and mentally. A case in point is the following: 317 very ferocious, he felt afraid to approach him until he had had recourse to hashish or ganja. As examples of endurance under influence of the drug, I might mention the following few instances out of a large number: 318 which the hemp plant grows spontaneously or abundantly in Berar. 7. In the following vil1ages of Mulkapur taluk of the Buldana district, the cultivation of hemp plant has hitherto been made for the production of ganja and bhang alone: 319 heat or moisture; to prevent deterioration they should be kept in underground cells. 19. Ganja alone is used for smoking. Charas is not available in the district, and therefore not used. Smoking ganja is prevalent everywhere, although on a very small scale. 20. The smoking of ganja is not restricted to particular classes of people. It is smoked by any class. The proportion of the smoking class is very difficult to ascertain. In every place and in every class, people are found to have been addicted to smoking. The number of persons smoking ganja may, however, be ascertained from the quantity of ganja sold in the district. The quantity of ganja sold during the past nine years, as ascertained from figures obtained from the Deputy Commissioner's office, will be seen from the following figures:320 sumption thereof, if possible, or the habitual con- sumers will have recourse to some other alcoholic stimulants. The sudden prohibition will lead to serious discontent among the consumers, who are proportionately so few in this district that the dis- content will not be politically felt, and therefore cause no danger. The danger will be serious where the number of consumers is large enough in pro- portion to population. 37. Not known, as charas is not available in the district. 38. The different effects on consumers of the three different preparations of ganja cannot be ex- plained, as only the flat ganja is available and con- sumed in the district. 39. No; the smoking of ganja is said to be more injurious to consumers than the bhang eating and drinking. The smoking is said to produce asthma, phlegm and cough in the consumers of ganja. The smoking often causes consumers to be immediately senseless and sometimes lose their lives. 40. Yes. 41. The ganja and bhang being digestive, the moderate use thereof may be beneficial in. its effects321 or eight years owing to the rule requiring such cultivators to obtain a license for hemp cultivation. 9. Ganja seeds do not germinate if sown by themselves. They are, as a rule, mixed up with the seeds of ambadi (Hibiscus cannabinus) and then sown. This ensures a good crop. The soil should be well manured and the seeds sown about the time of sowing cotton (June or July). 10. They are of the same class as other culti- vators. 11. I don't know. The seeds are imported from Khandesh, and I can't say if these are of wild hemp or not. 14. Ganja and bhang are the only two products prepared in Berar. But I can't give the locality nor the extent. 16. Yes; bhang can be and is generally prepared by the people in their houses. Yes; bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown, also ganja. But I don't know about charas. 17. Not restricted to any particular classes. 18. Ganja and bhang do not deteriorate for two years or so, but lose their effect entirely afterwards. I can't give any cause for deterioration. I don't Know any special measures. 19. Ganja is mixed up with some kind of dal and made into pies; some prepare dishes with mutton. 20. Ganja is mostly smoked by sadhus and others who have to travel much. Also those who can't afford to drink or take opium, smoke ganja. I can't say anything about charas. 21. So far as I know, round ganja is preferred for smoking. 24. There is no particular difference. Those who drink also eat. Generally Marwaris and Brahmins, who are prohibited from drinking liquor, eat or drink bhang. 25. It has increased. I say this from the rise in the price of ganja within the last ten years or so. Formerly only the old and grown up people used to partake of the drug, but now even boys also take it. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja. I don't know of any other. Dhatura is also mixed, but only by those who wish for a strong smoke having narcotic effect. Tobacco is mixed to soften the effects of the ganja. I don't know bhang massala. 31. Yes; it is easily formed. It is difficult to break off. I can't say about the development into excessive habit. 39. I have noticed that those who eat and drink ganja or bhang are healthy and in better condition than those who smoke. But I can't give reasons. 40. I don't know. 41. I don't know. But bhang helps digestion and increases appetite. 68. There are shops, but I can't form any opinion. 9. Evidence of MR. A. ARDAGH, Deputy Superintendent of Excise, Ellichpur. 1. Served in the Bombay and Berar Excise Department for the past fourteen years. 2. There is only one kind of ganja made in the Berars (flat). Bhang is not specially prepared, but the chur or chura (broken ganja dust) which accu- mulates in the course of trade is called bhang. No charas is collected in the province. 3. No district. 4. Don't know. 5. Cannot say. 6. Don't know. 7. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) No; small leaves of the plant round the buds which fall while being prepared or in course of trade are known and used as bhang in this province, but said not to be so good as that specially cultivated and obtained from the male plant. (d) No. It is cultivated in the Akola and Amraoti districts. Extent not known personally. 8. and 9. Have no knowledge. 10. Generally cultivated by malis, who are able to distinguish male from female plants. 11. Not known. 12. None. 13. Yes; by fees having to be paid to Govern- ment and licenses taken out, but not to any district. At present it is grown only in the Akola and Amraoti districts, but they were not selected by Government. I do not know anything about the conditions of soil, etc., for cultivation of hemp. 14. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) No, not specially. In the Akola and Amraoti districts. 15. Ganja is made by picking off the flowering tops of the plants; placing them in small bundles on the threshing floor, and driving bullocks round and round over them to be trodden flat. A. Ganja is prepared for smoking by picking off the buds from the stock, triturating them in the palm of the hand with water and pressing out the water. This process is repeated till the water runs clear; the resinous substance left is then mixed with tobacco and smoked in an ordinary country pipe (chillum). B. Bhang is prepared by the leaves being washed, dried on a fire in an earthen pan, triturated and mixed with black pepper, spices, etc. according to taste or means; and, a quantity of this being taken into the month, is washed down or swallowed with water. C. For drinking it is washed, then finely ground, then mixed with water or milk, strained, and the fluid is mixed with sugar, spices, etc. 16. No, bhang is not prepared specially in this province, but the small leaves which fall from the dried buds are sold as bhang. Actually it is chura and not bhang. It can be prepared from the plant wherever grown. Cannot say if ganja and charas can be prepared from the wild plant. 17. For smoking, drinking, and eating by the sadhus, bairagis, gosains and fakirs generally, and also by others addicted to its use. vol. vii. 2 x
322 18. Ganja and bhang, if kept quite dry, will keep for two or three years; after which it becomes mildewed and useless. It is said that no measures will suffice to keep it good for more than three years. 19. Yes. 20. Vide answer to question 17 for ganja. Charas is not made here. 21. Flat ganja. No other kind here. 22. None in the province. 23. No. 24. All classes eat and drink, but those that eat are very few as compared with those that drink. 25.Said to be on the increase. It is much cheaper than opium and spirit. 26. Cannot say. Both ganja and bhang are consumed in moderation by most of the habituals; those that use them in excess are few. 27. Vide answer to question 17. The habit is acquired by association with habitual users. 28. (a) Six masas (½ tola) (b) Two and a half tolas. About six pies per tola 29. (a) In ganja323 drinks. Six pies worth of the drugs, an anna's worth of opium, and four annas worth of spiritu- ous liquor will produce equal intoxicating effects. 66. No. 67. It is too low. 68. No shops or places are licensed for the con- sumption of the drugs on the premises. If they were allowed, they would become the resort of bad characters, beggars, and generally those who do not care to work honestly for their living, and the daily meeting together of such characters would tend to organized crime. 69. No; the people, I think, ought to be con- sulted. 70. First paragraph324 37. The effects of both are same, but the charas is worse, as it is stronger. 38. The effect of round and flat ganja is just the same, but effect of chur is slight. 39. Smoking is more injurious than drinking and eating, because the smoking affects the con- stitution sooner than drinking or eating. 40. Yes, it is used as medicine and. also for cattle. 41. No, it is not beneficial at all. (a) No. (b) Yes, for a time being to a habitual smoker or drinker. (c) and (d) No knowledge. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is not harmless, because by moderate use it leads gener- ally to excess. 43. Yes, they are inoffensive. 44. Slight intoxication to the habitual consum- ers. Yes, for time being only it is refreshing. Yes, it produces intoxication. Yes, it puts a stop to hunger gradually. No, it does not create good appetite. Moderate effect from one to two hours, and excessive for a longer time. Yes, dullness is the after-effect. Yes, excessive smokers are inclined to smoke some more; without that they cannot do. 45. Yes, it affects physically on the liver, lungs and brain; diminishes mental power. Yes, it does impair the constitution. Yes, it causes indigestion and loss of appetite gradually. It causes bron- chitis and asthma. Yes, it does impair morality and induce laziness. Yes, it deadens the intellect and produces insanity if taken in excess. No knowledge of type; cannot say temporary or permanent. 49 and 50. Yes, it produces impotence after a long time. 51 to 51. No knowledge. 55. Yes, they induce their victims to partake of drugs to further their design. Complete stupefac- tion can be effected without any admixture only to people who are not in habit at all. 57. To my knowledge ganja and charas are never eaten or drunk, but only smoked. 58. Yes, it requires improvement. 59. To whole Berar province cultivation of these drugs should be lessened by heavy license fees; also on import, export, and on wholesale sale; and for retail sale the maximum quantity should be fixed to the lowest quantity. 60. It should not be allowed to be sold whole- sale by any cultivator to any wholesale purchaser without a permit from a competent Government authority, as well as cultivators should not retain the crops without license, and a heavy fee should be levied on cultivators; also retail sale license to be granted to respectable person or party for each district. 61. No charas is produced in this province. 62. Yes, same as No. 60. 63. Same as answer to No. 59. 64. Same as answer to No. 60. 65. Intoxicating drugs such as bhang, ganja, and charas are cheaper than opium and alcoholic liquor, because one anna worth of liquor would not give satisfaction to a quarter anna worth of ganja and charas consumer; so there is no objection to taxation being increased on these drugs. 66. No, it should be in equal. 67. In my opinion there is no objection to the present method of taxing. 68. Licensees are not allowed by the license granted to them to allow consumers to consume drugs on the premises, and such method should be continued to prevent facilities for habitual smok- ers. 69. No, people are not consulted, and they ought to be consulted to know the reason whether in favour of these drugs or against, whatever it may be. 70. No. Yes, duty is paid. No. 11. Evidence of WAMAN GANESH, Tahsildar, Wun. 1. I am answering the questions regarding the matters relative to ganja from the information obtained from the contractors and. those who smoke ganja in this taluk. 2. The definition of ganja given by Dr. Prain in his report of 21st June 1893 is correct. In this taluk ganja is known by three different names325 the practice of planting ganja at the back of the house. While asking these men personally, they state that after ganja has been purchased from bazar, the seeds being collected therefrom are plant- ed in the gadda at the back of the house and are watered till their growth. If the plants get flow- ering tops, they are called male ganja. Male ganja is not used for smoking purposes. It is only used for thinking, which is called bhang. The smokers of ganja destroy these plants. If the plants do not get flowering tops they are called female ganja. These plants are only preserved, and when they receive buds the same are cut and kept in the hole in the ground in the shape of a juddi. This substance is used for smoking pur- poses. If care is taken of these plants they last for two or three years and grow very high. After they are ripened the branches of them are cut and kept in the shape of juddi till it is completely dried. 10. There is no particular caste which cultivates ganja. If permission is granted, ganja will be cultivated like grains in the fields by the cultiva- tors, but the cultivation of ganja is not allowed in this taluk. In old times only those who are in the habit of consuming ganja used to plant hemp at the back of their own houses. 11. As there is no growth of the jungli ganja in this taluk, nobody knows whether the seeds of the same are used for the cultivation of ganja. 12. There is no custom in this taluk of culti- vating ganja from the jungli ganja seeds, because there is no growth of jungli ganja in this taluk. It may, perhaps, be used in the countries where there is growth of this. No one can give reliable information about this. My opinion is that where there is a growth of the jungli ganja, the people there perhaps might be planting it in their fields for the purpose of bhang, but not for ganja, be- cause ganja is not prepared at all from it. If people find any plant of jungli ganja they uproot the same, because they have no use of it, and be- sides it spoils other plants. 13. The cultivator who wishes to cultivate ganja will be allowed to do so on payment of Rs. 10 per acre; but as nobody has got experience of this, and as there is no cultivation in this taluk, the particulars as regards climate, soil, etc., cannot be supplied, but I think ganja is planted in the white soil and not in the sandy. 14. Neither ganja nor charas is prepared in this taluk: only bhang is prepared. 15. Ganja is imported from Khandwa. The substance which remains after the hemp plant has been trodden under foot is called bhang, and it is used for drinking purposes. The flowering tops of the hemp plant are cleaned two or three times with water, and after the water is extracted there- from it is dried on pressing it in cloth; then this whole substance is mixed with tobacco and smoked in a chillum. This substance is called ganja. Nobody can say as to whether the jungli or culti- vated ganja is used for any of these preparations. Bhang is used for preparing ghatta, and the method of preparing it is that the leaves, etc., are kept in water till they become tender, After they are taken out of the water they are made to pow- der on a stone along with other perfumery articles, and this whole substance is filtered and drunk. This is called bhang. Some people take this with sugar and milk; every one can prepare this at his own house. 16. Yes, the people buy the particular sort of ganja from the market and prepare bhang at their houses. Where there are plants of ganja, bhang can also be prepared of the leaves therefrom; but the custom of such preparation is not in this taluk. Best ganja cannot be had from jungli ganja plants. Such plants may be used for preparing bhang. Some people who had been to Haridwar say that the jungli ganja grows there. 17. It is not customary that any particular class of people prepare any of these drugs. The contractors only sell ganja. The Halwais some- times prepare yakuti majum from ganja. 18. Any of these drugs does not deteriorate by keeping, but if it is kept for a long time the in- toxicative power of them becomes weak. The limit of keeping these drugs is nearly two years. After this period the intoxicative power of these drugs becomes weak. If they are kept with care they remain in power for three. or four years. No- body can state what special measures can be taken to prevent deterioration, because every year ganja is imported from Khandwa. The countries in which the ganja is cultivated the people there sell it after one year. From this it seems that ganja can remain in good condition with ordinary care for five or six years, but if it is kept everywhere it deteriorates and gives a bad smell. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smok- ing; they cannot be used otherwise. The contrac- tors prepare majum through halwais, and. sell it in Muharram by permission. Nobody can state in what other ways it is used, 20. I cannot say with certainty what classes of the people smoke ganja. Charas is not known in this taluk. Generally fakirs, gosains and la- bourers smoke ganja. It is a general opinion of the public that exertions of severe nature can be alleviated by ganja smoking. 21. The different kinds of ganja given in this question are not known to the people of this taluk. They smoke ganja which is imported from Khandwa. 22. Charas is not known in this taluk. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking, because it is less intoxicative than ganja; but the habitual smokers in time of need sometimes use bhang for smoking, but this happens very rarely. 24. Generally in the hot season most of the people of this taluk drink bhang. Bhang is not used for eating in this taluk. It is said that this is used in Hindustan. 25. The use of ganja and bhang is on the in- crease in this taluk. Day by day the state of the people becomes poorer and poorer; and as they have not got means to use any other costly drugs besides this they are obliged to use ganja. Among Hindus drinking of liquor is prohibited, and if they drink they are kept out of caste; but if they smoke ganja they are not kept out of caste. Under all these circumstances, I am of opinion that there is an increase as stated. 26. The proportion of the consumers of any of these drugs is as follows: 326 29. The moderate consumers of any of these drugs mix ordinarily tobacco in ganja while smok- ing, and exceptionally the excessive consumers mix kuchalla and dhatura seeds with it. Some drink bhang with water and sugarcane, while some with sugar, milk and other perfumery things. The excessive consumers mix dhatura seeds in ganja while smoking with the intention of making it more intoxicative. 30. Bairagis, fakirs, etc., use any of these drugs in company consisting of four or five members. The labourers smoke ganja at their own houses. The people think that ganja smoking is one of the mean acts. Those who are addicted to ganja smoking smoke at each other's houses. Bhang is also not prepared by one and drunk: it also requires a company of five or ten men. If any gentleman wishes to take bhang, he prepares it at home and drinks. It is mainly confined to the male sex of 20 years of age and above. Children never consume any of these drugs if they are under control; very scarcely any of the children take to these drugs. In Muharram alone it is said that bhang is drunk by all, i. e., from youths down to elderly persons. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed. It is difficult to break off at once. There is a tendency in the case of any of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There is no custom, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of any of these drugs, but in bairagis they consider it a religious custom and they drink. Drinking is generally excessive in them. It is likely to lead to the formation of the habit, and is thereby injurious. 33. Ganja smoking has been considered to be one of the mean acts by the people, because thereby one loses memory and health; it brings on cough and so forth. If bhang is taken moderately during the hot season it won't affect. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant in this taluk. 34. It is a serious privation to any class of con- sumers to forego the consumption of any of these drugs at once, because thereby they will not digest their food: they will suffer from purging, and so forth. This will last for two months and then it will be stopped. It is said that if any one wishes to break off this habit, ganja can be kept in butter- milk instead of water and then smoked, and there- by the habit of ganja smoking will be easily broken off. It is not injurious to drink bhang. There is a general custom to drink bhang in this taluk, and this habit can easily be broken off. 35. It is not feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs, because it is of a long standing. As there is a great number of the consumers of these drugs, it is impossible to stop it at once; and if it is so stopped the people will consume the drug illicitly. If the Government wants to prohibit the use of these drugs, I propose that some tax should be imposed on the consumers of any of these drugs, and thereby the number will be reduced. The quantity for the retail sale should also be reduced, but with all this, I don't think that it can be stopped at once. There is no doubt that there will be discontent amongst the consumers of these drugs, but it will not amount to a political danger, because the number of such people is not large. The prohibition will be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants by those who have got means to spend for them, and the rest will take to other drugs. 36. Reliable information on this head cannot be supplied. 37. So far as intoxication is concerned, there is, it is said, difference in the effects of charm and ganja smoking. Charas is too strong in its effect; ganja is not so: it can be smoked five, seven, and ten times during a day. 38. Reliable information on this head cannot be supplied. 39. The smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant is more injurious than eating or drink- ing, because by smoking it brings on cough and weakness. It is not mentioned in the medical books that ganja should be smoked. 40. Ganja is used in the treatment of cattle- diseases; but it is said that if it is administered to cows, buffaloes, etc., their milk is stopped. It is also used by native doctors as medicine, and they state that they have got authority in the medical books. 41. The moderate use of any of these drugs is beneficial in its effects327 consumers or any or these drugs commit graver offences. They may, perhaps, commit petty thefts with the intention of getting money for this pur- pose, very rarely and in time of need. 52. I don't think that the excessive consumers of any of these drugs will commit offences of a graver nature. 53. It cannot be stated with certainty that the excessive indulgence in any of these drugs incites to unpremeditated crime. I have no knowledge of any case of murder being committed by such men. 54. Reliable information on this head cannot be supplied. 55. The criminals, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake any of these drugs and so stupefy them. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced without admixture. 56. Tobacco is always mixed with ganja for the moderate effects, and dhatura seeds for the ex- cessive. These seeds are only used by excessive habitual consumers for their personal use. 57. It is said that there is a custom of mixing ganja with other eatable things. I have no know- ledge of this. 58. I consider that the present system of excise administration in this province is working well, and I do not think that any modifications are needed therein. 59. As there is no necessity of any improvements in the system of excise administration, the reasons called for are not given. 60. There is no cultivation of ganja in this taluk, and hence there is no management or control over it. 61. Reliable information on this head cannot be supplied. 62. There is no cultivation of ganja in this taluk. 63. I have no objection to the present system of wholesale and retail vend of any of these drugs. 64. I have no objection to the existing regula- tions in force in this taluk for governing the export and import of any of these drugs. 65. In my opinion the taxation on any of these drugs, viz., ganja and charas, is reasonable and requires no alteration. Ganja should be sold by Government to the contractors by recovering tax thereon instead of selling it by auction. The ganja is sold by auction along with opium, and hence the revenue of ganja alone cannot be supplied; and I suggest that ganja should be sold separately from opium. 66. Reliable information on this head cannot be supplied. 67. I think, in my opinion, that the tax on ganja is very little, and the method of taxing is supplied in answer No. 65 above. 68. There are shops licensed for the sale of any of these drugs in this taluk. It is sold there only and not consumed on the premises. 69. When the shops were stationed first they were stationed with the consultation of the people, and as well as looking to their conveniences. It is fair, I think, that the people should always be consulted in opening these shops. 70. I have not heard of any case of smuggling of any of these drugs from Native States in this taluk. Ganja is always imported on pass after the duty has been really paid. There is no use of untaxed ganja in this taluk. 12. Evidence of VICKOOJI NARAIN, Tahsildar, Kathapur. 1. I am answering the questions regarding the matters relative to hemp drugs from the informa- tion obtained from contractors and others. 2. There is no cultivation of ganja in this taluk. Charas is not known to the people of this taluk. The dried flowering tops with tender branches of the hemp plants are called ganja. The plants being trodden under foot, the substance remaining therefrom is called bhang. Ganja is imported in this taluk from Central Provinces and Khandwa. As there is no cultivation of ganja in this taluk, the names given by Dr. Prain are not known to the people. 3 and 4. The information on these heads can't be supplied. 5. Nobody knows about raw ganja in this taluk. 6. There is no growth of raw ganja in this taluk. 7. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant in this taluk. 8 to 13. The information on this head cannot be supplied. 14. Ganja is imported in this taluk from other provinces, as there is no cultivation of it here. 15. The ganja which is imported in this taluk is used for the following purposes: 328 and drinking purposes. They are also used as medicines. Ganja which is imported from Khandwa is used for smoking and eating purposes, and the one from Northern India is used for drinking. 20. The proportion of the people who smoke ganja cannot be given. Many classes of the people smoke ganja, but chiefly faith's, gosains, bairagis and labourers smoke ganja. Ganja eating and drinking is a general custom even in well-to-do people. 21. Ganja which is imported from Khandwa, etc., is used by the people of this taluk. 22. Charas is not imported in this taluk. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Reliable information on this head cannot be given. 25. It cannot be stated that there is increase of these drugs in this taluk. 26. The proportion of the consumers of these drugs is as follows:329 13. Evidence of VINAYAK APPAJI KAUR, Brahmin, Officiating Tahsildar, Darwa, Wnn District. 1. I am answering the questions regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs from information obtained from the contractors and the consumers of the same. 2. The definitions given in this question of the several forms of hemp drugs are very minute, but as there is no ganja cultivation in this taluk, the people have no knowledge of these definitions. This product is locally known by the following names: 330 29. Tobacco is one of the ordinary ingredients mixed with ganja, but exceptionally kuchala, dha- tura seeds, etc., are mixed with ganja to make it stronger. Bhang massala is described in answer No. 15 (C) above. 30. The consumption of each of the these drugs is practised by males of 20 years of age and above in solitude or in company. Children never consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is not easily formed. It is not difficult to break off. There is no tendency in any of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the exces- sive. 32. These drugs are not used as one of the social or religious customs, and hence the further parti- culars cannot be satisfactorily described. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is generally regarded as a mean act by the people. The consumers of each of these drugs are generally disrespected. It is the opinion in general that these drugs are injurious to the consumer's health. The hemp plant is never worshipped on any occasion; but in case the habitual consumer dies, the hemp plant is kept near his corpse at the time of his fu- neral ceremony. The use of any form of the nar- cotic is generally in disrepute, because there is a firm opinion among the public that the use of these drugs is one of the mean acts, inasmuch as the so- cial or religious customs are concerned. 34. There would be no serious privation to any class of consumers to forego the consumption of the drugs they use. These drugs have got one or two more troublesome effects than. the opium, liquor, etc. Still in opium and liquor there are some per- manent effects which are impossible to be checked at once, and hence. there would be a serious priva- tion to the consumers of these to forego the con- sumption. This is not applicable to the hemp drugs consumers. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs. By this I mean that the cultivation of ganja should be stopped. The prohibition of all these drugs will not, I think, occasion serious dis- content amongst the consumers, and it would not also amount to a political or social danger. The consumers of these drugs are generally bairagis, fakirs, kanphatias, etc. The number of such people is not large in this taluk. In family men such habits are very rare. If the use of the hemp drugs is prohibited, these men will have re- course to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs pro- ducing intoxication, without which they will not pull on. 36. It appears that the men who are used to the hemp drugs are addicted to a certain extent to alcohol. I attribute this change to the causes of getting the alcohol ready, and they have got a pe- culiar taste. I cannot offer any proof of its reality, but it is said that the liquor is much con- sumed. 37. As the Charas is not used in this taluk, the information on this head cannot be given. 38. There are different kinds of effects on the consumers of ganja and bhang, of which the former is stronger than the latter in its effects. 39. The smoking of the hemp drugs is more in- jurious than that of drinking or eating, but this habit is not so commonly in use as that of smoking. 40. See medical officer's report attached.* 41. Moderate use of ganja or bhang is beneficial in its effects as a digestive, and also gives staying- power under severe exertion or exposure and alle- viates fatigue, and is also effective as a medicine in malarious and unhealthy tracts. No information can be given for clause (d). The labouring classes naturally use this drug in order to alleviate fatigue. But in this taluk such people generally use liquor instead of this drug, and next to this they use opium. 42. Moderate use of these drugs is to some ex- tent beneficial, for which the explanation is already offered. It seems that the moderate use of these occasionally would be harmless, only perhaps it may harm during its intoxication for a short time. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of moderate use of any of these drugs on the habitual consumers is of a pleasing sort. It produces intoxication. It does not allay hunger. It creates appetite in some degree. The effects of these drugs last for about four hours on habituals and for twelve hours on beginners. Yes, there are after-effects. 45 and 46. Vide Medical Officer's report attached.* 47. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not appear to be a hereditary habit, but in some way it affects the children of the moderate consumers. 48. The excessive habitual use of any of these drugs does not appear to be a hereditary habit, but it affects the children. 49 and 50. Vide Medical Officer's report attach- ed.* 51. The bad characters only are used to these drugs. The proportion is not based on the popu- lation. The bad characters generally commit petty offences with the intention of defraying the costs of these drugs. The consumers of liquor require a large amount to spend for it, while the consumers of these drugs can manage with a small amount. 52. This has been solved in answer No. 51 above. 53. The excessive indulgence does not, it appears, excite the consumer to unpremeditated crime, vio- lent or otherwise, unless the consumer has not been out of his senses. 54. These drugs are not used by criminals in order to fortify themselves to commit a preme- ditated act of violence or other crime. 55. The criminals induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs, and so stupefy them in order to further their designs. Complete stupefaction can be induced by admixture. 56 and 57. Vide Medical Officer's report attach- ed.* 58. The present practice of control is rather satis- factory. For the present the Revenue Officers have been entrusted with powers in these matters; but if a separate officer be appointed for these matters, the control, etc., will be more satisfactorily exercised than at present. 59. The improvement can be effected by opening a separate department, and also by giving powers to the patels, etc. 60. Information on this head cannot be supplied, as there is no ganja cultivation in this taluk. 61. Charas is not known in this taluk. 62. See answer No. 60 above. 63. No improvements are necessary in the present system of wholesale or retail vend of these drugs. * Not received by the Commission.
331 64. I have no objections to the existing regula- tions governing the. import of these drugs. As there is no cultivation of ganja in this taluk, there is no exportation of the same. 65 to 67. I am unable to solve these satisfactorily. 68 No houses or shops have been licensed for the sale of these drugs or their preparations where these may be consumed on the premises. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted for the opening of shops. The shops are opened from information obtained from the contractors as to the sale of these drugs; but the public conveni- ence is always looked to in opening them. 70. The ganja is always imported from other provinces on a pass after the duty has been paid. There is no general use of untaxed drugs in this taluk. 14. Evidence of LAXMAN GOPAL DESHPANDE, Brahmin, Naib Tahsildar, Mangrul Taluk, District Basim. 1. I have had opportunities. of obtaining inform- ation regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs, in regard to which my answers are framed from the persons addicted to the hemp drugs and the cultivators of the plant, whenever I came in contact with them. 2. The said definitions can be accepted, except the definition of ganja. The name of bhang is applied to the dry leaves of cultivated female hemp plants. There are only two varieties known of ganja332 This fact evidently shows that the consumption is on the increase. 26. The following are the proportions of the consumers: 333 by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a pre- meditated act of violence or other crime. 57. Ganja is sometimes eaten or drunk when bhang is available. 58. I am strongly under the impression that when the Government introduced the system of excise administration the main object it had in view was to check the consumption of the drugs from the hemp plant as far as possible. But on consi- deration of gradually increasing number of consum- ers I cannot but say that the object aimed at is not likely to be accomplished by the working of the present system. The system is capable of improve- ment. 59. To improve the system such measures may be taken as would without fail check gradually the use of the drugs or prohibit at once the use ex- cept on medical purposes. Under the present sys- tem any number of maunds of the drug can be im- ported to meet the demands of the public, and be- sides that any number of acres can be brought under the cultivation of the hemp plant for the same object. In case the use is gradually and cer- tainly to be checked, the number of shops is to be reduced every year and the restrictions in regard to the fixing of such a number of acres to be brought under cultivation of the hemp plant and of such a number of maunds of the drugs to be imported as would suit our purpose under the circumstances, are indispensably to be brought into force. In case the Government thinks the use is to be prohibited except on medical purposes, it is well and good. 62. Vide my answer to question 59. 63. I have no objection to the present system of a wholesale or retail vend of ganja and bhang or preparations of them. 64. Vide my answer to question 59. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted or considered in any way before a shop is opened in any locality. The number of shops is increased or decreased on consultation of contractors, i.e., in- directly the wishes of consumers are consulted and considered. Local public opinion is to be taken into account before opening any shop. 15. .Evidence of COLONEL C. T. LANE, Inspector General of Police, Amraoti. 51. I do not believe that any large proportion of criminals are moderate consumers of hemp drugs. Nor do I think that moderate use has any connec- tion with crime. 52 and 53. Answering questions 52 and 53 to- gether, I would say that I believe the excessive use of these drugs does tend to excite a violent disposi- tion, which may culminate in temporary homicidal mania. A prisoner in the Akola Jail, who before con- viction for murder had been in the habit of taking bhang, was found after conviction to become violent334 premeditated crime, violent and otherwise. It causes irritation of the brain and produces an im- proper condition, wherein conceptions undoubtedly arise which lead to hitherto unpremeditated action. Known cowards have been known under such in- fluence to commit rash, even bold, acts they had never contemplated, much less been guilty of, with- out its inflammatory aid, and many a burglary and road crime had never occurred. but for its in- fluence. I have met no such case personally; but the annals of criminal history in India show it does lead to temporary homicidal frenzy: witness the repeated instances of running amuck, which might one and all be authenticated. 54. Yes; I have met many instances wherein these drugs have been used to encourage to the commission of burglaries and road crime, especially the former. I should say the Afghans (Kurbulla Syeds, other Peshinis, Yusuff Zaies, Hussan Zaies, etc.), Mænas and the Bowri class generally (and it has many ramifications) do resort to these drugs whenever there is a likelihood of resistance, when they will allow nothing to deter them either in the commission of the crime or to enable them to retreat. Even the commission of murder is looked on as nothing when under this influence. 55. Not to my own knowledge. I have read that such has been done, and without admixture it might be administered in a chillum; but I have no personal knowledge. But rather that, in order to stupefy a victim, criminals use the dhatura or the root of the jowari invariably. These being so much the safer also would be preferable; and the effect of both dhatura and the jowari root is iden- tical in its proportionate dose. I could point to many instances of the latter; personally to none of the former. 18. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR C. L. SWAINE, Officiating Sanitary Commissioner, and Inspector- General of Dispensaries. 1. From seventeen years' service in India in charge of Native troops, civil hospitals, dispen- saries and jails, and as Officiating Sanitary Com- missioner of this province. 2. These definitions may be accepted for this province, but charas is not known here, nor is ever used. The names used for the products in this paper are those in use locally. 19. Charas is not used in this province, but ganja is used mixed with tobacco for smoking. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 28. (a) One and a half drachm of ganja, the cost of which is three pie, will last a moderate con- sumer about four days. One ounce of bhang, the cost of which is three pie, will last a moderate consumer about four days. (b) Four ounces of ganja, the cost of which is two minas, will be consumed by an excessive smok- er in one day. Four ounces of bhang, the cost of which is six pie, will be used by an excessive consumer in one day. 29. Ganja mixed with tobacco is used by all smokers, irrespective of caste, trade or nationality. No other ingredients are mixed with ganja. Several ingredients are mixed with bhang before it is drunk, such as coriander seed, almonds, rose flowers, sugar, milk, etc. Habitual excessive ganja smokers sometimes mix dhatura seed in the smoking mixture. Opium, nux-vomica, cantharides, or betel-nut are never used either with bhang or ganja in this province. Bhang massala is known, and consists of bhang, black pepper, cucumber seed, almond, rose flower, sugar, milk, etc. 30. Ganja is not smoked in solitude, but in com- pany. Bhang is also used in company and not in solitude. Bhang and ganja are almost entirely used by men, except in few cases by prostitutes, but never used by children. 31. The habit of ganja smoking is easily con- tracted and never abandoned, except under com- pulsion. It is the same with bhang. There is no tendency as a rule for a moderate to become an excessive consumer of ganja or bhang. 32. It is essential that when fakirs, sadhus, and other religious mendicants are assembled for a feast, that before sitting down to their food ganja or bhang should be used. There are no other cus- toms at which it is essential that these drugs should be used that I am aware of. 36. I do not think that alcohol has been in any way substituted for these drugs. 37. I have no experience of charas smoking. By smoking ganja, intoxication is at once pro- duced, and lasts only for a short time, while in the case of bhang it is more gradual and of longer duration. 39. From my own experience among regimental sepoys the smoking of ganja is far more in- jurious than drinking or eating bhang. The con- firmed ganja smoker is always smoking, and will light his chillum whenever he gets a chance of so doing, and the cases of sepoys that I will mention. hereafter were all excessive ganja smokers. 40. In few eases these drugs are used by native doctors in treatment of disease, but in the treat- ment of cattle disease only bhang is used. 41. It is said335 physical, mental or moral. It does not impair the constitution, injure digestion or cause loss of appe- tite. It does not cause dysentery, diarrh336 47. I believe not. 48. Not hereditary. 49 and 50. No, and is not used in this way by prostitutes. Impotence sometimes results in the case of excessive smoking. 56. The admixture of other substances is used generally to increase the effect of the drug; opium is not used with hemp; I have no know- ledge of the action of the individual ingredients when mixed with hemp. 57. Charas is smoked only. Ganja, when eaten, is said to be more injurious than when smoked. The result, however, is not so rapidly obtained. 20. Evidence of SURGEON-CAPTAIN E. W. REILLY, Civil Surgeon and Super- intendent, Central Jail, Akola. 1. Very little. Only in the jail, when I come into contact with men addicted. to the use of these drugs. 2. In Berar, I am told, only ganja and bhang are to be had. Ganja is made from the flower of the plant. Bhang is prepared from the leaves of the plant. 19. Ganja is only used for smoking. Used thus all over Hindustan. Charas I know nothing about. The prisoners know of the compound, and say it is highly intoxicant. 23. Bhang is sometimes smoked when ganja is not procurable. Generally it is prepared to be used as a drink. 28. Ganja337 custom among the gosains to convert every disciple into a ganja smoker, being a formal initiation into the religious sect. 36. As ganja smoking has a tendency to under- mine the health, young men of the lower classes are carefully eschewing the habit of smoking ganja. The increased consumption of arrack and toddy points to ganja smoking being gradually superseded. Men who have been in the habit of smoking ganja for the last ten years give it as their experience that they do not see any steady increase in their number of ganja smokers. 37. Charas is not procurable in this district, and hence not used by the people. It is not known if there is any difference in ganja and charas smoking. There is no difference in the narcotic action produced by bhang from ganja smoking. 39. Ganja smoking has a greater tendency to affect the health than the using of bhang or bhang massala as a drink. Ganja smoking is taken into the lungs and speedily produces its narcotic action, Bhang and bhang massala being taken as a drink, and that often with milk, the dilution weakens the narcotic action, and hence has a less tendency to affect the constitution. Excessive ganja smok- ers are often the victims of insanity. 40. No. Not known. No information can be obtained on the subject. 41. The moderate use of ganja and bhang are beneficial in their effects, as detailed in (a) to (d). 42. The moderate use is both beneficial and harmless. There are men who have been in the habit of smoking ganja from adult to old age, and have not bodily suffered in any way, but give it as their experience that moderate smoking has often removed fatigues and stayed the pangs of hunger. 44. The moderate use of the drug, even on the habitual consumer, is refreshing and intoxicating. It allays the pangs of hunger and creates appetite. The effect of intoxication lasts for an hour. If used in moderation there are no after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification does not produce a longing or uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja or bhang is in no way detrimental to the consumers; on the contrary, it is beneficial. I give this as my ex- perience, and as the experience of men who are in the habit of using ganja in moderation for periods varying from ten to twelve years. 46. The excessive habitual use of ganja is highly detrimental to the consumer. Physically the habitual is rendered weak and emaciated. His intellect also becomes weak and clouded, while his moral feelings are blunted. The constitution of the habitual is highly impaired. He is weak and emaciated, with a tendency to develop tubercle in his lungs. (c) Yes. (d) Causes bronchitis and asthma. (e) Yes; induces laziness. (f) No. Pro- duces temporary insanity, and is the exciting cause of such temporary insanity. Type: like a case of acute mania. Temporary; yes. The chief symp- toms are ungovernable fury, great restlessness, want of sleep, dilated pupils, refusal of all food, talks ramblingly and incoherently; a busy delirium being present. There is also a sense of dread and suspicion. Besmears his excreta about his cell walls. (g) Not known. 47 and 48. No. 49. Ganja does not possess any aphrodisiac action on the consumer; but, when mixed with a small quantity of crude arsenic, it does produce an increased desire for sexual action. (b) No. (c) No. (d) No. 50. Ganja to the excessive habitual consumer acts not as an aphrodisiac, but has a marked ten- dency to produce impotency. 56. Hemp in moderation used with tobacco is not injurious. In excess, mixed with dhatura or opium, it is highly detrimental to the consumer. 57. Ganja and charas are never eaten or drunk. In conclusion, the moderate use of ganja, bhang or bhang massala is, in my opinion, highly benefi- cial to those who use the drug. It wards off fatigue, allays hunger, and produces a certain amount of happiness. Those using bhang massala benefit by it, as the preparation is taken with milk, the nutritive action of the milk being beneficial to the consumer. The drug being cheap and speedy in its action as a narcotic, does not drain the purse of the smoker, and hence does not produce any demoralisation so far as the consumer or his family are concerned. A moderate smoker is never known to be riotous or uncontrollable. He is happy in his own way, and is a peaceful citizen. I should certainly prefer to see the natives of India take their moderate dose of hemp in the chillum twice a day than give up the practice to become consumers of arrack or other ardent spirits. 22. Evidence of DR. J. MORRISON, Civil Surgeon, Yeotmal. 1. Very little. 2. Yes. Bhang, ganja, and charas; latter not sold here. 19. No charas sold or used. Ganja used for smoking as well as being made into bhang for drinking. Bhang is used only by a few people, e.g., Pardesis and Marwaris, as a cooling drink in summer. 23. Not so used. 28. Half a tola daily of ganja for habitual moderate consumers, cost 0-0-3; 1½ tolas for exces- sive consumers, cost 0-0-9. Charas not used. Bhang used moderately in summer by a few only. Can't say cost. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja for smoking. No bhang massala sold here. 30. No experience. Mainly confined to the male sex. Not usual for children to consume any. 31. Habit easily formed; difficult (when un- restrained) to break off. Yes, the tendency is to develop into the excessive. 32. Am not aware of any such custom. 36. I have no reason for so thinking. 37. Charas not sold here. Cases of acute mania have been attributed to ganja and charas smoking. Have not heard of bhang causing such disease. 39. Smoking ganja and charas is said to be more injurious. I, however, have no experience in this matter. Two cases of temporary mania have come under my notice, said to have been due to smoking ganja. 40. Charas and ganja are prescribed by native doctors. 41. I do not consider that the use of any of these may be of use either as a food. accessory, to give staying-power or as a febrifuge. vol. vii. 2 z
338 42. The human economy, I don't think, requires any of these drugs. Cannabis is prescribed in some diseases, e.g., neuralgia and spasmodic asthma, etc. 44. Pleasing ideas and hallucinations. Has a temporary refreshing effect. Bhang is said to create appetite. Yes, the want of subsequent gra- tification produces uneasiness and longing. 45. (a) Yes, eventually. (b) and (c) Eventually it does. (d) Ganja smoking has induced asthma. (e) It does eventually. (f) It deadens the intellect eventually. It has produced insanity. In two cases known to me it appeared the exciting cause. These two cases were in men who laboured under the opinion that their wives were carrying on criminal intimacy with other men. In the above cases I consider the connection conclusive. I have no evidence as to whether insanity may tend to the use of hemp drugs. 46. I have no experience, but think that the excessive use of any of these drugs would even- tually tend to insanity. 47. I can't say. Does not appear to act inju- riously on the offspring. 48. Have no experience. 49. Yes; they are said to be so used. Don't know if prostitutes use them. I have not known any case of impotence due to their use. 50. I have no experience. 56. Don't know. I have no information of the admixture of any of the drugs mentioned. 57. No experience. 23. Evidence of DR. W. J. MONTGOMERY, Civil Surgeon, Buldana. 1. My information is based on local enquiries made by me from persons connected with hemp drugs and on personal general experience. 2. I am told that hemp is not cultivated in this district, and even when allowed the cultivation was very limited. Bhang and ganja were the only products used. Charas was never used, because it was never taken from the plant. These definitions may be accepted as regards this province. Bhang and ganja are commonly known. 19. Charas, as stated in paragraph 2, is not known in this province. Ganja is used only for smoking. 23. I have not seen or heard of bhang being used for smoking. 30. The ganja smoker does not, as a rule, admit that he is addicted to the habit. It is often smoked in company, generally in the evenings. In fact, ganja smokers form a separate clan and are always thick friends. It is mainly confined to the male sex and to middle and old age. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. Yes; the habit is easily formed and is diffi- cult to break off. There is a tendency in a few cases only to develop into excess. In such cases the individual eats but little, and all his earnings are spent on his acquired pernicious habit. 32. It has been indulged to my knowledge by Purdesis during the Holi festival. The bhang is mixed with milk and taken. The use of the drug in this way on such occasions is not considered essential. It is chiefly partaken of owing to the sense of merriment which it produces from its stimulant properties. In some cases the person who indulges in the habit for the first time swears he will never touch it again because it has bad effects. 36. There is no reason to think that alcohol is being substituted for any of these drugs. 37. I have had no exprience as regards charas. Ganja smoking and bhang drinking are very much the same in their effects. 39. The habitual use of these drugs has a ten- dency to weaken the constitution. Habitual ganja smokers are generally emaciated and thin weakly men; and I have invariably found such men suffer- ing from an incurable chronic cough. The cough is so characteristic that I have often been able to say that this is a ganja smoker, simply from this one objective symptom. The muscular tissues and fat dry up so to speak, while the veins become full and prominent. The lips become thin. It is known to have caused temporary insanity. 41. It is supposed by natives to assist digestion and to be beneficial to the health. I have no doubt but it does assist digestion in habitual smokers. 42. Even the moderate use of hemp drugs is harmful. The mind becomes affected, and the person appears more or less silly. 44. The immediate effect is a sense of pleasure. It is refreshing. It produces intoxication when taken to excess. Perhaps it does allay hunger. The effects are temporary. There are no bad after- effects, except in the case of a tyro, who expresses himself as feeling very much relieved when the effects wear off. There is always a longing for the drug when once the habit is acquired. 45. Yes; even the habitual moderate use of these drugs affects the physique, mind and morals of the consumer. The physique becomes undermined, the mind weak, and there is a tendency to immo- rality. The man who takes to excess becomes literally half mad. 47. No. 49. It does not produce a desire for venery, and it is not used by prostitutes. I am of opinion it does produce impotency. 57. I attended the case of a recruit in a native regiment who indulged in drinking bhang for the first time. The effects were described as awful. There was great restlessness. Thirst and a sense of languor, great heat and pain in the head, with a feeling as if the top of the skull was flying off, eyes were blood-shot, and the man seemed to regret the state he had brought himself to.
339 24. Evidence of S. BAIJNATH, Medical Officer, Mady Hospital, Badnera. 1. From my boyhood I had frequent opportuni- ties to live with persons addicted to the use of hemp drugs in one form or the other. My father had been doing the work of a contractor, and had a number of gang people (from 50 to 500) working under him; hence my experience. My experience extends to the provinces of Oudh, Central India, Malwa, Punjab, Baluchistan, Berar, Southern Mahratta country, Guzerat, Carnatic, Kathiawar, and Sind. Everywhere the following products of hemp drug are used: 340 a man calm, considerate, less apt to mischeif, and lazy. 40. By native vaidyas it is given on account of its narcotic effect in bronchitis, asthma, dyspepsia, loss of appetite, vomiting, insomnia, and colic. Externally for fomenting painful parts. In cattle diseases it is given in colic, retention of urine, and when ruminating power is weakened. 41. (a) Yes; bhang particulary. (b) and (c) Yes. (d) Moderate use does good in commencing impotency. 42. Because it is next to impossible to stick to the moderate use, and as the same dose every day does not answer, requires the drug to be increased (without which its effect is nil); and as increased dose leads to a habit, and as the habit of any kind of intoxication is undesirable, so I consider the moderate use of this drug more harmful than harmless. 44. (a) It is refreshing. It acts upon the various organs, such as lower bowels, bladder, stomach, etc., and excites their function. (b) Yes. (c) Yes, a little; it depends upon the quan- tity used. (d) It excites hunger at first, but allays after- wards, and often causes craving. (e) Yes. (j) From two to three hours, and often up to five. (g) Heaviness about the head, aching of body, indigestion in novice, and general malaise. (h) Yes; its absence produces longing, and often uneasiness. 45 and 46. The habitual moderate use of bhang, ganja and charas at first gives a great appetite, and any kind of food is eaten with relish and delight. Thus the physical state of body im- proves, the person gains weight and stands any kind of exertion. The muscles become more develop- ed, and he finds general improvement of the whole system. This state of things remain for about a year or two. Afterwards the person finds that any large dose has no effect, and he longs for more intoxication, to obtain which he has recourse at first to increased doses; then addition of opium, dhatura, etc. Eventually the system becomes so deadened to the effects of these drugs, that ever so much moderate dose produces no desired effect, and gradually the whole system begins to suffer; at first the digestion is impaired; next the respira- tory and nervous tracts become affected. Dysen- tery, bronchitis, rheumatism, loss of memory, epistaxis, softening of brain, etc., set in, and the person becomes so sick that he finds his life a burden, more because no medicines which cure or- dinarily such ailments do him any good. These drugs in the beginning excite unusually great sexual desire; but after the lapse of some time, either on account of excessive sexual inter- course or on account of paralysing effects of the drug, the undue sexual desire becomes a matter of anxiety on the part of the person, who finds him- self much below the mark, and tries to regain it by increasing the dose and adding opium, dhatura, cantharides, etc., which for the time being gives some satisfaction, but ends in total impotency. I have seen in the lunatic asylums at Poona and Ahmedabad (Guzerat) that about 75 per cent. of the lunatics were, before their coming into the asylum and before becoming a subject fit for that place ganja and charas smokers, mostly the former. Ganja is the thing which excites insanity, because it acts directly on the nervine centre, and a man who is otherwise sober becomes irritable and ex- citable by its intoxication. Its effect is more acute and prompt in persons of weakened intellect and who abuse moral power than those who observe moderation. Bhang seldom acts as an exciting cause of in- sanity. It does not act at the commencement on the brain, but it does on the digestive organs first, Ind gradually the intoxcation travels on to the brain. I have seen some good songsters and athletes who, without using either ganja or bhang, cou1d do nothing; but when once having enjoyed their favourite drug, they find their intellect and muscles respectively sharpened and could do the best of performance. Usually a martyr of bhang, without it, has got his power of thinking or inclination of doing any other thing, a zero; but with the doses of bhang his intellect increases. This state of things remains for such time as the moderate use of the stuff could be borne. But when it reaches to the extreme, then either the overdose of the drug or the total want of it drives the man out of his senses, and he thus becomes a lunatic. When once in the asylum, the total abstinence from the drug, aided by the curative power of nature, exercised by rigid re- straint, brings the man round. But a repetition of the same without much time or drug brings the man again to his former state, and thus the lunacy returns. From the above it could be perceived that ganja is usually exciting and the bhang a predisposing cause of insanity, according to my oponion. The insanity produced by the effects of ganja is gener- ally of a violent character and rarely a mild one. Amongst most of the murderers about 90 per cent. will be found to be ganja smokers. The insanity of bhang is usually of mild type and temporary. Persons so affected have got some imaginary object in view; for example, some expects to find treasure; some thinks he is made of glass; some expects his friend, amp;c., and is very rarely of a violent character. Insanity produced by both these drugs is of a temporary kind; but, if once cured, is apt to return if the same drug is indulged again. Persons who generally use these drugs to an excess are mostly sadhus, jogis and bairagis. They having abandoned the world, are content amongst the society of their own. They neither speak much or interfere with other people. As this is also a kind of insanity, I consider the exces- sive use of the drug, though producing madness, its variety varies and the madness of the sadhus, jogis, etc., is one of them. 47. Children born of parents who are in the habit of excessive use of any of these drugs are mostly idiots and fools, often lunatics. But I have seen many such persons who have got no issue at all. 49. Often the moderate use of these drugs is practised as aphrodisiac, generally amongst prosti- tutes and whoremongers. Its effect is injurious, inasmuch as it tends to produce laziness, and thus cause persons to get more money by least trouble; consequently robbery, etc., is increased. Also it tends to prevent propagation on account of its pro- perty of checking the free formation of semen and drying up the blood from which the semen is formed. It is always the case that the persons
341 using these drugs are very thin, their blood, as it were, burnt up. 50. Please see my answer to questions 45, 46, and 49. 56. Effects of hemp in moderation is modified by the admixture of tobacco and occasionally by betel- nut. These admixtures produce a kind of soothing effect in nerves and on the organs of respiration, which by the use of hemp alone are usually affected by a feeling of dryness in the throat and causing irritability of the nerve centre. Admixture of dhatura, opium and cantharides are added (by those who use personally ) to increase the state of intoxication, especially to prolong the time and frequency of sexual desire, and by some to allay their sickness, such as asthma, bronchitis, etc. When it is given to others, it is for the purpose of robbing. 57. I do not know if charas is ever eaten; but ganja is occasionally taken instead of bhang when it is not at hand. In conclusion, all the preparations of hemp are injurious, taken in any form and in any quan- tity; and I am of opinion that the cultivation of this drug, if stopped (excepting for medicinal purposes), will prevent many people's ruin, crimes will be lessened, and the population of lunatic asylums will be very soon diminished. 25. Evidence of DR. S. G. STEINHOFF, Medical Officer in charge, Charitable Dis- pensary, Khamgaon. 1. Twenty-three years' medical practice among the people of this town and a knowledge of native habits and customs. 2. Bhang here is the leaves of only the female plant, the male plant is plucked out when young and thrown away. Charas here is not collected, nor imported, nor sold in the bazar. The flowering tops when separated from the rest of the plant is the ganja. The flower tops and leaves are cut off in one common stock and are arranged in flat sheaves about a foot-and-a-half in length and nine inches in breadth; and in this form reach the contractor's shop where the flower tops are sepa- rated from the leaves, and each sold separately. The stocks are used in the ganja shop for lighting. fires. These definitions may be accepted. Charas, ganja, bhang. 19. Charas is not used here. Ganja is chiefly smoked, sometimes eaten like betel and drunk like bhang. 23. Bhang is usually drunk and not smoked, but it is sometimes smoked, (when the dearer ganja is not available to the poorer classes) to a small extent. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers. (Charas is not used, not being available.) Ganja ½ chattack 2 annas. Bhang 4 do. 3 pies. (b) Habitual excessive consumers342 sake of its supposed staying-power, before and after a long journey. 41. It is not beneficial under the 1st, 2nd and 4th headings. As regards the 3rd, these drugs are not used here either as a febrifuge or preventive of disease. 42. The use of any of these drugs is not harm- less, as witness the worn-out, listless appearance of consumers, the wasted form and want of sufficient energy to carry out the ordinary duties of life, and defective will power. 44. In the moderate habitual consumer ganja and bhang are refreshing at first, then intoxicat- ing to some extent. No appetite is created. The effect lasts for about an hour or two. The want of subsequent gratification does produce longing and uneasiness. It does allay hunger. 45. Charas is not used here. Ganja and bhang do produce noxious effects on body, mind and morals. The constitution gets soon broken down. Digestion and appetite are impaired. Chronic bronchitis is caused by ganja smoking. I have not seen dysentery or asthma result from ganja or bhang. To some extent the moral sense is impaired and lazy habits and immorality follow. The intellect is deadened, but insanity is not produced usually. The disposition of the consumer is changed. He is irritable and fretful, readily gets into a passion, and is quick to resent an offence, imaginary or real. A temporary fit of acute mania may occur resulting from a single excessive indulgence of the drug (ganja or bhang) as the exciting cause; but he quickly recovers. 46. Physical mental and moral degeneration is intensified, and insanity is a frequent conse- quence. The insanity takes the form of acute mania with a homicidal tendency and terminating in permanent dementia. 47. No, the habit is not hereditary, nor are the children of the moderate consumers affected in any way. 48. In this case also there appears to be no hereditary habit, but the children are weakly in mind and body. 49. Charas is not used here. Ganja and bhang are sometimes used with this intention, but the result is disappointing. It is not so used by prostitutes. The use of these two drugs when used for their supposed aphrodisiac power is not more injurious than their use as an ordinary narcotic. The use of hemp does tend to produce impotence. The sadhus, who are inveterate hemp consumers, are more or less all impotent. 50. The excessive consumers of ganja and bhang never think of using them as aphrodisiacs. They very soon come to find that they are impo- tent. 56. The admixture of tobacco and the condi- ments mentioned in paragraph 29 do not seem to modify the effects of hemp; but the admixture of such powerful drugs as dhatura, opium, nux- vomica and aconite intensify the intoxicating effect of hemp, and render the mixture a most dangerous one to use, and indeed fatal cases have occurred where this compound had been ignorantly self- administered under the impression of its being a powerful tonic and vitalizer. 57. Charas is not used here. Ganja is drunk mixed with black pepper and water in place of the leaves of the hemp (bhang) by those who desire a more powerful narcotic. Such consumers are more liable to become insane than the excessive bhang drinkers. 26. Evidence of MR. DINNER NARAYEN, District Superintendent of Vaccination, Buldana. 1. My information in connection with hemp drug is based on the physical condition of such persons as have been in the habit of either drinking bhang or smoking ganja for the past twenty years, since which time I have known them. 2. There is only one variety of ganja, namely flat, which is used in the province. Flat ganja is prepared by being trodden under foot when it is fresh. Round ganja is not prepared in the province, nor is charas known to the people, who therefore do not import them. Hence no information regarding the round ganja and charas is given in any of the answers below. The definition 'fiat ganja' is accepted in the province, and the term is locally known. 19. Ganja is used generally for smoking, and it is used everywhere in the province. It is some- times used in eatables, either sweet or salt, on festi- vities and on fasting days. 23. Bhang is never used in smoking. 28. The habitual moderate consumers require one tola of ganja for smoking every day, and if they use bhang instead of ganja, they require a quarter tola of it. The habitual excessive con- sumers require three tolas of ganja or one tola of bhang for smoking or drinking per day. The cost of the drug in the case of moderate consumers is half anna, and in the case of excessive consumers it is one-and-a-half anna per day. The cost of the bhang is very trifling343 pleasure parties of the Holi holidays it is used by some. In both these cases it is used socially. On the Shivaratri fasting day, which is observed amongst the Hindus in honour of Shiva, one of the trinity gods, who is said to be very fond of the drug, it is used religiously amongst many classes of Hindus. However, the use of the drug is not re- garded as essential, since it is strictly prohibited by the Vedas (books on religion). The consumption of the drug on such occasions is very moderate. Such a rare use of the drug does not lead to the formation of a habit, nor is it injurious, except that it brings on temporary insensibility. 36. That alcohol is now being substituted to a certain extent for the drug is highly improbable. 37. The effects of ganja and bhang are different. Ganja smoking produces intoxication very soon. It lasts for a few hours, and the consumer feels more heat, while drinking bhang brings on intoxication gradually, and it lasts for hours together, and the consumer does not feel much heat. 39. Smoking ganja of any preparation is more injurious than drinking bhang or eating the same, because smoking acts directly on the lungs and partly on the liver. It burns vitality of brains, brings on asthma sooner or later, and shortens life. Instances of insanity brought on by the consump- tion of the drug are hardly found. 40. I am not aware that any school of native doctors has prescribed the drug on account of its medicinal properties; but it is undoubtedly very useful in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. The moderate use of ganja or bhang is occa- sionally beneficial in its effects. (a) It is accessory and digestive. (b) It gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure and alleviates fatigue. (c) It is a preventive of diseases in malarious tracts. (d) It mitigates anxieties and cares, provided it is consumed occasionally. 42. On the whole it is not beneficial, nor is the moderate use of it quite harmless. Because for a time, when one begins to consume it, it proves beneficial, but when he is used to it he has no effect of it, and ultimately it brings on asthma, bronchitis, and loss of appetite, 44. The immediate effect of the drug in moder- ate dose on the habitual consumer is that it keeps him in good humour. It is refreshing. It pro- duces some intoxication. It allays hunger and creates appetite. The effect lasts for three hours. When the consumer is free of its influence, he feels depressed and dull; he is unable to do any work. Want of subsequent gratification produces un- easiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of the drug produces after some years noxious effects, both physical and moral, but not mental. It impairs the constitution of the consumer, injures the diges- tion, causes loss of appetite. It causes dysen- tery, bronchitis or asthma. It impairs moral sense, induces laziness and habits of immorality and debauchery when the consumer is in the prime of his life. It deadens the intellect, but does not produce insanity. 46. It does no good to habitual excessive consumers, but it shortens his life on the contrary. 47. The habitual moderate use of the drug is not hereditary, nor can it affect the children of the consumer. 48. In the case of excessive consumer of the drug the maladies of the consumer are said to come to his children. 49. The moderate use of the drug is practised as an aphrodisiac. It is also used by some prostitutes. The use of the drug for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic, because it has a serious effect upon the generative system. His passion is only satisfied by further recourse to stronger doses, and in a short time the person is subjected to consumption. Its use in some instances tends to produce impotence. 50. Those who use the drug to excess easily fall victims even to common diseases. 56. The effects of the drug used (a) in modera- tion, modified by the admixture of other substances, produces more intoxication than that used without admixture; and (b) when it is used to excess it makes the consumer quite senseless. When dhatura, nux-voraica, cantharides, opium, or betel-nut are mixed with the drug and used, they bring on insensibility to the persons on whom the drug is administered. People who live by unfair means use such drugs to cheat other persons. 57. When ganja is eaten instead of smoked it produces more heat and intoxication, which lasts longer. In conclusion, the use of the drugs is condemned by every class of the people, and it is strictly pro- hibited by religion. That they are injurious and destructive of human life does not require other evidence than the present great mortality in the province, in which the consumers of the drugs are the first to fall victims. 27. Evidence of M. DOORGIAH PILLAY, 1st Class Hospital Assistant, in medical charge, AKola Dispensary. 1.From information I gathered from smokers and drinkers of both ganja and bhang, and from other reliable sources, and also from my own ex- perience as a medical man, I have framed my answers. 2. Yes, charas is very little used, or I may say is very seldom used in this province, but ganja and bhang are very commonly used. They are locally khown as ganja and bhang respectively. 19. So far as I know, ganja is used generally for smoking, but it is also used mixed with other in- gredients for making lahum or majum for intoxi- eating and immoral purposes, and is prevalent more or less throughout Berar. 23. Yes; it is somewhat used as smoking, but generally it is drunk prepared with bhang massala. It is used by mendicants, such as fakirs, gosais, sadhus, bairagis, and also by poor classes of lower immoral section of the community to a great extent; but it is also used among respectable classes on certain days of the year for sake of luxury. 28. (a) About four or five masas, costing 3 pies per diem.
344 (b) About 20 masas, costing 1 anna and 3 pies. 29. (a) Ordinarily for smoking a little tobacco is added, and for eating it is prepared in the form of sweets for aphrodisiac purposes and luxury. (b) Exceptionally it is mixed with opium, dhatura, nux-vomica, for unusual intoxication. Bhang is ordinarily prepared with sugar and milk for drinking purposes, and it is also prepared for drinking with bhang massala. The object of these admixtures is ordinarily for pleasures, and exceptionally it is used to nerve men for some deed of violence, and sometime also for poisoning. Yes, I know the ingredients, and I give them below. Bhang massala. Bhang or subji. Kali miri Black pepper. Goolab-ki kali Rose bud. Kura-kakdi-ka binj Cucumber seed. Badam Almond. Dhania Coriander seeds. Kaskas Poppy seeds. Ilaichi Cardamom. Mulatti Liquorice. Kaisar Saffron. Sugar. Milk. 30. In my opinion it is practised equally in soli- tude and in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex and to the period of early manhood. It is never used by respectable women. Certainly, it is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. Yes, the habit is easily formed. It is some- what difficult when the habit is thoroughly formed to give it up, but it is not attended with any danger. There is a decided tendency for the moderate habit to develop into excessive. 32. So far as I know, and from the information I gathered, there are no social or religious customs in connection with which the use of these drugs is considered so essential. 36. Yes, to a certain extent it is attributable to a better financial state; when the smokers become somewhat better off in pecuniary circumstances, then they give up smoking, and take to alcohol as a fashionable drink in substitution of ganja. I am not able to offer any proof, but I speak from my personal knowledge. 37. The effect of charas differs, so far as I know, from ganja that the former immediately stupefies the smoker quicker than the latter, and the effects of drinking bhang are more lasting and injurious than smoking ganja. 39. In my opinion and from the informations I gathered the drinking or eating of any form of plant is more injurious than smoking, and my reasons are to the testimony of users of the drugs whom I know. 40. To the best of my knowledge and belief, these drugs are rarely prescribed by native doctors for cattle diseases. 41. (a) No, not permanently. (b) Yes, temporarily. (c) Yes, in some malarious districts to foreigners temporarily visiting such districts, but not to the permanent inhabitants. (d) Not that I am aware of. 42. No; I cannot consider even the moderate use to be harmless, because even the moderate use of the drugs for aphrodisiac purposes, and also the moderate use of the drugs has a decided tendency to develop into the excessive use. 44. (a) The immediate effect of the moderate use of the drugs is simply to allay the pain, cramp- ing, and other accompaniments of the nervous reac- tion which follows the previous indulgence. (b) Only so far as above. (c) Yes. (d) It does. (e) Yes, false appetite. (f) About two or three hours. (g) The after-effects are prostration, vertigo, etc. (h) Yes, as above. 45. (a) Yes, it does to a certain extent. (b) It does. (d) Yes, the excessive use. (e) It does most decidedly. (f) It does. In my opinion it is very exciting, and it has been observed to be without predisposing cause of insanity. It does produce insanity, but of a mild type, and is of a temporary nature. Yes; it is reinduceable after liberation of restraint by use of the same drug. Rarely. Yes; those who possess no history of ganja smoking confess to the use of it. (g) From information in my possession, I am of opinion that persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease, who obtain relief in explaining their connections or considering them- selves as relief from insanity, under which they may have laboured, and persons deficient in self- control do indulge in the use of hemp as improv- ing measure. In my capacity as a medical man, I fell in several places where persons who after being cured of temporary insanity have confessed of their having found relief in their reverting to the use of hemp, but I am unable to quote any particular case, as it is now a protracted period since I became acquainted with the foregoing facts. 46. It does produce noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. It does destroy constitution. It does destroy digestion. It does cause dysen- tery, bronchitis and asthma. It paralyses moral sense, and induces to laziness, theft, cheating, and general debauchery. 47 and 48. I doubt very much as to its being hereditary. 49. Yes; very widely. I cannot say whether it is used by prostitutes. Yes; the use for this purpose is more injurious than is used as an ordi- nary narcotic, because it stimulates unnatural passion, the indulgence of which produces the addi- tional drain of excessive seminal loss in addition to the nervous reaction following its use as an ordi- nary narcotic. Yes; it tends to produce impo- tence. 50. The result as above, but corresponding worst. 56. The effect of hemp is modified according to the substance mixed with it, for, e.g., tobacco mixed with ganja would lessen the effect, whereas dhatura, nux-vomica, and opium mixed with ganja would naturally increase the effect, as personal consumption they take it for excessive intoxica- tion, but for administration to others to produce stupefaction for the purpose of robbery, etc. 57. Ganja in the shape of majum with other ingredients is used for eating. Charas probably is not known in this province.
345 In conclusion, I beg to lay before the Commis- sion the opinion of very eminent authors tran- scribed separately and hereto attached,* and under which I have added my own opinion as to the injury both to body and mind by the use of hemp. From the experience which I had, and from the information I have gathered, as well as different authors whom I have closely read, I may safely say that the use of the drug herein discussed is certainly very harmful, e.g., ganja eventually makes a smoker stammer and impotent, and bhang, which is considered to be of a cooling property, gives false appetite and eventually impairs diges- tion and exhausts constitution. * Not received by the Commission. 28. Evidence of M. POONAMBALAM MOODELIAR, First Class Hospital Assistant, Shegoon. 1. During my long service of twenty-five years, I have had several opportunities of seeing cases poisoned by hemp, and from my long experience, I give the information asked for. 2. The names given by Dr. Prain to the hemp plant, viz., ganja, charas and bhang, are the same as we call them. 19. Yes; ganja is used for smoking, and charas is very rarely used. It is mostly consumed, but its use by the people has different effects and actions when it is used differently. In this country it is used also in a very small proportion as medicines, wholly among the lower classes of people, and very rarely by the educated people: those who have very little contact with the doctors, to apply as a paste by mixing it to headache, etc., in order to stupefy the painful surface. 23. Bhang is very seldom used, if at all used, by lower class of people for drinking only. 28. (a) A tola, cost half an anna, (b) Four tolas, cost two annas. 29. They add only tobacco to increase narcotic properties. I am not aware that any of the drugs shown are used for smoking. I have not heard nor been told that bhang massala is sold in the bazar; but the consumers prepare by adding the following ingredients, viz : 346 29. Evidence of R. N. MUDHOLKAR, L.M.S., Private Medical Practitioner, Amraoti. 1. I had no special opportunities of obtaining information regarding the hemp drugs, except what information I was able to collect since the receipt of these questions. 2. These definitions may be accepted for our pro- vinces. The products are locally known as ganja, bhang and charas. 19. Ganja is generally used for smoking, and is very rarely used as a drink by those who are ex- cessively addicted to the drug. Charas is always used for smoking. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. It is always used as a drink. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers can smoke or think about an ounce of ganja or bhang in a day. The cost of an ounce of ganja is one anna, and that of bhang is one pice. (b) Habitual excessive consumers can smoke or drink about eight ounces of ganja or bhang in a day. 29. Ganja is ordinarily smoked with tobacco. The rich and luxurious people mix jaya-patri and powder of sandalwood with ganja to give fragrance to the smoke. The ingredients of bhang massala are:347 taken root on account of its connection with reli- gious ideas. The religious mendicants both in Hindus and Muhammadans who pass idle lives and persons living on charities are generally addicted to this vice. 28. Ganja smoking.Bhang eating. (a) ½ a tola per day (a) ¼ tola per day. (b) 4/5 tola per day. The cost is about a pice for an habitual moderate consumer and about an anna to one and half an anna for an habitual excessive consumer. 29. Ordinarily mixed are betel leaves, cardamoms, and tobacco in smoking. Dhatura is mixed by the inveterate for making the stuff more narcotic when the smoking of ganja becomes ineffective by habit. In eating or drinking bhang the ingredients that are used in its preparations are dried rose buds, poppy seeds, cucumber seeds, aniseed, sugar and black pepper. These ingredients for smoking or drinking are added in order to give good flavour and taste. Bhang massala consists of the above-mentioned things. 30. Ganja smoking is practised in company by the low when practicable and. available. By the respectable it is usually practised in solitude. Bhang is generally drunk in company by the re- spectable. Ganja is smoked by a few low females. Bhang is used by some low females; respectable females do not use either. Bhang is occasionally drunk by children. 31. More easily than other narcotics, and the habit is not more difficult to be broken off than other narcotics. There is no tendency. 32. The eating or drinking of bhang is obtained in the respectable inhabitants of parts of India mentioned in 24 as an occasional indulgence on fasting occasions and on holidays. It is temperate, and does not lead to the habit, and is not injurious to the constitution so far as its temporary effects are concerned. In the same way ganja smoking is resorted to by the low, but to a much less extent than bhang drinking is in the respectable. 33. Ganja smoking is looked down upon. Bhang eating or drinking, though considered a bad habit, is tolerated and is not objected to. Socially the objection is raised on account of their narcotic properties; religiously there is no objection. Ganja smoking is in disrepute on account of the smell of the smoke. Otherwise why ganja smok- ing should be more looked down upon than bhang eating or drinking I do not understand, as the effects of both on the brain are nearly identical. 34. Yes, to the habitual consumer. In the same way as the privations of other narcotics would be to their respective consumers. 35. It will cause much discontent in the con- sumers. Those that use this drug only which is allowed to them by their religion will not take of any other drug. 36. I do not suppose alcohol is being substituted for this drug. 37. Only in degree than kind, charas being stronger than ganja. 38. Chur is less potent than ganja. 39, I think smoking of ganja is more injurious to the constitution and mental faculties than eat- ing or drinking of bhang. The reasons are the effects observed of both forms, also the resins exud- ing from narcotic trees are generally stronger than other parts of them. 40. Its preparations are used in hysteria, mania, insomnia, and uterine affections by the school of native doctors. Bhang is used in cattle diseases. 41. (a), (b) and (c) Yes. Nearly 50 per cent, of the habitual moderate smokers of ganja use it for purposes mentioned in (a) and (b), nearly 10 per cent. for purposes men- tioned in (c), and nearly 10 per cent, of the occa- sional moderate smokers use it as a febrifuge. I have been informed of cases in which attacks of in- termittent fevers (ague) have disappeared by a single process of smoking ganja348 56. The habitual smokers of ganja in some cases add dhatura and aconite to it in order to intensify the effects. 58, 70. I am unable to give any information re- lating to this chapter, as I am not acquainted with administration, taxation, and control of hemp. 31. Evidence of KHAN BAHADUR NAWAB MUHAMMAD SALAMULLA KHAN, Jagirdar, Deulghat, Buldana District. 1. My information is based on local inquiries made by me from the persons concerned with hemp drugs and on what little I have seen of hemp consumers. 2. The hemp is not cultivated at present in this district. Its cultivation is almost ceased since the prohibition. made by the Government for its culti- vation without a license, and I am told that when it was cultivated in this district even then its culti- vation was very limited and only ganja and bhang were the products of the cultivation. Charas was not being obtained from the plant. 3. Hemp is not grown here at present, but I am told that it is grown in the Khamgaon taluk about the village Sutala, and hemp grown there is almost sufficient for the wants of the province. 5. It could be grown in any rich soil in this district, provided it is watered freely. 6. It is dense. 8. Since the introduction of the license system, there has been great decrease in the area under the cultivation of hemp, and the reasons of this decrease are as follows:349 tion and has nothing to do with the substitution for these drugs. 41. It is supposed by the consumers of ganja and bhang that the use of both these drubs assists digestion and is beneficial to the health, but I have no belief in it and I think the use of them is inju- rious in every way. It gives immediate relief in some cases of disease, but the effect does not last long and results in injury. It is said that it is good for asthma, but I have seen many ganja-smo- kers severely attacked by asthma. 42. Even the moderate use of hemp drugs is not harmless. Ganja consumer turns a silly fellow if not a half-cracked. 43. It depends upon a man's temperament. 44. I have no idea, but the effect of ganja is said to be immediate on the consumer and it lasts for a few hours only. 45. Yes. The use of these drugs even in modera- tion affects the moral character and brain of the consumer and results in immorality. The man loses all the control on himself when under its influence, and the result can be imagined. A man who takes to excess turns almost half-cracked. 32. Evidence of G. S. KHAPERDE, Brahmin, Pleader, Amraoti. 1. I am an inhabitant of these parts, have work- ed as an Extra Assistant Commissioner and Magis- trate for some time in this province, and have conversed with officers on matters connected with hemp drugs. I have also spoken to ganja con- tractors and other persons likely to have inform- ation. 2. These definitions may be accepted with this limitation that in this province ganja is usually manufactured not by treading, but by piling the twigs one on the other and then pressing them with a heavy stone or other substance. Round ganja is not much known, and charas is very sel- dom or never sold, The Patti or leaves are known as bhang, and the prepared flower-tops as ganja. 3. It is said to grow spontaneously in some parts of Melghat in Ellichpur district. 4. There are no different names. It is known as bhang plant. 5. It requires a damp climate, good soil, and plenty of leaf manure. 7. There is between 14 gunthas to 2 acres of land in Morsi taluk in the Amraoti district, in which hemp is cultivated. Some is also grown at Saloda in Amraoti taluk. It is cultivated for the production of bhang and ganja only. No charas can be produced from the ganja plants in Berar, because they are said to be of inferior quality. The proper plant yielding charas is Baluchar and grows in Upper India. Nothing is made and can be made of the fibre and seeds of the ganja plant. grown here. 8. Decreasing, because it admits of being easily imported from the neighbouring provinces, and also because a special assessment of Rs. 10 an acre is demanded, which is considered prohibitive. 9. Is sown at Mirag or sometime about the 5th of June, along with jawari. Each plant is put at a considerable distance from the other. Male plant is carefully eliminated. 10. No special class. The cultivation of bhang requires skill, and whoever possesses it cultivates the plant. 11. Never, so far as can be ascertained. 13. There are no restrictions except that of the assessment of Rs. 10 an acre, and that the culti- vator cannot sell it to anybody except to the ganja contractor. It is not restricted to any district. 14. Yes. Bhang and ganja. They are gene- rally prepared. by the consumers. People addicted to the use of bhang prepare it in their houses, The same is the case with ganja, except that some- times the ganja. contractor prepares it for his customers. 15. Bhang350 in damp, exposure, forced abstinence, lead to the use of the drug. 28. Two chataks. 29. Ingredients mentioned in my answer to question 15 above. Dhatura is not known to be mixed here, except in very rare cases. Equally rarely is also bachnag mixed. The object is to increase intoxication. Yes. It is sold in Bombay and other large cities. For its ingredients vide answer No. 15. 30. It is a social vice and is generally indulged in company. It is confined to males. Children never consume it in these parts. 31. (a), (b) and (c) Yes. 33. It is regarded with aversion. Children and women are protected from it. It is socially con- demned, though there is no religious objection. The disrepute is due to its inducing insensibility and is supposed to lead to impotency. No; none that I have ever heard of. 34. Yes, to Marwaris, mendicants and others mentioned in my answer to question No. 20, because once one gets addicted to the use of it, he cannot take to another intoxicant, and suffers both in body and mind. Roughly they may come to about one or two per cent. of the entire population, but this is a guess only. 35, (a) No. (b) Yes. (c) It can never be enforced. (d) Yes. (e) There would be no political danger. (f) No. 36. Yes, good opium and good liquor are driving it out of market. 58. I am acquainted with the present system of excise administration in my province, and consider it to be working well. 60. I think it sufficiently well controlled. There are rules on the subject. 68.There are shops licensed for the sale of these drugs and their preparations, but they are very rarely or never consumed on the premises. They do not differ from other ordinary shops. 69. The wishes of the people are not formally consulted or considered, but a good District Officer knows generally where to put and where not to put these shops. If a particular shop is objected to, it is generally removed. Yes, public opinion ought to be consulted. 33. Evidence of YESHWANT VAMAN DIGHE, Pleader, Basim. 1. From information derived from ganja smok- ers, traders and licensed sellers, and Berar Excise Reports. 2. Yes. With the exception of charas and round ganja, which are not known locally; the others are. The following are the additional names by which the products of the hemp plant are known, viz., bhangra or bhagar (male plant), buti or kalhi (female plant). 3. Grows spontaneously everywhere, but not abundantly. 4. The wild plant differs in appearance and quality from the cultivated. It is not used as a narcotic. 5. None. 6. Scattered. 7. (a) yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) No. See Appendix D to the Excise Report for 1880- 81. Cultivation limited to 29 villages at an en- hanced assessment of Rs. 10 an acre, and area under cultivation is on the average, during the last nine years, 64 acres and 181/3 guntas. For the last official year (1892-93) the area was 85 acres and 39 guntas in Morsi, Akot, Khamgaon, Jal- goan and Malkapur taluks. 8. No accurate data to go upon; but before 1884 any quantity of land could be sown on payment of a fee of Rs. 8, but since that year the imposition of Rs. 10 on an acre grown must in all probability have produced a decrease. Only 125 acres and 39 guntas are shown as the area under the hemp plant prior to 1884, when the average for seven years is struck. 9. The method does not differ from that followed in the cultivation of the staple products of Berar (cotton and jowar). When the plants attain a freight of a foot the male plants, called bhangra or bhagar, are weeded out in order to prevent the formation of seed in the female plant. It is sown in the month of July in well-manured ground. The plant grows from 3 to 7 feet high. In Berar the leaves and broken pieces of ganja of the plant are collected and sold as bhang, and these are macerated in water to prepare the bever- age that is drunk as such. 10, 11 and 12. No. 13. The only restriction is the payment of an enhanced assessment of Rs. 10 an acre. Culti- vation is confined at present to only three dis- tricts viz., (1) Akola, (2) Amraoti, and (3) Bul- dana. No special conditions are necessary. But the soil called pandhri in Berar is more favourable than any other. The latter requires good manuring. Cultivation impossible on marshy and rocky land. A good rainfall is required, otherwise artificial irrigation has to be resorted to. It is also sown in well-manured black soil. 14. (a Ye. (b) No. (c) Yes. The preparation is made by the cultivators of the plant in those districts in which it is culti- vated. The process is as follows:351 children are said to suffer. The methods of pre- paration of the cultivated plant are 352 33. The higher classes deprecate the smoking of ganja, but not eating any of its preparations; while the consumption of bhang is not looked down upon. The objection to ganja smoking is based on its being considered a low habit and likely to prove injurious. The hemp plant is not known to be worshipped in Berar. 34. The classes addicted to smoking ganja and drinking bhang would look upon its prohibition as a serious privation. The reasons are that they would be deprived of a muscular tonic and an intoxicant of the cheapest kind, which cannot be substituted for the price. For Berar the 1891- 92 and 1892-93 reports show the probable number of the class to be 1 seer -and 26 tolas per 100 of population on an average for ganja smokers, i.e., one tola per head. But the figure is not reliable. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of all of these drugs. It can be enforced by the stoppage of the hemp plant and its importation, in which case illicit consumption would be rendered difficult though not impossible. Great discontent would be caused among consumers, though it may not amount to a political danger. But a recourse to alcoholic stimulants and other drugs would become a cer- tainty. 36. No. 37. There is no practical difference. But charas is a stronger narcotic. 38. Round ganja and chur are not in use in Berar. 39. Smoking is a more injurious form of con- sumption than drinking or eating, as the lungs seem to become affected after a time. 40. Native doctors do not prescribe the drugs, but as a home remedy ganja is alone used as a sed- ative and an astringent for dysentery. Ganja and bhang are used for vermicide in cattle. 41. (a) Yes, as regards ganja and bhang only. (b) As above. (c) Not known. (d)Ganja wards off the injurious effects of im- pure and unfiltered water (germicide). No parti- cular classes can be selected or any proportion stat- ed. A moderate habitual use is referred to. 42. The moderate use is considered harmless and beneficial in the ways indicated in reply No 41. The moderate use of both ganja and bhang produ- ces activity and vivacity in addition to other bene- fits. 43. Yes. 44. Bhang and ganja are refreshing. They in- toxicate353 34. Evidence of NIAMAT KHAN BILAN KHAN, Merchant, Balapur, Akola District. 1. I was dealing in this trade for a considerable time, and my father did the same from the com- mencement of the British administration. I have seen the several preparations of the hemp plant being made. 2. I know only that the dry leaves of the plant are called bhang. I have not heard the other names. The definitions are appropriate so far as I know. Round ganja is not prepared in the Berars, but it is imported from Khandesh, and is called kalidar ganja. Broken ganja is called bhangira. 3. I don't know of any in the Berars. 4. I don't know. It would be called jungli (wild). 7. Yes; for the production of ganja and bhang only, and at the following places:354 36.There is no reason for so thinking. 37. Yes; charas is more intoxicating and strong- er than ganja. Both produce intoxication; but the former in a greater degree than the latter. 38. I can't say, as only the flat ganja is con- sumed in Berar. 39. The smoking of ganja is rather injurious than eating, inasmuch as it produces cough and produces nervous debility, while the eating not; but very few people simply eat the drug. Bhang is always drunk. 40. Not prescribed for men; but ganja and bhang is given to bullocks for some disorder of the stomach. It makes bullocks go faster. Bhang is taken internally for piles. 41. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) I don't know about fever; but I have heard from many sadhus that the use of bhang and ganja protects them against diseases in unhealthy tracts, by which I mean places where water is bad. (d) I don't know. Not restricted to classes. I refer to both moderate habitual as well as occasional. 43. Inoffensive. 44. It is refreshing and produces intoxication. It does not allay hunger but creates appetite. The effect lasts for about two or three hours. There are after effects. Yes; it does produce uneasiness. 45. It does produce physical and mental noxious effects, but not moral. I can't say if it impairs the constitution. It helps digestion and creates appetite. It causes asthma so far as I know, and that too at an advanced age. It does not im- pair the moral sense or induce habits of laziness or immorality, etc. It deadens the intellect slightly, but does not produce insanity. 47 and 48. It is hereditary amongst fakirs and sadhus, but not amongst others. 49. It produces impotence at an advanced age. 51 to 54. No. 55. Yes; a man not used to these drugs would be completely stupefied. 58. Yes; I am acquainted with the present system, and think it is not properly worked. The registers required to be maintained in the Form F are fictitious. It could be improved by the intro- duction of the registers in the Form E as prescribed for opium. 35. Evidence of LAKSHMAN ATMARAM MAHAJAN, Merchant, Manjrul Pir. 1. I have had some opportunities of coming in contact with bairagis, gosavis, fakirs, and others who lead the life of pilgrims, and thus of obtaining information from them regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs, in regard to which my answers are framed. 2. The definitions given by Dr. Prain of the different narcotic articles that can be naturally obtained from hemp may be accepted for my province. Bhang is known only by two names, siddhi and bhang, while charas is quite unknown. Here flat ganja and chur are in use. 7. Hemp is cultivated to a slight extent in the three taluks, Malkapur, Khamgaon and Akot for the production of ganja and bhang. 10. The cultivators of hemp form no special class. They are of the same classes as other agri- cultural cultivators. 11. The plants cultivated for the production of ganja are never raised from the seed of the wild hemp. 12. I have no reason to suppose that the (so- called) wild hemp is anywhere specially cultivated for the production of ganja. 13. The cultivation of hemp for ganja is re- stricted throughout my province. There are some special conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, etc., which are necessary for the cultivation of hemp for producing ganja. Black soil does not suit it. It is cultivated in the lands adjoining village sites. Rain water alone is not sufficient for hemp; it requires well water also. The cultivation of hemp is possible throughout my province. 14. Ganja, and bhang are prepared in the Mal- kapur, Khamgaon, and Akot taluks, but to a slight extent. 15. Ganja is usually manufactured. by being trodden under foot, or by being deposited for a day or two in a ditch, specially prepared, and little earth is thrown over it. The following are the common methods of pre- paration of ganja and bhang for smoking, eating and drinking purposes:355 keeping. With ordinary care it keeps good for about three years. To prevent deterioration water should never be allowed to leak in. 19. Ganja is used not only for smoking, but it is sometimes eaten also. 20. Bairagis, gosavis, fakirs, and others who lead the life of pilgrims generally smoke ganja. Some Rajputs and few Brahmins also smoke it. In short, about 2 per cent. of the population smoke ganja. The practice of smoking ganja is prevalent throughout the province. 21. Flat ganja is generally in use, but chur is also rarely used when flat ganja is not available. 23. Bhang is used for smoking when ganja is not available. It is generally the pilgrims that make use of bhang for smoking to a slight extent. 24. Those who drink bhang eat it also. The practice of eating and drinking bhang is prevalent throughout the province. Those classes of people that smoke ganja eat and drink bhang also. 25. The use of ganja and bhang may be said to be on the increase. Had it been otherwise, a large quantity of hemp might have been lying idle year after year. But this is not the case. All the hemp that is produced in the province falls short of yearly requirements, and to meet them a large quantity of it is imported also. Again the import trade of hemp is on the increase, and the excise farmers bid higher at the auction every year. This shows that the number of ganja or bhang consum- ers cannot hut be on the increase. 26. The proportion of habitual moderate con- sumers of ganja to the habitual excessive occasion- al moderate and occasional excessive consumers of it is as 5, 2, 3, and 1, and in case of bhang it is as 4, 2, 3, and 1. 27. Gosavis, bairagis, and fakirs are habitual moderate and excessive consumers; while Brahmins and Rajputs are occasional moderate and excessive consumers. The lazy and careless use these drugs. 28. The average cost of ganja or bhang per diem to the habitual moderate consumers is one anna, to the excessive consumers four annas. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja when it is used for smoking, and dhatura exceptionally. The other ingredients are given in my answer to the question No. 15. 30. The consumption of ganja or bhang is prac- tised in company to a slight extent, but in soli- tude to a considerable extent. It is mainly con- fined to adult males. It is not usual for children to consume ganja or bhang. 31. As vice has more false charms than virtue, the human nature, being frail, easily falls under the clutches of the former; and as ganja or bhang is a vice, the habit of consuming it is easily formed. There is also a tendency in the case of ganja and bhang for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. On the Maha Shivaratri day a few people of the higher classes drink bhang. This custom has a religious aspect, but it is not regarded as essential. Though it is temperate at the beginning, it is likely to lead in the long run to the formation of habit. 33. The consumption of ganja and bhang is regarded as a vice, because it blunts the mental fa- culties, and therefore it is generally in disrepute. 34. To forego the consumption of ganja or bhang is not a serious privation to any class of con- sumers. It is a luxury to take to its use, and has no beneficial effects on the constitution. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and bhang. These drugs will never be used illicitly. The cultivation of hemp should be at once stopped, as the poppy cultivation is stopped. The prohibition will not cause any serious discontent among the consumers, and will not therefore amount to a poli- tical danger. The prohibition will be followed by a recourse to tobacco, but not to alcoholic stimu- lants. 36. There is no reason to suppose that alcohol is now being substituted for ganja or bhang. 38. Flat ganja is little more strong than "chur" ganja. 39. The smoking of ganja is more injurious than eating or drinking it (ganja is sometimes used as bhang); for to smoke is to inhale the gas that is produced, which seriously affects the breast and produces cough. It affects the brains also, and makes the consumer senseless. 40. In nervous diseases the use of ganja is pre- scribed by some native doctors. It is also used in cattle diseases. 41. The moderate habitual use of ganja and bhang is beneficial in its effects so far as it gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, or alleviates fatigue and acts like a prevention of dis- ease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. In no other way it can be said beneficial. 42. The moderate habitual use of ganja and bhang is not harmless. It impairs the constitution and makes the man lazy and careless. It causes asthma in the long run. 43. Moderate consumers are generally inoffen- sive to their neighbours. 44. To the habitual consumers the moderate use of ganja and bhang is little refreshing and does not produce intoxication. It neither allays hunger nor creates appetite. These effects last only for a couple of hours. The want of subsequent gratifi- cation produces longing and uneasiness, but not so much as in case of other narcotic drugs or alcoholic stimulants. 45. The habitual moderate use of ganja and bhang produces noxious effects (physical, mental and moral). It impairs the constitution; injures the digestion, causes loss of appetite, causes asthma, deadens the intellect, and produces slight insanity, which is of a temporary character. The symptoms of insanity may be re-induced by the use of these drugs after liberation from restraint. 46. In case of excessive habitual consumers the effects referred. to in my answer to question No. 45, take place earlier, while in case of habitual moderate consumers they take a longer time. 47. As children generally follow in the footsteps of their parents when they become of age, so the children of the moderate consumer are affected to an imperceptible degree at least. 48. The above remarks hold good in the case of habitual excessive use also. 49. The moderate use of ganja and bhang is practised as an aphrodisiac. The use for this pur- pose is more injurious than their use as an ordinary narcotic, because in the long run it tends to produce impotency. 50. In case of excessive use the effects are more serious. 53. The excessive indulgence in ganja and bhang incites a man to commit acts of violence. 54. To fortify themselves to commit a premedi- tated act of violence criminals do not use these drugs. vol. vii 3 B 2
356 55. Criminals do sometimes induce their victims to partake ganja or bhang to stupefy them, but no complete stupefaction can be effected without admixture of dhatura seeds. 56. When tobacco is mixed with ganja it modi- fies the bad effects of the latter, and therefore ganja is never smoked without the admixture of tobacco. 36. Evidence of KHAJA ABDUL BAKI, Money-lender, Mehkar, Buldana District. 3. Ganja is generally cultivated in the Akola district. 4. Though it is known by different names, still it is the produce of one plant. 5. Climate temperate, land well-prepared, rain middling, is required. In other two seasons sufficient well water is required. 6. Cannot give any information regarding growth of wild hemp. As regards cultivated crop, the thinner it is the better. 7. Ganja and bhang are produced in Sutala tahsil, Khamgaon. Extent of cultivation cannot be told, as it depends on the pleasure of the culti- vator. 8. The area has decreased recently, because the cultivator has to undergo considerable responsibility regarding the crop. 9. It is sown dense in the month of Ashad. When the plants grow bigger, a plant called bhangra, which grows in the crop, is weeded out, because it spoils the main crop. 10. There is no special class of persons who cultivate hemp. They are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 11. The ganja grown this side is from the seed of cultivated hemp. 12. The male plant, called bhangra, which grows in the new crop, is extirpated. 13. There is no special restriction. Government gives permission on payment of some fees. This is the practice in all districts. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in this pro- vince, not charas. Ganja and bhang are prepared in almost all places. 15. Ganja means the bud of the hemp plant, bhang the flower of the bud, and charas is the resinous matter on the leaves of the plant. If ganja is to be smoked, it is washed with water and smoked after mixing it with tobacco. Some eat ganja without mixing it with anything else. F or drinking the leaves are pounded and mixed with sugar, pepper, milk, etc. 16. Bhang is generally prepared by the people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant. The same is the case with ganja and charas. 17. There is no restriction in any classes of the the people. But generally the gosais and bairagis make the intoxicating preparations. 18. The three drugs will remain in their origi- nal state for considerable number of days. Pre- parations thereof will not remain for many days. If good care is taken the three drugs will remain for two or three years. They lose their effects by exposure. If care is taken on this point, they may remain possibly for a longer time. 19. Ganja is used for smoking only. Charas is used for smoking and eating also. Both these are used as medicines also, so their use is general. 20. The practice of smoking ganja and charas is in all classes of people. Proportion is not known. 21. Round ganja is more preferred for smoking. 22. Native charas is generally used. Foreign charas is not imported. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Poor people generally eat and drink bhang. This practice is prevalent in the persons who live in religious places. 25. The use of ganja, bhang and charas is on the decrease. It is due to education that the people are lately given. 29. Dhatura is mixed with this drug in order to increase intoxication. The roots of jowari and kuner are also mixed for the same reason. 30. The use of these drugs is practised more in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex, young and old. However, females of bairagis and gosais also use them. Children never consume any of these drugs. 31. Yes; the habit is easily formed by company, and once used to it cannot break it off without diffi- culty. Yes; there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. These drugs are used on Shivaratri day and Shimga holidays. 33. The drugs being intoxicating, their use is not considered respectable by the public. 34. If the use of these drugs is stopped it would not do much harm. 39. Smoking ganja is more injurious than eating or drinking, for by smoking the smoke enters in the chest and its filth accumulates in the chest. 40. Native doctors use these drugs in medicines. They are used in the treatment of cattle disease also. 41. The use of the said three drugs would very possibly give staying-power under severe exertion or exposure or alleviate fatigue. If it is used in a country which is cold or where the climate is bad, it will not be possibly beneficial. These drugs will not be beneficial in any other way. 42. Moderate use of these drugs also will not be beneficial for......... (incomplete). 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. It produces no immediate effect on habitual consumers. If habitual consumers will not drink they will feel tired, and they will not be able to do their ordinary work without drinking. It has some effect on the consumer. It allays hunger; does not create it. The effect lasts for three or four hours. The after-effects are weakness and laziness. 45. Moderate use of any of these drugs also pro- duce bad effects. It is injurious in every way. It produces bile and asthma; it makes one lazy; it accustoms one to whoremongery for some time; retards intellect; and brings on madness. But it remains for some days, and the use does not deprive the madness; the consumer becomes actually mad. 46. Excessive use of the said drugs will lead to worse effects.
357 47. The use of the said drugs does not appear to be a hereditary habit. It affects the health of the children of the moderate consumer. 48. If moderate use is injurious, excessive use habitually must be more so. 51. There is no large proportion of bad characters who are habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs. Moderate consumers are criminals of general or special character. 52. Those who use these in excess are more bad characters and more addicted to crime generally. 53. It cannot be trusted when and what crime will these excessive consumers do. One bairagi murdered a woman at Shendurjana, Mehkar tahsil, while under intoxication, and he was sentenced for it. 55. In order to further their object, criminals induce their victims to partake of any of these drugs to stupefy them. In the case of persons not accus- tomed to the use of these drugs, complete stupefac- tion can be used without admixture. 56. The effects of using hemp in moderation and in excess, modified by the admixture of other sub- stances, are different, i.e., bad effects are seen on the health and intellect of those who use them in excess. 66. It is not necessary to have different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja. 68. In our province license has to be taken out for selling the said drugs. 69. The people are consulted before a new shop is opened, and it is necessary to consult people is such matters. This is now done indirectly; but it is necessary to take direct opinions.
359 EVIDENCE OF AJMERE-MERWARA WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of MR. G. BENNETT, Abkari Inspector, Ajmere. 1. Supervision of importation, cultivation and sales. 2. Yes; except that only the flat ganja is im- ported for sale in the Ajmere-Merwara districts. The drugs are named charas, ganja, bhang and majum. Majum is a sweetmeat composed of sugar and bhang. 4. Yes; bhang ganja tree. 5. I believe the wild hemp plant grows on any cultivated land if it has sufficient supply of water. 6. It grows very dense on the hills about Kus- sowli. 7. Very little. (c) For use as bhang only. (d) For its fibre. In the malis' gardens generated spontaneously. 8. There has been a decrease within the last eight years. The drug contractor offers such a low rate for the bhang grown within the district. 9. The seed of the hemp plants is sown in beds about six feet square, on land adjacent to a well or stream, where it can have a good supply of water. 10. In this province I have only known malis and fakirs growing it. 11 and 12. Not known. 13. No restriction to cultivation, but that the produce must be sold to the Government Contractor. The seed germinates during the rainy season. 14. Only bhang. Such plants as are found growing are marked, and the production thereof is sold to the Government Drug Contractor. 15. Ganja is the flower of the plant. Charas is made from juice extracted from the stem of the plant. Bhang is the dry leaf. Charas and ganja are smoked as tobacco in the huka. Bhang is mixed with a little lime and eaten. It is also used for making a cooling drink (sherbet). 16, Under section 7 of the Excise Act, XXII of 1881, no person is allowed to possess more than ¼ seer of bhang. I have not seen either ganja or charas made, but I should think it could be made from the wild hemp plant. 17. Such as fakirs, mahajans and Chaubes. 18. Yes; it will become quite useless in time. Causes of deterioration not known. 19. I have only known it to be used for smok- ing. 20. Fakirs, mahajans and Chaubes. The pro- portion is not known to me. In the cities and villages. 21. I have only seen that flat ganja used in the Ajmere-Merwara districts. 22. Foreign. From the Punjab. 23. I have not known bhang used for smoking. 24. Mahajans and Chaubes through the district eat and drink bhang. 25. According to the Drug Contractor360 66. No; the tax should be the same. 67. No. 68. No; the purchaser must take the drug to his own house or some other place to consume it. 69. No; the Collector may authorize a shop to be opened in any part of his Collectorate. 70. Yes; there have been 27 persons prosecuted for importing illicit ganja, bhang, and charas, and majum during the past three years. 2. Evidence of MR. G. W. GAYER, District Superintendent of Police, Ajmere. 1. Practically none. I have questioned native experts on the subject. 2. The definitions may be accepted for Ajmere. Flat ganja is called pathar, round ganja is called baluchar, broken ganja is called makoria. The other products go by the names mentioned in the introductory. 3. I hear it grows spontaneously in Malwa, parts of the Deccan, and along the North-Western fron- tier from Saharanpur westwards, under the Hima- layas. 4. Bhang, subji, and buti. Yes. 5. Not qualified to say. It grows well, however, along the Nerbudda river, where the rainfall is plentiful. 6. It is said to be dense. 7. I believe that in all about 40 maunds are cultivated in the Ajmere district by individuals for their own profit. 8. I am told that for the last few years, owing to the scanty rainfall, the amount cultivated has been reduced to the above 40 maunds. When the rainfall is plentiful, probably three times the amount is cultivated. 9. The soil is not carefully prepared, and after sowing, the plant is left to itself. 10. Cultivators of every class cultivate hemp. 11. I believe not. 12. Unable to say. 13. No. 14. Yes; bhang to small extent in one licensed shop situated in Ajmere. 15. Bhang in Ajmere is only prepared. from cultivated plant, and for drinking purposes it is mixed with almonds, black pepper, dried rose petals, cucumber seeds and other articles according to fancy. 16. (a), (b) and (c)Yes. 17. By all classes. 18. Yes; all three, it is said, quite lose their effect after two years in spite of all care. I do not know the cause of deterioration, nor do I know what special measures should be taken to prevent deterioration. 19. Only for smoking. 20. Most, if not all, classes of natives smoke both. 21. The round is considered best. 22. Foreign Yarkandi charas is mostly used. 23. I believe not. 24. All classes drink bhang, but it is said Brah- mins are most addicted to it. When it is not ob- tainable in the liquid form, it is eaten in the solid form. 28. Ganja. Charas. Bhang. (a) 1 pice worth. 1 pice worth. 1 pie worth. (b) 4 annas worth. 4 annas worth. 2 annas. 29 Ganja. Charas. Bhang. (a) Tobacco. Tobacco. Almonds and black pepper. Copper is. often inserted to in- crease the intoxi- cating property of the liquid. Dhatura is also mix- ed with bhang. (b) None that I know of. 30. Males mostly take the drugs; women and children seldom. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs is formed in much the same way as that of tobacco smok- ing and is as easy (or difficult, as the case may be) to break off. 32. The Holi is a festival during which nearly every person takes bhang. It is not regarded as essential. It is generally temperate. No. 33. When the drug is ready, a little is usually offered to Mahadeo, but otherwise I do not think it comes into the Hindu religion. 34. It would probably be the most serious pri- vation to the gosains and bairagis, as they use the hemp to sustain and nerve them for their arduous duties. 35. No. Yes; by force of arms. Most serious discontent. Yes; very probably. 36. I can't say. 37. Charas is a much more powerful intoxicant than ganja. 38. Only in degree: the round is the most power- ful, the flat comes next. 39. The drinking is less injurious, as the pre- paration in consequence of being mixed with non- intoxicating articles is weaker. 40. Bhang is prescribed for weakness, guinea- worms, piles, etc, Yes; bhang is often prescribed for diseases of cattle. 41. Ganja. Charas. Bhang. (a) Yes. Yes. Yes. (b) Yes. Yes. Yes. (c) Yes. Yes. Yes. (d) Don't know any other way. All classes. I don't know proportion. Both. 42. Ganja, if smoked in moderation, is, I believe, as harmless to most people as tobacco smoking. There are of course constitutions that it affects in- juriously. 43. As much so as tobacco smoker's or peg drinkers. 44. Refreshing and exhilarating or intoxicating according to constitution. It does not allay hun- ger; it creates appetite. Four hours. Yes; slack- ness. Yes; more or less longing and uneasiness. 45. As far as I can find out, the moderate use of any of these drugs is practically harmless. In.
361 every way it is only when mixed with copper or dhatura that it becomes harmful. 46. The habitual excessive use of all these drugs is said to be harmful in every way, as the consumer is always more or less in an intoxicated state. 47 and 48. No. 49. I believe so. I am informed that some prosti- tutes use it for this purpose. I believe its use for this purpose is not more injurious. It is said not to produce impotence. 50. The same remarks apply. 51. Bad characters are said to be more addicted to all the hemp preparations than other persons, probably in the same way that bad characters are said to be addicted to drink, opium, etc. 53. I don't think it incites to unpremeditated crime of any kind. 54. I have often found that when a crime has been premeditated, ganja and charas is taken to give Dutch courage. 55. Often. I believe not, for instance when a man has taken as much of any of the hemp drugs as it is possible for him to take, although he will become quite unconscious, a sharp shock will re- store consciousness immediately. 56. Can't say. 57. I have never heard of either of these prepara- tions being eaten. 63. None whatever. 64. None. 65 and 66. No. 67. None. 68. Yes; no alteration in the system is re- quired. 69. The opening of a shop in a certain locality is, I believe, generally petitioned for, and if thought advisable, sanctioned. The system is reasonable and. fair. 70. No. 3. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR D. FF. MULLEN, Civil Surgeon, Ajmere. 1. Information has been collected by enquiring from the consumers of the drug. 2. These products are known by the names of bhang, ganja and charas. 3. It grows in the districts of the Punjab and Central India. 4. Bhang, charas and ganja. 5. It grows on cultivated land, where the water-supply is sufficient. 6. Not known. 7. Yes. (a) and (b) No. (c) Yes. Very little in malis' gardens and sadhus362 23. Bhang is never smoked. Penniless beggars, when they fail to procure charas and. ganja, do sometimes use bhang for smoking, but the intoxi- cation produced is very slight: still it affords a tem- porary satisfaction. This is rarely done in places where ganja cannot be had. 28. A moderate consumer can drink bhang from 3 mashas to 1 tola at a time. Ganja and charas too can be smoked in similar quantities. Government contractors supply a tola of bhang for two pies. Where there is no contract, it can be had gratis. Government Contractors charge an anna per tola for ganja and three annas per tola for charas. Where there is no contract, ganja can be had at three pies per tola, and charas at six pies per tola. Excessive consumers can drink a quarter seer of bhang at a time, and can smoke five tolas of ganja or charas during the whole day. 29. Moderate consumers mix sonf, kasni, rose flowers, cucumber seeds, coriander, almonds, and black pepper with bhang in summer, and in winter nutmeg, mace, saffron, pepper, almonds, pista, etc. Nobles sometimes add musk and amber to the above. Excessive consumers mix dhatura seeds. Charas and ganja smokers mix raw or prepared tobacco with them. Opium is never mixed with any of these drugs. By mixing the bhang with butter and sugar they prepare majum sometimes to render the intoxication excessive. Dhatura seeds are also mixed, especially in Native States. Nux-vomica, opium, kaneer, cantharides, and betel-nut are never mixed with these drugs in this part of the country. If mixed, they render the mixture better. Gulkand is prepared by mix- ing bhang, butter, rose flowers and sugar-candy. Yakuti is made by mixing mava (condensed boiled milk), sugar, almonds, pista, raisins, and rose or keora waters. To obtain bhang butter they have to boil bhang leaves with milk; then the milk is turned into curd and churned. The butter thus obtained is used in majum and other preparations. 30. These drugs are sometimes used in loneliness, but generally in company. Nearly 80 per cent. of the consumers use them in company. Males of all ages use them. Such of the females as prostitutes and those that keep drug shops do sometimes use them in the company of male consumers. Other women do sometimes, but rarely drink bhang and eat yakuti or majum on Holi or marriage occa- sions. But females, except the wives of sadhus and sakins, never smoke ganja or charas. Boys of ten or twelve years of age do sometimes drink bhang on Holi. In dancing parties on Hob and marriage occasions people sometimes distribute majum. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs can easily be formed by using them in company for some time. It can be easily broken off. Those who break off have to suffer pain in the limbs and sometimes in the whole body, and have to yawn constantly for three days. Water flows from the eyes, appetite diminishes, and the person suffers from constipa- tion. After the expiration of the said period the person feels no desire for these drugs. This can be done in the case of both the, moderate and ex- cessive consumers. There is no tendency in any of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. On the Holi and Shivaratri festivals the drinking of bhang is looked upon as a religious, and in marriages and entertainments as a social custom. It is generally temperate and does not lead to form a habit. 36. No. 37. The effects of charas are felt inimediately after smoking; that of ganja some five minutes after. Bhang brings on intoxication a quarter of an hour after drinking, and it lasts for more than six hours. The intoxication created by charas lasts an hour, and that of ganja 30 or 40 minutes. Bhang excites appetite; charas and ganja diminish it. Charas and. ganja smoking creates warmth. Ex- cessive smoking sometimes brings on senselessness. Bhang is aphrodisiac. 39. Please see reply to question No. 23. 40. Vaids, hakims and native doctors do pre- scribe the use of these drugs on account of their medicinal properties for dysentery, diarrhoea, cholera, want of sound sleep, hydrophobia, spermatorrh363 suffer from bronchitis and asthma. They eventually run mad. 47. No. 48. The effect of excessive use of these drugs is not hereditary. The children of excessive consu- mers do not fall into the habit of using these drugs and have a sound reason. 49. The moderate use of bhang is practised as an aphrodisiac. Prostitutes do use it with that object. Bhang does not bring on impotence. 50. Excessive use of these drugs does render the consumer impotent. 56. This has been replied to in answer to ques- tion No. 29. 57. Ganja and charas are never eaten and drunk. When bhang is not procurable, the ganja leaves are sometimes drunk in the Deccan. The intox- ication thereby produced is stronger than that of hemp. In conclusion, as these drugs are very cheap and can be easily procured, people get into the habit of using them excessively. It would therefore be pro- per to adopt means to render them dearer. 5. Evidence of ASGHUR ALI KHAN, Hospital Assistant, Ajmere Dispensary. 1. When I was at Peshawar on military duty there was a Kahar in the army. He was much habituated to smoking charas and ganja, and also I saw some bhang drinkers in Ajmere. I answer the questions by the aid of medical books. 19. Generally charas and ganja are used only for smoking by the common class of people for indulgence and for medicinal purposes. Ganja and charas are used by the doctors and hakims for anodyne and antispasmodic action in the form of tincture specially, and are also used for removing constipation and headache and others. 23. I think that it is not used for smoking, for I never saw anybody smoking bhang. 29. By the bhang drinkers the following things are mixed into its liquor: 364 break off. Moderation and excess depend on one's temperament. 32. The consumption of these drugs is due to custom, and is not enjoined by any religion. Hindus generally use bhang on marriage occasions, or when they are in a large company with a view to feast. On such occasions the use of these drugs is considered essential by way of custom, and persons do often use them to an excess. Certainly, owing to these customs, people contract a habit for consumption of these drugs. 36. In this part of the country alcohol is never substituted for bhang. A person used to bhang, charas or ganja will never be satisfied until he gets the particular drug to which he is habituated. To a certain extent opium may be substituted for it. 37. The effects of charas and ganja are very nearly identical; the only difference is that ganja produces its effects sooner than charas. Charas and ganja cause sleepiness and affect lungs. The bhang, having in it two different properties, at first increases appetite and afterwards produces bilious matter. 39. I have never heard that any preparation of the hemp plant is used in smoking, but for drink- ing or mixing with majum or gulkand (confec- tion). Its oil is used in confections, which is ex- tracted by boiling it with milk. Its excessive use sometimes produces melancholia. 40. In some diseases Hindus are prescribed bhang. It is also used for treatment of cattle- disease. 41. With my experience, I do not know if ganja and charas ever produce beneficial effects; their evil effects are many. No doubt bhang is useful to appetite and digestion. It is also used to ward off fever in special cases. It alleviates fatigue after severe labour of habitual consumers. 42. As far as my experience goes, ganja and charas are injurious to health, whether used moder- ately or otherwise, because they affect brain and lungs, contrary to bhang, which, if used moder- ately, is not injurious, but beneficial. 44. Bhang brings on intoxication after some time even to habitual consumers, contrary to ganja and charas, which produce it at once. The bhang intoxi- cation creates appetite; its effects depend on the temperament of the consumers, who feel giddiness and breaking of limbs if they would not get it. 45. Bhang in the beginning produces refresh- ment, brightness on face, increases hunger and sex- ual power, but in the end induces laziness, giddiness, causes darkness in vision, mania, melancholia and dropsy. Ganja and charas cause insanity, bron- chitis and asthma. These drugs, even in moderate use, produce bronchitis, pain and sleepiness. Debauchees use them for sexual power; their excessive use impairs intellect. In the beginning they produce temporary effects. As soon as intoxi- cation increases, irritation begins, which affects brain, and at last does injury. As long as its effect is temporary, insanity too, which may be caused by it, will be temporary; when it fully affects the brain, insanity caused will take its root. After temporary liberation, people may be addicted to the drugs when re-used. 46. The excessive use of bhang is also injurious, and produces the diseases mentioned above. 47. The moderate use, so long as it has not fully produced its effect on mental powers, does not affect children. 48. The children of those persons who consume these drugs excessively are weak. Their excessive use is a preventive even to beget children. 49. Prostitutes generally use these drugs, especi- ally bhang. It first increases sexual power, but in the end tends to produce impotence. Its excessive use is injurious, but moderate use is beneficial in special cases. Ganja and charas are primarily used for sexual power, to which they are injurious in the end. When bhang is excessively used, it too dimi- nishes sexual power. 50. The evil effects arising from the excessive use of these drugs have been detailed above. 56. The ingredients of bhang, which are ordinari- ly mixed, have been described above. Their ad- mixture modifies its effects. Charas and ganja without any admixture produce irritation and con- fusion in brain. In this district consumers do not appear to mix opium and nux-vomica with these drugs. If they do so, it will tend to cause death. 57. As far as my experience goes, I can say that even the moderate use of these drugs is injuri- ous to health; especially the age of ganja and charas consumers shortens, and. various diseases, such as asthma, bronchitis, etc., are produced. Even the moderate use of bhang in the end weakens liver and mental powers. 7. Evidence of JATI AMAR HANSA, Baid, Ajmere.* 19. Ganja and charas are only used in smoking, and they do not appear to be used for any other purpose. Ganja is used for some medicinal pur- pose even in this country. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking, or if it be .ever used as such, I never saw or heard of it in Marwar and Meywar. 28. The consumers of these drugs might know their average allowance and cost. Some people take bhang in one masha dose, some more than this. At first they use it in small quantity; there is no fixed dose for it. I know nothing of its price; those who sell it know about it. Bhang, ganja and charas are habitually used365 They are confined to males only. I have neither seen nor heard females smoking ganja and charas. In some countries females drink bhang or take it in yakuti (a kind of confection) and gulkand (rose flower confection). It is not usual for children to consume these drugs. In old age some people use bhang with some cathartics. 31.Habit of consuming these drugs is easily formed in company. It is difficult to break it off; and if broken, it brings on diseases, such as loss of appetite, breaking of limbs, indigestion, giddiness, feeling fatigue on work. At first it is taken in little quantity, but some increase it gradually and some not. 32.The consumption of these drugs is not allowed in religious laws (Dharam Shaster), but they are used socially or habitually. Bhang is drunk on occasions of marriages and dinner parties, but so doing is not considered to be the custom. Its continual use converts into habit. It is not harm- ful to habitual drunkards, but in case they leave it, it will be injurious to them. 36. Men addicted to these drugs do not sub- stitute wine for them; and if any one will do so, it will do him some injury and lie against his religion as well. I do not know if any one substitutes it. Some use opium for bhang. In some countries wine is drunk for bhang, but it is injurious. 37. The difference between the effects of ganja and charas is that ganja brings on intoxication soon, which lasts shortly, but charas brings it on gradually, which lasts longer. Bhang brings on less intoxication than these two: it produces its effect too late, but it lasts longer. It is less in- jurious than ganja and charas. 39.Ganja and charas are used only for smoking and not for eating and drinking. Bhang is taken with yakuti and gulkand (rose flower confection) or drunk like liquor. Smoking of ganja and charas causes certain diseases, viz., it corrupts brain, produces irritation of throat, mania, bronchitis, asthma. Confection of bhang is used as a tonic. Con- sumers of bhang in the first stage feel heat, redness in both eyes, excitement in brain, creation of ap- petite, and sexual excitement, but in the second stage, when its effect subsides, it causes coldness (which is injurious) and loss of memory. 40. Ganja and charas being injurious are never prescribed by baids. As stated in Yajur Veda Shaster, bhang is prescribed in certain diseases to which it is useful. It is used in the treatment of cattle-disease. 41. Bhang without ganja and charas creates appetite, digests food, increases strength (physique), and is beneficial to cholera, bronchitis, asthma, dysentery, h367 EVIDENCE OF COORG WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of MR. A. BOPPANNA, Planter, Bepunaad, Green Hills, Coorg. 1. I have seen wild hemp plants growing, and have also seen people who have used hemp drugs and also seen them smoking ganja. I also heard from others using the hemp drugs. 2. Subji is also called here by the name of "ramrasa." 3. Smokers throw the seeds around their huts, and there they grow wildly. 4. Jaday bhangi and phoo bhangi. 5. They grow in the months of May and June, particularly on burnt soil, and they require 50 to 60 inches of rain. They grow on lands between three to five thousand feet above the level of the sea. 6. Ordinarily dense. 11. They are raised from the seed of the wild hemp. 12. I hear some people cultivate wild hemp, and the male plant is extirpated in such cases. 13. I think it is restricted. People can culti- vate after obtaining license in any part of the country if the soil is burnt. 15. The wild female plants, called Jada bhangi, are cut down and are exposed to the sun for a day, then the branches are collected into bundles and are exposed to the sun and dew alternately during the nights and days. This continues for two or three days, then they are preserved after being wrapped up in thick coarse cloths or kamblis. The leaves are pounded after being moistened with water, and the juice is squeezed out before the pounded mass is used for smoking. 18. They say ganja does not deteriorate in keeping if well preserved. The cause of deteriora- tion is exposure to the air. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking. 20. Wild tribes, such as Palayars, Kapalas, Karaters, fakirs and bairagis, and Malabar coolies and Muhammadans. Individuals here and there of the Eraver class smoke ganja; but it is quite common among the other classes mentioned by me. In the estates and jungles. 24. I hear low class Muhammadans drink bhan- gi, called in Canarese " ramras," in the time of Muharram. 25. Use of ganja is, I think, on the increase. Coffee and cardamom estates are now opened, and the large gang coolies working in them take to ganja smoking. 26. Almost all of moderate consumers. 27. Lazy and idle life, fakir's and bairagi's life, beggarly life, and people working in the cardamom jungle, and some coolies working in the coffee estates, and wild tribes, as a rule, take to ganja smoking. 28. (a) Two or three pies. (b) Six pies. 29. (a) Tobacco is ordinarily mixed up with ganja for smoking. I hear the bhang massala mixed with ganja is made up of dried Bengal gram, cardamom, ghee, raisin, almond, sugar, or jagri, and also a seed called in Hindustani "tope." 30. Confined to male sex. It is not used by children. 31. Not easily formed. They say it is diffi- cult to break off. There is a tendency of moderate smoking of ganja, developing into the excessive. 33. Use of the drug is looked upon by the public as detrimental to health. 34. No; it would not be a serious privation. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. These drugs would be consumed illicitly. The prohibition can be enforced by legis- lation, to prevent people from cultivating or collect- ing the wild plants, from possessing and from pur- chasing or selling any of these drugs. Privation would occasion some discontent among the con- sumers, but would not be so serious as to amount to any political danger. 41. (b) Smokers say moderate use of ganja is beneficial, giving staying-power under severe exertion or exposure or to alleviate fatigue. (c) I think it is preventive of disease in mala- rious and unhealthy tracts. I refer to moderate habitual use. 42. I think ganja is not beneficial and is not harmless, because I find the smokers weak in body and in intellect. They always appear to be dull and careless. 43. I think they are offensive to their neigh- bours owing to the smell. 44. It produces intoxication and giddiness. They say it creates appetite, and they eat more food after smoking. Intoxication lasts about two or three hours; they feel restless afterwards. Yes it does; and they try to smoke again. 45. It impairs the constitution. It causes loss of appetite in course of time. It causes dysentery, because several of the smokers complain of it. It does impair the moral sense. It induces laziness. It deadens the intellect. It appears to produce some insanity of a temporary character, because when they are under its influence they appear to talk all sorts of things. 49. I hear the subji or ramrasa is used by prostitutes. I think the use of hemp tends to pro- duce impotence. 51. I think a large portion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers. 53. I think it does in the case of those who eat and drink bhangi preparation. 62. I think it should be controlled, and it is feasible; method suggested by me in answering question 35. 65. I think taxation of these drugs would be reasonable if the tax is levied, and that a heavy one. It would not only tend to prevent excessive use of these drugs, but will also prevent several poor people from having recourse to it.
368 66. I think a higher rate of tax should be levied for a more injurious drug. 67. I have no objections to the taxing of the drugs. 68. There are licensed shops in Coorg for the sale of drugs or preparations. 69. No, not to my knowledge. I think local public opinion ought to be considered. 70.I also hear the bhangi is also mixed up in a sweetmeat preparation called " kamier'," or " halwa " (in Hindustani) and sold in sweet meat shops. I also hear that mutton, after it is well boiled, is mixed up with bhangi, condiments, spices, dried cocoanut and kuskus, and is roasted in ghee. It is then eaten with bread, particularly by Muham- madans. This preparation is called " bhangi dhallianha." 2. Evidence of MUKKATI IYAPPA, Cultivator, Davanagiri, Coorg. 1. I have seen some people who grow and use hemp in this country. 2. Here people prepare only ganja or bhang, both of which are known by me. Preparation of charas is unknown here. So I had no opportuni- ties of knowing it. Here ganja is more extensive- ly used than bhang. Ganja is known as Jade- bhangi, and bhang is known as Hoovo-bhangi. 3. I know no place where it grows spontane- ously. 4. Here it is known only by one name, viz., Bhangi-gida. 5. There are no special conditions regarding the matter referred. 7. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) No. To a very small extent369 EVIDENCE OF BALUCHISTAN WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of MAJOR G. GAISFORD, Deputy Commissioner, Quetta, Baluchistan. 1. I have been in charge of a district for over four years and have had opportunities of seeing the people of all classes. 2. None of the drugs are grown in the district, except a very small quantity of bhang. Charas and ganja are not prepared here. The definitions of charas and ganja may be accepted. No dis- tinction is made in the district in the different varieties of ganja. The drug used in this district is called "pathar." 3. In the Quetta sub-division of the district only a small quantity is grown. 4. The plant is called bhang. 7. The cultivation of the hemp plant is carried in Ahmed Khanzai, in the Quetta sub-district, to a very inappreciable extent, for use as bhang. 8. There has been no appreciable increase or decrease in the cultivation. 10. Only one or two zamindars cultivate the plant. 11. Never. 12. None. 13. See answer to question 7. 14. None. 18. Bhang, charas and ganja deteriorate after three years. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smok- ing. 20. Ganja and charas are chiefly used in this district by the low class Indians residing in Quetta and other bazars. Proportion cannot be ascer- tained. 21. In this district the ganja called "pathar" is used. 22. Foreign charas is used. It, is chiefly imported from Punjab and Afghanistan. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Same as answer against question 20. 25. The use of ganja, charas and bhang seems to be on the decrease in this district. The country is becoming more settled, and the low class Indians, who were numerous during war time, have decreased in numbers. 28. (a) Bhang. Ganja. Charas. 2 tolas 1 tola 1 tola. Cost 5 pies As. 1-6 As. 4. (b) Bhang. Ganja. Charas. 4 tolas 2 tolas 4 tolas. Cost 9 3/5 pies. As. 3 Re 1. 30. Bhang is used in solitude. Ganja and charas are generally used in company. It is not usual for children to consume these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming bhang is easily formed. It is not difficult to break off this. Cha- ras and ganja develop into the excessive. 32. Among the Hindu sect called Bam Bargis the consumption of bhang is regarded as essential. It is given in very moderate quantity, and is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit. The quantity used is too small to be injurious. 33. The consumption of charas is in disrepute, as it is only used by people of low classes. 37. The effects do not differ. 38. None. 43. Yes. 47. No. The use does not appear to be here- ditary. 58. The present excise system of the province is working well. 60. Ganja is not grown in this district. 61. Charas is not produced in this district. 62. The cultivation in the district is so very small that no control seems necessary at present. 63, 64 and 68. None 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted. 2. Evidence of KAZI IMAMUDDIN, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Pishin. 3. Not of any kind in this sub-division. It grows spontaneously in Kangra and Kulu districts (Punjab province). 7. Not in this sub-division. 18. Charas and bhang are deteriorated by keep- ing of three years in a wet place, so necessary measures to prevent deterioration are to keep them aside from wet place or wet season. 19. As far as known, ganja and charas are only used for smoking, but it has also been ascertained that habitual consumers do eat charas to complete their intoxication. 20. These drugs are generally used without any distinction of classes among Sindhis and Purbias, as several Thakurs and Brahmins of these countries are seen in this habit. Several residents of Kan- dahar among Musalmans and Hindus are also in habit of smoking charas. 21. Only chur ganja is used somewhere in this sub-division, and in my opinion it is preferred by smokers. 22. It is imported from British India and Afghanistan territories. 24. Only menial sects of Muhammadan and Hindu nations of the Punjab province eat or drink bhang, as it is considered a shameful event to see a lad of good family of this province and India too indulge in this habit and called a bhangi. 25. Certainly in decrease in this sub-division and in other provinces too. 28. Rs. A. P. (a) 0 0 6370 29. Dhatura is sometimes mixed by excessive consumers for excess of intoxication. 30. Only male sex. Bhang is also given to Muhammadan children at time of their circumci- sion in place of chloroform. 31. Habit of consuming these drugs is formed in two months if used daily without fail. Ten- dency is certain in case of any of these drugs for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. These drugs are strictly prohibited amongst Muhammadans according to their religious laws and regulations. 35. As these drugs are not in common use among the inhabitants of this sub-division, it is feasible and an easy task to prohibit the use of these drugs. Though it will agitate some discon- tent among the excessive consumers, but discontent of such men cannot amount to a political danger. 36. Somewhere in the sub-division where mode- rate consumers can spare money, they substitute alcohol for these drugs. 51. There are none out of the original inhabit- ants of this sub-division who are habitual con- sumers. There are some men of other countries, as of Punjab and Kandahar, etc., who are moderate habitual consumers, but their character has never been noted under influence of these drugs. 52. None. 53. No case of this nature has come before me for an instant during the past three years in this sub-division. 54. Ditto. But criminals generally fortify themselves in other places or districts to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crimes with use of these drugs. 55. No case of such nature in this sub-division, but criminals do further their designs and induce their victims to partake of these drugs, and complete stupefaction can thus be induced by these drugs without admixture if given to a man who has never taken any of these drugs for intoxica- tion. 3. Evidence of BABU KEDAR NATH, Head Clerk of the Political Agent, Kalat. 3. It does not grow spontaneously in the Bolan Pass; nor is it known to grow wild in Baluchistam. 4, 5 and 6. No information available. 7. None in the Bolan Pass, but a little in Kalat territory. 8. Nil. 9. Information not available. 10.Hemp is not cultivated in the Bolan. The cultivators in foreign territory are the same as other agricultural cultivators. 11, 12 and 13. There is none to be found. 14. None in the Bolan. 15, 16, 17 and 18. No information available. 19. Only for smoking. 20. Fakirs, also Baluchis smoke ganja. 23. No. 24. Fakirs, also Pathans and Baluchis. 25. Baroo, an old Bania, resident of Sibi, says that men smoke ganja and drink bhang in society, because the drugs are available than they used be- fore. 26, 27 and 28. Particulars not available. 29. Information not available. 30. Consumed more in company than solitude. Children never smoke. Fakirs' women sometimes smoke. 31. (b) It is difficult to break off. (c) No. 32, 33, 34, 35, and 36 Information not available. 40.Yes, but very seldom. 41.No information available. 49. Yes, but not in general. 68. Yes. 69. Yes. It is known that workmen will con- sume drugs; if workmen cannot purchase what they want, they will not come to work. 70. No. Duty is paid on imported drugs. There is no general use of untaxed drugs. 4. Evidence of MUHAMMAD YUSUF, Hospital Assistant, New Chaman. 1. While in 1888 up to 1891 I was in charge of Ferozepore and Hoshiarpur Branch Dispensaries, and here particularly I studied and enquired about the subject, and got some information from con- sumers and other people. 2. The definitions are accepted in the province (New Chaman), namely; ganja, charas and bhang. 19. Here only charas is used for smoking, and ganja is not used here, not even sold. 23. Bhang is never used here for smoking, and, as far as I know, is not used elsewhere for smoking purposes. 28. (a) Bhang ½ chittak for 6 pies, and charas 3 mashas per anna. (b) Bhang 4 chittaks of 2 annas, and charas 2 tolas of 8 annas. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with charas and is smoked; exceptionally is not known. These in- gredients are not mixed here with any of them. Sweet almonds, poppy seeds, sugar, and black pepper are mixed often as bhang massala, but here nothing is sold by the shopkeeper for the purpose; it lies only in the will of the consumer. 30. Bhang half or one chittak ( 1 oz. or 2 oz. ) in solitude, and half a seer or one pound in company of eight or ten men. Chains 3 mashas or 45 grains in solitude; sometimes in habitual excessive use it is smoked up 2 tolas or 6 drachms. They say that in Sukkur, Rori, Multan, and Dera Ghazi Khan bhang is used by women as well as by men; and it is usual in Sind for mothers to give somewhat to their children also. 31. The habit of consuming any of them is not easily formed, except they are used for months. It is easy to break off the habit. There is no ten- dency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive, yet very rare examples are seen in some foolish persons. 32. No religion, as far as I have known, gives liberty for the use of these drugs.
371 36. I am not aware of. 37. They say that if bhang be given to the man who is in the habit of smoking charas it would not satisfy him, and so vice versä. 39. Cannot explain properly. 40. As far as I have known, no native doctor uses them for medicinal purposes. On enquiry I have found that none of them is used in cattle- disease. 41. Not beneficial as a food accessory or diges- tive. Yes, it gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, and alleviates fatigue to habi- tual consumers. It is not known to me as a febri- fuge, etc., elsewhere. Not known. 42. The moderate use of any of these is harm- less. This explanation is given by those who use them. 44. To habitual consumers any of these drugs gives stimulation. Not refreshing, but produces dryness in system. Yes, it produces intoxication, but does not make one senseless. Yes; it allays hunger of habitual consumers. Yes, it creates appetite. The effect lasts for some hours, but keeps them in satisfaction up to the fixed time of next day. Yes; it produces longing or uneasiness if not taken in time. 45. (a) Yes; it produces noxious effects. (b) Yes; it does. (c) By eating in excess. (d) No. (e) Generally it does. (f) Never except in excessive use. Such sort of cases have never been noticed by me up to this time. 46. Yes, it produces noxious effects. Yes, it impairs constitution. Yes; it causes indigestion. It causes bronchitis and asthma. Generally it impairs the senses. Yes; it is believed it produces insanity; it causes madness only, but harmless. Yes; they confess when they return to their senses. 47. Rarely they are hereditary; generally they produce the habit themselves. It is not known that it affects their children. 48. Please see my answer No. 47, the same for this also. 49. Yes; I have been informed that bhang only is used as an aphrodisiac. Yes; it is more injurious than if used ordinarily as a narcotic; because, for aphrodisiac purposes they use to excess, and when intoxicated, they lose their sexual power more. Generally it is used by prostitutes. Yes; it pro- duces impotency. 50. Please see my remark on No. 49. 56. Cannot answer satisfactorily. 57. They are merely used in smoking. In conclusion, it is my opinion that these things should be discontinued. 5. Evidence of WARYAM SINGH, Hospital Assistant, Pishin. 2. These narcotics are not natural products in this ilaka. These are imported here from other provinces, and called as bhang, charas and ganja. But these are called in the Punjab by the follow- ing names:372 6. Evidence of MOHAMMAD AKBAR ALI KHAN, Senior Hospital Assistant, Quetta. 1. During my service of twenty-two years I have had frequent occasions to come in contact with fakirs, bairagis (mendicants), and sick men who were addicted to the use of these drugs. 2. Yes. Same names as given in this question. 19. For smoking only. 23. Never. 28. (a) Ganja ½ tola; price varies at different stations ½ to 1 anna. Bhang ½ oz.; price varies at different stations ¼ anna, (b) Ganja 3 to 5 tolas; price, varies at different stations 3 to 5 annas. Bhang 2 to 4 oz.; price varies at different stations 1 to 2 annas. 29. Ordinary tobacco is added to ganja and charas for smoking. The following ingredients are usually mixed with bhang, the object being to counteract its unplea- sant effects, such as thirst, dryness of throat, etc., and render it palatable:373 ly when it is mixed, as the ease is generally, with milk, seeds of cucumber and almonds to wash out the deleterious substance from the body through the urinary and digestive systems. Ganja affects nutrition of the body; the charas more so. 39. Smoking of ganja and charas is less injuri- ous than eating and drinking; in the former case the essential parts of the drug being smoked only; the effect in this form is more rapid. 40. No. 41. No. (a) No. (b) Yes, to some extent. (c) and (d) No. 42. It is harmful in every case. 44. (a) Refreshing and intoxicating. (b) Yes. (c) Yes; false appetite if any. (f) Two to four hours. (g) and (h) Yes. 45. (a) Yes, it produces emaciation, weakness and dryness of blood. (b) and (c) Yes. (d) Bronchitis and asthma almost common. (e) Becomes Impotent, lazy, and nervous weakness. (f) Yes, insanity is almost certain result if the practice is continued long or used excessively. Predisposing cause in cases where there is no here- ditary tendency, and exciting cause where it exists. Acute mania, both of temporary and permanent forms. Yes, the symptoms may be re-induced. Congested state of conjunctiva. No. A near relative of mine who used the charas in moderation at first died of mania of per- manent form, in which ease all the known treat- ments were of no avail, and there was no here- ditary tendency in the family. 46. It kills the persons much more rapidly by destroying the brain functions and thereby produc- ing mania. 47 and 48. No. Yes, children are small and weakly. 49. No; it produces impotency. Sadhus and fakirs use it for this purpose alone. Prostitutes use it more particularly by its intoxicating; effects, and also it is said by them that it keeps the private parts dry. 50. As above. In aggravated, form. 56. Not known to me. 57. Not to my knowledge. In conclusion, ganja and charas produce bron- chit is and asthma, and after a long use, insanity. The offsprings are thin and weakly. Their use must be stopped. They are the causes of ruina- tion of many families, more specially often the smoker, the head, of the family, becomes lazy and lunatic. It is much less injurious than alcohol and inexpensive. The alcohol first of all to be stopped, which is very excessively used than formerly. The ganja and charas come next to alcohol; besides the smoker of charas and ganja does not commit a crime as a drunkard does; alcohol deranges the whole organs and is very expensive drink. The habitual smoker or eater does not commit crimes, but I hear it, is used occasionally by those un- accustomed to it as a strong stimulant.
375 EVIDENCE OF BURMA WITNESSES. Evidence of COLONEL H. R. SPEARMAN, Commissioner, Tenasserin Division. 1. Thirty-one years' experience as Assistant Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner and Com- missioner. 20. Ganja.376 and only license consumption there, except in the case of respectable Chinamen, who might be allowed to take out licenses at the discretion of the Deputy Commissioner. That would have checked consumption by Burmans. I would not recommend such a system in regard to ganja, because there is no established use of ganja. Opium is lawfully sold in the country. Besides that, opium is used by Burmans already; ganja is not. I would stop ganja by punishing posses- sion with rigorous imprisonment, and also by fining ships in which it is found without owner. I would leave as little as possible to the discretion of administering officers. Punishment should fall with absolute certainty and in fixed degree. Fine is useless, because if you fine lightly you do not punish the man, While a heavy fine is so difficult to realize that the higher judicial officers object to them, and imprisonment is better in every way. I should regard the matter purely from the Bur- man point of view, without regarding in the least the discomfort, or hardship, or suffering of natives of India. If they choose to come to this country they must accept tike conditions there. The improvement alluded to in my written answer No. 58 is that indicated in answer No. 59, viz., this increased rigour. In regard to opium we have found that some Burmans would not register at all and that others registered eagerly to enable them really to sell to other non-registered consumers. I regard the registering as utterly untrustworthy. The Bur- mans use alcohol. The use is extending, both the moderate and excessive use. The best Burmans take no intoxicant of any kind. I have never heard of the use of ganja by the Siamese. The Shans in Mergui district are almost invariably Siamese. I know nothing of cultiva- tion by them in that district. Letter from COLONEL SPEARMAN appended to his evidence. I have the honour to invite the attention of the Hemp Drugs Commission to my evidence given on. The 6th instant, and to request that so much of this evidence as relates to ganja being " marketable " may be considered and dealt with in the light of the following remarks. 2. I accepted the word " marketable," which was not mine, without claiming, as perhaps I ought to have claimed, a definition of the meaning the Commission put on the word. I accepted it, not in the last sense given in "Webster's Dictionary, but in one of the others, viz., " saleable." Those who want to buy can buy it if it is to be got. I meant it to be understood that in my opinion, as founded in what I believe to be legitimate inferences from such facts as have come under my own observ- ation and as I have, as a matter of duty or other- wise, succeeded in verifying, persons not known or suspected to be in the public service or employed as spies or informers can, with risk to themselves, greater or less, according to surrounding facts and circumstances, at a cost which can be measured on each occasion only, and with a delay which could only be similarly measured, obtain ganja. 3. Briefly, but fully and accurately stated, my belief is that in my Division, and I. decline to speak for any other, ganja is " marketable " as smuggled tobacco is in England. 2. Evidence of LIEUTENANT-COLONEL C. B. COOKE, Commissioner of Pegu. 1.The people of Burma not being addicted to the use of hemp drugs, my opportunities of obtain- ing information have been few. 2. "Sè chauk " or " dried medicine" is the ordinary name applied to ganja (flat or round) by the Burmese. It is also known as "bhin." 3. It is said to grow spontaneously in parts of Upper Burma. 7. Its cultivation is forbidden by law. 35. The use of the drug is prohibited in this province. The prohibition is intended to protect the indigenous population from acquiring a habit which is by some persons held to be a cause of insanity. The alien population of Burma at the time that the prohibition was ordered was insignificant in numbers; in the twenty years since the prohibition was ordered that population has probably increased 500 fold, and the difficulties of enforcing the prohibi- tion have also increased; but still, I think, the prohibition should not be annulled. 36. No. 58. Yes; I think it should be left unchanged. 68. None are licensed. 69. The wishes of the people are consulted usually before any new excise shop is licensed. Oral Evidence. Question 1.377 fibre, the leaves being used both in flavouring dishes, as I have stated above, and also for medi- cinal purposes. It is used, I know, for treating elephants, and I believe this practice was brought from India. The Burmese name of the plant is bhin-bin. Question 35.378 I have made inquiries from the township and other officers whom I have recently met, and I submit their statements. These statements show that ganja is well known in Upper Burma as an intoxicant and an aphro- disiac and an antidote for fever, that it was used by a comparatively small number of people, that it is known by Burmese doctors as a cure for dysen- tery and diarrh379 no know it nor did many others. When we took our food every one noticed that the fowl curry was exceptionally tasty. They took it heartily. I felt a peculiar smell in the curry, but also ate it with the others. Of those who took it, I and several others were not affected by it in the least. Two, I remember, were intoxicated and showed signs of timidity, uttering most humiliating words. I have seen children suffering from dysentery cured by rubbing ganja pounded and mixed in water on the navel. Oral evidence. Question 1.380 have never drawn special attention to the prohibi- tion with a view to enforcing it strictly. Their attitude has been practically that of the Burmese Government, viz., formal prohibition without strict enforcement. I believe, however, that the drug is grown and used to a less extent now than it was under the Burmese kings, and I think the prohi- bition does check the spread of the habit among the Burmans. I do not think the Danu people are morally, with respect to intoxicants, a stronger people than the Burmans, but they are said to require the drug owing to their damp climate. 4. Evidence of MAJOR B.A. N. PARROTT, Officiating Commissioner, Southern Division. 1. I have been in Burma nearly twenty-five years, and all I know about ganja is from cases brought before me in Court. 2. I only know ganja in the forms of sticks and leaves. It is called in Burmese " sè chauk." 3. I know of no districts in Burma where it grows spontaneously. 4. I only know it by the name " sè chauk." 5. I cannot say. It would grow well, I think, over most part of Burma. I have seen plants in Thayetmyo and Kyaukse districts. 6. Scattered, I think. 7. I saw a little in Kyaukse district in 1888-89, I think. I think it was grown for production of ganja. 8. I cannot say. 9. I do not know. 10. In the only two cases I can remember, one was an ordinary cultivator; but, if I remember right, half native. In the other, it was a native of India. 11. I do not know. 12. I do not know. I think not. 13. Ganja is not allowed in Burma. 14. I have only seen ganja in the form of twigs and leaves. It is used, I understand, for mixing with sweetmeats and cheroots, and is used only by natives of India, sepoys, and prostitutes. 15. I cannot say. 16. I do not know. 17. I cannot say. Natives of India only as far as I know. 18. I do not know. 19. I cannot say. 20. Only natives of India, sepoys, and prosti- tutes. 21, 22 and 23. I do not know. 24. Cannot say. 25. Decrease I should say, for I have had very few cases before me within the past few years. 26. Cannot say. 27. Please see No. 20. 28. I do not know. 29. Cannot say. 30, 31, 32 and 33. Do not know. 35. Yes; it is prohibited here. It would, I have no doubt, be consumed illicitly, but only to a small extent. The number of consumers in Burma is small I think, and no serious discontent has occurred. It would not amount to a political danger. I cannot say as regards (a) or (b). 36. No; I do not think so. 37 to 39. I cannot answer these questions. 40. Not that I have heard of. 41. I do not know, and have never heard that charas, ganja or bhang were beneficial. 42. I cannot say. I should doubt these being harmless. 43. I do not know. My experience of ganja smokers is very slight. 44. I cannot say. As ganja has been prohibited here so long, and is only mostly met with in the seaport and military stations and posts, my know- ledge of the subject is limited. 45. From what I have seen of ganja smokers, I should say it certainly had a noxious effect, physically, mentally and morally. 46. I am unable to discuss the question. 47. and 48. Cannot say. 49. Do not know. It is used by prostitutes. Cannot say if the use of hemp tends to produce impotence. 50. Cannot say. 51 and 52, Cannot say. My experience of ganja smokers in Burma is limited. 53. I should say it would, but cannot quote any cases. 54. I have heard so, but cannot give instances. 55. I have heard so. 56 and 57. Cannot say. 58. I think it is working well. 59. Probably some more European Excise Inspec- tors would do good. 60, 61 and 62. Ganja is prohibited here. 63. They are not sold here. 64, 65, 66 and 67, Not allowed here. 68 and 69. No. 70. Cannot say. 5. Evidence of MR. A. R. BIRKS, Officiating Commissioner, Arakan Division. 1. I have had no special opportunities for obtaining information, as my attention has not been directed to the subject. The information now supplied has been given me by Mr. Wadman, Inspector of Excise in this Division. In one or two cases I have had ganja produced in Court, and I am aware it is sometimes sent through the post office to men in the military police force. 2. The Burmese name for ganja is "sè chauk." 3. A species of wild hemp grows in the Division, but not abundantly.
381 4. It is called " boil ally " by the Chittago- nians. 5. Not known. 6. It grows like a weed and is scattered. 12. I believe not. From enquiries it appears that the wild hemp is of very little good, and only used occasionally for medicine. 18. Ganja deteriorates after being kept two months in the damp climate of Arakan. If well wrapped up in cloth and put in a chatty with paddy husks and buried near a fire-place, it will stand for about four months at the most. Mr. Wadman has seized ganja buried in this way. 19. Charas is not used here. Ganja is smoked or put in curries and cakes. It is also taken with milk. When put in curries or milk the juice is extracted first. Smoking is the most common way in which the drug is used. 20. The natives of India are the only people who use it in this Division. 21. Flat ganja; the price varies from Rs, 35 to Rs. 45 per seer. 22. The little ganja that is used here is smuggled from Chittagong. In the shipping season a little is brought by native vessels from the Madras side. 23. Bhang is not used. 25. I should say that ganja is more used than formerly. I believe the military police introduced into Burma since the annexation indulge in this when they can get it. 31. There is no tendency to excessive consump- tion. After indulgence for one year the habit is hard to break off. 42. I have never heard of any cases where the use of the drug has been found harmful. 43. Yes. 6. Evidence of MR. J. K. MACRAE, Magistrate of Hanthawaddy. Oral evidence. Question 1. 382 What is known as ganja or 'sé chauk' is smuggled into Burma from India viâ the post or by steamer by natives of India. In 1891, 351 tolas of ganja were seized, of which 300 tolas came from India. In 1892, 67½ from Shan States and India. In 1893, 10,780 tolas from Shan States and India, of which 9,897 tolas came from India, but none from Burma, as far as known. 3. The hemp plant was found cultivated to a small extent in some parts of the Madaya and Pyniulwin townships of this district in 1891, but measures were at once taken, and there is at the pre- sent time no hemp grown at all. 4. By one name, ganja or sé chauk. 5. I am not aware of any special conditions. In places where it was grown the rainfall ranged from 30 to 50 inches per annum, and elevation from about 300 feet to 3,600 above sea level. 7. None known here. 19. Ganja so called, or sé chauk, used to be used for medicinal purposes only in this district. Except by natives of India. 35. (a) Yes, as in Burma. (c) By the existing excise law. (d) I cannot say. The Burmese do not con- sume any of these drugs pure and simple, but the ganja with ingredients for medicine. (e) I cannot say. (f ) Probably. 54. Not in Burma as far as my own experience goes. Oral evidence. I have been in the Burma Commission for twenty- two years. I have served in the Tenasserim, Ir- rawaddy, and Pegu Divisions of Lower Burma, and have been in Mandalay (Upper Burma) since 1891. I remember the prohibition of 1873. I was then in the Tenasserim Division in the Amherst district. There was no ganja shop there. So I know nothing about the effects of the prohibition. In 1882 I was in the Hangawaddy district (Rangoon); but I cannot say anything about the effect of the amendment of the law, inasmuch as eases of illegal possession did not, so far as I remember, come under my notice. Soon after I took charge of Mandalay district in 1891 my attention was drawn to the subject. I have no recollection of cases before that. In 1891 I found that hemp was grown in gardens, compounds, and cleared yards round houses in this district. There was no extensive cultivation by any individual: no field cultivation, but individuals had plants, I was told, planted for their own use. It was reported to me by local officers, because excise was being specially looked after in connection with opium smuggling. It was the measures taken in connection with the detection of opium smuggling which was believed to be common, which brought this ganja cultivation to light. It was not genera or over an extended area;. but I cannot say that was not formal cultivation. I believe it was gene rally for medicinal purposes for man and beast but it may have been used for smoking. I issued order, under the cognizance of the Commissioner, warning the people that this was illegal, and that those who cultivated the drug would be prosecuted A few prosecutions did follow, one or two cases, as an example. I believe this was the first action of the kind taken in this district after the extension of the Excise Act to Upper Burma in 1888. I do not think that the correspondence with the Commission- er would throw light on the amount of cultivation. I know of no prohibition of cultivation under Burmese rule, and I have been told by Burmese officials that cultivation went on then. I believe that there is now no cultivation in this district. I have made enquiries, and the reports of all my officers show that the cultivation does not exist. I have not myself seen the plant growing. I should not recognize it. The figures given in my paper (answer No. 1) regarding seizures refer to my own district only. They are taken from the records of prosecutions or of cases of ganja seized without discovery of the offender. I cannot explain the increase in 1893. But of the 10,780 tolas for that year, over 7,000 tolas were found in a box which came from India. It was discovered by the customs officials, who warned us. The consignee was a native of India, and a petty trader. I understand that he got the drug to sell. The figures I have given in my paper are figures for seizures. They show the cases that have come to light. There were pro- bably many cases that did not come to light. I think that such a large amount of smuggling would not indicate that all was to be used locally. The importers might hope to dispose of the drug over all Upper Burma. I do not think they would expect to create a demand. There is a demand among sepoys, military police, and other natives of India. There were some other seizures in 1893, amounting in one case to 300 tolas and many small items, and totalling altogether 10,180 from India. Other cases were of military police re- turning from duty in the Shan States. I cannot give any special reason for the great activity in 1893. But it may have been due to the fact that troops and military police were on duty more in 1891 and 1892, and centred here more in 1893. There has been special establishment off and on since 1891; but it has been largely reduced last year. We have still one Superintendent, one Inspector, and eight Sergeants. The Sergeants are stationed where there are police. The reason of the reduction was to spread the establishment over a larger area, as its concentration in this district was held not to produce good results. The boundary of the Shan States against Manda- lay is a very easy one for smuggling. It is jungle, in parts uninhabited. This applies more or less to all the eastern boundaries. The cases of smuggling through the post, which have come to light, have been consignments to military men, not to the general public. There are only five Burmans in respect to whom any seizure has been made during the last three years. All the rest are natives of India. In the case of postal consignments, detection has been by the postal authorities. The practice here is for the post office authorities, when they suspect a parcel, to give intimation to the Revenue Officers before delivery. As far as my experience goes, the general opinion of Burmans in respect to prohibition is one of in- difference. I have heard a Burman official declare that he thought the prohibition was hard on the poorer people using the drug medicinally, chiefly for cattle and ponies, not so much for human beings. But generally the attitude is not of indifference.
383 8. Evidence of MAJOR W. F. H. GREY, Deputy Commissioner, Toungoo. 1. Personal observation and the reports of subordinates. 3. Prome and Shwebo. It is not abundant in either. 4. The Burmese name is bing. 7. No. 12. I have heard that it is sometimes cultivated in toungyas in the Prome district, but the practice is uncommon. 41. I am informed that fishermen believe that by the use of ganja their powers of diving and remaining under water can be increased, and that, in spite of the prohibitions, it is occasionally used by them with this object. 67. No. I have no information whatever with regard to the questions left unanswered. 9. Evidence of MR. A. M. B. IRWIN, Deputy Commissioner, Tharrawaddy. 1. Only police reports of prosecutions for possessing ganja. 2. I have never come across charas. Ganja is called by Burmans " sè chauk," which means " dry drug" or " dry tobacco." In Akyab it is called ginza. The specimens I have seen may have been ganja or may have been bhang, I do not know. The Burmans make no distinction. 3. I do not know of any. 14. Not that I know of. 19. I do not know. 22. From Bengal, I believe. 25. Pretty stationary, I think. 26, I do not know. 27, I believe ganja is largely consumed in Burma by natives of India. I know it is in Akyab. I think the prohibition of possession has very little effect. So far as I am aware, Burmans never took kindly to hemp drugs. 35. It is consumed illicitly, and prohibition can, I think, never be wholly successful. 43. I think so. 51. I never detected any connection between them. 53. No; I know of no case. Oral evidence. Question 1.384 10. Evidence of MR. H. ADAMSON, Deputy Commissioner, Meiktila. 1. The experience of sixteen years' work as an Assistant Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner in Burma. As, however, bhang, charas and ganja have been prohibited in Burma for twenty years and more, all dealings in these drugs are secret, and an official hears very little about them. 2. The definitions are correct. 3. I understand that the hemp plant, from which drugs can be got, does not grow spontaneously here but must be cultivated. 4. The bin-pin or segyaukpin. I believe they are the same plant. The bin-pin is not to be confounded with the bein-pin, which is the poppy. 7. It is cultivated secretly in gardens occasional- ly, and it is said that the soil of almost any garden in the country is suitable for its production. 13. It is altogether prohibited. 14. Whether they are prepared or not, I cannot say; but all these are to be found in the possession of natives of India, who secretly traffic in them. 20. Natives of India, such as military police, camp followers, shoemakers, mehters, etc. Very few Burmans use it. 22. The charas used is almost entirely imported from India. 25. Its use among Burmans is so trifling as to be scarcely worth notice. 33. Bin or ganja used to be classed with opium in the time of Burmese rule, and its use was nomin- ally prohibited. 35. As regards natives of India, I am doubtful, But the prohibition during the past twenty years has certainly had the effect of preventing the vice from spreading from Indians to Burmans. 40. Yes; ganja was used for dysentery by Burmese doctors, and it is considered invaluable as a medicine for elephants. 43. Yes. 58. I consider that the present system of locally prohibiting these drugs is working well, and I think that it should not be in any way changed. 70. In the instructions to witnesses it is stated thatthe Commission are anxious to know whether the consumption of charas and bhang has increased since the prohibition of ganja. There appears to be a misapprehension, as the prohibition of ganja has always included the prohibition also of charas and bhang. Prosecutions for illegal possession of ganja are common enough. But there have been very few prosecutions with regard to either charas or bhang. I cannot say why, as these drugs are common enough. I had no difficulty in procuring a piece of charas from the bazar here for my own inspection through a servant. It is said to sell for its weight in silver. It is quite clear that, not- withstanding the prohibition, these drugs are smuggled into the country to a considerable extent, for they are in common use among natives of India. But it is certain that their use among Burmans is quite insignificant, and I have no doubt that this fact is due in great measure to their use being prohibited by law. 11. Evidence of MR. H. G. BATTEN,* Deputy Commissioner, Mergui. 1. I have served in the Burma Commission since April 1878 and have been located in the following towns and districts of Burma,385 hemp and smoking ganja is to a great extent in in their own country. 30. In solitude generally. By males chiefly. 31. (a), (b) and (c) Yes. 32. None that I know of. 33. All use of narcotics is forbidden by the Buddhist law, and persons addicted to use of same are held in disrepute. I believe the same holds good amongst the Siamese, who are bound by the same laws. 34. No. 35. Already illicit in Burma. 36. No. 40. (a) No. (b) Yes, for elephants. 41. No. 42. Even the moderate use seems to affect the nervous system. 43. Yes, as far as I know. 44. (a) Exciting. (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) and (e) No. (f) Only a short time. (g) Yes, depression of spirits. (h) Yes, like most narcotics. 45. (a) and (b) Yes. (c) and (d) No. (e) Induces laziness. (f) Yes; persons become temporarily imbecile, laughing or crying, and behave in a childish way. 46. Two Punjabi policemen in the Reserve Police became insane from the excessive use of the drug. 47. I believe not. 50. Habitual and excessive use is said here to produce impotence. 51, 52, 53 and 54. No. 55. I never heard of any such cases in Burma. 58. Total prohibition, such as is sanctioned for Burma, only system possible. Extract from letter from MR. BATTEN ap- pended to his evidence. Question 27.386 any cases brought to court for some years. Illicit use, or sale, or possession is promptly reported for sake of the reward. 33. Any Burman Buddhist consuming these drugs would be regarded as utterly abandoned. The Buddhist scriptures entirely forbid the use of these drugs. 34. No, none; but natives of India use the drug. Few respectable members of that community use it, and the few who use it can get opium instead. Of Burmans, one out of many thousands may use the drug. 35. Total prohibition has been in force for twenty years past. The drug is consumed illicitly, but practically by natives of India only, and to a very limited extent. The total prohibition does not cause discontent to the Burman population, and few respectable persons amongst the native of India community consume the drug. The existing prohi- bition is effective. Heavy fines have sufficed to reduce the consumption to a minimum. Natives of India who used ganja and bhang in India probably use opium in Burma. 36. Certainly not. 40. Not by Burman native doctors. 43. There are too few consumers for me to give an opinion. 45. I have known natives of India go off their heads from using bhang or ganja. 58. Working well. Not capable of further im- provement. Very little of the drug is smuggled. The majority of cases are detected and offenders punished. It is impossible to prevent smuggling altogether. 62. The total prohibition now in force is abso- lutely necessary. Were the use of the drug to be sanctioned, the spread of the habit would be great, and the results lamentable. 64. Import and export totally prohibited in Burma. 68. None. 13. Evidence of MR. W. N. PORTER, Deputy Commissioner, Upper Chindwin. 1. Twenty-three years' service in Burma. The Police and Commission. 2. In this district and elsewhere, so far as my experience extends, hemp of all kinds is known as sé chauk. There are no separate names for separate forms of it. 3. Does not grow spontaneously, but very luxuriantly, when planted, everywhere in Burma. 4. Only sè chauk. Yes. 7. No. Medicine men sometimes cultivate a plant or two for medicinal purposes, but the fact is kept very secret. Nearly all the different forms of hemp are imported by natives of India for their own con- sumption. Very little is cultivated, and that only after precautions have been taken against detection. 17. Natives of India usually. Very few natives of Burma indulge in ganja. 19. No. It is put in curry, the flavour of which it is said to improve. The leaves of the hemp are also occasionally smoked with tobacco in the form of cigars by Burmans and Shans, but instances of either use are very rare. 20. Shans in the Upper Chindwin used to do so under the Burman regime. The practice, however, was not very wide-spread nor general, and since the British occupation and absolute prohibition, the use of hemp has practically disappeared. 21. The leaves of the hemp plant. 22. Not used. 23. Principally by natives of India, but very seldom by Burmans and Shans. 25. Rapid decrease among Burmans and Shans, owing to the absolute prohibition of the drug and measures adopted to enforce it. The use of the various forms of the hemp plant is rather common among natives of India. 27. I can't speak for natives of India. In case of Burmans and Shans the practice of hemp con- sumption is so very uncommon that information in regard to questions Nos. 26 and 27 is not available. In fact, among them there are no habitual consumers, the young bloods only occasionally indulging. 31. Among Burmans and Shans it does not amount to a habit. They have no difficulty in refraining from its use, because they so seldom take it. 33. Hemp consumption is regarded with strong disapproval by Burmans and Shans. 40. Yes; both by Burman and Shan medicine men as a febrifuge and digestive and remedy for rheumatism. 44. On Burmans and Shans its use leads to temporary mental derangement or intoxication, as it commonly happens that, when taken at all, which is very seldom, it is taken in excess. 45. I can't say; the hemp habit is so infrequent in Burma. 49. Yes; occasionally. I have heard of a few instances. 51. No. None in the case of Burmans and Shans. With regard to natives of India I can't say. 57. The leaves of the hemp plant are sometimes eaten in curry. The effect is to intoxicate and induce sexual desire. 14. Evidence of MR. S. H. T. DE LA COURNEUVE, Deputy Commissioner, Pakokku, Upper Burma. 1. Twenty-one years' service in Burma: sixteen in Lower Burma, and five in Upper Burma. 2. Ganja is known in this province under one name only, viz., sè gyauk. This is the flowers and leaves of the plant. 3. I have never seen it grown. I have served in nine districts in Lower Burma and five in Upper Burma, and have never seen the plant or heard of it either as indigenous or cultivated. 4. Sè gyauk is the generic term for ganja. 6. Not indigenous. 7. No. 14. No. 19. Sè gyauk is not used for smoking by the
387 natives of Burma. It is used as a medicine only, and that in very limited quantities. 58. The absolute prohibition of the production and consumption of ganja in this province in 1872-74 has had the best results and cannot be improved upon. 15. Evidence of MR. A. L. HOUGH,Deputy Commissioner, Akyab. 1. Little or none. Ganja has been prohibited in Burma for very many years and is not used by the people of the country so far as I know. 2. Never saw or heard of anything but ganja. What I have seen looks like dried leaves or dried sprigs. 3. None in Burma to my knowledge 14. None to my knowledge in Burma. 19. I do not know how ganja is used. 20. I know of no one but natives of India using ganja. 21. I do not know. 25. The use of ganja is, I think, on the increase in Burma, because the number of cases in court have, I think, increased since more native of India troops and military police came into the country subsequent to the events of 1885. My three years' experience as District Magistrate of Rangoon leads me to say this, and the influx of natives of India steadily going on should cause this result. 26. Cannot possibly know. 35. The Financial Commissioner has asked me to furnish you with the following information: 388 would be impossible to cultivate the hemp plant in the paddy kwins of this district. 14. Not to my knowledge. Ganja is smuggled into the province ready pre- pared for use of natives of India. 15. Unable to give particulars, as the subject is not known to me. 16. Don't know. 17. Formerly by Karens and Talaings. 18. No personal knowledge on the subject. 19. Ganja is sometimes used for flavouring cur- ries and medicinal purposes. Charas not known. 20. No statistics available. 21. Flat ganja. 22. Charas not known. 23. Bhang is used for smoking, chiefly by natives of India, in the district, and a few Burmans. 24. Burmans don't drink bhang, but only smoke it. The Hindus are reported to drink bhang. 25. Decrease amongst the Burmans. Natives of India use it when they can get it. 26. Not known. 27. The poor class. Habits of life or circum- stances which lead to the practice not known. 28. Not known. 29. Tobacco is mixed with ganja, either because it is too strong or too expensive. Bhang massala is not known to me. 30. As ganja is prohibited in the province, its consumption is practised in solitude. Mainly con- fined to the male sex and not given to children. 31 (a). Yes. Not by Burmans. (b). Yes. 32. Not known. 33. The consumption of each of the drugs is re- garded by the Buddhists with disgust. Public opi- nion (social and religious) is against the use of these drugs. Consumers of these drugs are looked upon as idlers, suspects, and bad characters. I am not aware of there being any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. Not amongst the Burmans, except in the few cases of persons who have become habituals. In my opinion it would be a serious privation to natives of India; but this question is one for the medical witnesses to answer. 35. The use of these drugs has been prohibited for the last twenty years, and is now only illicitly consumed. 36. No reason to think alcohol is now being to a certain extent substituted for any of these drugs. 37. Charas not being known, the effects of charas smoking, compared to ganja smoking, are not known. 38. Not known. 39. Consumption of ganja by smoking is said to be less injurious than eating it. 40. Yes. The Karens give ganja to their elephants, and I believe it is used in the treatment of cattle-disease but being prohibited, the Burman agriculturist will not admit the fact. 41. The medical officers and Burman doctor consulted say 'yés.' 42. See reply to 41. 43. Opinions differ. Offensive to Buddhists, in- offensive to natives of India. I don't know any respectable persons who are consumers of the drug. 44. The medical opinion is it is refreshing, pro- duces intoxication, does not allay hunger, but creates an appetite. The effects last from three to six hours. After-effects are great lassitude and drowsiness. The want of subsequent gratification produces long- ing and uneasiness. 45. The opinion of the medical officers and Bur- mans consulted is, these drugs produce a noxious effect, but only to a very small degree. Does not impair the constitution of a Burman or injure digestion or cause loss of appetite. It does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma; in fact it is prescribed by native doctors as a remedy for these diseases. Does impair the moral sense, and induces laziness, but does not induce habits of immorality or debau- chery. Does deaden the intellect, and produces insanity, temporary and permanent. If temporary, the symptoms may be re-induced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. The medical wit- nesses will give evidence regarding the typical symptoms and remaining points to be reported on under this section. 46. The effects of the habitual excessive use of any of the drugs is the same as the moderate use. Only the effects are more violent in form. 47. No. 48. The habitual excessive use of these drugs is reported to affect the children of habitual excessive consumers. 49. This question can be answered by the medical witnesses who will be examined. The Burman doctor reports that ganja is used by Burmese prostitutes. 50. For the medical witnesses to say. 51. Not in Burma. A ganja consumer is sus- pected of every petty theft in the quarter where he is seen. 52. Same as 51. 53. Yes. Personally I know of no case where excessive indulgence has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. I am not aware of Burman criminals so for- tifying themselves with these drugs. They fortify themselves with alcohol instead. 55. Cannot say, as no such cases have come before me. 56. No experience; can't say. 57. Ganja, when not moderately taken, eaten in a curry produces deep sleep and unconsciousness. 58 to 69. As the drug is prohibited, no reply necessary. 70. Ganja is smuggled into this province at the seaport towns by lascars and others belonging to the steamers that trade between India and this province. It is also sent by post to sepoys and others in garrison towns and towns in the interior. Oral evidence. Question 1.389 Rs. 50. A man I arrested told me this was the value of the drug. The prohibition has been effect- ual in regard to the Burmans, but has not had any apparent effect in regard to the people of India. I have no personal knowledge that the Burmans used to consume the drug, but have been told that they did. The prohibition has been effectual in preventing the Burmans taking to it, and I have been told by Burmans that some have given it up in consequence of the prohibition. Question, 35.390 I believe the smugglers were people like the ship's crew. They brought the stuff for native traders or shopkeepers, who sold to consumers. The object, therefore, was profit to be realised by surreptitious sale. This profit was large, because the price in India was low and it was high here. This was true of that time as well as this, though the profit is higher now. The importation of ganja was not, I think, mate- rially stopped. by prohibition, because smuggling sltil went on. I think it went on just the same as before. I do not t hink the prohibition made any material difference. I cannot say accurately with- out statistics whether the importation of ganja was as great as ever, but my impression is that it was: that is, that the illicit ganja imported after the prohibition was not materially less than the licit and illicit ganja formerly imported. I think that since 1873 the importation of ganja has been going on regularly without diminishing. I think that of late years it has increased very much. There are many more natives of India. That would explain increase. In regard to seizures, a sudden drop in the number may be due to a change in the practices of smugglers. Then we would not know how to search for and. detect consignments until we learned their new ways. This would in turn lead to a rise in the number of seizures till their plans were changed. This is the only explanation I can give of the great drop in 1889-90 and the increase in 1893. I cannot recall any other explanation of the latter, except some information some of our officers got which enabled us to make important seizures. The last two or three months show seizures slack again. Magistrates give rewards. Sometimes half the fine, sometimes the whole of it, is given to the Customs officers who seize the stuff. They pay the informer by private arrangement. It depends on the generosity of the officer. I have had com- plaints made by informers and have used my in- fluence to get the informers due amount; for we cannot work successfully without them. All the seizures mentioned in my memorandum are quite apart from the police. Officers making large seizures have sometimes complained to me of cases in which smugglers were heavily fined and went to jail without paying. In these cases no fine is realised and no reward given. This is discourag- ing to officers making seizures. I think some measures should be taken to avoid this. Again, if a conviction is not obtained, no special rewards are given to us. I cannot say whether every one who wants ganja can get it in Rangoon. I know that people can get it clandestinely; but I cannot say by whom it is sold and whether everybody can get it. I hear that it costs one rupee a tola, and can be obtained in a quiet way. I hear and believe that there is a great deal of ganja in the country. I have been told by informers that the drug costs a rupee a tola. I heard that only a short while ago. The preventive establishment working under me consists of four Inspectors and two Additional In- spectors during the busy season (February to May), about twenty-seven preventive officers, and twenty- five "temporary" officers who are kept on all the year round. They get from Rs. 80 to Rs. 150, and the Inspectors from Rs. 150 to Rs. 300. There are also six patrol peons from Rs. 12 to Rs. 14 per mensem directly under me. I do not think that there is any extortion practised by this establish- ment. There has been no case of this kind. The average number of vessels that arrived at the port of Rangoon during the last five years is 1203 for each year. Native boats moving about on the river are not looked at, unless they come up to the wharfs and there is inspection of contraband goods. Sea-going craft are systematically over- hauled. The trade by native craft from Chitta- gong, Calcutta and Madras has been almost entirely cut out by the steamer transport. I be- lieve they still trade considerably to Akyab and Moulmein, though not so much as formerly. There is the same preventive system as we have. We used to search such native craft carefully and often found ganja. I do not think that the native craft put in on the coast avoiding the ports. I do not think that contraband traffic is thus carried on. We have never heard of any traders resorting to such places. We would soon come to know if such craft were to visit such places. We have no pre- ventive staff along the coast line. There would not be much difficulty, so far as I see, in native craft running in this way. They also like to do as much coasting as possible. The smuggled ganja comes principally from Madras, Cocanada, Bimlipatam, and other ports on the Madras Coast. It has not come to my notice that it comes from Pondicherry. We have had no cases. There is not so much smuggling of ganja as of opium from Calcutta. We have had no cases of late. Formerly we had some isolated cases. We have no dealings with the police in this matter. It is principally Chittagonians and Mala- bar people who pick up tins of contraband ganja thrown off from ships; but I know nothing of the police being in sympathy with them. 19. Evidence of MR. E. LEWIS, Excise Officer, Rangoon. Oral evidence. I am senior Excise Officer in the town of Ran- goon and the district of Hanthawaddy. I have been thirty-two years in Burma and. for eighteen years in Rangoon. Before that I was in charge of excise in Thayetmyo for a private contractor when the ganja was prohibited. I left him and joined the police in 1874. From there I joined the Ran- goon excise work. I remember the issue of the prohibition of ganja. The drug was largely used by natives of India in Thayetmyo, by men employed in the Commissariat, etc. It was used by natives of Burma, but these consumers were very few. The source of supply was Upper Burma. After the prohibition I made extensive seizures from Upper Burma in my police capacity. There was no other source of supply then, for there was no railway, and the journey was fifteen or twenty days. There was much ganja over the border. I was stationed in Alimyo, near Minla, and it was easily obtainable. The con- sumers prefer Madras ganja to local ganja, and elephant-drivers may have brought some up with them when they came up-country. But I made no seizures, and have no facts to show that. The ganja was extensively grown across our old border. I have seen it within ten miles of our old border.
391 There was some cultivation, but it was said that the plant grew wild. I have seen small plots of cultivation392 few. Burmans use ganja for their cattle, not for themselves. The few consumers abandoned the habit on the prohibition. I do not think that the Burmans would ever take to ganja. During my thirty years' experience I have found that they do not take to it. They take it for their cattle only. 20. Evidence of MAJOR PEILE, Inspector-General of Police. Oral evidence. I am Inspector-General of Police in Burma. The military police are mainly Northern Indians and Gurkhas and also a few Karens. The civil police are almost entirely Burmans, excluding the European officers. In municipal towns we have a few Indians also. I joined the police in 1887 in the supply depart- ment or commissariat of the military police. Before that I had been in service in the army. For about a year I was Deputy Inspector-General of Military Police, and for three years I have been Inspector- General of the whole force. I think there are about 16,500 military police and about 13,000 civil. The military police have been employed in Lower as well as Upper Burma for about four years. They work over the same area as the civil; but in Lower Burma and the lower parts of Upper Burma they are used for treasury and other guards and escorts. In Upper Burma, as they are required for sending out columns, they are more numerous than in Lower Burma. I have not much knowledge of the use of ganja by men in the force. I had a case about two years ago of a Gurkha who was reprimanded by his officer for quarrelling in the lines and tried to shoot his officer. He was supposed to be a smoker of ganja. It was reported so by the officers and men; but there was no direct evidence of his having taken the drug. I think the natives would more readily attribute such an act to ganja than to drink. They distrust a ganja smoker. I cannot say certainly what this Gurkha's character was. I did not take note of that. I do not know whether he drank alcohol. Being a Gurkha, he probably did. He went off to the Kachin hills and was not seen again. So far, however, as I know, the discipline of the force has not been affected by the use of ganja. I do not find the use of the drug alleged as a cause of defects in working or breaches of discipline. If I found a man who smoked I should turn him out, because he would be breaking the law and also because he would be dangerous. I have turned out such men at the end of their three-years' engagement. I think also that there have been cases of dismissal for ganja smoking. I do not think that smuggling of ganja by the military police is common; and I do not think that the use of the drug is very common in the force. I do not think people not using the drug in India would use it here. Burma has not proved unhealthy to them. The force has been wonderfully healthy. On the contrary, men using it in India might give it up here owing to the difficulty of getting it. We recruit throughout India, and get, I believe, the same kind of men as join regiments. I do not think there is much smuggling of ganja into Burma. We catch cases sometimes. But I cannot give figures. I should have nothing to do with Customs seizures; but the police sometimes search on information received. From what I hear I understand that smuggling is constantly going on at the ports and also a little up-country across the border, but not so much of ganja there as of opium. Last year we had orders to go and establish a post at Sima, north-east of Bhamo. We left a garrison of three hundred men there. I heard that they were getting some kind of ganja and making it into a drink and using it. The Kachins found it in the jungles and sold it to the men. We took measures to stop it. The men were Gurkhas I think, and there may have been some Sikhs among them. I think they made a drink of it. That was my impression. We could, no doubt, easily obtain a specimen of the drug. Sima is in the middle of the Kachin country. This is not the only case I know of the cultivation or growth of the plant. I understand the Sima stuff was wild. There was a seizure at Kyaukse, and another at Pakokko (I think) 393 (b) I cannot say. Ganja is usually smoked in a chillum or earthen pipe, while bhang is prepared like sherbet and drunk. Both, however, are sad to produce drowsiness. 22. Evidence of MR. R. W. MARTIN, District Superintendent of Police, Rangoon. 51. A small proportion of bad characters con- sume ganja. Many respectable natives of India partake of bhang in the form of cooling drinks, others smoke ganja mixed with tobacco, others partake of it in the form of sweet halwa called ma- jum. Fakirs take it in the form of pills; they mix the ganja with pepper and ginger. Ganja leaves are also cooked in curries. The drug is smuggled into Burma from India through the Postal Department and by steamers. In Upper Burma the plant is often seen grow- ing near villages and is used medicinally. There is no connection between hemp drug and crime. 52. The excessive use of ganja is said to be dele- terious, persons indulging in its use and while under its influence have no inclination to commit crime; on the contrary, the feeling is one of drowsiness with an inclination to remain indoor. 53. Excessive indulgence of the drug does not incite unpremeditated crime of any kind, but I be- lieve it has its bad results on the constitution and the consumer grows cowardly. 54. The consumer of the drug, when under its influence, grows lazy and drowsy, and consequently does not go in for committing crime, but I believe criminals when in want of funds commit crime to enable them to procure the drug. 55. Yes, there are instances where criminals to further their designs induce their victims to par- take of the drug; complete stupefaction can be in- duced by partaking of it without admixture. 23. Evidence of MR. A. G. MAYNE, District Superintendent of Police, Pegu. 51. Not in Burma. I have not come across any such cases during my service in Burma ex- cepting two cases mentioned below. 52. I have not had much experience regarding the use of hemp drugs. Where I served in India, dhatura and arsenic were chiefly used. 53. No; not to my knowledge. No. 54. Yes, and in all cases in which the persons concerned are in the habit of taking these drugs. At Sagaing in Upper Burma in 1888 (?) the Sub- Major of the military police battalion was shot dead by a sepoy, who indulged in bhang. An- other bhang-eating sepoy of the same battalion and in the same year, I think, attempted to murder a Burmese girl. Both these men are supposed to have fortified themselves with bhang, but as they were not captured till two or three days after com- mission of the offences, it would be impossible to know for certain. I cannot recall any hemp-drugging case, vide my reply to No. 52. 24. Evidence of MR. A. J. A. JARDINE, District Superintendent of Police, Bassein. 51. (a) No. (b) None in my experience in Burma. I have not known these drugs used by Burmans. With natives of India, it sometimes leads to homicidal frenzy. 52. In Burma, I have never seen a case of ex- cessive use. 53. Yes; but I have only known cases of exces- sive doses of ganja leading to homicidal frenzy. This was in India. 54. Not in Burma to my knowledge. But I have known a case of Burmese dacoits fortifying themselves in liquor. 55. (a) I have heard of cases in India, but not in Burma. (b) I have not seen any cases, but I have been informed in India bhang causes complete stupe- faction. 25. Evidence of MR. W.G. SNADDEN, District Superintendent of Police, Maubin. 51. No; ganja is hardly ever consumed by. Burman criminals. 52, 53, 51 and 55. I have had no experience of the effects of the excessive use of any of these drugs. 26. Evidence of MR. M. J. CHISHOLM, District Superintendent of 51. Hemp drugs are not used by the Arakanese. The Chittagonians and Bengalis, of whom there are a large number in Arakan, indulge in ganja and drugs obtained from hemp. It is consumed both by respectable men and bad characters. I do not think it has anything to do with crime. No in- stance has been brought to my notice where crime has been put down to the use of these drugs. The people use it to allay pain and keep off malarious fever. Mostly all the violent crimes in this district have originated in liquor shops. 54. No; not here. 55. No case of the kind has been brought to my notice. 57. Charas is unknown here. Ganja is used with tobacco and smoked by the people. vol. vii. 3 G
394 27. Evidence of MR. E. H. MOLLOY, District Superintendent of Police, Meiktila. 51. As far as my experience goes none of the Burmans with whom I have come into contact use these drugs. I have not come across any native bad characters who use them. It has apparently little or no connection with crime. 52. These drugs are not used by the Burmans. 53. Not, as far as I know; have never heard of a case during my twenty years' residence in Burma. 54. Not within my knowledge, neither have I been able to ascertain anything on the subject from the natives with whom I have been brought into contact. 55. No; such a case has not been heard of in this district, neither do I remember hearing of any. 28. Evidence of MR. C. M. PRENDERGAST, District Superintendent of Police, Sagaing. 51. Natives of India are consumers of ganja; but I do not think Burmans are habitual consumers. Charas and bhang are not known in this district. No instances have come to my notice in which any criminals or bad characters have been consumers of any of these drugs, and I do not think crime is affected one way or the other by it in this part of the country. Ganja to a small extent was grown in the district by Burmans, who did not know the same was prohibited; but it was grown for sale to natives, and not for their own consumption. 52. No cases of excessive use have come under my notice. I do not know of any case in which Burmans are consumers of any of these drugs in this district. 53. From enquiries made from old Burmans, I am informed that in the king's time some few Burman bad characters did consume ganja, but it merely had the effect of making them happy and sleepy; but the men from whom I have made the enquiries say they have never known a case in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. The opinions of the people about here are to the effect that the use of these drugs amongst Burmans does not tend to fortify them to commit crime; but that it would make them helpless and incapable to carry out any premeditated crime. 55. I have not had any experience of any such cases. 29. Evidence of MR. W. H. TARLETON,* District Superintendent of Police, Thayetmyo. 51 The large proportion of criminals in this district, are opium smokers and not consumers of ganja, etc. Bhang and charas are not known to Burmans. Certain villages round Tindau and Thetngaibyin in the Allanmyo subdivision are in the habit of trading in ganja which they bring into Allanmyo and Thayetmyo and sell to natives of India. To my knowledge there are no habitual consumers among the natives of India in this district, and moderate consumption of the drugs referred to does not lead to crime. 52, 53, 54 and 55. I cannot answer these ques- tions as no cases have occurred in this district, nor have I heard of any cases during my service in the Police. 30. Evidence of MR. E. G. MUMFORD, District Superintendent of Police, Tounghoo. 51. (a) No; not in Burma. (b) The use of these drugs does not affect crime in Burma. 52. See above. 53. No. 54.No. 55. (a) Yes; but very rarely in Burma. (b) Yes. 31. Evidence of MR. R. A. E. CASTLE, District Superintendent of Police, Prome. 51. From enquiries made, I find that bad charac- ters in this district are not consumers of these drugs. If there be any consumers at all, the per- centage is so very small that it is unnoticeable. Consumption of these drugs has no connection with crime in this district. 52. There is no excessive use of these drugs. 53. The only effect of excessive use is heavy sleep and stupidity. If excessive use be continued, it leads to idiotcy, but does not incite to crime, violent or otherwise. I do not know, nor have I heard, of any cases in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy in this country, though it does so in India. 54. No, not as a rule, though there are excep- tional cases. Criminals, if they wish to fortify themselves, do so by drinking liquor. 55. Yes, criminals do induce their victims to partake of these drugs, and so stupefy them. * Summoned to attend at a sitting of the Commission for oral examination, but was unable to appear.
395 Complete stupefaction appears to be induced by this drug without admixture. The general opinion regarding this ding is that, if used, it causes heavy sleep and stupidity. Crim- inals require all their wits about them when about to commit crimes, and so do not use it. Burmans, as a rule in this district at least, appear to fear the drug, seeing that it leads to idiotcy. 32. Evidence of MR. A. A. ST. CLAIR MILLER, District Superintendent of Police, Tharrawaddy. 51. The drug is not used by the Burman bad characters of this district. 52. It is not used. 53, 51 and 55. No. 56. Not used in this district. 33. Evidence of MR. H. P. PEDLER, District Superintendent of Police, Shwegyin. 51. The bad characters of the Shwegyin district are chiefly Burmans, and they scarcely ever use these drugs even in moderation. Natives of India (Hindustanis), are known to use the drug in moder- ation, and when so used, its use has no connection with crime. 52. Excessive use is very uncommon. I cannot recall to mind a single instance of it in this district during the last year; excessive use is known to lead to one kind of crime, which is known as " run- ning amuck." 53. As reported above, I know of no instances since I have been in this district. If used in excess, and if followed by crime, it would be unpremeditated violent crime. 54. No; not to my knowledge. 55. No such cases have ever been proved to my knowledge, and I cannot say whether complete stupefaction could be induced without admixture. 34. Evidence of MR. A. B. KIERNANDER, District Superintendent of Police, Minbu. 51. The consumption of hemp drugs is solely confined to natives of India, with whom I have had very little experience, and regret that I am unable to give an opinion. 53. The only case that I know of was that of a Hindu syce in my employ. He frequently indulg- ed in bhang and behaved like an idiot for two or three days at a time. He laid hands quietly on articles he could find and threw them into the well whilst intoxicated; he would not let any one approach him, and climbed up trees to escape being captured. 54. I have had no experience of any such case. 55. I regret that I am unable to give an opinion. 35. Evidence of MR. B. L. CUMBERLAND, District Superintendent of Police, Magwe, Upper Burma. 51. No; moderate use has no connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 52. The excessive use of any of these drugs un- doubtedly leads the poorer classes to commit theft to enable them to purchase the drug. I do not think it leads to crime of any special character. 53. Yes; I have known more than one case in which excessive indulgence has led to stabbing cases, but in these cases there has been previous enmity. 54. No; I think not. 55. No. 36. Evidence of MR. E. G. MCDOUGALL, Officiating District Superintendent of Police, Myingyan, Upper Burma. 51. No; most certainly not No connection whatever in this province. 52. The use of these drugs in most parts of Burma is so infinitesimal, that they have no per- ceptible influence on crime at all. 53. Not that I am aware of. No. 54. No. 55. Perhaps in one case in ten thousand. Yes. vol. vii. 3 G 2
396 37. Evidence of BRIGADE-SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. SINCLAIR, Inspector General of Jails, etc. Oral evidence. I am Inspector-General of Jails with Civil Medical Administration, including hospitals. I have been in Burma since 1871. I have never held charge of Lunatic Asylums and have no special knowledge of insanity. I understand that it was in 1873 that Govern- ment issued a prohibition of ganja. But I am unable to give any information of any value com- paring the state of things before and after that prohibition. I was in military employ until 1873. I know nothing of the use of the drug here. I think, however, that it prevails only to a very limit- ed degree, and that only among natives of India. I found this opinion on the experience I have of a few cases of the discovery of ganja in jails among prisoners who were natives of India. There were no more than two or three such cases in the ten years I had charge of jails. With this exception, I am unable to give any information regarding the use of the drug in Burma. I am therefore unable, from personal observation, to say anything about the effects of the drug. The Lunatic Asylum Report and Returns are en- tirely prepared in the office of the Superintend- ent. I am not responsible for them. I do not always share the Superintendent's views, though I pass on his report. I think that the information on which causes are assigned is generally unreliable. I base this opinion on what I have heard from Superintendents of the grounds on which they make entries. They are anxious to get information and lay hold of anything they get, though it is often of little value. It is difficult to get any in- formation. We often cannot even get the names of individuals. The form prescribed has to be filled in, and the endeavour to do this leads to causes being entered which have not been fully ascertained. The causes in the returns might be shown as un- known where cause is not ascertained. There is really no objection to this. But the impression, if this were largely done, would be that the Superin- tendent was not taking sufficient pains to ascertain what the causes were. I should not like to say that it was a merit to have the entries in the column of " unknown cause " few in number. I see that in the 1884 report I make a comparison with other provinces that would indicate this. The fact is that if the entries were numerous the impres- sion would be unfavourable; I should be inclined to think that the officer was indolent. Since then, however, I attach less weight to the causes shown than I did then. The subject of the connection of the drug with crime has never come before me in my jail ex- perience. I have formed no opinion on the matter. I have no sufficient materials. I believe that if there were any great connection between ganja and crime it would have come to my notice; but that is only an impression. I have no facts on which to base any opinion. My duties give me no opportunity of judging of the working of the system of administration in respect to drugs. 38. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL O. BAKER, Civil Surgeon, Rangoon. Oral evidence. I have been over twenty years in the service and for nineteen years in Burma in civil employ. I have had no special training in lunacy and no special experience in lunacy. I have had charge of this asylum only for a little over two months. I had never to my knowledge any experience of ganja insanity before I joined the asylum. Last year out of 169 civil lunatics, 72 were admitted from Rangoon. The lunatics from Ran- goon come for observation here; and the medical certificate is made out here. They come with a statement from the police, which is frequently quite blank, every entry being filled in as " Not known " or "Nil." The only case of insanity ascribed to ganja which has come to the asylum since I joined is that of Abdul Kadar. He was sent merely with a letter asking that he be kept under examination. No information was sent with him. The Assistant Surgeon, Moung Thin, filled in the Case Book after seeing the man's friends. I did not see the friends. The friends very rarely come at all; and they cannot be kept. In this case I did not see them. The Assistant Surgeon entered "ganja eating" as the exciting cause, no predisposing cause being given; and the following entry Occurs three days after the man's admission: 397 39. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL P. N. MOOKERJEE, Civil Surgeon, Sagaing, Upper Burma. 1. My knowledge of the drug is chiefly obtained from what I have seen of their use in India. 2. In Burma no one is allowed to cultivate, manufacture, sell or possess either ganja, charas or bhang. The Burmans in Upper Burma at least do not use these drugs. It is only used by the natives of India surreptitiously. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 23. I have never heard of bhang being used for smoking. 28. Habitual moderate consumers take about four grains of charas, fifteen grains of ganja and about thirty grains of bhang leaves for a dose twice daily. Habitual excessive smokers take five, six or more times the above quantities. 29. Ganja and charas are smoked mixed with tobacco only. Bhang is sometimes taken by itself, but ordinarily mixed with the following: 398 servation. Besides the point of heredity, I con- sulted the man's Medical Sheet, which was all right. That was all the enquiry I made, and I thought that was sufficient to exhaust other causes. The medical history sheet only covered the period of his service, about four years. I had no knowledge of his medical history before that time. This is the only case of true insanity from the hemp drugs which I have known. The other cases referred to in my answer to question 45 were slighter, and I cannot say if they were due to moderate or exces- sive use of the drug. Among the slight cases I remember a young sepoy going off his head and walking round the mess table. After two days he was all right. He said he was off his head, and did not know what he was doing, and the sepoys said his condition was due to ganja. He himself denied that he had smoked ganja. The sepoys said lie had smoked on that occasion, not that he was an habitual smoker. Under the in- fluence of alcohol, people do not behave in the same way. You might say that the above sepoy was intoxicated with ganja, not rendered insane. My experience of hemp drug insanity is confined there- fore to one case. My answer to question 46 is based on that case. 40. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR S. H. DANTRA, Civil Surgeon, Mandalay. 1. Having come across consumers of drugs in gaols, military police and regiments. 2. These definitions are quite in accordance with my knowledge of the drugs. I am not acquainted with these varieties. I have only known of one kind, viz the dried flowering tops, etc. 19. As far as my knowledge goes, ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 23. Bhang is generally used for drinking, but very rarely, when ganja and charas (both of which are dearer than bhang) are not obtainable, it is smoked by poorer classes. Smoking bhang is not restricted to any locality or class of people as far as I know. 28. (a) About twenty grains, worth one anna in Burma, and half an anna in India; (b) Varies a great deal, bat about a drachm in majority of cases, costing from two to three annas. 29. Ordinarily ganja and charas are mixed with tobacco; and bhang is mixed with bhang massala. Exceptionally the first two are mixed with dhatura and nux-vomica; may be with cantha- rides or betel-nut, but never with opium. The object of mixing ganja and charas with to- bacco is to increase the quantity and prolong smok- ing by the poorer classes. Bhang is never drunk alone, but always with massala, which is supposed to produce a nice cooling feeling in the stomach. Dhatura is mixed with ganja and charas by jogis and ascetics with a view to increase the effect of the latter two and reduce their virile power. The object of nux-vomica I am not in a position to say. The number of ingredients used to form bhang massala varies a great deal. It ranges from black and white pepper, sugar and milk, to poppy seeds, seeds of water-melon, almond, pumpkin seeds, dried rose petals, fennel seeds, sugarcandy, corian- der, cardamoms, etc. 30. These drugs are not used by all classes of people, but those who do use, are in the following proportion: 399 very passive nature. It creates appetite, but at the same time if he does not get food at once, he can bear hunger for some time without much distress or discomfort. The duration of the effect varies according to the dose and susceptibility of the individual, but generally it lasts from two to four hours. 45. (b) It makes one thin. (c) It interferes with digestion so far that he does not take the same quantity of food, but somewhat less. (d) It neither causes dysentery nor asthma, but it produces cough. (e) It does not impair moral sense; excess induces laziness, but in moderation it is quite the reverse. (f) Small dose excites sexual desire, but excess has quite contrary effect. In excess it deadens intellect and produces insanity, and appears to be merely as an exciting cause. The types of insanity are in majority of cases acute mania, and in a few, melancholia, and it is generally tempor- ary, but is apt to recur by using the drug again. (g) No, not in the majority of cases. It may be in a very few cases. 16. Already discussed. 47 and 48. No. 49. (a) Yes. (b)Yes. (c) Yes, by indulging in excessive venery. (d) Excessive use of hemp produces impotence without fail. 50. Discussed already. 56. When sufficient quantity of hemp is not procurable on account of its heavy cost, tobacco is mixed with charas and ganja with a view to aug- ment their effect at less expense. Besides, smok- ing a large quantity of charas and ganja is sup- posed to be more injurious than smoking a mixture of these with tobacco. Dhatura is mixed with these by jogis with a view to bring about impo- tency. I am not aware of the practice of mixing any of the other drugs. Bhang massala is used with bhang with the object of its being a nervine tonic and it being very exhilarating. 57. Vide 39 already answered. Oral evidence. Question 1.400 28. I have had no means of ascertaining this. 29. I understand that tobacco and betel-leaf are mixed with ganja for smoking purposes. I have no knowledge of the preparation (bhang massala). 30. The consumption of ganja is, I believe, chiefly practised in solitude and principally by males, but female prostitutes are addicted to the habit. 31. I have so little experience that I am unable to give any reliable information on these points from personal observation. 32. I know of none. 36. I have no data on which to form an opinion on this point. In this country, ganja is only used by a few natives of India. The possession of the drug is entirely prohibited, but that it is used is proved by the fact that individuals are occasionally detected with considerable quantities. 37. I have had no opportunity of comparing the effects of these different preparations. 40. Not that I am aware of. I cannot say. 41. I have not had sufficient experience with reference to the action of the drug to give any reliable information on these points. 42. The above reply applies to this question also. 44. I have never had a habitual consumer of ganja, under observation; and cannot therefore reply to these queries. 45. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. In the few cases I have met with, the subjects have been thin and anæmic. When the habit is carried to excess, it appears to injure digestion. (d) I am not aware that it causes either dysen- tery, bronchitis or asthma. (e) It certainly impairs the moral sense and induces habits of laziness. (f) It perverts the intellect and produces in- sanity. I have not had cases of toxic insanity from this cause under treatment, and therefore am unable to give an opinion as to whether the abuse of the drug was the exciting or predisposing cause. The form of insanity is chiefly maniacal. 46, 47 and 48. My want of personal experience debars me from discussing these questions. 49. The drug has a reputation as an aphrodisiac and is used by natives of India, who are prostitutes, probably to stimulate the sexual appetite. 50. My knowledge of the effects of the drug is too slender to enable me to do so. 56. My knowledge of the effects of the drug is too slender to enable me to do so. 57. In the few cases I have met with, the drug is chiefly employed for smoking. In conclusion, the drug is entirely prohibited in this province. I cannot recall an instance in my own experience in which a Burman was addicted to the use of hemp in any form. Want of experience therefore precludes me from giving any useful information regarding its uses and effects from personal experience. 42. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR G. T. THOMAS, Civil Surgeon, Moulmein. 1. My experience of these drugs is very limited; they are not used at all in South India, where I never saw any cases for eleven years; and in Burma, except from two or three Indian prisoners, I can gather no information from persons who have used these drugs. These drugs are obtained privately by natives of India, but now it is practically not known to the Burmese, who use opium, if possible. Charas in Burmese S401 46. By excessive use these drugs undoubtedly may cause insanity. In moderate doses it enables natives of India to undergo a great amount of physical labour which otherwise they could not. 47. Not that I know of. 48. Not to my knowledge. 49. Some Northern Indian races take these drugs as aphrodisiacs: and prostitutes use them. Large and continuous doses would produce impotence. 50. In excessive and long-continued doses these drugs would act in the reverse way to paragraph 49. 57. No differences known as to effects by eating or drinking these drugs. 43. Evidence of SURGEON-CAPTAIN R. E. S. DAVIS, Superintendent, Central Prison, Rangoon. 1. Only from observation of prisoners and cri- minal lunatics who have been addicted to the habit. 19. The ganja smokers I have come across make little or no distinction between ganja and charas, but my experience is very limited. 31. As far as my information goes, the habit is easily formed and difficult to break off. There appears not to be any great tendency to develop the habit to excess. I am not in a position to give any definite opinion. 44. It would appear to be refreshing and sooth- ing. It certainly does, in some instances, produce some intoxication. 45. I have met two well-marked cases of insanity, which were apparently caused by abuse of this habit. In neither case was I able to obtain reliable information, on which I could base an opinion as to the mental state before the habit began. I have no doubt whatever that persons of a neurotic diathesis might find this habit the starting point of mental disease. Oral evidence. Question 1.402 46, 47 and 48. Do not know. 49. I have heard of its being used for such purposes, but do not know of any special cases. The rest of the questions I am unable to give an opinion. 50. Do not know. 57. My experience is limited on this question, and the only cases that I can recall now are those which I saw occurring at festivals, where some of the men both eat and drink ganja to an excess which subsequently acts on their constitutions and produces evil results. 45. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON O. L. MOONSHI, Civil Surgeon and Superin- tendent of Jail, Maubin, Thongwa District. 1. As the ganja is not much consumed by the people of Lower Burma, my experience on the subject is limited. The information furnished in the accompanying answers is chiefly based on ex- perience of the usage of the drug amongst the people of Lower Bengal. 2. The definititions given by Dr. Prain of the three narcotic articles obtained from hemp plant in India cannot be accepted for this province, inas- much as, except the ganja, charas and siddhi are seldom used by Burmese. Ganja is locally known as " saykyouk " or dry tobacco. 19. Ganja is used only for smoking. 23. Unable to give any information on this sub- ject. 28. Unable to give any information on this subject, as I have seldom come across habitual or excessive consumers of ganja amongst the Burmese. 29. In India siddhi or bhang is ordinarily mixed with coriander and cardamom to give it flavour, and exceptionally with sugar to add to its intoxicating effects. Dhatura is ordinarily mixed with ganja by thugs or highway robbers, and administered to their victims with a view of inducing temporary unconsciousness so as to facilitate their object of plunder. No; I do not know of bhang mussala. 30. The consumption of these drugs mostly practised in company, and. chiefly confined to male adults. The female sex occasionally partake of bhang; children seldom consuming any of these drugs. 31. Yes; the habit is easily formed and difficult to break off, as in the case of any other narcotic drug, e.g., opium, alcohol, etc. There is always a tendency in ganja also to lead from moderation to excess in its use. 32. I am not aware of any amongst the Burmese, but amongst Hindus siddhi is used on the fourth day of the greatest Hindu festival called Bijaya, and the custom is regarded as essential. It is always temperate, and not likely to lead to the formation of the habit or otherwise injurious. 36. I do not think that alcohol is now to any extent being substituted for any of the drugs, nor do I think it ever will, for alcohol is dear, ganja cheap. Half an anna worth ganja will produce intoxication in a beginner, whereas half an anna worth alcohol will fail to produce that effect. 37. The only difference in the effects of the use of these drugs is one of degree: ganja producing the strongest effects, and siddhi the least. 39. Instead of smoking ganja or charas being less injurious than drinking or eating the same, I am inclined to think that it is more so, for obvi- ous physiological reasons which it is unnecessary to discuss here. 40. Except bhang, which is prescribed by native doctors as a vehicle in cases of diarrh403 instances the mental powers have sustained an irreparable damage. I am not aware of any cases of temporary insani- ty reinduced by the use of the drug after libera- tion from restraint. The latter part of the ques- tion I am unable to answer satisfactorily, as I have known none who had had to indulge in the abuse of the drug to obtain relief from mental anxiety or brain disease. 46. Habitual excessive use of any of these drugs will undoubtedly deteriorate the health, produce serious gastro-intestinal disorder, lead to im- morality and finally drag its victim to the gates of an asylum. 47. Assuredly not. 48. Same remarks as the above apply here. 49. Yes; it is used as an aphrodisiac. The prostitutes use it also for the purpose, but to a less extent than the alcohol. I do not consider that its moderate use as an aphrodisiac is attended with more injurious consequences than its use as a narcotic, because the same quantity would answer both the purposes. I have known no instances of importance resulting from the use of hemp. 50. Its excessive use as an aphrodisiac will certainly produce all those ill-effects of its abuse as a narcotic. 56. When adulterated with dhatura and other narcotics, it will produce deleterious effects on the system whether used in moderation or excess. As already stated, except the administration of dhatura with ganja by thugs to increase its narcotic effects, I know of no other substances that are added to it to modify its effects. Both ganja and charas are usually used with tobacco as a vehicle for smoking. 57. I know of no instances where it is either eaten or drunk. Oral evidence. 1. I belong to the Indian Medical Department, and have been twenty-one years in the service. I took the degree of L. M. S. at the Calcutta Uni- versity in 1872. The first five years of my service were passed in Bengal and the last sixteen in Burma. I have never held charge of a lunatic asylum, and have had no special experience in lunacy. 45. My answer refers to the period during which I was Assistant Surgeon in Bengal. One case was a relation of my own, who began smoking at an early age and finished in the lunatic asylum. He began to smoke at the age of 16, used to take 15 chillums a day, and went mad after ten years' in- dulgence in this habit. He lived close to me, and I knew him almost from childhood. I was about 15 years of age when he began to smoke, and I was a Civil Surgeon in Bengal when he went mad. He and I lived as neighbours for six years after he began smoking, but the last four years of his history before he went mad was only known to me by hearsay. As we were closely related, I continued to know all about his habits. I am confident there was no other cause of insanity but the ganja. The first six years of his smoking produced no symptom of insanity, but he neglected his studies and took to bad com- pany. The low company he frequented was not criminal, but was vicious. He may also have fol- lowed vicious and licentious courses, but I did not attribute his madness to his licentious courses, be- cause many of the company followed the same courses and did not go mad. I have read of sexual indulgence as being one of the principal causes of insanity, and our Shastras contain the same teach- ing. I do not think the moderate use of ganja will cause insanity, because I have known innumerable moderate smokers who have not become insane. The insanity generally takes the form of mania. Mania can be produced by spirit drinking, sexual excess, grief, fear, and many other causes. In. the present case there were six years of ganja smoking followed by four years of sexual excess in addition to the ganja habit. The ganja smoking was the exciting cause of insanity. I was not present when the man went mad, but I ascribe the insanity main- ly to ganja smoking, because I saw no other pre- disposing cause. I could not differentiate between insanity due to ganja and that due to sexual excess, but in this case attributed it to the former cause because others had indulged in sexual excess with- out going mad. The others also went in for ganja smoking, but not to the same extent as this boy. I knew them all as they belonged to my village, and am therefore able to make this statement. I could not say whether they indulged in sexual ex- cess to the same extent as this boy. The case went to the lunatic asylum, but I don't remember which asylum. The man is dead long ago. In the Gaya district I saw one or two cases. They were not, however, very bad cases, being partial aberration of mind. They occurred seventeen years ago. The cases came under my treatment as out- door patients, and on my enquiring the cause of their insanity I was told that it was excessive use of ganja. They were not under my observation for any length of time. I am not certain that these cases were due to ganja, as I am in the other case previously described. 46. Evidence of MAHENDRA NATH ROY, Resident Medical Officer, General Hospital, Rangoon. 1. My information is from404 prepared by kneading on the palm of the hand. This, I believe, makes it less pungent. Charas is put into a capsule of prepared tobacco (used in Bengal for smoking), and then put on fire, which melts the charas and thereby gets it mixed with the tobacco. This has also the same effect. Bhang is used with black pepper, aniseed, rose petals, cucumber seeds, milk and sugar. These are supposed to have a cooling effect, but the term is used rather vaguely. Dhatura, opium, nux-vomica, cantharides or betel-nut is not used. Bhang massala is sold in Calcutta for the purpose of its being mixed with bhang, and is composed of black pepper, aniseed and rose petals. 30. Ganja and charas smoking is considered de- grading in the Bengal society, and consequently they are not smoked in public; but when smokers meet they smoke together, and generally there is a place where they meet and smoke. Bhang is consumed in public, as sanctioned in the social custom mentioned under paragraph 32; but it must be mentioned that a son using anything intoxicating (even smoking common tobacco) before his father or men of that position is not sanctioned by good manners. I have not seen ganja or char- as used by females or males in their minority, nor have I seen bhang being used by minor males. Females seldom use bhang during the above-men- tioned social custom. 31. I am unable to answer. 32. There is a social custom in Bengal under which bhang is used on the fourth day of Durga Puja (the biggest of all Hindu religious ceremonies held in Bengal about September or October). Hindus re- turning home after throwing the idol into water, visit and embrace each other. During these visits bhang, prepared into a syrup with the ingredients mentioned under paragraph 29, is offered as well as sweets. It is not essentially necessary to drink the bhang thus offered. It is generally temperate, but as it is used once only in a year, and as there is no definite rule about the strength, people sometimes find the amount of intoxication produced undesir- able. I have never seen any injurious effect produced by this custom, neither have I seen any one being habitual consumer of the drug. 36. None that I am aware of. Use of alcohol is very rare in my part of Bengal, but then alcohol shops are few and far between. 37 and 39. I am unable to answer. 40. Bhang is used as medicine by kabirajes, and as a family medicine in diseases of the digestive organs. Ganja is used in cattle disease. 41. From my limited experience I am of opini- on that all the three in moderate doses are405 much eaten, and this might be a probable cause. Dr. Baker altered the entry again to "unknown" after consulting Dr. Dantra, and obtaining his consent. 48. Evidence of SONA MULL, Brahmin, First Grade Hospital Assistant, in medical charge of Dispensary and Jail, Myanaung. 1. My answers are framed according to my own experience. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking; but sometimes, if a habitual bhang drinker can- not get bhang, he will use ganja for drinking; and in places where ganja is expensive or not easily procurable, such as in Burma, people often drink ganja instead of smoking, as a small quan- tity will be sufficient to intoxicate, while more is required for smoking. 23. I have never noticed that bhang is used for smoking. 28. BHANG. GANJA. CHARAS. Allowance per diem. Cost per diem. Allow- ance per diem. Cost per diem. Allow- ance per diem. Cost per diem. Moderate 1 to 2 tolas 3 pies ½ tola 1 anna ¼ tola 1 anna. Excess 5 to 10 tolas 9 pies 2 tolas 4 annas 1 tola 4 annas. 29. I have never noticed if any ingredients, such as dhatura, nux-vomica, opium, cantharides or betel-nut are mixed with ganja and charas. The following ingredients, called bhang massala, are mixed with bhang before it is prepared for drinking, viz., aniseed, black pepper, cucumber seeds, water-melon seeds, poppy-head seeds, and almonds. 30. The drugs are generally confined to the male sex, with the exception of some bad women. I have never known children to consume these drugs. 31. It is easily formed and can be easily broken off. Yes, the moderate habit of using these drugs will gradually run into excess. 32. There is no social or religious custom that I am aware for the consumption of these drugs. It is likely to lead to the formation of a habit, and it is injurious if taken in excess. 36. I don't think that alcohol is substituted for these drugs, because, first, alcohol is more expensive; second, most of the people who are in the habit of using these drugs are Hindus and Muhammadans, who, on account of caste prejudice, don't like to take alcohol. 37. The effect of charas smoking is the same as ganja. The effect of bhang drinking is milder than that of smoking charas and ganja, and has a more astringent effect. 39. In my opinion the smoking of any prepara- ration of the hemp plant is not less injurious than eating and drinking of the same, because in both ways it will affect the nervous system. 40. I have seen in my country, Punjab, native doctors sometimes prescribe bhang drinking for menorrhægia, dysentery, insomnia, some forms of dyspepsia; and barbers generally give bhang to drink to Muhammadan boys before the operation of circumcision. I have never seen any one prescrib- ing ganja or charas for any Bhang is sometimes used by the natives of India on cattle for stomach diseases. 41. The moderate use of charas, ganja and bhang is effectual as digestives, in alleviating fatigue, and as a nervine stimulant, but tem- porarily. 42. The moderate use of any of these drugs is harmless, as people using these drugs in small quantity once or or twice daily don't suffer any ill effects. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of these drugs is refreshing and produces intoxication. It creates appetite. The effect lasts about four hours. The want of subsequent gratification pro- duces longing and uneasiness. 45. I have never seen a man suffer bad effects by moderate use of these drugs. The moderate use does not cause dysentery and bronchitis, but produces laziness. About live years ago a police constable, a native of India, was under my treat- ment suffering from mania said to have been caused by excessive use of ganja smoking and bhang drinking. He was sent to the lunatic asylum. In 1877, while I was doing duty in the 8th Regiment, Madras Native Infantry, I recollect a Madrasi sepoy died suddenly as soon as he re- turned from ball fire. On enquiry it was reported that he had a smoke of ganja before he started at 6 A.M. and had another smoke on his return at 11 A. M. This man was a habitual ganja smoker; cannot say whether moderate or in excess. No post mortem was held. 47 and 48. The habitual moderate use of these drugs does not appear to be a hereditary habit, and does not affect the children of the moderate con- sumer. 49. The moderate use of these drugs is practised as an aphrodisiac, and its use for this purpose is really injurious. The sexual desire which is pro- duced by the use of hemp drugs is false and tem- porary. 50. The excessive use of these drugs is sure to produce impotency. 57. I have seen people eat and drink ganja sometimes, when they do not get bhang, who are in the habit of drinking it. In conclusion, I beg to say, although the moderate use of the above drugs is harmless, they produce laziness and stupidity, and there is always a tendency of the moderate smoker and drinker to develop into excess, which is injurious to the con- stitution, and makes the man useless for any- labour. Therefore I think it will be good for the public if the sale of these drugs be stopped.
406 49.Evidence of the RIGHT REV. DR. STRACHAN, Bishop of Rangoon. Oral evidence. I have been in the Madras Presidency for twenty-two years, and over eleven years in Burma. I was a Missionary in Tinnevelly, and afterwards Secretary to the S. P. G. Mission in Madras. I have since been Bishop of Rangoon. I lived among the people in the Madras Presidency, at one time being seven miles from any European. My experience was in Tinnevelly, Ramnad, and Madras itself. I am also M. D. of Edinburgh University and did medical work as a Misisonary. For years I was five hours a day in my hospital. I suppose I must have prescribed from 300 to 500 thousand times for natives. My experience with regard to the hemp drug preparations is absolutely nil. First of all, amongst the people of the extreme south of India, who consist to a great extent of the Shanar caste, the drug was not used at all. I never remember to have met any case where I had reason to believe that the drug had been used during my experi- ence in Tinnevelly. In Madras itself there were a few cases where the patient came and I was led to ask questions as to the use of the hemp drug. I have never had a case where a patient came to be treated for the results of the drug; but I have had in Madras six or eight cases at the most, where I was led by the symptoms to ask questions as to the use. The use was admitted in one or two cases. But still I could not certainly trace the symptoms as the effect of the drugs. I have left all my records in the various hospitals, and besides, the cases are too few to establish any conclusion. In one or two cases the connection of the symptoms with hemp drugs was so far estab- lished that, though the patient complained of something else, I treated the drugs as the origo There seemed to me nervous symptoms, so to say, artificially produced. There was no insanity. But I saw signs, as I thought, of softening of the brain in one case. The excitability displayed led me to infer that the disease of the brain was caused by the man's habits; and this led me to make enqui- ries, the result of which caused me to associate the symptoms with constant use of the drug. It was a mere impression. There are many other causes which might produce these symptoms; but by questioning one eliminates certain causes and is able to say: " In this such seems to be the cause." This case occurred about 1875 or 1876. So far as I remember, I eliminated other causes. I do not remember the treatment I followed; but I recollect the diagnosis. I think there were one or two more cases in Madras in which my impres- sion was that brain disease was traceable to hemp. drugs. In those cases I found no history of liquor. Though liquor is more common than ganja in Madras, I found no liquor history in these cases. I have never read of brain changes from ganja; but I presume they might result from it as they do from liquor. At all events, I diagnosed them as far as I could judge. At the same time my experience of hemp has been too limited to give any opinion on the effects of hemp drugs. Then it must be borne in mind that, though my hospital experience of hemp was small, there may have been more in military or police hospitals, and so on. My observation in respect to Southern India, so far as it goes, is that the drug is hardly used at all, i.e., in the Madras Presidency. The drug has never in any way forced itself on my notice in my itinerating work. It has never come before me as one of the evils with which a missionary has to deal. And in my missionary vists to villages, when listen- ing to quarrels and so on, I have never found any of this set down to hemp drugs. In Burma the hemp drug has never come into my experience. It has attracted my attention only from the reports I have read in regard to smuggling of ganja. I received copies of the questions of the Commission to distribute. I distributed ten copies, but only received one answer. I have since enquired, and am told that Burmans never use the drug. I have never my- self met a Burman who did. I should say from what I hear that there must be difficulty in getting the drug by natives of India, but that there is much brought in. My impression is that there has been increase of smuggling; but that may be due to hearing of more seizures. My impression is that scarcely a steamer of the B. I. S. N. Company comes in without some ganja. The company do not approve; but the stuff gets on board their boats. But I have never seen the drug used at all since I came to Burma. From my limited experience in Madras, I feel difficulty in saying anything definitely; but, gene- rally speaking, I may say that it is always diffi- cult to interfere with the intoxicant of a nation, and that it is unwise to do this without very grave necessity. I think further that there seems to be a physiological necessity for some kind of artificial stimulant in the human race. And it is a very seri- ous matter to attempt to interfere by force with the habits of a race or people in regard to their stimulants. It has to be done with the greatest caution. 50. Evidence of SAW MAUNG, ex-Sawbwa of Nyaungywe State. Oral evidence. Fort Stedman is in the Nyaungywe State. The State is about 60 English miles in length from north to south by 28 in breadth from east to west. The Danu country borders on the State, and some Danu villages are within it. The name of the capital of the State is Nyaungywe, and it is near Fort Stedman. The hemp plant, bhen bin, is used but little for the drug, and principally for its fibre in the State. The Shan people only grow a few plants here and there, but the Palaungs, Kachins and Lawas culti- vate it in fields to a very small extent. The occa- sional plants grown by the Shans are used for the drug. The more extensive cultivation by the other classes is for the fibre. Each patch of this cultiva- tion would be less than the area of this hall (60 by 35 feet), and nearly every house would have a plot. The drug is not made from this cultivation, and the plant thus grown for fibre is called "gom bin." The fibre is used in the house of the grower and it is not sold. The "bhen bin" and "gom bin " are precisely the same plant. I do not know if the male plant is removed when the plant is grown as a narcotic by the Shans; but the stem of
407 the plant is split and a piece of wood is inserted, and. a chatty or other vessel is suspended over the flower head to prevent the plant growing and make the head grow thick. All the plants grown for the drug are treated in this way. The chatty remains suspended over the plant for about a month. The stem is split when it has grown about as thick as the finger, and the plant is cut down a month after. I have never seen the seeds of the plant; but I have seen the plant growing. The plant grows to a height of about 7 or 8 feet, and is propagated by seed. I have never heard of the seeds being consumed. When the head and its leaves become dried, the " séjouk " is fit for use. There is no process of preparing the flower head for storage; it is stored as it is gathered. No part of the plant below the incision is turned to use, not even for fibre, because the stem is crooked and the fibre is spoilt by the splitting of the stem. I don't think the head contains any seeds. About six or seven bunches or heads are taken from each plant. The branches of the plant are pressed together and thrust into the neck of the chatty, which latter is about a foot in diameter. The chatty is made of mud and is light, but baskets are generally used. The chatty or basket is supported by the plant it- self. The bunch on the leading shoot is regarded as the best in quality. This cultivation would not be found in every Shan village. Among the Shans about two men out of a hun- dred smoke the drug; women never smoke it. The drug is used in three different ways. The drug is cut into shreds, mixed with tobacco and smoked in the cigar. It is not washed or prepared before mixing with tobacco. I can't say in what propor- tion it is mixed with tobacco. The cigars in which it is smoked are very small, about the size of a cigarette. The smoke is inhaled into the lungs. Tobacco is not inhaled in the same way. The drug is sometimes smoked unmixed, rolled up into a cigar. I have seen it so smoked, and the cigarette is half the size of that in which the drug mixed with tobacco is smoked. The "tanape" leaf is the covering of the cigar, the same as that used for the tobacco cigar. The drug is sometimes mixed in curries. It is also used medicinally, mixed with other drugs, in treatment of debility and dyspepsia. It is not used in the treatment of fever, but as a protection against malaria. I don't know if it is used for dysentery. I do not know of its being used for cattle; but I have heard that it is given to elephants when they become lean and weak. The drug in small quantity is exhilarating, but in large doses the user becomes timid. I have heard that, taken in excess, it causes madness. I have seen a man become temporarily mad from an excessive dose. The man is frightened at every- thing he sees, and therefore I call it madness. Such a man will scream at a post, thinking it is about to fall upon him. He will remain in this state for five or six days without a fresh dose. I have never known any one become permanently mad from the drug. I have never heard of any other drug being mixed with " sèjouk" to increase its strength. The people of the Danu villages within the State grow and use the drug in the same way as the Shans do. They do not grow the plant for fibre. I never heard of the drug being taken in the form of drink. Since the Shans are Buddhists, all intoxicating drugs were prohibited in the Nyaungywe State. The hemp drug was only allowed to be grown for medicinal purposes. For the first offence an offend- er would be lightly punished, on a second convic- tion he would be imprisoned. The State did not take any special steps for enforcing the prohibition. I used occasionally to punish offenders myself, but the punishment was always very light. I think it would be possible to put down the cultivation by severe measures. There would be no strong feeling against such measures, because, unlike opium, the habit of using hemp can be easily broken. People would smoke tobacco if deprived of hemp. " Sèjouk" is never sold out of the State. People grow it only for their own use, and sometimes it is given to friends. 51. Evidence of KUNGYI, uncle of Sawbwa of Hsipan (Thibaw). Oral evidence. The State of Hsipan (Thibaw) is north-east of Mandalay. I am uncle of the chief and his princi- pal adviser. The hemp plant is not cultivated in our State for narcotic purposes, so far as I know. It may be, but I do not know. The Kachins grow the plant for fibre, but there are no Kachins in our State. I have never seen the drug used in the State, but I believe that it is used both for smoking and also in curry. The use is not pro- hibited in the State, because there is no need to prohibit the use. The subject has never come up for any administrative action. It has never occur- ed to me to have it prohibited, for, though there may be use of the drug, I do not think there is in our State. 52. Evidence of KINWUN MINGYI, C. S. I., Prime Minister to the late Govern- ment of Burma. Oral evidence. Under the Burmese Government the hemp drug was under prohibition because it was one of the things prohibited by the Buddhist religion. The prohibition was enforced by light punishments. For the first offence the offender would be warned, and surety for good behaviour taken from him. For a repeated offence the offender would be im- prisoned. Offences were brought to light by the officers of police. No special orders on the subject were issued to the police, but the people knew they were not allowed to indulge in intoxicating drugs. As Prime Minister, I had no personal connection with such cases, and I do not therefore know how the prosecutions originated. I have known people to be punished for breach of this prohibition, but the punishments were awarded by the Police Magis- trate. No special law on the subject was passed during my tenure of office as Prime Minister. The cultivation of the plant was not prohibited, but the prohibition was against the use. I have seen the plant when I was young, but I should not be able to recognize it in the field now. I never heard of
408 its being cultivated anywhere in Burma under Burmese rule. I never heard of the drug being used in the palace mixed with tobacco in cigarettes. It is possible it was used, but I do not think it could have been. I never heard of its being used by any servants of the king. There were some natives of India living in Mandalay under Burmese rule. I never heard of their using hemp, but if they broke the laws they were dealt with by the British Resident, The prohibition against hemp would not apply to them. 53. Evidence of MYOWUN U. PE SI, C.I.E., late Town Magistrate of Mandalay. Oral evidence. I was Town Magistrate of Mandalay during the Burman Rule for seventeen years. During the Burmese time, the person who drank liquor would be dealt with severely: the opium consumer less severely, and the ganja smoker would be least severely punishable. Drink was most severely punished, because the man who takes liquor is violent and quarrelsome. Ganja makes a man more jocose and not violent. Opium is more ex- pensive than ganja and more difficult to give up as a habit, and was therefore thought a worse habit. I think also that the man who uses opium becomes a lazy man and unfit to do anything. The ganja consumer does not; and a man does not get into the habit of smoking ganja, as in the case of opium, so as to be unable to give it up. But all three were prohibited. The prohibition originates in religion, but the king sanctioned it. No special measures were taken to enforce the prohibition; but when people were found using the drug they were punished with a light punishment. The police might find them; but they had no special order to search out the use of this drug. But it was the practice to read the general prohibition of intoxi- cants every month at fasts along with the other moral laws sanctioned by the king. The police, however, had no special orders to search out such cases. Only if people became noisy or otherwise attracted notice the police would interfere. One or two cases of prosecution for use of intoxicants might occur in this town in a year. The prohibition regarding the use of ganja would not extend to cultivation. Before becoming Town Magistrate I was a Commissioner on the southern border of Upper Burma. There was cultivation, but very little. There would not be more than a plant in a hundred houses. There was no part where I knew of cultivation being more extensive than any other. I heard that ganja was also imported from the Shan States, but I did not know that of per- sonal knowledge. I cannot speak to the extent of the use in the country generally. In Mandalay perhaps about fifteen or twenty in the whole city were convicted of having used it. I mean fifteen or twenty Burmans. Hindus and other natives of India use the drug much more than Burmans. It was always obtainable at shops where people sell medical drugs. There was no prohibition against sale of the drug at all. The prohibition is only against use. Notwith- standing this prohibition, the ganja was used in small doses in pipes through water and also in cigars and. also sometimes without tobacco in cigarette form by all classes, even by persons employed in the palace itself. This pipe was never used for tobacco and not frequently for ganja. Ganja was more gener- ally smoked in a cigar. Ganja was not widely used; not many people used it, but some did of all classes. In the palace it was only secretly used, The man smoking it would draw his smoke into his mouth and blow it into the hole in the floor made for spitting into, so that the smell might not get abroad. This was not ordinarily done with tobacco. I have seen cases in which persons got mad for a few days from ganja; but I have not heard of cases in which a man got mad permanently from using ganja. As City Magistrate I dealt with insane persons. I never had any person perma- nently mad from ganja before me. I saw about ten cases in a year of temporary madness from the- use of ganja during the seventeen years of my office. They were mostly of the lowest class of Burmans. The insanity did not last even an hour, generally about fifteen minutes. Some of these cases were brought before me as a Magistrate and some I saw privately. About three or four hun- dred persons intoxicated from liquor would be brought before me as a Magistrate in a year. About twice as many people were found intoxicat- ed from opium than from ganja. When I said before that there were only " one or two cases of pro- secution for use of intoxicants in a year," I meant cases in which there were complainants owing to assaults having been committed, and so on. My jurisdiction extended considerably beyond the city of Mandalay.
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission VOL. VII. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM BOMBAY, SIND, BERAR, AJMERE, COORG, BALUCHISTAN, AND BURMA. TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74911896.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894. Price Two Rupees Eight Annas.
