NOTES ON THE PROPAGATION AND CULTIVATION OF THE MEDICINAL CINCHONAS, OR PERUVIAN BARK TREE.
IP/25/BC.2 m. 91. e
NOTES ON THE PROPAGATION AND CULTIVATION OF THE MEDICINAL CINCHONAS, OR PERUVIAN BARK TREES. Printed and Published by Order of the Government of Madras. BY WILLIAM GRAHAM McIVOR, F.R.G.S., C.M.R.B.S.E., SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT CINCHONA PLANTATIONS AND BOTANICAL GARDENS, NEILGHERRIES. MADRAS: PRINTED BY GANTZ BROTHERS, AT THE ADELPHI PRESS, 175, MOUNT ROAD. 1867.
CONTENTS. PARAS. Alkaloids, formation of, in the plant 39, 40 Alkaloids, oxydation and waste of, by the action of light 41 Aspect of Plantations 5 Bark, first harvest of 34ii PARAS. Propagation by cuttings 15NOTES ON THE PROPAGATION AND CULTIVATION OF THE MEDICINAL CINCHONA OR PERUVIAN BARK TREES. IN submitting to the public a brief outline of my experience in the cultivation of these valuable plants, I would observe that I do not presume to furnish a complete guide to their management, as, before this can be done, much has yet to be ascertained of the requirements of the plants under cultivation. My object in this pamphlet is merely to place in the hands of all who are interested in the extension and increase of this valuable product, a knowledge of the management of the plants in their earlier stages, or up to the period to which our experience in their cultivation extends. 2. An almost unlimited number of seeds being now produced by our plants on the Neilgherries, and the Government of Madras having placed the Cinchonas within the reach of the general public, by authorizing their distribution at the low rate of one anna each, the time has, therefore, arrived for the rapid increase of Cinchona cultivation; it however has been felt that the distribution of the plants and seeds might, in many instances, lead to disappointment and failure, if unac- companied by instructions for their cultivation and management. 3. Habit of the Plant.2 shine and free currents of air. The roots of the plants, however, are easily injured, and invariably decay when bruised or bent; hence, in the operation of transplanting, it is of importance, to ensure success, that the roots be placed straight and carefully in the soil. When once fairly established in the ground, (which is not before eighteen months or two years after planting,) the plant is very hardy, the spreading fibrous roots giving it a firm hold of the ground, sufficient to support it against all ordinary storms, and enabling it to bear alike, without injury, seasons of drought or rain; they, however, thrive best in seasons of alternate showers and sunshine. None of the Cinchonas will bear to be shaded by living trees, and therefore should be planted on clear ground, and fully exposed to the light of the sun; this gives the plants a robust habit, which they can never obtain when planted under living shade. 4. Selection of sites for Plantations.3 parch the soil. A northern aspect has also the advantage of preserv- ing a much more uniform temperature than a southern, because the excessive radiation and evaporation on the southern slopes greatly reduces the temperature at night, while in the day they are heated to excess by the action of the sun's rays, striking the surface as they do at nearly right angles. The practical effects of aspect on the plants are so great, that they cannot be overlooked with impunity, and in order to impress this upon the minds of all who may have the selection of localities for Cinchona cultivation, I may mention that the difference of temperature is almost incredible; for example, at this elevation (7,500 feet) a thermometer laid on the surface of the southern face of a hill exposed to the sun at 3 P.M., will frequently indicate from 130º to 140° Fahr.; the same thermometer, if left in its position and examined at 6 A.M., will generally be observed to indicate from 30° to 40° Fahr.; while on a similar slope, if selected with a northern aspect, the thermometer, under the same circumstances, at 3 P.m., will indicate 70° to 80° Fahr., and at 6 A.M. from 40° to 50° Fahr. All authors agree that Cinchona delight in an equable temperature, and this has been unmistakably established by the plants under cultivation. The vital importance of aspect is, therefore, fully explained. While on this subject, it may be observed that a hollow or land-locked valley is also unsuitable to the cultivation of Cinchonas, because the cold air, gene- rated at night on the sides of the neighbouring hills, being of greater specific gravity than the warm air, rolls down and fills the valley, thereby reducing the temperature of the valley to a degree injurious to the plants, especially in the clear winter nights. 6. Sites, Rainfall, or Irrigation.4 November. Long continued rain is decidedly injurious to the health of the plants, as also continued drought; but of the two, the latter is less so, as the plants can be made to thrive well under artificial irriga- tion. When it is necessary to irrigate, the streams should only run in the centre of the rows of trees, allowing the water to reach the roots by percolation, because if the water is allowed to flow near the stems of the plants, it frequently causes them to rot. 7. Elevations.5 knowledge should be disseminated as to the principles of propagation, as the increase and multiplication of every valuable or newly-imported plant form an object of the utmost importance, and by such means only can they be produced in quantities sufficient to test their utility and commercial value. The Cinchonas are propagated by seeds, layers, cuttings, and buds. 10. Propagation by Seeds.6 a bag, and immerse the same in water. When the seeds have been soaked the prescribed time, take the bag out and drain off the water; the seeds will be found to have swollen considerably, and in order to separate them, mix them with about twice their bulk of dry sand. In this way the moisture around the seeds is absorbed, and, on being stir- red gently the seeds separate from each other freely, and intermix with the sand. In this condition they are sown on the surface of the soil in pots (prepared as hereafter described,) and lightly covered over with a mere sprinkling of fine sand. After sowing, the pots are slightly water- ed with the syringe, the watering being repeated in dry weather four or five times a day, in order to maintain uniform moisture. 12. The soil we have used with most advantage in rearing Cin- chona seeds, is composed of leaf-mould, or the earth produced by rotten leaves, sifted and mixed with four times its own volume of sand. The leaf-mould, in the first instance, was exposed to the sun for two or three days, and when thoroughly dry, was heated to about 212° Fahr., order to destroy grubs and larva of insects; after being allowed to cool, watered sufficiently to make it moist, but only to that degree that the particles of soil would not adhere together when pressed firmly with the hand, that is, the earth on being laid down was sufficiently dry to break and fall into its usual form. The leaf-mould and sand in this state of moisture were mixed together, and the pots filled, the surface lightly pressed down, and the seeds sown thereon and covered with a sprinkling of sand, as above described. The pots then plunged into beds of moist sand, sufficient water given to damp the surface, but not to penetrate or consolidate the soil in the pots. Under this treat- ment some of the seeds begin to germinate strongly on the sixteenth day after sowing, others continuing to come up through the space of two months afterwards. One ounce of clean seeds produce, on an average, from 20,000 to 25,000 plants. The principal art appears to be to keep the soil in a uniform state of moisture, but never wet; the least excess of which causes the seeds to mould and damp off, while, as a matter of course, if kept too dry, they become parched up. 13. As soon as the seeds germinate and develop the seed-leaves, they are carefully pricked out into pots filled with fresh earth (prepared as above); this operation is a very delicate one, the seedlings being care- fully raised out of the original seed-pot by means of a small stick with a rectangular notch at the point, to embrace the seed-lobes, as illus- trated at A in Plate I., Figure I, The plant thus removed to the new
7 pot, a hole is made in the earth by a small round stick, and the root placed in the hole is firmly secured in the soil as at B, with the seed- lobes well above the surface. In this way from one to two hun- dred seedlings are transplanted into a nine-inch pot, and then treat- ed, in every respect, the same as the seeds when first sown; that is, they are never watered heavily, the surface being merely sprinkled, and the pots plunged into beds of damp sand to keep the soil in that medium state of moisture as when first placed in the pots. The seedlings should be exposed to free currents of air, especially in moist weather. The necessity for this care is to prevent the seedlings from damping off, to which they are very liable when treated otherwise; it also facilitates their growth and the formation of roots, as the earth in which they are placed being so open that it is readily affected by the action of the atmosphere, and thus kept in the most favorable condition for promoting vegetation. When thus treated, seedlings make an average growth in one year of over thirty inches, while many of those raised and grown on a retentive soil have not attained the height of three inches in the same period. Cinchona seeds germinate best at a tem- perature varying from 65° to 75° Fahr., they will also germinate, though slowly, at a temperature of 55° Fahr., and will sustain a temperature of 80° Fahr.; seedlings raised in a higher temperature than this are weak, and more or less unhealthy. 14. Propagation by Layers.8 the juice, and effectually prevents the ill-effects abovementioned. The layers, when well rooted, are removed from the parent plant, potted off and kept in a close atmosphere for a few days until they become estab- lished. In removing the layers great care must be taken, for if they are cut off before the shoots, shewn in Figure II. at A and B, have at- tained a good size and their leaves fairly developed, the stock or parent plant is almost certain to die off. The reason of this is, the sap flows into the plant with equal vigor, but cannot be elaborated because of the removal of the leaves attached to the layer, and consequently it ferments and causes decay in the parent plant. 15. Propagation by cuttings.9 16. The cuttings are now carefully watched, the surface and the leaves being moistened by a fine syringe when the atmosphere in the frames appears dry; they are, however, never heavily watered, it being very necessary to ensure success to avoid this, as we have invariably found that when the earth is so watered it causes the cuttings to damp off, it also retards their rooting. The cause of this appears to be that the cuttings not only suffer from excess of damp, but when the soil is watered in the usual way after the cuttings are placed in the pots, by its expansion and adhesion from the action of the water, its particles are forced far too close together to be beneficial for the development of roots. With young wood, our losses with cuttings have not averaged three per cent. In removing the cuttings from the stock plants, one or two pairs of loaves and buds should, if possible, be left between the plant and the part cut; this is done in order not to decrease the suc- ceeding supplies of young wood, which would be the case if the cut was made close to the parent stein. Another circumstance very reces- sary to be attended to in order to ensure success, is to be careful to place each cutting, as it is made, into the pot with the cut-end in brick dust or on a piece of dry brick; this must be attended to, because where the cut is made, the juice begins to flow, and this juice, if not immediately absorbed, causes mildew and rot. When the cuttings are placed in the frames, they are exposed to as much light and air as they can bear without flagging, when they begin to flag the cases are of course shut, and the action of the external air cut off. 17. When a large number of plants is produced, and consequent- ly much labor employed in this operation, we have found it necessary, in order to economize and lessen the cost of propagation, to abandon the system of placing the cuttings on a piece of brick as described above. The method then adopted is to fill the pots, as formerly, with prepared soil, but only to within an inch or three-fourths of an inch of the sur- face. This space is then filled up with pounded brick dust, into which the cuttings are inserted, as at A in Figure IV., B representing the stratum of brick dust; C, the ordinary soil; D, moss to facilitate drain- age; E, the potsherd or draining material. Under this treatment of cuttings are found to root freely, while a man can pot off in a day nom four to five times the number he could under the former method. This simple expedient is of great importance in extensive propagating opera- tions, as it reduces the cost to nearly one-fifth of that incurred by placing the end of the cutting on a piece of brick, and at the same time econo-
10 mizes space in the propagating cases. By this system more then three times the number of cuttings can be placed in a four-inch pot. 18. Propagation by Buds.11 section. These pots, prior to use, are dried in the sun, by which they become hard, and in every respect answer the purpose of an ordinary pot; when buried in the soil they become soft by the moisture, and in this condition are easily penetrated by the roots of the plant, but are still sufficiently adhesive to permit of handling without breaking when removing or transplanting the plants. 21. Substitutes for earthen pots.12 degrees, by raising them more and more daily, according as the plants indicate their ability to bear the effects of light and sunshine, the side hurdles being retained where the nurseries are liable to be affected by high winds. 23. The terraces are now again dug over their entire width, with the exception of the pathway at the back, and formed into beds five feet six inches in length, and five feet wide, with a pathway of one foot be- tween each bed. These beds when raked smooth are ready for the recep- tion of the young plants, which are planted four inches apart in rows across the bed, the plants being three inches apart in the row, which gives 300 plants to each bed, or fifteen rows with twenty plants in each; this allows for the spaces lost at the ends of the beds. Of course, the plants in the nurseries require watering when the weather is dry, and even if showery, so long as they are covered with the grass hurdles. In mild showers, it will be found beneficial to the young plants, even if not well established, to remove the grass hurdles while the rain is falling, but they should again be covered immediately the rain ceases. 24. When the plants are transplanted direct from the cutting pots into the nursery, it is desirable, in order to enable the plants to be transplanted without damage to their roots, that a layer of moss be introduced under each line of plants. Figure II, Plate V., A represents a transverse section of the nursery bed with moss as at C, B being the longitudinal section. The manner in which the plants are planted being the same as described in paragraph 30, it being essential to success not to catch the roots of the plants in the hand, as the least bruise destroys them, therefore the plants should invariably be lifted by the leaves. 25. When the plants in the cowdung pots have been established in the hardening cases, they are planted in the nursery beds, as illus- trated at Figure III., Plate V., A being a transverse section of a row of cowdung pots as placed in the beds, and filled in between with earth; B shewing a longitudinal section of the bed, the pots being placed at the distance of two and a half inches apart, and the spaces between them filled up with earth to a level with the stem of the plants. In this way the plants can be removed and transplanted by untrained laborers, without danger of damage to their roots. 26. Cultivation.13 have advocated that the land should be entirely cleared of forest, at least so much of it as is intended to be planted with Cinchonas. In very exposed situations, or such as are subject to occasional storms and high winds, perhaps it might be well to clear patches of a few acres in extent here and there throughout the forest, in order to ensure shelter. The only objection to this system is in the liability of the trees left standing on the borders of the patches to be blown down, and damage the plants within their reach. The system of cultivating the Cinchonas in partially cleared land is liable to the same objection, for the forest trees, when deprived of a portion of the support upon which they are accustomed to lean, are also liable to be blown down; and, moreover, this system has the more serious objection of shading the plants too much from the sun, while they are subjected to the damag- ing effects of the drip during the rains, and the roots of the forest trees immediately fill up and choke the holes into which the Cinchonas are placed, thus depriving the young plants of nourishment. In forming our plantations, we have planted a considerable extent of land in this way, but with such bad results as now render it necessary to clear away the remaining forest trees. Our principal plantations have been formed on land entirely cleared of forest, and here the growth of the plants has been incomparably more satisfactory than that of those placed under any degree of living shade. It is, therefore, certain that the open system of planting will be the only successful one, especially on the Neilgher- ries; it is true, that while the plants are young, this system has dis- advantages, which should not be overlooked. I refer to the excessive evaporation and radiation during the bright and cloudless season, when our dry and cold weather prevails. We have hitherto combated this difficulty, by sheltering the young plants with a temporary shading of bamboo or fern. Many thousands of our plants, however, have passed through successive dry seasons without any protection whatever; and, although their growth has not been so rapid during the cold weather, their health is quite equal, if not superior, to any of those protected by artificial shade, while during the spring and rainy season the growth is more rapid in the plants without shade, than in those which have been shaded; consequently, the system of artificial shading may be abandoned altogether, except in very exposed situations, and when the plants are newly transplanted. 27. Cultivation. Preparation of Sites.14 and proceeding with the work upwards, until the whole is completed. Belts of forest may be left upon the ridges to give shelter, but these must be pretty wide, otherwise they will be destroyed by fire when burning the fallen forest. After the forest has lain for a sufficient time, two to three months, to become dry and fit for burning, the afternoon of a dry clay with a brisk wind is selected for firing, and this operation should be done with care, as great saving in expense and labor is secured by its being well done. A. row of coolies being placed about twenty or thirty yards apart across the entire length of fallen forest, at its lowest extremity, each provided with a fire-stick and a large bundle of dry grass, the grass being carefully placed under the leaves and branches of the fallen trees opposite to each man, at a given signal the whole is set on fire at once, thus im- mediately generating a force of fire which consumes nearly the whole of the trees, and saves an immense deal of after-labor in lopping and burning. By thus firing the forest, a good burn (as planters term it) is almost certain, whereas if the forest is set on fire in one or two places, it travels comparatively weakly through the trees, consuming only the leaves and small branches. The burning being finished, the next operation is to lop and burn such portions as are entangled by the stems of the trees. 28. When the lopping is completed, the lines of road are marked in such positions as render the different parts of the plantation easily accessible, all the main roads should be ten feet wide, and the branch roads five to six feet. The next operation is that of lining or marking off the distances at which the plants are to stand apart. For C. Suc- cirubra, C. Calisaya, and the varieties of 'Grey bark,' when the plants are scarce, the lines should be placed ten feet apart, but when plants are abundant the distance at which the plants may be planted can be much reduced. The plants being thus placed close together causes them to run up with strong stems, and afford each other shelter and support. For the varieties of the 'Crown barks,' the lines should be placed eight feet apart. This being done, the land is trenched over three feet wide, and two feet deep along the lines, and the plants planted in the trenches at six or ten feet apart. In placing the plants in the trenches, they should stand alternately, that is, the plants of the second row should be in the centre of the vacancies of the first row. When trenching is considered too expensive, pits may be dug for the recep- tion of the plants, two feet square, two feet deep, and four, six or eight
15 feet from centre to centre, according to the species intended to be plant- ed. When filling in the holes, the best surface soil mixed with a little charcoal and the burned earth is selected, care being taken not to fill the pits with wood ashes, which proves destructive to the plants. 29. Planting.16 nurseries to be permanently planted out, they are raised from the nursery beds and arranged on a light dealwood tray, two feet by three feet, as at Figure II., Plate VI, B; this tray being filled, is lifted by the handles and placed in the bottom of a box at C; another tray is filled in like manner, and three round sticks being run through the holes in the sides of the box at D, the second tray E is placed on and supported by these sticks, and the third tray F treated in the same way. The box being now filled, and containing about 540 plants, is lifted by the pole G and carried by two men to the planters, where it is deposited, the same men returning with an empty box to be re-filled. The planters first draw out the pole G, and remove the upper tray F from the box, and proceed to plant out the plants as illustrated at Figure III., filling in the soil in the same manner shewn at B, this completed, the plants are immediately shaded, and the operation of planting is completed. 31. The young plants may be shaded after planting by a cylin- drical basket open at both ends, twelve inches in diameter, and fourteen inches long, as at Figure I., PlateVII., made out of suitable and plentiful material, one man making from eight to ten of such baskets daily, this is found to be an efficient as well as an economical way of protecting the plants, as when they are established the baskets can be removed and are available for further use. When timber is plentiful on the spot, the plants can be as effectually protected with split wood placed around the plants, as at Figure II., Plate VII. This rough split wood, as a protec- tion and shade for the young plants, has been found very suitable, while one man is able to shade from fifty to sixty plants per day. As the plants grow they are protected against chafing by a grass rope being twisted round the top, as at H. 32. It may here be observed, that no plant should ever be watered while the sun is shining upon it, as every globule of water forms a lens, which burns up the portion of the leaf on which it rests; neither should any plant be buried deeper in the ground than the collar, or union of the stem and roots. When a portion of the stem is buried in transplanting, the growth of the plant is much retarded, and it does not, as some suppose, give it a firmer hold of the ground, but the re- verse. When manure can be obtained, its application will be found to be highly beneficial, as Cinchona plants, like the coffee, delight in a good soil well enriched by manure. If used too fresh, the application of manure might prove injurious; it is, therefore, always safest to apply such manure only as is well decomposed.
17 When the planting is finished, the young plants must be carefully attended to until such time as they become established; should the weather prove wet with high gales of wind, the shading should be drawn out to such a distance as not to touch or rub upon the plant when moved by the action of the wind. 33. The plants when young are shaded and protected as describ- ed above, and when they attain the height of two to three feet, they are staked, and tied with grass ropes, as at Figure III., Plate VII., A, great care being taken to see that the grass rope does not touch the stem of the plant, as when this is the case, the movement of the plant by the winds cuts the bark through at the point of contact with the rope, and destroys the plant; this can be effectually avoided by drawing the rope up to encircle the leaves and small branches when present, so that the leaves or branches come between the rope and the stem of the plant. This requires particular attention, because, if not attended to, a whole plantation might be destroyed in one storm, it being much better that the plants be not tied at all, if not secured effectually. To stake a large number of plants may occasionally prove inconvenient and sometimes impossible, especially where labor is scarce. On the Neilgherries our plants suffer most from the violence of the winds in June and July, when, on exposed situations, they are frequently cut to pieces by the heavy gales, in consequence of the branches lashing one against the other, and the heavy top giving the action of the wind a leverage over the stem, renders the plant liable to be broken off a few inches above the ground. These bad effects can be in a great degree avoided by trimming the plants up, i.e., removing the side branches and large leaves in the early part of June, an illustrated at Figure IV., Plate VII., B. The trimming of the plants and the conse- quent removal of leaves in some degree retards the development of the stems, but asthis pruning does not require to be practised after the second year's growth, the injury is merely temporary, and is more than com- pensated in the saving of the expense and labor attendant on staking and tying. The plants being once fairly established, the plantations, like those of coffee, will merely require to be occasionally weeded, and the surface turned over from time to time, in order to permit of the action of the atmosphere upon the soil, 34. It may be expected of us to answer the very natural, and probably the first question which will arise in the mind of every plan- ter, namely. " How will Cinchona cultivation pay?" Although we
18 have not yet practically answered this question, I feel called upon to contradict a very erroneous notion which has been extensively propa- gated, that "Cinchona trees will not produce bark under forty or fifty years." It is hot desirable to be over-sanguine as to the produce to be obtained from any new cultivation, but still the advantages which the Cinchonas offer should be taken fairly into consideration. In the early part of this experiment, it occurred to me that a small produce might be obtained in the sixth or seventh year after planting, since then it has been proved, that a small harvest of bark may be pro- cured in the fourth or fifth year, and that Cinchonas will not be far behind coffee or tea in the period which must elapse between the time of planting and that of reaping the first crop. Another serious objection urged against the profitable cultivation of Cinchonas is the supposed necessity of felling the trees in order to procure the bark, because this has usually been done on the Andes. There can, however, be no doubt that such a system can never be put into operation with plants under cultivation. The opinion which I first advanced has already been fully confirmed, namely, that constant and uniform yearly supplies of bark can be obtained by lopping and pruning the trees, this operation being necessary in order to give our Cinchona trees straight clean trunks of from twenty-five to thirty-five feet in height from the ground to the first branch, the stems yielding at the same time large supplies of bark by the system described in paragraphs 42, 43 and 44. 35. Judging from the growth the plants have attained here, I estimate as the probable produce of the fifth year half a pound of bark from each tree, or 250 lbs. per acre. 36. The cultivator of Cinchona should bear in mind that the expenses of the plantations are heaviest at first, namely, from the first to the fifth year, as after this period the cost of maintaining the planta- tions will be a mere trifle, the trees being once fairly established, require neither care nor attention, but only time to enable them to gain their full development. After that age, neither would the health of the plants nor the annual produce of the plantations be affected by adverse seasons. 37. Value of South American bark, compared with that pro- duced on the Neilgherries. We find that Howard, in his noble work "Nueva Quinologia," gives, as the finest produce of South American bark, the following results:19 " for comparison, gave me20 C. SUCCIRUBRA. Age of Bark. MOSSED BARK. UNMOSSED BARK. Renewed Bark. Time under moss. Purified Alka- loids Crystallized Sulphates. Cinchonine. Purified Alka loids. Crystallized Sulphates. Cinchonine. Years. Mths. Per cent. Per cent. 1 6 3.40 2.80 0.60 2.59 Renewed bark aged 1 year, on a tree aged 3 years, yielded 9.72 per cent. of purified alka- loids, 2.72 of crystal- lized sulphates. 2½ 12 6 5.20 080 5.06 2.43 Renewed bark aged 1 year and 5 months, on a tree aged 3 years, yielded 7.7 per cent. of purified alkaloids, 5 of crystallized sulphates. 3½ 11 8 6.94 1.06 Dr. de Vry obtained 11 per cent. of alkaloids from the same sample. 3½ 18 11.34 The renewed bark which gave 2.72 per cent. of crystallized sulphate when one year old, on a tree aged 3 years, gave 5.85 when 18 Months old. 39. The unprecedented result of 11.34 per cent. of crystallized sul- phates was obtained from the bark of a tree of three and a half years old, and of this nine-tenths were Quinine and the remainder Cinchonidine, the inferior alkaloids not being taken into account. This is a result greatly superior to anything derived from South American bark, both in quantity and quality, the South American 'Red bark' invariably producing from one-third to half as much Cinchonidine as Quinine, as will be seen by the above quotations from Mr. Howard's work. Cinchona bark may, and frequently does produce five alkaloids, namely, 1st, Quinine; 2nd, Quinidine; 3rd, Cinchonidine; 4th, Cinchonine; and 5th, Aricine. The first of these alkaloids is of the greatest value in commerce, the second and third being rather more than one-half the value of the first, while the
21 fourth and fifth are almost valueless; it is thus that the price of Cin- chona bark depends entirely on the quantity it contains of the three first alkaloids in a state capable of crystallization, therefore to increase the quantity of quinine to the diminution of other alkaloids, is the first and most important object of the cultivator, especially when it is considered that the presence of inferior alkaloids, though of some value, add so much to the cost of manufacture as to render their pre- sence a disadvantage. With these important considerations in view, from the time the Cinchona plants were introduced to this country, my attention has been steadily directed to ascertain, by practical observa- tion, how and in what manner the alkaloids are formed, how they increase and pass from one into another. Although the experiments and observations have been limited when compared with the import- ance of the inquiry, still I feel satisfied that this problem has been so far solved as to place in a great degree under the control of the culti- vator, the quantity and quality of the alkaloids produced. 40. Quinine and other alkaloids are first formed or produced in the leaves by the action of light and air on the juices, and while the leaves are performing their usual office of elaborating the sap or juices of the plant. Here the alkaloids are intimately combined with the elements of the sap, such as Quinovic acid, &c., and in this condition carried down by the return sap, and deposited in the bark, most impure in the liber or inner bark, but as the liber becomes trans- formed into cellular tissue, a superior alkaloid (quinine) is pro- duced in a state of great purity and easy of separation. The inferior quality of the alkaloids in the liber is apparently caused by the rapid circulation in this portion of the bark of sap containing oxygen from recent exposure in the leaves; quinine being most abund- ant in the cellular tissue of the bark, where it is deposited at first, also in an impure state, but in consequence of the retarded and horizontal circulation of the sap in this bark, the tendency of the alkaloids is to become and pass into quinine. In the cellular tissue, however, there is also a process of waste, caused by the action of light and air on the surface of the bark, thus the quinine apparently oxydizes, becomes inseparably combined with, or passes into red colouring matter and gum. This process of waste is, however, somewhat less than the deposit or accumulation in the bark, and for this reason the alkaloids increase according to the age of the plant. 41. From the above it will be understood that if this process of
22 oxydation or waste from the surface is effectually prevented, quinine will be deposited and increased in the cellular tissue of the bark to a large extent, because the leaves form the quinine laboratory, while the bark is merely the storehouse, and doubtless the leaves daily elabo- rate, and deposit a certain proportion of quinine, and will continue to do so till the last day that a healthy leaf exists upon the tree. There is, therefore, a continual and never-failing alkaloid-producing power in action, and the alkaloid thus formed and deposited can be cheaply and most effectually preserved by covering the surface of the growing bark with any material, so as to exclude light and the action of the air. There will of course be a limit to the quantity of alkaloid that the cellular tissue will contain, which probably will be from 18 to 25 per cent. the bulk of the bark, and making an allowance for the less pure alkaloids of the liber, from 14 to 17 per cent. of pure quinine may be obtained from " Red bark" thus managed. In addition to protecting the alkaloids from waste, it is desirable to increase the cellular tissue, and to effect both these objects, moss has been selected to cover the sur- face of the bark, as this material effectually excludes the light, and at the same time greatly increases the cellular tissue. By this process the yield of quinine can be tripled, quadrupled or even more, according to the time the bark is subjected to the process, which to develope its full advantages should be applied for a period not less than eighteen months, a longer time than this being still more advantageous. This process also gives the advantage of enabling the bark of the stems and branches to be periodically removed and renewed, so that in reality the produce from an acre of land will be fully thirty times as much as that which can be obtained by the usual method of cultivation. The application. of moss or other material to effect the above purpose having been secured by letters patent,* the following extract from the specification will explain the modus operandi. 42, The finest green moss, (or ot her suitable material,) is selected to protect the bark from the influence of light and air, and also to in- crease the cellular tissue of the bark, as this portion forms the principal receptacle of the quinine. To effect both these purposes, moss has been found a cheap, convenient, and very suitable material, as its pre- sence on the exterior of the bark greatly increases its thickness, and consequently its capacity for the reception of the alkaloids. * The patent was cancelled by the Governor General of India in Council23 With these observations I proceed to detail the particulars of the application of moss only, submitting it to be understood that when other material is used, variations will be necessary, according to the com- parative density or otherwise of the material employed, but ordinary moss should have the preference, as this, as a rule, can be procured in abundance in all localities suited to the growth of Cinchonas. 43. To be effectual, the covering of moss should be from three to three and a half inches thick, laid on uniformly as at Figure I., Plate VIII., with the surface or green side of the inner layer, (freed from all extrane- ous matter,) next to the bark of the tree, while the outer layer should have the surface exposed to the atmosphere. By covering the bark in this manner, the plant is secured against injury from fermentation, as this may take place if the inner layer of moss is much mixed with decayed leaves, grass, lichens, &c. When thus put on, the moss immediately begins to grow, especially when used in wet or damp weather, and this is of great importance, because the natural growth of the moss increases its own bulk and thickness around the tree, while the root fibres, and young shoots, ramifying through the moss, effectually secure the whole around the stems and branches to which it is applied. The moss, when laid on, is secured by pliable bands of split cane, fibrous bark, creepers, or any other convenient and suitable material, wound round the outer layer in a spiral manner, this being further secured here and there by cross ties, until the covering of the whole of the bark be completed. 44. The bark, when subjected to this process of protection from light and air for eighteen months or two years, (more or less at the option of the cultivator,) is opened out by the moss being divided in a straight line down the stem or branch, and turned back until about one-half of the stem or branch is laid bare as at Figure II., Plate VIII. The sheet of moss is then secured in this position by thin pieces of semi-circular hoop iron, A, when the strips of bark are removed from this portion, as at B, the stem is again re-covered by the moss, and the other half laid bare, and treated in like manner to the first. In this way at each operation one-half of the bark is removed from the stem, in alternate strips of from one to three inches in width, according to the size of the tree. 45. In performing these operations the aid of a knife, such as at Figure I., Plate IX., is necessary, in order to enable the operator to perform the work safely and expeditiously.
24 46. This knife has a perpendicular cutting blade on each side, to cut through the thickness of the outer bark and a portion of the liber, behind the cutting face of these two blades and joining them together is a very thin horizontal steel blade for separating the bark from the trunk or branch; this blade is constructed to curve at pleasure to any radius, by an adjusting screw, so that in a few seconds the blade can be made to fit any stem or branch. This blade being adjusted to fit the stem, and the roller to the depth the slice of bark is to be cut, which should be so arranged as to leave a small portion of the liber and the whole of the cambium undisturbed; the cutting knife is now ready for use, and is first brought into operation on the bark near the roll of moss, at a height of about three and a half feet from the ground, where it is pressed into the bark, then downwards in a straight line until it reaches the ground, the knife being held and worked by the right hand, the bark as separated is secured by the left hand. 47. The operator now turns round and inserts the knife at the point from whence he took the downward strip, and pressing the knife in a direct line upwards, in this way proceeds to remove a strip of bark, the whole length of the stem, dividing it in lengths of three or three and a half feet, so as to be convenient for drying. The space thus denuded is immediately re-covered by the moss. A. like width of bark to that removed is now left untouched, and another strip of bark taken off in the manner above described, and so on until. one-half the bark is re- moved from the tree. This done the moss is again re-secured, and the tree allowed to remain covered for about four months, when the trunk is again uncovered, and the other half of the bark (that is the alternate strip originally left) removed in the same manner as the first, the tree is now again covered with moss, and not disturbed for eighteen months or two years, when the renewed coat of bark can be removed in like manner to the first. This operation may be repeated every eighteen months or two years, because after this period each new bark will have attained considerable thickness, and give a large yield of alkaloid. 48. From the above description it will be readily understood that by the application of this invention, the produce of quinine, from an acre of land, will be fully thirty times as much as can be obtained by the usual method of production. 49. The following brief notice of the different species of Cin- chonas at present cultivated on the Neilgherries, will enable intending purchasers to select such as may be best suited to their localities
25 Cinchonas yielding Quinine and Cinchonidine. 50. Cinchona Succirubra, the "Cascarilla Colorada," or "Ge nuine Red Bark" of commerce. This species grows to a lofty tree, and is rich in alkaloids, which generally amount to as much as three to four per cent., and thus fair average samples are valued in the market at 1s. 6d. to 8s. per pound of dry bark. This sort is also hardy, its range of growth extending from 3,000 to 8,000 feet; the plant, according to Mr. Spruce, prefers open ground with " plenty of air, light, and room, wherein to develop its proportions, the bark is thin in proportion to the diameter of the trees when growing at low eleva tions, and thick in proportion when growing at high elevations." The amount of alkaloids is also much affected by elevation. Mr. Spruce informs us " that Senor Cordovez (who has analyzed the Red bark, collected at various altitudes) found that the greater the height at which the tree grows, the larger is the proportion of alka loids contained in the bark." 51. Cinchona Calisaya, or "Yellow Bark of Bolivia." This species grows to the height of a large forest tree, and is considered the most valuable of all the medicinal barks. The present price of Cali- saya or " Yellow Bark," varies from 2s. to 4s. per pound. Of this spe- cies we have now on the Neilgherries four varieties, very distinctly marked. Our Calisaya, considered to be a valuable kind till this year, is now ascertained to have been the Josephiana, a comparatively worthless variety; but, in December 1865, Mr. C. Markham and Mr. J. W. B. Money brought to the Neilgherries two separate parcels of Calisaya seed, which have germinated largely. Among these there are numerous plants of the Calisaya Vera, and of the Calisaya Verde, and the remainder are of a different variety not yet ascertained. Ac- cording to Mr. Markham and Dr. Weddell, "the tree Calisaya grows on declivities and steep rugged places of the mountains 5,000 to 6,000 feet above the sea, in the hottest forests of Caravaya and Bolivia." Subsequently Mr. Markham, in writing of this species, states: "There " can be no doubt that the correct method of cultivating the Cinchona " is planting them out, in the open ground, with plenty of light and " air. They may require shade from the direct rays of the sun at " first. The only really fine well-grown plant of Cinchona Calisaya " that I saw in Caravaya, was one that had been planted in a small " clearing entirely exposed; those in the forest were poor straggling " things in comparison."
26 52. Cinchona Officinalis, a Uritusinga, the "Cascarilla, fina," or " Original Loxa Bark" introduced by J. E. Howard, Esq. This spe- cies, which in the days of La Condamine, was a noble and lofty forest tree, is now almost extinct, the trees of a large size having entirely disappeared from the Andes; it is rich in alkaloids, good specimens giving a total of 3.8 per cent., and in this respect it equals the Cali- saya bark of Bolivia; it was common on the mountains of Uritu- singa, and grows at elevations from 6,000 to 8,000 feet. A general opinion prevails among the Cascarilleras, that the bark of this species " differs in quality according as it is exposed to the morning or even- ing sun." 53. Cinchona Officinalis, ß. Condamenia, the "Cascarilla Colo- rada del Rey," or " Cascarilla Amarilla," the " Rusty Crown Bark" of English commerce and of equal value to the preceding species, to which it is nearly allied, inhabiting the same localities, but perhaps growing at greater elevations. In the days of Pavon, this was a slen- der tree of little more than twenty-four feet in height, and is considered to be the species that produced the bark which cured the Countess of Cinchon. At the present time, Mr. Cross informs us, but few trees are to be seen of these dimensions. The plants from which the bark of commerce is now taken are, in general, not more than eight to ten feet in height: When the plants are cut down, three or four young shoots, or suckers in general spring up, but this does not always happen, as some of the more industrious Cascarilleras frequently pull up the roots, and bark them also. The bark is taken from the smallest twigs, thus the annual growths are sometimes taken, especi- ally if they are strong. Mr. Cross also observes that the alluvial deposit in the ravines, where this species is found growing, is shallow, and in many places not more than six inches in depth. 54. Cinchona Officinalis, 27 sea, from the cold summits of the mostly snow-capped mountains, where it sometimes reaches the upper limits of the growth of trees, that is, 3,500 metres (10,797 feet). Mr. Howard observes that this species produces a bark which rivals in their rich product of quinine the barks of Bolivia, and consequently commands a very high price." Cinchonas yielding Quinidine and Cinchonine. 56. Cinchona Nitida, "Quina cana legitima," or "Genuine Grey Bark." This is a lofty tree, abounding in the higher regions of Huanco; its predominant alkaloid is quinidine, and is consequently of less value than the preceding species, which belong to the class yielding quinine28 chiefly of " Cinchonidine and Cinchonine."It thus ranks among the most valuable of the Grey barks. 60. Arrangement of Labor and direction of Operations,29 attention, we find it to have been a party of weeders, and a number o men staking plants. We examine the work performed by the weeders, and find it done in the most slovenly manner, the roots of the weeds for the most part being left in the ground, and many of them merely trampled down. On referring to the Superintendent, he says, he gave the strictest instructions how the work should be done, but this maistry and these coolies will do so and so, and what can he do ? We now proceed to the party employed in staking, and find that the ties, instead of supporting the plant, are so placed as to cut their stems through on the first high winds or storm. It is pointed out to the Superintendent that he is not merely wasting his labor, but employing it in such a manner as to cause serious injury to the plants. Here again we are met by the unanswerable argument, what can he do ? The coolies will tie them in that way. We look at the plants recently put out, and find them densely shaded and rotting off if the weather be damp, or it may be all shade removed, and the plants parched up by the sun. In this way the estate suffers first by one disaster, then another, until the loss becomes insupport- able, and the damage irreparable. We now look into the tool-room, and find that the tools, instead of being arranged on their racks and pegs, are thrown over the floor in a mass of confusion and being de- stroyed by rust. If we now examine an estate under efficient manage- ment, we find that though here things may be occasionally in fault, yet the Superintendent, so far from exonerating himself by attaching the blame to overseers, writers, maistries, and coolies, admits the oversight which led to the neglect, and forthwith puts it right, fully comprehending that his duty is to do all things necessary to secure success. If either the writers, coolies, or any one else on the estate neglect their duty, or perform their work badly, the Superintendent enforces attention mildly but firmly, and shews with his own hands to the unskilful laborer the way in which the work should be perform- ed. He keeps that steady pressure on the whole of the establishment necessary to check negligence and imposition. On examining the work, we find the pits of the prescribed size, and the numbers agree with the returns. The roots of the weeds have been carefully taken out of the ground and the whole buried. The plants are tied in the manner best calculated to give them support; the tools are kept in ex- cellent working order, and the labor has been concentrated and well arranged. It is the manner of doing these and other duties connected
30 with the well-being of an estate, that distinguishes the qualified from the unprofitable Superintendent; that makes the whole difference between profit and loss. 62. The main object in the distribution of labor is so to arrange the men, that the responsibility of neglect can be instantly fixed upon the delinquent. 63. In order to secure this, it is necessary that there be no con- fusion in the manner in which the men are placed to work, and that the men be not removed from one work to another. The work directed must be begun at a given point, and each individual should be restricted to a given space or row (or two rows in some cases) in pit- ting, planting, shading, weeding, staking, &c. Over each twenty-five or thirty men there is one maistry or headman, whose only duty is to inspect the work of his gang. Should any individual in the gang per- form the work in a careless, negligent, or insufficient manner, it is the maistry's duty to call the man back, and to cause the work to be properly done, and to report the same to the Superintendent or overseer, who should inflict a fine on the individual laborer, pro- portionate to the injury or loss sustained by his neglect. But if the maistry has failed to report the neglect, or is unable to fix it clearly on any individual, the maistry is then held responsible and punished accordingly, in proportion to the loss sustained by the neglect of his gang. Where order is to be maintained, a fine inflicted on a maistry should never be remitted, because the neces- sity for such can only arise by the grossest negligence on his part, and the loss cannot be redeemed. With the laborer it is different, as by subsequent good work, the punishment for one neglect may be occasionally remitted with advantage. When these punishments are inflicted, it is the duty of the Superintendent to explain in a tempe- rate and kindly manner to the diligent laborers, the reason for inflict- ing the fine, and its necessity to obtain attention and care in the per- formance of the work. With native laborers it requires both temper and tact to maintain any system, as they have hitherto been accus- tomed to perform the smallest possible work for their wages with the men mixed up in a mass of confusion, and this is most congenial to the native mind, since it renders hopeless any attempt to bring home individual responsibility, and they are perfectly indifferent to blame attached to them as a body. 64. The above arrangement of labor can, therefore, only be car-
31 ried out successfully by moderation on the part of the Superintendent, by gaining the confidence of the maistries and bringing their influence to bear on the men, by giving to each man only a moderate task to perform, and by inflicting punishment with moderation, and only when gross neglect is clearly brought home to the individual. Other- wise discontent, murmuring, and strikes will be the result, especially at first, but when the system is once fairly introduced, all good men much prefer it to any other, because their individual merits become at once apparent, and these merits should at all times be fairly appre- ciated and rewarded. 65. Next in importance to the arrangement of the individual laborer is that of concentrating the whole of the labor on the estate in the performance of operations in a given space on the plantation. This renders the supervision of the labor easy and effective, whereas when men are allowed to work in straggling parties, supervision is difficult and inefficient, and of this the men immediately take advantage. All the operations necessary to be done on the plantation should be performed at one time, and by the same gang of laborers, beginning at one end of the plantation and progressing steadily to the other, until the whole is completed. For example, with the operation of planting, the shaders should immediately follow up the planters. In weeding an estate, the weeds should be carefully taken up by the roots and buried in deep pits. As this operation progresses, the weeders should drain round and remove accumulations of earth from the stems of the plants, should clean out the catch-drains, and repair all roads and pathways which lie in their immediate line. Immediately succeeding these a certain number of men follow, whose business it is to inspect and secure the stakes and ties. Thus the plantation, behind the weeders and tiers, shews the whole of the work completed. This saves the waste of labor caused by sending small parties to perform operations in detail. Such works as road-making, pitting, and trenching may, with advantage, be performed separately and best by contract, but these works should be completed as the gang progresses, and on no account should portions be left in an unfinished state. 66. Every Superintendent should arrange beforehand the future work for his laborers. He should never pass his men without examin- ing the quantity and quality of the work performed. He should shew them with his own hands, and instruct them in the performance of this work. He should never allow any work to be ineffectually
32 performed, and never attempt to do any thing in a hurry. This, in other words, is merely to throw away the time of the men employed and waste the wages for such time, because all work ineffectually performed must be either immediately done over again, or will become either worthless or positively injurious. 67. In propagating in nurseries, in pitting, in trenching, in planting out, and in subsequent attention to the plants, work ineffec- tually performed, or the omission of work for a few days, may lead to increasing or irretrievable injury for years. 68. Transmission of Plants.33 in a shady position, and opened only so much at a time as the plants will bear without flagging. So soon as the leaves of the plants are observed to flag or droop, the cases should be immediately closed, and great care taken not to give the plants too much water at the roots, as this is apt to cause them to rot; in fact, the soil at the roots should always be kept rather dry than otherwise the supply of moisture being kept up in the plant by frequently sprinkling the leaves. This treatment is only necessary until the roots assume a healthy and vigor- ous action, which will take place in from eight to twenty days, accord- ing to the length of time the plants have been confined in the War- dian cases. W. G. McIVOR, Supt. of Govt Cinchona Plantations. GOVERNMENT GARDENS, OOTACAMUND, 5th September 1866.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969688.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969688.tif] 1. Layer as pre 2. Represents the LITHO PRESS CHEPAUK MADRAS MARCH
PLATE. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913402.tif] Manner of planting young seedlings FIG. II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913402.tif] 1. Layer as Prepared for laying down. A the piece of Brick, B, the tongue. C. the peg. 2. Represents the same plant, six weeks after being laid C the rootlets D the surface of the soil. GOVT LITHO PRESS CHEPAUK MADRAS MARCH 1867. DRAWN BY
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969691.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969691.tif] 10. I. a polling shed b furnace ho may become slightly heater 10. III. a the cases filled with pots b 10. IV. shows the gradual rise o Govt Litho Press Chepauk Madras March 18
PLATE. II. PLAN OF A PROPAGATING HOUSE. FIG.I. GROUND PLAN. FIG.II. FRONT ELEVATION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913405.tif] FIG 1. a. polling shed, b furnace house, c. fireplace d. flue e. the propagating cases, f. the cistern placed over the flue so that the water may become slightly heated g. path. FIG III. a. the cases filled with pots b. the flue C. shelves attached to the spaces of wall between and below the windows. FIG IV. shows the gradual rise of flue in the beds a. the flue b level of ground c. the level of the beds. Govt. Litho Press Chepauk Madras March 1867. Transfer by
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969694.tif] FIG. II. 1. Represents the bu shewing the cu 2. A pot of buds of 3. A bud of Cinchon Govt Litho Press Chepauk Madras March 1867.
PLATE III. FIG.I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913408.tif] A Cuttings. B, stratum of brick dust, C, ordinary soil of the pot, D, moss to facilitate drainage, E potsherd. FIG. II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913408.tif] FIG. II. 1. Represents the bud A prepared for placing in the pot, shewing the cut part B upon the break C. 2. A pot of buds of Cinchona calisaya 41 days after planting. 3. A bud of Cinchona succirubra also 41 days after planting. FIG III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913408.tif] FIG. III. Shewing cuttings as placed in the pots with the ends on a piece of dry brick A, the brick, B the soil. C, moss, D. potsherds. Govt Litho Press Chepauk Madras March 1867. Drawn by
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969697.tif] Fig: 1. A. the Cowdung Pot, B. the So. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969697.tif] Fig: H. A, the Mould, B, Blo GOVT LITH PRESS CHEPAUK MADRAS MARCH 1867
PLATE. IV. FIG: I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913411.tif] Fig: 1. A. the Cowdung Pot, B. the Soil, C. the Plant. D. the Section. FIG. II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913411.tif] Fig:II. A, the Mould, B, Block with plugs, D, Removing boards, O, Guides. GOVT LITH. PRESS CHEPAUK. MADRAS MARCH 1867 Drawn by J. Sunres. V LITH BY R J BALDREY.
Fl [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969700.tif] A [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969700.tif] FIG Govt Litho Press Chepauk Madras April 1867.
PLATE V. FIG.I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913414.tif] FIG. I. Section of box for removing plants from the nurseries to the plantations. FIG.II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913414.tif] FIG. II. .Plants placed in nurseries over lines of moss A transverse section of bed, B longitudinalFIG. I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969703.tif] FIG. I. Manner of Planting [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969703.tif] GOVT LITH. PRESS CHEPAUK MADRAS MARCH 1867 FIG. II Box
PLATE. VI. FIG. I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913417.tif] FIG. I. Manner of planting out, young plants. FIG. II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913417.tif] FIG.II Box for conveying Plants long distances. B. one of the Trays FIG. III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913417.tif] FIG. III. Manner of planting plants in Cowdung pots GOVT LITH. PRESS CHEPAUK MADRAS MARCH 1867 DRAWN BY J SUARES V LITH: BY R J. BALDREY.
FIG. I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969706.tif] FIG. I. Basket for shading. FIG. III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969706.tif] FIG. III Method of sta Govt Lith Press Chepauk Madras March 1867
PLATE.VII. FIG. I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913420.tif] FIG. I. Basket for shading. FIG.II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913420.tif] FIG. II. Shading by Split wood. FIG. III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913420.tif] FIG III Method of staking. FIG. IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913420.tif] FIG. IV.Plant pruned to stand the Wind. Gov Litho Press Chepauk: Madras March 1867 Drawn and Litho by R. Baldrey
FIG. I Application of Moss FIG. II Manner of removing the bark. FIG. I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969709.tif]
PLATE VIII. FIG.I. Application of Moss. FIG II. Manner of removing the bark. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913423.tif] DRAWN BY R J BALDREY V LITHO BY R.J. BALDREY CHEPAUK
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969712.tif] FIG.II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74969712.tif] FIG. II Top view of barking depressing the roller B. C. Screws for decreasing nature of the cutting blade D. E tops of k the knife works G Socket handle. FIG. III. Perspective view of knife A horizontal cutting blade, B side pivots D holes for screns. Press Chepauk Madras
PLATE IX. FIG.I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913426.tif] FIG.I. Side view of barking knife, A one of the screws for elevating or depressing the roller B c sliding axle box attached to the screw A D one of the screws for decreasing or increas ing the curvature of the horizontal cutting blade E One of the side cutting blades F Socket for handle FIG.II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913426.tif] FIG.IITop view of barking knife. A Screws for elevating or depressing the roller B, C Screws for decreasing or increasing the cur vature of the cutting blade D, E tops of knife, F pivots on which knife works G socket handle FIG.III:Perspective view of knife. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913426.tif] A horizontal cutting blade B side cutting blades, C holes for pivots, D holes for screws. GOVT LITHO PRESS CHEPAUK MADRAS 1867.
