IP/SA.1 IP 37/258 PAPAVER SOMNIFERUM-OPIUM. (An extract from the sixth volume of the Dictionary of Economic Products of India.) BY GEORGE WATT, M.B., C.M., F.L.S., C.I.E., REPORTER ON ECONOMIC PRODUCTS WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA.
PAPAVER SOMNIFERUMExtracted from the Dictionary of 2 PAPAVER somniferum. The Opium or White Poppy. 882, 896; VII., 875-877; VIII., 1437; Johnston (Church Ed.), Chemis- try of Common Life, 309-331; Report of Opium Commission, Part IV., Rules, &c., for Guidance of Officers of Patna & Ghazipur Opium Factories, 1883; J. Scott, Man. Opium Husbandry; Selections, Records, Bengal Govt., No. 1 (1851); The Opium Poppy by Dr. Eatwell; also No. XXV. of 1857; Notes by Dr. Lyall; Gennoe, Notes on Poppy Cultiva- tion; Selections, Records, Financial Department, 1871; Blight in Poppy Crop in the Behar & Benares Agencies; Selections, Records, N.-W. P. Govt., Vol. VI. (1873), 429; Birdwood, Bomb. Prod., 6, 18, 125, 198, 275;Baden Powell, Pb. Pr., 293; Drury, U. Pl. Ind., 327; Atkinson, Him. Dist. (Vol. X., N.-W. P. Gaz.), 304, 704, 757; Duthie & Fuller, Field & Garden Crops, 64-68; Useful Pl. Bomb. (Vol. XXV., Bomb. Gaz.), 144; Econ. Prod. N.-W. Prov., Pt. V. (Vegetables, Spices, & Fruits), 27; Royle, Prod. Res., 102-107; Cooke, Oils & Oilseeds, 63-64; Hawkes, Report on the Oils of South India, 19, 20, 31; Tropical Agriculture, 422, 430; Ayeen Akbary, Gladwin's Trans., Vol. 82; II., 44; Ain-i-Akbari, Blochmann's Trans., Vol. I., 378, 384; Lin- schoten, Voyage to East Indies (Ed. Burnell, Tiele & Yule), Vol. II., 112; Milburn, Oriental Commerce (1825), 293-4; Hove's Journal of a Tour in Bombay in 1787, 59-60, III; Man. Madras Adm. Vol. I., 456-59; II., 291; Nicholson, Man. Coimbatore, 8; Boswell, Man. Nellore, 305; Madden, Official Rept., Kumáon, 279; Bomb. Man., Rev. Accts., 102; Quarterly Jour., Agri., X., 37; XI., 120; Adm. Rept., C. P., 1866-67, 69; Settlement Reports:the Economic Products of India. 3 The Opium or White Poppy. Opium" in Central India and certain parts of Rájputana. It nowhere manifests in India a tendency to escape from cultivation or to become na- turalised; it thus confirms so far the historic facts which point to its introduction within comparatively recent times, though long anterior to the British conquests and influence. PAPAVER somniferum. Oil.4 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Trade in Poppy Seed. OIL. One or two similar brief passages occur in Indian works on this subject, but for the past forty years no writer of any note appears to have dealt with poppy seed or oil. All that has appeared on the subject might, in fact, be characterised as a republication of the statements made by Hawkes and Bingham, in which the oil is commended as one likely to find a place in European commerce. Silently it has, however, advanced, and, at the present moment, it holds a distinct place among the oil-seeds of India. TRADE IN POPPY SEED. TRADE in Seed. The following table exhibits the FOREIGN IMPORTS and EXPORTS to and from India in poppy seed for the past ten years: the Economic Products of India. 5 Medicinal Properties of Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. must, therefore, be unimportant and included in the collective list of "Other Seeds" which is supplementary to those separately dealt with. TRADE. OF THE INTERNAL TRADE BY LAND ROUTES - The North-West Pro- vinces are shown to export the largest quantity. In 1888-89, these Provin- ces consigned to Bombay port 4,98,223 maunds (say 355,873 cwt.), and to Calcutta 2,10,328 maunds (150,234 cwt.). The internal trade returns for 1889-90 have not as yet been published, so that the imports into Bombay port and Calcutta, given above, were not the sources from which the foreign exports were drawn in 1889-90. An inspection of the returns of foreign trade for 1888-89 reveals the fact, however, that Bombay exported 428,794 cwt., so that by far the larger portion of the Bombay foreign exports in poppy seed were in that year drawn from the North-West Provinces; only a small amount, if any, of the Malwa poppy seed was exported. Rájputana. and Central India are, however, shown to have exported a considerable amount of poppy seed to Bombay port. In 1888-89 these exports amount- ed to 83,083 maunds. Here, again, then the nature of the poppy seed exported from Bombay is of some interest, in connection with the discus- sion which will be found below, as to the Malwa poppy being possibly the dark-seeded plant, Papaver somniferum, var. glabrum. But the writer can find no direct evidence on this point, and only offers the suggestion as worthy of consideration. That the poppy seed exported from India is mainly, if not exclusively, drawn from the Patna and Benares Agencies there would seem to be no doubt. Bengal, however, figures second on the list of internal trade in poppy seed. The Province consigned its supplies (available for export) almost exclusively to Calcutta. Internal. Exports of seed are drawn from Behar & Benares. POPPY OIL.6 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Medicinal Properties of Opium. MEDICINE. the tendency to death is by coma or by apnæa, than to those which produce death by asthenia. In the latter, as in peritonitis, it holds the first place as a remedial agent. In fevers, especially in the advanced stages, it is of the highest value, either alone, or in combination with antimony, camphor, &c., allaying vascular and nervous excitement, and procuring sleep; but, as a general rule, it is inadmissible when contrac- tion of the pupil is strongly marked. In painful spasmodic affections, opium in large and repeated doses often affords immediate relief. In various morbid states of the abdominal viscera, e.g., simple or cancerous ulceration of the stomach, chronic gastritis, gastrodynia, nervous and sympathetic vomiting, diarrhthe Economic Products of India. 7 History of Opium-eating and smoking. PAPAVER somniferum. cultivation occurs. They are also exported from these districts all over India, and are extensively employed by the sweetmeat-makers or in the manufacture of certain curries. The OIL obtained from the seeds is also largely eaten or used for culinary purposes. The narcotic, OPIUM, is eaten in many parts of India, or a liquid is prepared by maceration in water and then drunk. A beverage called post or koknar is also prepared from the CAPSULES and consumed in many parts of India. But opium-smoking is by no means uncommon, two special preparations being used for this pur- pose, viz., Madak and Chandu. Though the expression opium-smoking-shop raises at once the picture of Chinese demoralization, which for years past has been flaunted before the eyes of a sympathetic public, yet were the vic- tims and materials of the indulgence changed for those of a drinking den in London or any other European town, the picture of the one scene might be substituted for the other. So general is the moderate use of opium, in many parts of India, that the comparison is practically legitimate between the people of this country and the inhabitants of Europe in their use of beers, wines, and spirits. It is, as already remarked, almost a necessity of life, and so much faith do the people place in the drug that they by no means infrequently give it to their horses when an exceptionally heavy task has to be rendered. Barnes alludes to this practice as specially pre- valent with the Cutchees. Indeed, some difficulty is experienced in check- ing a certain amount of illicit importation of the drug through the habit of Afghan and Shan horse-dealers bringing opium with them for their horses, the unused surplus of which they sell in India, or cover absolute contraband traffic under pretence of the surplus provision for their horses. The Ráj- puts and other Hindus also frequently present opium at ceremonial visits and religious entertainments with the same familiarity, Forbes remarks, as the snuff-box was formerly handed round the friendly circle in Europe. FOOD. Oil. Opium. Capsules. OPIUM. An inspissated juice obtained by scratching the unripe capsules of Papa- ver somniferum, Linn., and allowing the milky sap, which exudes thereby, to dry spontaneously. The bulk of the medicinal article is obtained from Asia Minor, at the present day, as it has been for nearly the past 2,000 years. Indian Opium is, however, the most important form commercially, being that which is smoked, eaten, or drunk, in various preparations, by the inhabitants of Asiatic countries, chiefly the Chinese. HISTORY OF OPIUM, OF OPIUM-EATING, AND OF SMOKING. HISTORY. Historically there would appear to have been several phases in the growth of our knowledge of this substance. Various species of poppy are mentioned by early writers as ornamental garden plants: the merits of the seed, as affording oil and as being medicinal and edible, were early recog- nised, perhaps before the discovery of the somniferous property of the cap- sules, and certainly anterior to the recognition of the value of their milky sap: the plant was grown, as it is at the present day, in most parts of India and Central Asia, as a vegetable, similar in its action to lettuce: the capsules were employed in the preparation of soporific drugs or in the manufacture of a stimulating and soothing beverage: and lastly came the discovery of the more potent nature of the inspissated sap. It seems probable these phases were evolved in the order named, and that Papaver somniferum was grown in Asia Minor for its capsules which the Arabs carried all over the East even to China, some time before the Greek discovery of the value of the juice. Opium was probably originally, detected in Papaver setigerum, though that species must have been rapidly displaced by P. somniferum, a form which
8 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. History of Opium-eating HISTORY. took its origin apparently in Asia Minor and was itself very likely but a sport from P. setigerum. In Classic periods. We learn, at all events, that the poppy was grown as a garden plant, and its medicinal properties understood during the early classic periods of Greece and Rome. Homer gives us the simile of the exhausted warrior hanging his heavily helmetted head, like the drooping poppy flower buds. Livy tells the story of one of the last of the Roman Kings sending the message to his son, Sextus Tarquinius, to remove the headmen of one of the Etrurian cities. That message was symbolically conveyed by the king striking off the capsules from the tallest poppy plants in his garden. Theophrastus, who lived in the beginning of the third century, was ac- quainted with a preparation from the poppy which he called µthe Economic Products of India. 9 and of Opium-smoking. PAPAVER somniferum. the ya-pien followed the mi-nang. Interest in the oil-yielding seeds and medicinal capsules had thus been fully aroused in Asiatic countries, long anterior to the introduction of opium. It is, therefore, not difficult to under- stand the existence of names for these parts of the plant that are un- doubtedly more ancient than the word opium; some of which, indeed, even seem, if they are not actually, of an indigenous character in the countries where used. Thus, for example, as has been stated, the Greeks were acquainted with the value of the seeds and capsules prior to their know- ledge of the inspissated juice. Virgil commemorates not only the poppy as possessing, like the river Lethe, the power of producing forgetfulness, but he connects the opium plant with the goddess Ceres. The contention here advanced (of the discovery of opium being intimately associated with the Greeks) by no means, however, precludes the inhabitants of Asiatic countries, where species of Papaver were found wild, from having contemporaneously, or even at an earlier date than the classic records of Greece and Rome, recognised the value of these plants as vegetables, as sources of oil, or as medicines. Some of the Asiatic names for these parts of the plant may, therefore, be spontaneous; that is to say, they were not necessarily imported with a communication of the value of opium. Several species of Papaver are met with in India10 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. History of Opium-eating HISTORY. are not scratched for their opium though that property is fully known. Thus Mr. Baden Powell informs us that this is the case in Jálandhar where the poppy is grown for its capsules which are used in making post, an in- fusion consumed as a beverage. The post of the Panjáb appears to closely resemble the kuknár which was a luxury among the Muhammadans in the time of Akbar. Bontius, writing of Batavia in 1658, tells us that the Indians were there divided popularly into two sectionsthe Economic Products of India. 11 and of Opium-smoking. PAPAVER somniferum. cal work K'ai-pao-pén-ts'ao should be prepared. In that work the poppy is called ying-tz12 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. History of Opium-eating HISTORY: Chinese. del Coast opium was exported to Siam and Pegu. Here we also find clear indications of the activity of Arab traders in extending the cultivation of the poppy in India. The Chinese also at this time imported opium them- selves, to be used medicinally. It is important to note this for the proper understanding of the history of Opium in China." First know- ledge of, in China, 15th century. CULTIVATION IN CHINA of Poppy and preparation of Opium; 15th century. Description, Method, Extraction. From about the fifteenth century, therefore, interest in poppy capsules is in Chinese works diverted to opium. Wang Hsi, who died A.D. 1488, says it is obtained in Arabia from a poppy with red flowers. He gives a minute description of its use in dysentery, and as he was governor of the province of Kansuh for 20 years and had thus to look after a large Muhammadan community, his knowledge of opium must have proceeded from more than casual report. He died ten years before the arrival of Vasco de Gama in India. But not only does Wang Hsi describe the uses of opium, but also the cultivation of the plant and the extraction of the narcotic. Thus, there can be no doubt that the Chinese had commenced the cultivation and the preparation of opium as early as the fifteenth century. Several of the Ming dynasty writers describe the cultivation and extraction of opium, but only for medicinal purposes. The prohibition against foreigners trading with China (1523), consequent on the raids made by the Japanese on the coast, caused foreign drugs to become scarce, hence directions were actually issued for the more careful cultivation of opium in China itself, and the value of the poppy, as an agricultural crop, was thereby enhanced and greatly extended. Imposition of Import Duty, In the year 1589 an import duty was imposed on opium in common with Myrrh, Olibanum, Asafthe Economic Products of India. 13 and Opium-smoking. PAPAVER somniferum. the sketch written by Dr. F. Porter Smith (Mat. Med. & Natural History of China, pp. 162-164) and with the learned discoveries made known from time to time by Dr. Bretschneider14 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. History of Opium-smoking. HISTORY: Chinese. First mention of an opium- smoking shop, 1712 A.D. Chinese opium-smok- ing prepara- tion. That indefatigable explorer was born in 1651; visited Persia in 1683the Economic Products of India. 15 Opium-smoking at Peking. PAPAVER somniferum. as a medicine." Thus the opium monopoly was a legacy from the Mu- hammadan rulers of India to the British conquerors at Plassey in 1757, but the external traffic in it was not taken up until some time after when its direct control became a necessity in the administration of India. HISTORY: Chinese. The habit of opium-smoking had reached Peking in 1790 and assumed there so alarming proportions as to call forth fresh edicts against it. At about the same time the local authorities at Canton began to complain of rapid increase in the trade in opium. In 1800 there was an edict issued prohibiting opium from being brought to China in any ship. It was from this time that the more distinctly smuggling period commenced. It was a contraband trade, but connived at by Viceroys and Governors; they felt a difficulty, and concluded not to touch the evil with any firm intention to heal. How to treat it they knew not. The evil grew beyond their power of control. They regarded it as the "vile dirt of foreign countries;" they feared it would spread among all the people of the inner land, wasting their time and destroying their property; they advocated the prohibition of the trade, and the Government consented to their advice, and frequently issued prohibitory edicts, but too often some of the officials themselves smoked, or their nearest friends smoked, and so the hand of interference was paralysed, and the demand for opium continuing, the import was never seriously checked till the time of Lin Tsê-hsü, and the war of 1841." Opium- smoking in Peking, 1790 A.D Prohibition against import of Opium, 1800. Chinese war, 1841 A.D. The unconstitutional and unauthorised action of the provincial Com- missioner Lin in destroying £ 2,000,000 sterling worth of opium, the pro- perty of British traders, while the Imperial negotiations were proceeding which were intended to meet the wishes of the Chinese Government, could have resulted in nothing but war. It was clearly not the duty of external Governments to superintend the commerce of their subjects, on the stand- point of what they conceived should be the moral character of the Chinese people, even if the perniciousness of opium-smoking be admitted. It would have been the duty of these Governments, however, to see that their traders did not violate the treaties made with China. Had the Chinese Government taken the course open to it, and that too without arbitrary injury to a trade of large proportions which had been fostered by the governing com- mercial principle of demand, to impose a gradually increasing taxation on imported opium; had it exercised also the power, which it should have possessed if it did not do so, of restricting or prohibiting the cultivation of the poppy within its own territory, little would have been heard of the per- plexing opium question of the present day. But that the Chinese Gov- ernment was either helpless against the popular desires of its people or never earnestly intended to combat the evil there seems no doubt. Matters were therefore left to drift along in a state of lawlessness, and the con- flicting interests of the Chinese Imperial and Provincial Governments encouraged rather than prevented the spirit of high-handedness and robbery which culminated in a violation of international law. The Chinese Government had thus to pay 21,000,000 dollars towards the war which its vacillation and weakness entailed, as well as the further sum of £ 1,250,000 in compensation to the British merchants whose property had been con- fiscated or destroyed. But even losses of such severity did not teach the Chinese Government that the suppression of the opium traffic (if that was actually its object) depended on a reform in its own fiscal administration. In spite of all the prohibitory measures which had been taken, the habit of opium-smoking became firmly established, and that, too, long before British commerce had anything to say to it. But the foreign supply, at no period since the introduction of opium-smoking, has been able to keep pace with the demand. Local production has accordingly grown into in- finitely greater importance. Had the Indian Government desired, did it desire now, to repress Chinese production, and competition with Indian opium, a reduction of the export duty would very probably have the Power to control Opium Traffic.
16 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Controlling factor in Indian Exports. HISTORY Chinese. Cultivation in China. Indian Opium a Luxury. immediate effect, provided (and this is the keynote to the whole question) the Chinese Government refrained from imposing a correspondingly increased import duty. The limits of possibility in Indian production are not the con- trolling factors in the exports to China. The Indian duty is such as to make our opium the luxury of the rich, and a reduction in the export duties from India would but transfer a larger share in the profits of the traffic from India to China without either lowering the price to the Chinese- smoker or restricting the amount consumed. That the Chinese Govern- ment are fully alive to their own interest and do not now and never have desired to lose their opium revenue is a fact that no student of the question can be ignorant of. "It appears thus to be certain that, while the Court at Peking was endeavouring to suppress the foreign trade in opium from 1796 to 1840, it did not or could not put a stop to home cultivation of the drug, since a Chinese Censor in 1830 represented to the throne that the poppy was grown over one half of the province of Chekeang, and in 1836 another (Cho Tsun) stated that the annual production of opium in Yunnan could not be less than several thousand piculs" (Encycl. Brit.). Magnitude of Native Opium Production. But on tracing out the expansion of Chinese cultivation to more recent times it is seen to have attained, as might have been expected, alarming proportions. The following brief passages exhibit this fact: the Economic Products of India. 17 Supply of Opium recognised as National. PAPAVER somniferum. districts to not only produce opium but to have it conveyed throughout the length and breadth of the land. Awakened at last to the reality of the case, the Chinese Government saw that the supply of opium was a national demand, similar to that for tobacco and spirits in other countries. That the attempts to stifle it by the high hand of law had but led to a deeper moral corruption which stultified the humane desires of the refined and cultured reformers. All restriction was therefore removed. Importation and cultivation were legalised, and a fiscal revenue, which could be made to control the traffic far more effectually, was thus drawn into the Imperial treasury, instead of being swallowed up by unscrupulous officials in the form of blackmail. For some years past the influences of this wise decision have been felt powerfully by all opium-producing countries. The Malwa opium of India, which resembles most that produced in China, has proved a less and less remunerative enterprise. The competition which has, for some years, been carried on between the Chinese and Indian drug, appears at length to have appreciably affected the latter, especially the Malwa description. Prices have fallen heavily, and the Government of India has found it expedient, in view of representations from the traders of increasing losses, to reduce the transit duty to the level at which it stood before 1877. The duty has been levied at the following rates since 1845:18 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. History of Opium in India. HISTORY: Indian. Cultivation in India during 15th century. Opium the Economic Products of India. 19 Opium smoking & Opium eating. PAPAVER somniferum. There is, however, no mention of the poppy being grown in Behar, but, as an instance of how agricultural systems have changed in India, it may be added that Abul Fazl (the historian of Akbar's reign) specially points out that juár and bájrá were not grown in Allahabad. At the present day these might be described as the chief autumn crops of that district. HISTORY: Indian. Thus the State Monopoly in Opium and the policy which is practically that pursued at the present day, was a hereditary gift to the British successors of the great Mogul Emperors. The extent to which opium was in use by the people of India (from the peasant to the noble) may be judged of from one or two passages from the Ain. In Gladwin's Transla- tion we learn that the people of Mahoa "gave their children opium to eat till they were three years old." Abul Fazl, the intimate adviser and historian of Akbar, feels no sense of odium attached to the confession that "whenever His Majesty is inclined to drink wine, or take opium, or kuknár, trays of fruit are set before him. He eats a few, but the greatest part is distributed amongst the attendants and nobility." The kuknár alluded to was, no doubt, a beverage prepared from poppy capsules, and the word rendered "opium" in the translation shows that both the inspis- sated juice and the poppy capsules were in use in Akbar's time. The dissipation of the grandees at the courts of Akbar and his son Jahangir is, perhaps, one of the most striking features of the annals of that period, when it is remembered that the tenets of Islám forbid the use of wine. In Bloch- mann's biographical notes of these noblemen, the remark, in varying form, "that he fell a victim to the vice of the age and died from excessive wine- drinking," will be found some twenty to thirty times, while, not infrequently, the addition of some reference to opium occurs. Thus of Shabeg Khan it is stated, "he was much given to wine-drinking. He drank, in fact, wine, hemp, opium, and kuknár, mixed together, and called his beverage of four ingredients Chár Bughra." Jalal-uddin Mas'ud referred to in the Tuzuk, is said to have "ate opium like cheese out of the hands of his mother." Barkhurdar (Mirza Khan Alam), Governor of Bihar, was much "given to kuknár (opium and hemp) and neglected his duties." But it is, perhaps, unnecessary to quote other indications of the extent to which the habit of eating opium or drinking a beverage made from poppy capsules prevailed in India during the sixteenth century; suffice it to add that, in none of these passages does any mention occur of smoking opium in the form of madak or chandu, the special preparations which are in use at the present day. State Monopoly a gift to the British. A Beverage prepared from Poppy Capsules. Reference has already been made to the Portuguese traveller Barbosa as the earliest European writer who deals with the subject of Indian opium. He wrote of the years 1511 to 1516. The reference to Barbosa, given in Crawfurd's Descriptive Dictionary of the Indian Islands, p. 312, may be here reproduced:20 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Early Traffic from India. HISTORY: Indian. the places bordering upon the mouth of the Red Sea is blackish and hard. That which commeth from Cambaia and Deccan is softer and reddish. Amfion is made of sleepe balls" (i.e., poppy-heads) "and is the gumme which commeth forth of the same to ye which end it is cut up and opened. The Indians use much to eat Amfion, specially the Malabares, and thether it is brought by those of Cambaia and other places in great abundance. Hee that useth to eate it, must eate it daylie, otherwise he dieth and con- sumeth himselfe. When they begin to eate it, and are used unto it they eate at the least twenty or thirty grains in weight everie day, sometimes more: but if for foure or five dayes hee chanceth to leave it, he dieth with- out faile: likewise hee that hath never eaten it, and will venture at the first to eate as much as those that dayley use it, it will surely kill him: for I certainly believe it is a kind of poyson." Tobacco- smoking in 16th century. Dutch & Portuguese Traffic in Indian Opium during 16th & 17th centuries. Though opium had been made known to Europe long anterior to Linschoten's time, still his account was far more complete than that of his predecessors in Indian exploration. His remarks leave no room for doubt but that in the sixteenth century poppy cultivation and opium indul- gence had attained considerable proportions in India. He makes no men- tion of opium-smoking, but he confirms the statement already recorded, that eating opium was by no means confined to the Muhammadan nobility but had taken a powerful hold on the people of India. Indeed, the practice of tobacco-smoking was not introduced into India until the sixteenth cen- tury, and it seems highly probable that as in China so in India, opium-smok- ing was an outcome of the inhalation of tobacco fumes. Tavernier, the great French traveller who sojourned in India about the middle of the seventeenth century, was apparently not brought prominently into contact with poppy cultivation, since he specializes all the crops he had studied on his journey through India, but says little or nothing of the poppy. He, however, saw tobacco, and remarks of Burhánpur: "In certain years I have known the people to neglect saving it because they had too much." Of opium he simply remarks (and his words are significant, as they imply a well-established trade which scarce deserved, in his eyes, more than a passing notice): "Opium comes from Burhánpur, a good mercantile town between Surat and Agra. The Dutch go there for it, and exchange their pepper for it." Numerous other records show that the traffic in opium from India had assumed by the sixteenth and seven- teenth centuries an important position in the Portuguese and Dutch trade prior to the advent of British merchants. Thus, an Italian writer in 1511 says, that General Albuquerque had seized "8 Guzzarate ships" "because they were enemies of the king of Portugal; and that these had many rich stuffs and much merchandize, and arfiun (for so they call opio tebaico) which they eat to cool themselves; all which he would sell to the king for 300,000 ducats worth of goods, cheaper than they could buy it from the Moors." Ramusio in 1668 alludes to a purchase of 60 parcels of opium from Cambaya. Valentijn deals also with the export traffic of opium from India. "It will hardly be believed, he says, that Java alone consumes monthly 350 packs of opium, each being of 136 cattis, though the East India Company make 145 cattis out of it" (Vol. IV., 61, publisted 1726). Coromandel Opium. Incidentally allusion has been made to opium being conveyed to Batavia from the Coromandel Coast of India. Roxburgh, Elliot, and Ainslie, who wrote of that region and of Madras generally, make no mention of opium cultivation in South India. That it was once on a time cultivated there, as well as in Orissa and Bengal generally, there can be no doubt, for we have the East India Company orders that its cultivation should be restricted to Patna and Benares. Doubtless the danger to the commu-
the Economic Products of India. 21 Early Historic Records of Indian Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. nity and the difficulty in preventing illicit transactions, with a widespread, almost promiscuous, cultivation, must have forced on the Directors of the Honourable Company the necessity for confining the traffic within narrow limits, where fiscal restrictions could be brought directly to bear on it. Prior to that arrangement there were no doubt frequent cases of contra- band shipments leaving the smaller port towns of South India. At all events we read of Siam and Pegu obtaining their opium in the sixteenth century from Negapatam and Meliapur. The statement that opium was unknown in Burma prior to British annexation is thus quite incorrect. The Arabs introduced the drug into Burma and succeeded in making its use very general. HISTORY. Indian. Restriction of Cultivation. Burma ob-tained Opium from India in the 16th century. Kampfer in 1688 saw the people of Java smoking tobacco impregnated with opium which, he says, the Batavians brought from Bengal and Coro- mandel. In 1516 Pyres referred to opium as a production of the kingdom of Cous (Kuch) Behar and also of Malwa. Perhaps the earliest direct reference to the opium of Bengal, however, occurs in Captain A. Hamil- ton's New Account of the East Indies (I., 315) published 1727, where he says: "The chiefs of Calicut for many years had vended between 500 and 1,000 chests of Bengal ophium yearly up in the inland countries, where it is very much used." A little later (1770) the Abbe Raynal (Histoire Philosophique, &c., I., 424) wrote, "Patna... is the most celebrated place in the world for the cultivation of opium. Besides what is carried into the inland parts, there are annually 3,000 or 4,000 chests exported, each weighing 300lb..... An excessive fondness for opium prevails in all the countries to the east of India." About the same period (1787) Dr. Hove22 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. History of British Indian Monopoly. HISTORY: Indian. above what would be the common selling rate of the subsequent month of Bysakh, as it was in that month that the rate or price of the opium was fixed, according to the smaller or greater quantity of the produce, being first settled at about 2 rupees per seer of 80 sicca weight: and the Patna merchants at this rate, receiving according to their stipulations, with interest, &c., the commodity for the advances they had made, they brought it into town and prepared the same carefully in their houses, so that it might suit the European purchasers. There were also smaller dealers, known by the names of Pykars, resident throughout the country at large who made purchases and prepared the opium in their houses from 10 to 50 maunds, but the commodity thus received from the Pykars was never genuine. After the opium-growers had delivered to the Patna opium merchants as much of the commodity as liquidated their advances, they then heightened their prices. In the month of October, the opium being prepared, the merchant used first to offer it for sale to the Dutch, and all the merchants joining together fixed a price and agreement with the Dutch Chief, a merchant having 500 maunds in his house, contracting to deliver 200 maunds, and receiving payment thereof to that amount. After thus settling with the Dutch, the merchants used to make further contracts with the English, but with an enhanced price above what the Dutch had agreed for; and thereafter they went and contracted with the French at a still higher price than they had stipulated for with the English. Thereafter, in the month of November, the Dutch made a second contract with the mer- chants at a higher price than they had at first agreed for, and the commodity began to be delivered; and the mofussil Pykars taking something by way of Arat or brokerage disposed of their goods to the Patna merchants; but there was very little thereof found of such a quality as to be accepted, it being, on the contrary, for the most part rejected. If in any year the demand for opium was more urgent than usual, the Pykars, by collecting the article from Shahabad, &c., made it sink very much in quality by which means the commodity became in general very much adulterated; the purchasing price of the Europeansran then from 100 to 150 rupees per maund, though, in some years, by reason of the urgency of the demand and the competition among the gentlemen, the price has now and then risen to 200 rupees, whereby many native merchants made fortunes, whilst, on the other hand, by reason of European wars and other causes, the price has fallen as low as 70 or 75 rupees, in which time both the merchants and Pykars were great sufferers. Thus the purchasing price of opium was various, but that variety never affected the revenue rate of the poppy lands." In the official papers which the writer has had the privilege of consult- ing, the historic facts of the period of which Ram Chand wrote down to the establishment of the Honourable the East India Company's monopoly has been ably reviewed A few passages from these records may be here reproduced: the Economic Products of India. 23 History of British Indian Monopoly. PAPAVER somniferum. of the Companies continued to trade clandestinely on their own account in the drug, with the result that a large quantity of adulterated opium was brought into market. At length, in 1773, an end was put to all disputes by the Governor of Bengal (Warren Hastings), who assumed, on behalf of the English East India company, a monopoly of all the opium produced in Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, promising to the Danes, the Dutch and the French, a certain quantity of opium annually, to be received by them from the English Company's agent." "The arrangement with the French and the Dutch was terminated by the taking of all the possessions in India and Ceylon, of those nations, in 1793 and 1795. That with the Danes continued in force for some years later. But the arrangement with the French was renewed in 1815 by Article 6 of a Convention executed in London on the 7th of March of that year." By that article the French were to receive upon requisition duly made opium to the maximum extent of 300 chests. The right thus conveyed is still exercised by the French Administration in India. Delivery of the opium is never taken for sale or consumption in the French settlements; but on the issue of the notification of opium sales for the ensuing year, the privilege to receive the 300 chests is put up for sale to the highest bidder. The purchaser is by means of it able to keep back from sale part of the whole of the reserved chests, and thus raises the price (a form of opium gambling) at a given sale. Delivery is rarely taken, and the loss on re-sale (often considerable) falls upon the British Government. From the remarks below on the opium Fiscal Administration it will be found that for some years past the right to this claim, 300 chests, has been sold to the Indian Government for an annual sum, so the difficulty indicated above has for the present been overcome. HISTORY: Indian. Birth of the British Monopoly in 1773. But to return to the historic facts which bear on the Indian Opium monopoly, it may be said that from 1773 to 1797 the right to the exclusive manufacture of opium on account of the Company was sold annually in the first instance, but from the year 1781 by four-year contracts (see 9th Report of a Select Committee of the House of Commons, 1783; also Cole- brooke's Digest of the Regulations, &c. (Calcutta, 1807), pp. 396 to 423). "The contracts were disposed of by private bargain and favour till the year 1785, when they were opened to public competition, and were assigned to the highest bidder. Definite stipulations were thenceforward exacted for protecting the cultivators from being compelled to grow the poppy, for securing to them freedom from vexatious imposts, and a fair price for the raw-juice delivered by them to the contractors, and for the payment by the contractors of certain charitable allowances. The cultivators, on the other hand, were made liable to penalties for keeping back the opium produced by them, and to a deduction of batta (to be assessed by arbitrators) upon opium with which water had been mixed. Opium delivered by the growers adulterated otherwise than with water was made liable to confiscation; and, under certain conditions, became the property of the contractors, who were allowed to dispose of it as they pleased, except as part of the Com- pany's provision. Dealing in opium, contrary to the monopoly, was made punishable, in the case of British subjects, by forfeiture of the Company's protection and deportation to Europe; and in the case of other persons, by fine recoverable 'by the mode of process laid down in the judicial regula- tions for enforcement of decrees.'" (Official papers in the Department of Finance & Commerce.) Colebrooke (Remarks: on the Husbandry of Bengal, Calcutta, 1804, and London, 1806) alludes to the system of enforced cultivation of poppy that seems to have been engendered by the contract system. The Provincial Council of Revenue also, in a notification on this subject, expressed their strongest displeasure (1st August 1777) at a high- Right to manufacture farmed. Evils of the Contract system.
24 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. History of British Indian Monopoly. HISTORY: Indian. Necessity for Government Agencies (1797) handed proceeding which had come to their notice in which "a considerable tract of land in the neighbourhood of Ghya was covered with green corn, and which would have been fit to cut in about a month or six weeks: this corn was suddenly cut down, in order that the land might be prepared for the immediate cultivation of poppy." Frequent mention occurs in the records of the period that the farmers of the opium monopoly insisted that when once a cultivator had produced opium on a field he must, year after year, continue to do so. That their vested rights were infringed by a spasmodic cultivation. That if a rayat did not wish to continue the opium cultivation, he should forfeit his right to the land and allow the contractors to find arayat who would be willing to continue the cultivation. The instances of abuse in spite of the most stringent injunctions made by the Company with the contractors became so rife and flagrant, that the Board of Directors were forced to seek some other plan of operations than that of farming out the right to produce a drug of such potency. Moreover, the opening of the contracts to competition compelled the contractors to lower their prices and to adopt false contrivances to secure their profit. Amongst others they incited adulteration or themselves directly adulterated the opium, and thus coming into possession of large quantities that the Company would not take from them they became retail vendors to an alarming extent. Year by year the provision opium became worse and worse, the revenue fell in consequence until, in the early part of 1797, it was decided to abandon the contract system and to open direct Government agencies. Profits of Opium credited to Revenue. In 1775, the issue was raised as to whether the profits of the opium traf- fic shall be credited to Commerce or Revenue. Ultimately, much to the honour of the great trading Company, the question was decided in favour of the latter. It thus became all the more necessary that no intermediary profits should be tolerated, but that the country at large should get the full benefit of the savings which could be effected by a proper administration of the Opium Department. The vested interests of the community at large were thus early recognised as having a direct claim on the proper control and profits derived from opium. This change was highly com- mended by Colebrooke (Remarks on Husbandry, &c.), and even Ram Chand Pundit, who could contrast the old free-trade system, in which he formerly participated, with the subsequent contract system, after discussing the grievances of the rayats, amid bribery and corruption, the enforced cultivation and dishonest weighments of their produce, admitted "If the grievances above stated, supposing them still to exist, were fairly obviated, it appears to me that the carrying on the opium business as a monopoly is the best mode, as well for the rayat as for the preservation of the quality and the good of the country at large, including the advantage of the Company." After discussing the many recommendations of the new system, viz., a con- stant market, liberal advances, freedom from all compulsion to cultivate, he adds: "The rayats should never be let off without punishment whenever detected either in delivering the juice of the poppy in an adulterated state or in disposing of it elsewhere; and finally, after its receipt into the warehouse, it should be made up with the greatest care, that to whatever region it may be exported its good quality may redound to the honour of the agent." It will thus be seen that the free trade, as also the contract systems, had been found by the East India Company, as well as by the community at large, defective and pernicious, and that direct control was hailed by the enlightened people of India as a greatly needed and valuable reform. Consumption of Opium in India restricted. It is to be regretted that definite statistics do not exist of the consumption of opium in India for more than the past twenty or thirty years. From the general terms in which it is spoken of, however, by the seventeenth and
the Economic Products of India. 25 Introduction of Opium-smoking in India. PAPAVER somniferum. eighteenth century writers, there would appear no doubt that it was more prevalent formerly than at the present day. One of the direct results of the control of Government has been to restrict cultivation to narrow limits and thus to remove temptation from the door of the peasant. This would appear to have altered the form of indulgence, for the capsules and plant could not so readily be obtained as formerly, and, in many parts of the country, the bever- age post or kuknár rapidly became unknown. The consumption of opium itself by eating it or making a water decoction from it, to be drunk in place of kuknár, seems to have been unaffected by the change. Down to the beginning of the present century no writer appears to have recorded the existence in India of the Chinese special form of indulgence, namely, the smoking of the drug. To the ordinary student of Indian questions of poli- tical economy, the fact of opium being actually smoked in this country appears to have escaped observation26 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Attitude of Indian Government HISTORY. THE ATTITUDE OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE CHINESE OPIUM QUESTION. Attitude of Indian Government. It would be foreign to the purpose of the present article to enter fully on the arguments that have been advanced in support of, or against, the attitude taken up by the Indian Government in the opium question. The controversy may be said to have assumed a voluminous form with the details of which the public are already conversant. The despatch (alluded to above) which issued from the Marquis of Ripon's Government and was presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty, sets forth the chief difficulties that exist. In that despatch the following succinct passages occur: "The economic objections to the manner in which the opium revenue is raised, whether in Bengal or Bombay, may be ad- mitted to be considerable. In the former case, the Government itself en- gages in private trade, a course which is open to obvious objections. In the second case, a very heavy export duty is imposed. In both cases the course adopted interferes with and restricts the free production of and trade in opium. It cannot be doubted that it would be highly profitable to any private trader to pay for crude opium a very much higher sum than is now paid by the Government to the cultivators of Bengal. If, therefore, supposing such a thing to be possible, no restriction were placed upon the cultivation of the poppy, and if, at the same time, the export duty were taken off, it is certain that an immense stimulus would be given to the production of opium, and that China would be flooded with the Indian drug. Thus, in the direct proportion to the removal of the economic objections, the moral objections would be intensified in degree. So long, therefore, as the plea of the Anti-Opium Society is confined to the con- tention that the Indian Government should cease its direct connection with the opium trade, it may be said, with perfect truth, that their policy is based purely on theory. Not only can it effect no practical good, but it almost certainly would do a great deal of harm. It would increase the consumption of opium in China. It would, by cheapening the price of the Indian drug, cause the poorer classes of Chinamen, who now smoke native opium, to substitute Indian opium in its place. It would, moreover, encourage the use of opium amongst the native population of India, some of whom, notably the Sikhs, are already addicted to the practice; and it would result in a diminution of the food-supply of India by reason of the cultivation of the poppy over tracts where cereals are now grown. If, therefore, the policy is to be not merely theoretical, but is to be productive of some practical good, it must aim, not only at the disconnection of the Indian Government with the opium trade, but at the total suppression of the trade itself. "As to whether it be more immoral for the Government to be directly connected with the manufacture and sale of opium than merely to derive a revenue from the manufacture and sale of the drug by others, that is a point on which, without doubt, much difference of opinion may exist. We do not think that any useful object would be gained by a discussion of this point, or of the cognate question of whether, in Mr. Fawcett's words (Times, 5th June 1880), there is 'much difference between raising revenue from opium and raising 26 millions as we do in this country (England) to a great extent out of the intemperance, improvidence, and vice of the people.' "We turn to the second point, in respect to which the position of the Government of India is especially open to attack, namely, the policy pur- sued towards the Chinese Government in relation to the opium trade. This branch of the question requires ample treatment. It is stated that the treaty under which opium is admitted into China was extorted from
the Economic Products of India. 27 on Chinese Opium Question. PAPAVER somniferum the Chinese Government; that the Chinese Government are now forced to admit opium, and that they are both able and willing to put a stop to the consumption of opium in China, if the foreign import trade were stopped. HISTORY: Attitude of Indian Government. "These are grave accusations. We think, however, that we can show that, whatever opinions may be entertained as regards the policy of the various wars waged with China, it is wholly incorrect to say that the article in the Treaty of Tientsin, which provided for the admission of opium, was extorted from the Chinese Government; that Indian opium is in no way forced upon China, but that, on the contrary, the Chinese Government derives a large revenue from the import trade, which it is very unwilling to sacrifice; that the statement that the Chinese Government is willing to put down the use of opium must be received with great qualifications, and that irresistible evidence is forthcoming to show that they are not able to stop it, even if their willingness to do so be freely admitted. Treaty of Tientsin, in 1860. "We need not go into the history of the various wars which have from time to time been waged with China, nor examine whether the policy of those wars was justifiable or the reverse. It may be very true that the Chinese were with difficulty got to assent to the terms of the Treaty of Tientsin. There is nothing very remarkable in the fact that, at the close of a war, the vanquished party should accept, with great reluctance, the terms on which the victors insist. But as regards the particular point which we are now discussing, namely, the admission of opium into China, we have excellent evidence to show that it is wholly incorrect to say that this pro- vision of the treaty was extorted from the Chinese. Mr. Lay, who was Chinese Secretary to Lord Elgin's Mission, and who personally conducted the tariff negotiations, has specially stated that 'the Chinese Government admitted opium as a legal article of import, not under constraint, but of their own free will deliberately.' Mr. Laurence Oliphant, who was Sec- retary to the Mission, has confirmed Mr. Lay's statement, and has added that he informed the Chinese Commissioner that he had 'received instruc- tions from Lord Elgin not to insist on the insertion of the drug in the tariff, should the Chinese Government wish to omit it. This he declined to do. I then proposed that the duty should be increased beyond the figure suggested in the tariff, but to this he objected, on the ground that it would increase the inducements to smuggling'. Mr. Lay's and Mr. Oliphant's statements appeared in the Times of the 22nd October and 25th October 1880. Their evidence, we venture to think, is conclusive answer to the charge that the clause of the Tientsin Treaty, under which opium was admitted into China, was extorted from the Chinese. "In point of fact, it is quite clear that a constant struggle is going on in China between the Imperial and the local authorities. The former en- deavour to check the consumption of native opium, and are not so much averse to the use of the foreign drug, inasmuch as they derive more reve- nue from the latter than from the former. The interests of the local author- ities are in a totally different direction. To them the use of the native is far more lucrative than that of the foreign drug." The Government of India in dealing with the question of the power of the Chinese Government28 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Attitude of Indian Government. HISTORY: Attitude of Indian Government the native drug,the Economic Products of India. 29 On Chinese Opium Question. PAPAVER somniferum. opium-smoking in China. If the supply of opium from India were to cease, the richer classes in China would be deprived of a luxury which they prize, but, so far as the general population was concerned, the consumption of opium would remain much as it was before. Long before Indian opium went to China, opium was consumed there; no one can say how long the custom of opium-smoking has prevailed. A single province of Western China produces more opium than the whole of India; the cultivation is carried on, so far as the Chinese Government is concerned, with perfect freedom, and it is constantly and rapidly increasing. The population of China practically depends for its supply on the opium produced at home. HISTORY: Attitude of Indian Government. "If, therefore, all that is said about the ruin of the Chinese by opium were true, the prohibition of imports from India would afford no remedy. But it is certainly not true. Excess in opium, so far as the individual con- sumer is concerned, may probably be as bad as excess in alcohol; it cannot be worse, and its effects upon his neighbours are comparatively harmless. Used in moderation, as the vast majority of Chinese smokers use it, there is no reason to believe that opium is injurious. I do not doubt that the people of France, and Italy, and Spain are, on the whole, better for their wine, and that the people of England and Germany are better for their beer. Neither do I doubt that, on the whole, the Chinese are better for their opium. Effects of Opium Indulgence. "It is often said that the Chinese Government views the opium trade with dislike and desires its abolition. Whatever may once have been the case, it undoubtedly now desires that the trade should flourish, because it derives from duties on Indian opium a large and highly prized revenue. It has officially disclaimed any wish to see the imports from India diminished. Its real and reasonable object, for which it has long been striving, has been to obtain for itself a larger share of the profit derived by a foreign State from the consumption of opium by Chinese subjects." One of the chief difficulties in the Chinese opium question is that which has been briefly touched on above, in the remarks regarding the compli- cation of the Chinese Imperial and Provincial interests. By the Treaty of Tientsin (1860) the Imperial Government of China received 3o taels (R95) on every chest imported. But besides that duty opium has always been made to pay a far heavier Provincial charge known as the likin dues. These dues were, till within the past few months, imposed by the Provincial Govern- ments at rates fixed by them not only on imported opium but also on what was produced in the country. The latter being greater in volume, and that volume being increased by the decrease of the foreign imports, the Provincial authorities naturally put greater value on local produc- tion. Their interests were thus diametrically opposed to the Imperial Government, since the latter obtained no revenue from local production. But these likin dues were a never-failing source of annoyance both to the people and to the administration, from the difficulty of collection and the countless facilities for blackmail, over and above the authorised charges, rendered possible in a trade which by Imperial legislation fell under the severest bane of the law. Formerly the likin charge on im- ported opium was not a constant one but often indeed assumed the form of an accumulative transit charge. By the Convention of Chefoo, finally ratified by the British Government February 1887, the likin taxes on im- ported opium were consolidated with the Imperial import duty. All im- ported opium by present arrangement is deposited in bond, from which it is removed only on payment of the entire duty due to the Government. Finding that the reform thus set on foot was by no means sufficient, the Imperial Government of China has recently advanced further and placed the entire traffic in opium and poppy cultivation under Imperial supervision. Imperial and Provincial Dues. Convention of Chefoo in 1887.
30 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Poppy Cultivation. HISTORY: Attitude of Indian Government. Opium a State Monopoly in China. The likin dues are now collected by the Provincial Governments and credited to the Imperial revenue. Opium is thus in China as in India a State Monopoly. Of imported opium, however, it is currently reported that the working of this new arrangement is not giving satisfaction to the traders. The chances of contraband traffic and of escaping the likin charges through the easy bribery of the humbler officials has been greatly minimised, and that being so the profits are much less to the smaller native dealers, hence their purchasing limit has been considerably lowered. There seems little doubt, however, that as far as the Chinese Government is concerned, the traffic, by being thus legalised, is at last placed on a more certain footing, and one from which such restrictions, as may be found necessary to the expansion of consumption, will be within the power of the Government to effect on perfectly constitutional grounds. At present the revenue realised by China on its imported opium alone cannot be far short of £1,500,000; the Indian Government realises on its exports (mainly to China) a net revenue of, say, £5,500,000.* These two sums are, therefore, additional charges to the cost of production of the article, and though they do not very probably express much more than half the total profits made from the consumer of Indian opium, they show conclusively that if taxation can repress luxurious indulgences, opium is being fully brought under that in- fluence. Opium, in fact, pays quite as heavy a tax as the corresponding indulgence of the working classes of Great Britainthe Economic Products of India. 31 Varieties of the Plant. PAPAVER somniferum. value. Thus in one part of his work while commenting on the analysis of opium produced on certain soils, he remarks: 32 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Poppy Cultivation; CULTIVATION Var. 2nd, glabrumthe Economic Products of India. 33 Races Grown. PAPAVER somniferum. a peculiar dehiscence in his Malwa poppies argues against the possibility of their having belonged to var. glabrum. The definition of P. somniferum, however, as given by most botanists, provides for a considerable vari- ability in the shape of the leaves and the form and colour of the petals. It is, therefore, by no means a matter of necessity that the red coloured poppies of Malwa belong to the variety glabrum. This discussion, as to the possible botanical nature of the opium poppies of India, founded on the peculiar expressions used by Indian authors, has been forced on the writer, owing to his not having had the opportunity of investigating the subject personally. It will, therefore, perhaps, be readily admitted as desirable that we should not much longer remain ignorant on so all-important a feature of the poppy industry. The subject is by no means one of purely botanical interest. The recognised merits of the opium of this country and that depend upon a number of circumstances, such as climate, soil, systems of agriculture, methods of preparation and purity; but it can- not be denied that into that category must also be placed (and perhaps foremost of all other considerations) the peculiar merits of the variety or race of poppy grown. Even when cultivated side by side in the garden, Mr. Scott noted that the various races which he found in the hands of the cultivators, or which he was able to pick up as mere sports, or to produce by cross-breeding, yielded materially different results in quantity and quality of the drug. It is freely admitted that the highly valued medicinal form of opium obtained from Asia Minor is the produce of the variety glabrum. At the present moment we possess no proof as to whether or not that plant is grown in India. But to return to the forms of the Indian poppy, described by Mr. Scott, it would seem that many were, as he states, mere degenera- tions through neglect or from poverty of soil. Others were hybrids, if they may be so called (between recognised races), which he had himself pro- duced, while a third class were sports, found in the fields and which he had cultivated in the hope of discovering more profitable strains than already existed. The writer has very carefully considered all the statements made by Mr. Scott, and has come to the conclusion that the following forms described by him are probably recognisable races, most of which seem to be known to the opium growers of India. A selection of Mr. Scott's forms must of necessity, however, be made with considerable diffidence, since that painstaking observer is the only writer who has dealt with the subject, and any such selection may tend to detract from the value of his work. At the same time it seems desirable to separate Mr. Scott's experiments in the production of what he calls " Mongrels " from old established cultivated races. CULTIVATION Races. Hybrids. Sports. Bengal Forms. Safaid-dherri. 1st, Safaid-dherri. 34 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAP AVER somniferum. Poppy cultivation CULTIVATION Races. Kalodanthi 2nd, "Kalodanthi," or Black-stalked poppy.35 the Economic Products of India. Races Grown. PAPAVER somniferum. CULTIVATION Races. men of this variety in one of my plots of kutila in the season 1873-74. I sowed the seed, but unfortunately none germinated. Again, in the follow- ing season, I found another plant which has this season afforded me a few more. I have also unexpectedly got an addition to these from a mongrel progeny raised first in the season 1874-75. The cross was with kutila as the female and the safaid-dherri, or common glaucous capsuled poppy, as male. The effects of the cross were clear on the first season's progeny; as with many of the kutila-foliaged variety, there was also a considerable percentage with the leaves of the male parent36 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Poppy Cultivation; CULTIVATION Races. adjoining plots had been overrun and destroyed by the mould, this variety resisted it very effectively, retaining to the last its normal functions for the secretion of drug. This season (1875-76), which proved so very unfavour- able to the germination and health of the early-sown plant, thinned con- siderably my plot of this variety, but fortunately a sufficiency of plants escaped to afford me a few seers of seed. The plant retains its robust habit, setigerous flower-stalks, with the large spherical capsules." This is the form alluded to above as approximating to the type of Papaver setigerum. Mr. Scott does not say that its capsules were dehiscent, nor did he apparently record the number of its stigmatic folds. (Conf. with the definition of var. setigerum, p 47.) Gunagun- posta. 10th, Gunagun-posta, or Sufaid-patta.the Economic Products of India. 37 Races Grown. PAPAVER somniferum. experiment on the Deegah land. The plants generally acquired a some- what more robust habit, but they again proved miserably poor drug-pro- ducers, the maximum produce being about 4½ seers per bíghá. It is to be observed, however, that even this is a considerable increase on the first season's results. Again in 1874-75 I gave them a third season's trial. They all suffered, however, so seriously with the common poppy mould, that they gave considerably less opium than they had done the previous season. This blight injury, however, they suffered from in common with nearly all the local varieties. I will now describe the Malwa varieties from the specimens grown in the gardens last season: having now been grown in this district for five successive seasons, a period sufficient, as one might naturally anticipate, for the perfect acclimatisation of an annual herb in a district, where others of its own kin are so extensively and successfully cultivated." CULTIVATION Races. 11th, Lukria.38 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Poppy Cultivation; CULTIVATION. Races. Leela. sorts which I have this season separated from the others. They are of vigorous but somewhat dwarf habit, 3½ to 4 feet high, rather branchy, the leaves ovately oblong, 9 to 12 inches long by 5 to 7 broad, the margins but slightly lobed and coarsely toothed; the texture rather thick and firm; the colour a dull sea-green; the flowers large, white, with entire margins; the capsules roundish-oblong (2½ to 3 inches long by 2¼ to 2½ broad) and glaucous in the one varietythe Economic Products of India. 39 Races Grown. PAPAVER somniferum. is thus exceedingly susceptible, in the early stages of its growth, especially, to the cooling of the soil by the rapid and incessant evaporation of mois- ture. As illustrating this, I may observe that some of the most healthy of my Malwa plants have always been those sheltered less or more from the westerly winds. I have observed also that under a soft and moist easterly wind they quickly acquire a mere healthy appearance. Again, if slightly overshadowed by a tree, they are also greatly more vigorous than when fully exposed: this can be only due to decreased radiation and its consequent chilling effects, and some little perhaps to the plants being slightly screened from the direct rays of the sun. The chilling effects, however, of radiation is, as I believe, the main cause of the hitherto in- different success of the Malwa plant here, and only when it has acquired a thicker and firmer textured foliage (as it now evidently has) will it afford a remunerative crop "(Man. Opium Husbandry. pp. 44-52). CULTIVATION Races. In a further page it will be found that Mr. Scott, while dealing with the subject of the fungoid diseases to which the poppy plant is liable, pointed out that an even greater interest centres around his discovery of the existence of distinct varieties and cultivated races, than the fact of these affording vary ing proportions of the drug or of its separate alka- loids. As with the potato and many other cultivated plants so with the poppy, Mr. Scott noted, that while one race was invariably severely in- jured by disease others enjoyed a comparative or even complete immunity from it. It may thus be inferred that one of the most hopeful courses of improvement would be to foster the cultivation of the races of poppy which yield the maximum of the drug commensurate with the minimum tendency to disease. AREA OF POPPY CULTIVATION & YIELD. Area & Production. In modern language "Bengal opium " means opium manufactured at Patna and Ghazipur as distinct from Turkey, Malwa, and other opiums. The area and yield of Bengal opium are annually known with the utmost accuracy, but that which falls under the definition of " Malwa" and " Other Indian Opiums " can only be learned from the reports fur- nished by the chief producing Native States. In the Panjáb, opium is grown in almost every district, more or less, but the area is regularly declared. The permission to grow the plant and to manufacture the drug in the Panjáb is looked upon as too unimportant to call for special interference more than is done in the case of opium cultivation in certain mountainous tracts and petty Native States within British districts. The Panjáb opium is consumed locally, and the fact that it does not prove sufficient to meet the demand seems satisfactory evidence that the supervi- sion and restriction imposed are sufficient to keep the traffic within legitimate bounds. Throughout the length of the Himalaya the poppy is grown, but little or no control is exercised, since nothing has as yet transpired to show that there is any export from these tracts. It may thus be said that wherever semi-independent Native States and wild mountainous country occur, a limited poppy cultivation is permitted, through the habit of non- interference, but that, with the exception of the Panjáb, no other British province is allowed to grow the plant save in the tracts that have been brought under the direct supervision of the Agencies of Patna and Benares. The accuracy of the returns of area furnished by the chief Native States that produce the Malwa opium, is doubtless open to suspicion. Further, the amounts registered at the weighment stations cannot be used as a factor to check these returns, since it is well known that, in spite of all precautions, con- siderable quantities do actually percolate illicitly into British districts. At the same time the local consumption within Native States is not known, so that the returns, such as they are, have to be accepted. Speaking generally.
40 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Area & Production. CULTIVATION Area & Production. therefore, it may be said that the opium-producing area of British India lies in the Gangetic basin and follows the natural configuration of the country from Monghyr (37° E. long.) to Agra, Muttra, and almost Delhi (78° E. long.), and between a line on the south from Gya, Allahabad, Banda, Jalaon, and Agra (24° to 26° N. lat.) to a similar line on the north from Cham- parun (Moteeharee), and Keri to Moradabad (28° N. lat.). Beyond these limits a casual or insignificant cultivation of course exists from Kuch Behar in the east to Peshawar and Dera Ismail Khan in the west, but the British districts of Bengal, east of Monghyr, which formerly were per- mitted to grow the drug, have been prohibited from doing so since 1840. The area defined approximately embraces the region that produces the Bengal opium. Bengal opium. The following three tables exhibit certain important features of the Bengal opium traffic:the Economic Products of India. 41 Area & Production. PAPAVER somniferum. Extent of Cultivation and Total Produce in the Patna Agency. OPIUM SUB-AGENCIES. BIGHAS CULTIVATED WITH POPPY (OPIUM BIGHA= 5/8 th OF AN ACRE). PRODUCE IN MAUNDS. Average yield per big há for the years 1883 to 1890. 1883-84. 1884-85. 1885-86. 1886-87. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1883-84. 1884-85. 1885-86. 1886-87. 1887-88 1888-89. 1889-90. Srs Ch Tirhoot 17,255 19,048 22,199 26,765 25,638 21,142 24,367 1,686 2,033 2,318 2,443 2,410 1,285 1,550 3  15 Hajeepore 13,138 11,256 15,338 17,444 13,227 14,119 11,507 1,538 1,321 2,009 1,871 1,721 1,160 925 4 9 Chupra 28,094 29,923 26,425 31,103 29,883 27,969 27,701 4,112 3,484 4,495 3,518 4,470 2,637 2,782 5 9 Alligunge 41,155 42,640 42,612 44,031 43,286 40,774 38,728 6,158 6,409 7,325 6,465 7,455 4,336 4,516 6 5 Moteeharee 55,208 71,232 74,343 74,142 74,30? 57,787 63,041 4,842 6,683 6,978 6,968 6,534 3,354 5,021 3  10 Betteah 33,983 39,512 41,430 40,564 37,488 37,456 33,311 3,160 4,515 4,141 13,799 3,905 2,474 2,553 4 0 Shahabad 35,198 35,807 36,623 35,711 34,556 32,239 29,384 6,992 5,751 5,621 4,376 6,050 3,001 4,361 6 7 Gya 63,420 65,906 69,117 65,696 66,044 62,832 60,238 10,992 8,725 9,814 7,066 9,969 5,005 7,802 5  10 Tehtah 42,986 45,036 46,972 45,741 46,178 42,455 43,152 8,231 6,555 6,466 5,436 6,843 3,809 5,812 5  15 Patna 39,147 39,469 43,038 42,396 41,846 40,754 38,445 7,079 6,151 6,430 4,472 6,444 2,964 4,738 5  15 Monghyr 29,934 33,332 35,417 34,673 35,313 30,339 28,356 4,775 4,175 4,277 3,168 4,391 2,158 3,057 4  15 TOTAL Bighás. 399,518 433,161 453,514 458,266 447,759 405,866 398,230 59,560 55,802 59,866 49,582 60,192 32,233 43,147 5 2 Acres. 249,699 270,726 283,446 286,416 279,849 253,666 248,893 CULTIVATION Area & Production.
42 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVERER Somniferum Area & Production. PAPAVER somniferum. Area & Production. CULTIVATION Area & Production Extent of Cultivation and Total Produce in the Benares Agency. OPIUM SUB- AGENCIES. BIGHAS CULTIVATED WITH POPPY (OPIUM BIG HA = 5/8TH ACRE) PRODUCE IN MAUN DS. Average yield per bíg há for the years 1883 to 1890. REMARKS. 1883-84. 1884-85. 1885-86. 1886-87. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1883-84. 1884-85. 1885-86. 1886-87. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. Srs. Ch. Ghazipur 36,133 39,214 39,826 39,856 38,471 21,139 20,995 6,092 5,820 6,150 4,549 6,248 2,316 2,864 5 15 Mirzapur ... ... ... ... ... 16,699 18,421 ... ... ... ... ... 1,728 3,021 ... Azimgurh 15,377 17,677 20,574 20,263 19,028 15,531 17,231 2,759 3,186 3,252 2,674 3,059 1,691 2,218 6 7 Gorakhpur 29,118 30,781 30,720 31,477 30,550 27,925 29,478 4,361 5,008 4,707 4,501 5,134 3,113 3,598 6 3 Bustee 36,054 38,434 40,235 34,983 31,388 29,425 26,215 4,810 6,181 5,406 4,625 4,765 2,926 3,515 2 11 Allahabad 22,565 23,983 24,418 23,349 23,074 13,050 14,421 4.937 4,594 3,312 3,907 4,069 1,186 2,085 7 1 Etawah ... ... ... ... ... 11,364 13,103 ... ... ... ... ... 832 1,218 ... Cawnpore 30,450 11,237 12,349 10,928 10,817 ... ... 3,818 1,057 862 764 814 ... ... 3 7 Futtehgarh 45,065 34,192 36,433 29,965 26,076 19,056 20,735 7,042 4,386 3,106 3,804 2,935 1,695 2,556 4 9 Mainpuri ... 33,449 37,453 33,606 28,842 14,124 15,959 ... 4,436 3,397 3,002 3,157 1,343 2,276 4 3 Average for four years only. Rohilkhand 29,696 40,668 47,741 32,689 29,969 23,171 27,635 5,117 7,382 4,184 3,822 4,312 2,643 4,271 5 9 Aligarh 6,540 9,098 11,310 8,976 8,093 ... ... 917 1,156 743 897 895 ... ... 3 9 Lucknow 59,056 56,118 57,969 50,743 48,033 24,889 31,241 9,949 10,783 7,925 7,759 8,052 3,331 5,133 6 7 For four years only. Sitapur. 18,878 19,300 16,105 15,347 18,718 21,353 3,288 2,135 2,109 2,188 2,442 3,533 5 9 Faizabad 38,030 43,809 46,552 40,142 36,812 18,159 21,639 5,360 7,368 6,178 5,902 5,874 2,285 3,502 5 15 Gonda ... ... ... ... ... 18,708 27,023 ... ... ... ... ... 1,916 3,186 ... Pertabgarh ... ... ... ... 28,663 25,916 31,752 ... ... ... ... 5,116 2,611 4,338 7 2 For 1887-88 only. For four years only. Rai Bareilly. ... 39,910 41,053 38,263 35,650 32,043 36,661 ... 7,517 5,810 5,917 6,233 3,441 5,407 6 9 Sultanpur 61,747 33,784 32,427 29,673 ... ... ... 11,875 5,839 4,467 4,763 ... ... ... 6 10 TOTAL Bighás 409,831 471,232 498,360 441,018 410,813 329,917 373,862 67,037 78,001 61,634 57,995 62,851 35,499 52,721 5 11 Acres 256,144 294,520 311,475 275,636 256,758 206,198 233,664
the Economic Products of India. 43 PAPAVER somniferum. From these tables it will thus be seen that the area under the poppy, the production of opium, and the consumption of the drug in India have been practically stationary, during the past thirty years as far as the Patna and Benares Agencies are concerned. CULTIVATION Area & Production. Turning now to the other Indian opiums it may be said that the Panj44 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Area & Production. CULTIVATION Area & Production. opium, the latter had similarly increased and the doom of the opium trade seemed then not far off. The less productive districts, and those which yielded inferior opium, were once again barred from cultivation. Affairs were wound up in Hazaribagh, Lohardugga, Rungpore, Dinajpur, Meerut, Allahabad, Jalaun, Etawah, Mainpuri, and Banda. But at the close of the Chinese war in 1842 prospects once more revived, but it was then resolved to extend cultivation within existing districts and not again to open up those lately abandoned. The Behar Agency, with the exception of the discontinuance in 1848 of Purneah and the re-introduction of the poppy into Chutia Nagpur in 1869-70 and its re-abandonment in 1877-78, has remained stationary since 1840. It is thus quite incorrect to say (as in the Pharm acographia Indica) that the eastern limits of opium production of the present day is Dinajpur and its southern Hazaribagh. In the Benares Agency changes have been more frequent and the ex- pansion larger. From 1840 to 1861 the only addition was the recultivation of the poppy in Mainpuri and in Banda. But after the disturbances of 1857 and the annexation of Oudh, opium-producing districts had either to be permitted to continue as they had been doing during Native rule or be prohibited. The conditions and necessities of the country were vastly changed and opium cultivation was accordingly permitted (in 1860 to 1864) in many new districts or restored in others, such as Saharanpur, Dehra Dun, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Aligarh, Bulandshahr, Muttra, Agra, Budaun, Moradabad, Bareillv, Fyzabad, Bara Banki, Unao, Lucknow, Gonda, Bahraich, Hardoi, Sitapur, Sultanpur, Partabgarh, and Rae Bareli. But as it became impossible to exercise proper supervision and con- trol over the opium production and consumption, Meerut, Agra. Muttra, Muzaffarnagar, Bulandshahr, and Aligarh were given up and Etah added in 1864-65 to the North-West opium-growing tract. Moradabad, Dehra Dun, and Saharanpur were abandoned, while Kheri and Shahjahanpur were added in 1871-73. In 1881-82 a fresh re-arrangement and slight expansion of the area took place, but not such as to materially increase the total of all India, and, indeed, some contraction has since taken place in the North-West area. The changes that have occurred were governed by many considerations, chief among which appear to have been the administrative necessities of the country and the discovery that one locality produced a better quality of the drug than another. Total area. In concluding this brief review, of the opium-producing area of India, it is perhaps safe to say that it does not now and has never under British domination in India materially exceeded 1,000,000 acres. The total annual production of opium might, therefore, be put at about 1,50,000 maunds. This statement assumes an average yield of 10 seers the acre. Duthie & Fuller in their Field & Garden Crops think, that, while the average yield recorded at Ghazipur, for the North-West Provinces, during 16 years prior to their estimate was 9 seers, the well-known fact that the consumption of Government opium in poppy-growing, is much lower than in non-poppy growing districts, proves, these authors contend, that the culti- vators always retain a portion of the produce. On that account they regard a yield of 10 seers as more nearly correct. In most parts of the Behar Agency the yield is considerably less than in the North-West Prov- inces, but in Malwa it is greater, so that a yield of 10 seers is very probably not far from the average production for all India. The figure arrived at by such an estimate corresponds to the actual returns plus an allowance for illicit consumption. In conclusion, it may be said that the number of licensed cultivators in the Government Agencies is, as a rule, a little over 1,000,000
the Economic Products of India. 45 Cultivation of Poppy in Bengal. PAPAVER somniferum. Preparation of the Land & Methods of Cultivation. CULTIVATION in Bengal. I.46 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Cultivation of Poppy CULTIVATION in Bengal. Manure. (4th) Lime 6 maunds, mixed with 3 maunds charcoal dust, to be applied at the early stages of growth in place of No. 1. (5th) Shorah 4 maunds, with 4 maunds charcoal dust, all well pulverized and mixed, to be applied in a more advanced stage, say with the first appearance of the flower-buds. (6th) Common salt 20 seers, shorah 40 seers, mixed with 160 seers of lime, to be applied as in No. 5. Sowing.the Economic Products of India. 47 in Bengal. PAPAVER somniferum. three times, the sickly and superfluous plants being got rid of and the vigorous plants left at a distance of seven to eight inches from each other. Dr. Lyell says of Behar that the young plants which are removed at the first weedings "are sold and eaten as a salad, those of second and third thinnings possess narcotic properties and are seldom used." CULTIVATION in Bengal. Flowering and Period of Collection of the Opium.48 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Cultivation of Poppy in the CULTIVATION in N.-W. P. & Oudh. in every case by the direct dealings of a Government department with the people on their lands, a feeling which has at other times, with even less reason, led them to oppose the making of new canals. The ultimate gain to the landlord from opium cultivation differs only in degree from what he owes to canals. He is able to charge the highest rate of rent on the land devoted to it, and has little to fear from irrecoverable balances." Opium Cultivators.the Economic Products of India. 49 PAPAVER somniferum. N.-W. Provinces & Oudh. CULTIVATION in N.-W.P. & Oudh. R a. p. Making water beds 0 3 0 Watering (six times) 9 8 0 Weeding (four times) 8 0 0 Harvesting (8 coolies at 2 annas a day for 15 days) 15 0 0 * Manure (2oo maunds; 50 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Cultivation of Poppy in the CULTIVATION in Baroda. these beds, the earth is then turned over with an implement called the khandi, and is watered immediately after Care is required in selecting the seed: it should be a year old and free from damp, and the cultivators, as a rule, preserve a stock from the crop of the previous year. The pro- portion sown is about 2lb to the bighá. In poppy cultivation irrigation requires attention, charnels having to be made for the even watering of the beds. Poppy fields are watered seven times: the first watering com- mences with the sowing, the second four days after, and others follow at intervals of about a fortnight, and after the flowers appear there is one watering. Weeding is a laborious process. It has to be gone through three times, and on each occasion, besides removing strange growth, the poppy plants are thinned until they are left at a distance of eight inches from one another. The First weeding is done twenty days after the plants appear, the other two at intervals of a fortnight. Withered or jogida plants are removed. But barren or vánjia plants are kept for the seed, although they produce no juice. The plants, when tender, are used as a vegetable by many classes. The earlier sowing is in flower in January, and the later in February The poppy-heads are considered ready for scarifica- tion when they present a coating of a light brown colour and do not yield easily to the touch. The process of scarification commences in February or March according to the date of the sowing " (Gazetteer, p. 98). PANJAB. V.the Economic Products of India. 51 Panjab & the Central Provinces. PAPAVER somniferum. 3,500 acres, the produce of which, at an average of six seers per acre, amounts to 525 maunds. Even reducing this by a fourth to allow for loss in drying, we have still the large quantity of 394 maunds, which, at ten rupees a seer represent no less a sum than R 1,57,500. Careful enquiry has shown that, of the produce of the district, all but a few maunds leave it, the destination of by far the greater part being the great Sikh centres of Lahore and Amritsar" (Panjab Gazetteer, pp. 65 & 66). CULTIVATION VI.52 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Diseases of the Poppy Plant. CULTIVATION in the Central Provinces. field is also sown a little garlic or patches of barley. There are about 2,500 acres under opium cultivation, yielding an average of 180 maunds of chik annually. "The chief inducement to grow opium is that it requires so much less labour than sugarcane, and being only four months in the ground requires but comparatively little water, and many streams which run quite dry during the hot weather are available for the irrigation of it, ripening as it does by the end of February" (Report on the Land Revenue Settlement of the Baitool District, Nerbudda Division, Central Provinces, by W. Ramsay, pp. 68-70). DISEASES. DISEASES OF THE POPPY PLANT. The late Mr. Scott gave this subject much patient study, and the able chapter which he devoted to it in his Opium Husbandry should be con- sulted by all interested in the matter. It is impossible to devote to the diseases of the poppy the space in this work which its importance demands. It may be said at the outset that the life-history of the most injurious para- sitic fungus has not apparently been as yet worked out to its final issue. Mr. Scott presumed that the recuperative germs that carry on the growth exist in the seed and is thus sown with the crop instead of coming to it from some other plant. On this supposition he explained the observation that seeds saturated in camphorated water were less attacked owing, as he thought, to the germs of the fungus having been killed. The writer has alluded to this subject above in the paragraph devoted to the manurial materials employed in steeping the seeds. Scott discusses the diseases of the poppy under the following headings: (I) Specific diseases of a functional or organic nature, caused by an excess or deficiency of those agents which are necessary for the vigorous growth of plant, such as soil, light, heat, and moisture; (2) Injuries caused by parasitic plants (a) of the higher or flowering plants, e.g., the broom-rapes and (b) of the lower or so-called flowerless class, limited to the natural order of Fungi; (3) Mechanical injuries of various kinds, chiefly the attacks of insects. Ist, Specific Diseases.53 the Economic Products of India. Diseases of the Poppy Plant. PAPAVER somniferum. sons. The symptoms are a general drying up of the upper or younger parts of the plant, the leaves becoming shrivelled and variously contort- ed, with the veins of a brownish or purple-black colour, while a longitudi- nal section of the plant shows a dry and shrivelled apex, and the pith less or more decayed from above downwards. As showing that this injury is caused purely by heat, it is frequently observed that the stem throws off lateral shoots immediately after irrigation. CULTIVATION Diseases. (c) Sclerosis.54 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Diseases of the Poppy Plant. CULTIVATION Diseases. more than the poppy. They grow up from the roots of the crop sending, above ground a tuft of beautiful spikes of bluish flowers. When very pre- valent they do considerable injury to the crop, but as they are large and easily seen can be exterminated. Indeed, unless when very prevalent, they rarely do any appreciable injury. Fungoid: Peronospora. (g) Peronospora.the Economic Products of India. 55 Diseases of the Poppy Plant. PAPAVER somniferum. woven by a sterile mycelium, the decay of which caused their discoloration and death. Again, the fungal discolorations and disease of the leaves were communicated to the nodes,56 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Diseases of the Poppy Plant. CULTIVATION Diseases. striking form as exemplified in those of 1874.75. The latter, its develop- ment and effects, we will now briefly notice." Peronospora. Mr. Scott next deals with the manner in which the mycelial disease progresses. Starting from the first leaf on the seedling, he says, it ascends (never descends) attacking in succession each cycle of leaves until the whole plant is involved, the onward progress being temporarily arrested between each new cycle. "From the above summary of a series of careful observations, there can, I think, be no question as to the correlation of periodicity in the development of the mould and its foster-parent, each periodic invasion of the former being strictly limited to a single leaf cycle of the latter. In its limitation to the fully mature leaves, and in presenting well-marked periods of rest and activity, the poppy-mould appears to differ altogether from its ally. the potato-mould, in which, so far as I am aware, no such phenomena have been observed. It is also important to note that the poppy-mould does not necessarily extend wherever a green leaf matrix presents itself. This, as it appears, is a clear proof that atmosphe- ric influences have really little to do with the extension of the mould, but that, on the other hand, it is largely, if not wholly, dependent on the degree of maturation of the matrix; that is to say, on certain peculiar chemical changes which occur in the juices of the nurse plant at that period, and that these are alone favourable to any high degree of vital activity in the mould. This is a matter of high importance. Hitherto, it has been customary to correlate the sudden appearance and rapid extension of various fungoid-blights to certain peculiar atmospheric conditions. Now, there may be some such relation in the spread and extension of the truly terrestrial or even epiphytal species; but I do think that careful observations will show that this scarcely, if at all, holds in those of a truly parasitic character, and especially such as the poppy and potato-moulds, which are wholly dependent for their development on a supply of the juices afforded by these plants in the period of their vegetation. As regards the poppy-mould especially, I am convinced that its development and exten- sion are largely dependent on certain changes in the juices of the maturing leaves though I admit that there are grounds for the belief that the parti- cular mode of developmentthe Economic Products of India. 57 Diseases of the Poppy Plant. PAPAVER somniferum. him, from whatever locality obtained, agreed in showing the presence of Peronospora arborescens, a fungus closely allied to that which occurs in potato disease. " The fungi," he says, " which belong to this genus, besides the two species mentioned above, include various others affecting other host-plants, are true entophytes, their mycelium or vegetative apparatus being developed within the tissues of the plants which play the part of hosts, whilst their reproductive apparatus consists partly of filaments bearing the so-called spores or conidia which emerge from the substance of the leaves and project on the surface as a whitish mouldy layer, and partly of larger reproductive bodies termed Oogonia which are developed within the substance of the affected tissues. These consist of a sac containing a mass of living protoplasm which subsequently forms the Oospore, and is ulti- mately invested with a thickened membrane, frequently marked with pro- jecting tubercles, ridges or reticulations. The former class of reproductive bodies, the conidia, are produced in extreme abundance and serve for the rapid diffus on of the parasite from plant to plant, whilst the latter, wrapped up in the tissues of the host and additionally protected by the thickened character of their envelopes, are supposed to be capable of retaining their vitality under conditions destructive to that of the myce- lium and conidia, and to be thus endowed with a capacity for germination after prolonged periods of rest. This process has, however, never been actu- ally observed to occur in them, but is only inferred to exist from what has been observed in regard to the corresponding bodies in the allied genus Cystopus. It is by means of such Oospores that the species of Peronospora affecting various plants at home are supposed to survive the winter and to be ena- bled to appear year after year." Dr. Cunningham next alludes to a method of survival which pertains in perennial host-plants. "For example, Oogonia and their contained Oospores have never been detected on the Peronospora infestans, as that parasite exists in Europe on the potato plant, and yet it survives the rigours of the winter and appears year after year because portions of its mycelium affecting the tissues of the tubers remain protected and dormant, wrapped up in the substance of the latter and ready to grow and spread outwards with the young shoots arising from the tubers when they are planted." In the case of the potato disease Dr. Cunningham says that so far as the evidence goes it would seem as if certain breeds of the potato had a hereditary predisposition to attack or exemption, co-existent with perfect health in the host. This well accepted view, regarding the potato disease and some other parasitic diseases, makes it very probable that Mr. Scott's observation is correct, namely, that certain forms of the poppy plant are less liable to the attacks of the disease than others. In support of the idea it may be added that Dr. Cunningham noted that the disease presented different appearances according to the nature of the leaves in which it was found. In his micros- copical investigations also he failed to detect any haustoria or penetrating portions of the mycelium. The filaments were seen to be closely adapted to their containing intercellular spaces and to exhibit projections and dilata- tions corresponding with the irregularities of the intercellular spaces of the leaf-tissue within which they freely anastomosed, but were never seen to pene- trate the cells of the host. The filaments were also observed to be devoid of any septa. " The fertile filaments are erect, strung, and persistent, many remaining recognisable adherent to dried fragments of leaves attached to dead plants, or obtained from the neighbouring soil. When quite fresh, they are perfectly colourless and full of finely molecular protoplasm; but on keeping, the latter shrinks into granular masses of bright yellow colour and remains without further change for many months in dried specimens." " The conidia appear very rapidly to lose the power of germinating. In CULTIVATION Diseases. Perenospora.
58 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Diseases of the Poppy Plant. CULTIVATION. Diseases. Peronospora. several instances in which fresh specimens were sown in water, germi- nation was observed to take place, the method, curiously enough, being in general somewhat different from any of those described by De Bary as characteristic of the genus. The protoplasm at first became divided into several, generally four, distinct masses, as though a formation of zoos- pores were about to occur, but in place of this each mass gave origin to a simple germinal tube. The latter elongated considerably, but remained undivided, and showed no further development in water, and, owing to the want of fresh-growing plants, experiments on their behaviour towards the living tissues of the host could not be carried out." "Prolonged and careful search was made for Oogonia and Oospores, but entirely without avail, for, a though fresh leaves in every stage of the disease and withered ones which adhered to blighted plants or had fallen on the surrounding soil, as well as specimens of the soil itself, were care- fully examined, in no instance could any such bodies be detected. This absence of Oospores, however, may have been a peculiarity in the leaves examined, or may be dependent on their development being confined to some part or parts of the host not submitted to examination, such as the capsules, cotyledons, first developed true leaves, &c." Dr. Cunningham also examined specimens of the common weed (allied to the poppy and met with throughout the plains of India) Argemone mexicana, in the hope of detecting the Oospores of Peronospora on that plant, but in this also he failed. "The absence of Oospores," he adds, "in all the speci- mens submitted to examination is remarkable, as there can be little doubt that they must be produced, the recurrence of the disease from year to year being otherwise almost inexplicable, as the conidia are, in so far as observation goes, incapable of retaining their vitality when dried, or of germination after any length of time. The possibility of their development being confined to special parts of the host has been already alluded to, and it is also possible that the germs of the my- celium may be contained in the seed." This opinion was held by the late Mr. Scott, viz., that reproduction must pass through the seed. The only other likely method would be by the production of the Oospores on some altogether different plant in the vicinity of the poppy fields, This suggestion is of course at variance with the accepted life-history of the better known PERONOSFORÆ, but it is within the bounds of possibility that some such migration from one host to another is specially adapted to bridge over the period during which the poppy is off the fields. Dr. Cunningham suggests at least a safe precaution that no diseased parts of the plant should be left on the field from one season to another. It might further be recommended that the Bombay system of burning the surface soil (rábbing) might be tried as a prevention against the possible survival of Oospores in the soil or attached to the roots of the plant. The above detaled extract from Dr. Cunningham's valuable paper has been given in the hope of its proving useful to persons interested in the subject who may not have access to the Annual Report of the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India (1873) in which the original paper occurs. The life-history, so far elaborated by Dr. Cunningham, gives the key to the natural course of future investigation by which the concluding admission of failure made by Dr. Cunningham may be re- moved from a subject of vast importance to Indian agriculture and an in- valuable source of revenue to this country, namely, the failure to detect the location of the Oospores or to discover the existence of any other arrange- ment which could provide for the recurrence of the Opium Blight. In summing up his views, Mr. Scott (a practical horticulturist) offers
the Economic Products of India. 59 Diseases of the Poppy Plant. PAPAVER somniferum. certain further remarks regarding poppy mould and other fungi seen on the opium plant. CULTIVATION Diseases. Peronospora. " From these personal observations I was thus rather prepared for the periodicity in the mould attack, of which we are afforded unmistakable evidence in the Gya and Tehta returns, for the last quarter of a century or so. In conjunction with my own observations, these crop statistics indicate intervals of from three to four seasons in the appearance of the mould in a more or less severe blight form. Admitting, then, the opera- tions of a law of periodicity, I would explain the apparent triennial or quadrennial recurrence of mould in a virulent form. thus: 60 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Diseases of the Poppy Plant. CULTIVATION Diseases. Dactylium. which forms the blue mouldiness on cheese. It is distinguished by its necklaces of spores, rising from a less or more globular head, and support- ed by erect, septate, microscopic threads. "(m) Dactylium.the Economic Products of India. 61 Diseases of the Poppy Plant. PAPAVER somniferum. injury to which the China opium cakes are liable. It appears to destroy the aroma and other physical qualities of the opium if allowed to affect it seriously. With regard to the conditions favourable or otherwise to this mould on the cakes, Dr. Durant remarks: -. I am much inclined to attribute it to the use of an undue proportion of lewa, as it is a well known fact that all adulterated opium of the kind and quality generally confiscat- ed as unfit for use, if kept for a short time, will generate this fungus to any extent. This fungus also may be seen to perfection during the rainy season on the surface of all contraband opium classed as fourth quality, which, as a rule, is chiefly composed of foreign extracts, and is kept in large wooden boxes until destroyed. The only remedy for infected cakes is to strip off at once all affected parts of the shell, and to replace it by a new one well smeared with fresh lewa.' A moist and hot atmosphere is peculiarly favourable to its development and rapid extension, and really the only practical mode of suppressing it, for example, in our opium godowns, as in other closed structures, is to supplement free ventilation with a per- fectly dry atmosphere62 Extracted from the Dctionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Extraction of the Crude Drug from Poppy. MANUFAC- TURE. "leaves"); (d) "trash" or a powder prepared from the dried stems and leaves; (e) capsules; and (f) seed. The first mentioned three substances are those alone with which the Opium Department is concerned. They will, therefore, be dealt with in some detail in this place. Extraction. Extraction of the Drug.63 the Economic Products of India. and the Manufacture of Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. at the base to the summit of the pod. Three sets of people are so arrang- ed that each plant is bled all over once every three or four days, the bleed- ings being three or four times repeated on each plant. This operation always begins to be performed about three or four o'clock in the afternoon, the hottest part of the day. The juice appears almost immediately on the wound being inflicted, in the shape of a thick, gummy milk, which is soon thickly covered with a brown pellicle. The exudation is greatest over-night, when the incisions are washed and kept open by the dew. The opium thus derived is scraped off next morning with a blunt iron tool re- sembling a cleaver in miniature. Here the work of adulteration begins - the scraper being passed heavily over the seed pod, so as to carry with it a considerable portion of the beard, or pubescence, which contaminates the drug and increases its apparent quantity. The work of scraping begins at dawn, and must be continued till to o'clock; during this time a workman will collect 7 or 8 ounces of what is called chick. The drug is next thrown into an earthen vessel, and covered over or drowned in linseed oil at the rate of two parts of oil to one of chick, so as to prevent evapora- tion. This is the second process of adulteration, the rayat desiring to sell the drug as much drenched with oil as possible, the retailers at the same time refusing to purchase that which is thinner than half-dried glue. One acre of well cultivated ground will yield from 70 to 100 pounds of chick. The price of chick varies from 3 to 6 rupees a pound, so that an acre will yield from 200 to 600 rupees' worth of opium at one crop. Three pounds of chick will produce about two pounds of opium, from the third to the fifth of the weight being lost in evaporation. It now passes into the hands of the bunneah, who prepares it and brings it to market. From 25 to 50 pounds having been collected is tied up in parcels in double bags of sheet- ing cloth, which are suspended from the ceiling so as to avoid air and light, while the spare linseed oil is allowed to drop through. This opera- tion is completed in a week or ten days, but the bags are allowed to remain for a month or six weeks, during which period the last of the oil which can be separated comes away, the rest probably absorbs oxygen and becomes thicker, as in paint. This process occupies from April to June or July, when the rains begin. The bags are next taken down, and their contents carefully emptied into large vats from 10 to 15 feet in diameter and six or eight inches deep. Here it is mixed together and worked up with the hands five to six hours, until it has acquired an uniform colour and consistence throughout, and become tough and capable of being formed into masses. This process is peculiar to Malwa. It is now made up into balls of from 8 to 10 ounces each, these being thrown, as formed, into a basket full of the chaff of the seed pods. It is next spread on ground previously covered with leaves and stalks of the poppy; here it remains for a week or so, when it is turned over and left to consolidate, until hard enough to bear packing; it is ready for weighing in October or Novem- ber, and is then sent to market. It is next packed in chests of 150 cakes, the total cost of the manufacture at the place of production being about R 14 per chest." MANUFAC- TURE. Pasewa or Pasewha.64 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Extraction of the Crude Drug from Poppy, MANUFAC- TURE. dissolved in dew or in moisture absorbed from the atmosphere; it has a peculiar smell, is strongly acid in reaction, and contains meconic acid, resin, morphia, and narcotine. Pasewa does not appear to be always present in opium, but is produced under certain atmospheric conditions. It is said to be never present, for example, in opium collected during strong westerly winds or in the absence of dew. Leaves. Leaves.the Economic Products of India. 65 and the Manufacture of Opium. PAPAVER Somniferum. broken up for 66 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Estimation of value of Opium. MANUFAC- TURE. Valuation. has been adjudged of nearly equal consistence by the remarkable power of hand estimation practised at the factories, a power that is gained only by years of experience in the examination of the drug. " It would be difficult thereforethe Economic Products of India. 67 Estimation of Value of Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. rough-and-ready method of assigning into one class masses of opium the true average consistence of which is finally settled by the first method. MANUFAC- TURE. Valuation. "For the determination of consistence which is dependent only on the quantity of moisture contained in the drug the mode of procedure is a simple one and the results satisfactory. In practice, however, disturbing elements are very often introduced, and one of these is pasewha. Opium with an admixture of pasewha is deceptive to the touch. "In drug free from pasewha the granular texture appears to maintain cohesion between the particles which, as it were, support each other and offer a certain amount of resistance to pressure. In drug with a copious admixture of pasewha the granular texture is destroyed by the gradual merging of the tears into each other through the medium of the tenacious and shiny pasewha, the cohesion existing is thus lessened, but the tenacity of the drug is increased. "Where the bulk of the produce at the factories lies somewhere interme- diate, with regard to the admixture of pasewha between the two descrip- tions of drug given above, the sense of touch is regulated by what comes most in its way. When dealing, therefore, with varieties bordering on the two extremes of the drug we are apt to go astray, and we are thus able to account in a large number of cases for what is known as being 'out in parakh' (judgment). We have thus prepared for ourselves an arbitrary and indefinable standard of 'touch;' it is, nevertheless, a standard so generally accepted by all examiners of opium in the Agencies that it is practically a fixed one, and it is a recognised maxim that opium entirely free from pasewha will assay lower than this our accepted standard of touch, and that opium with a copious admixture of that substance will assay corre- spondingly higher. A good 'parkhia' (examiner) will always, therefore, make due allowance for the absence or presence of pasewha in any sample of the drug that is being subjected to examination for consistence. The remarks made here refer entirely to good opium. "Another disturbing element in estimating consistence is heat, parti- cularly on drug charged with pasewha. Drug of this character, under the influence of heat, undergoes liquefaction to a moderate extent in the process of drying. Opium to be examined for consistence by touch should in- variably be placed, therefore, in shaded and cooled verandahs, and the examination should be concluded by 9 or 10 o'clock in the morning, and before the sun gets hot. When, for want of accommodation, jars have to be placed in open yards, their examination should invariably be undertaken first, and in the early morning. The examination by touch, for consistence, of opium that is lying exposed to the sun's rays in the months of April, May, June, and July, when all the examination at the factories is conducted, must always be faulty and conjectural, and should never be attempted. "COLOUR.68 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Estimation of Value of Opium. MANUFAC- TURE. Valuation. finger on a white earthenware plate. Here it is that we see clearly the various shades of chestnut, reddish-brown, dark brown or mahogany, but never black. When rubbed between the fingers opium displays a shining surface and a waxy lustre. "The colour of opium is a valuable indication as to its purity. Texture. "TEXTURE.the Economic Products of India. 69 Estimation of Value of Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. ill-ventilated and smoky closets, or shutting it up for security in small, close receptacles, will dissipate and destory the aroma in drug that is otherwise intrinsically good, and will even give it an offensive odour. MANUFAC- TURE. Valuation. "The aroma of the drug is one of its chief commercial criterions, and as such should be carefully guarded by the cultivator. To the Opium Exa- miner it gives a very important indication as to the suitability of the drug for the various factory purposes. It is only by chemical tests that the Examiner can be certain that opium that is devoid of aroma or offensive to the smell, although apparently good as to texture and colour, has not also a foreign substance in its composition, assuming that the foreign sub- stance, if present, has not given the clue by its own specific odour. Under any circumstances, opium deteriorated in its aroma, although it may be otherwise pure, should be set aside and utilised for other than the main factory purpose, that is, amalgamation with drug intended for the central mass of cakes, otherwise there will be risk of the deteriorated drug tainting a much larger mass of good opium " (Pharmacog. Indica, I., 101 to 107). Adulteration of Opium.70 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Manufacture at Government Agencies. MANUFAC- TURE. Opium Factory. drawers, and constantly turned over. Whilst keeping, it becomes coated with a thin blackish crust, and deepens in colour according to the degree of exposure to the air and light. From this general store (malkhana), it is taken daily, in quantities of about 250 maunds (of 82 2/7lb), for manufacture into 'cakes.' Various portions are selected (by test assay) so as to ensure the mass being of the standard consistence, and these, weighing exactly to seers (21lb) each, are thrown promiscuously into shallow drawers, and rapidly and thoroughly kneaded up together. The mass is filled into boxes, all of one size, from each of which a specimen is drawn and assayed. The mean is taken as the average. Before evening, these boxes are emptied into wooden vats, 20 feet long, 3½ feet wide, and 1¼ feet deep, and the opium is further kneaded and mixed by men wading knee- deep through it from end to end, till the consistence appears uniform. " Next morning the manufacture of the cakes commences. Each cake-maker sits on a wooden stand, and is provided with a brass cup and a graduated tin vessel. The 'leaves' for forming the shells of the cakes are weighed out over-night, tied in bundles, and damped to make them supple; and boxes are provided containing lewa, for agglutinating the the Economic Products of India 71 Manufacture at Government Agencies. PAPAVER somniferum. 'leaves.' By October, the cakes are perfectly dry to the touch, and fairly solid; they are then packed in chests, furnished with a double tier of wooden partitions, each tier with twenty square compartments for the reception of so many cakes, which latter are steadied and packed around with loose poppy-trash. The chests must be most carefully kept from damp for a length of time; but ultimately the opium in the cake ceases to yield any more moisture to the shell, and the latter acquires extreme solidity. Each case contains 120 catties (about 160lb). The foregoing remarks refer exclusively to the Government prepared opium for the Chinese market, which includes the great bulk of the entire product. MANUFAC- TURE. Opium factory. " Bengal opium intended for internal consumption, and known as abkari opium, is prepared in the following manner: 72 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Chemistry of Opium MANUFAC- TURE. Chemistry. applied in this manner.* The chemical composition of porphyroxin appears to be a matter of some uncertainty; according to O. Hesse it is a mixture of several distinct principles. Pedler & Warden isolated in 1886 from Bengal opium a neutral principle insoluble in water, but dissolving in ether, chloroform, benzol, &c., and yielding solutions which exhibited a magnificent blue fluorescence. The morphine in opium is combined with meconic acid. The nature of these two substances was made known by Sertürner in 1816, who at the same time pointed out the difference between morphia and narcotine, a substance which had been discovered in opium by Derosne in 1803 and also by Seguin. There can be no doubt that these two chemists also obtained morphine, but failed to distinguish it from narcotine. Warden (Chem. News, 38, 146) has examined the ash of Behar opium. It was of a light grey colour and contained. 857 per cent. of char- coa1; which was deducted before calculating the percentage composition, which is as follows: the Economic Products of India. 73 Chemistry of Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. " It afforded e, the crude, dried morphine, which, after twice or three times repeated recrystallisation, finally furnished f, purified morphine. This purification of morphine cannot be performed without a loss of morphine; the real practical percentage of that alkaloid may, therefore, more correctly be regarded as somewhat superior to the figure f. It would be desirable to apply a process furnishing the exact percentage; yet there is, as far as I know, no such method thoroughly satisfactory. I have been struck with the very large discrepancy, in the Indian opium, of the figures under e and f, which, I think, is larger than in opium from Asia Minor. Another fact well worth considering is the usually low percentage of morphine of Indian opium, narcotine being frequently present to a larger amount. This has already been pointed out in the Pharmacographia, p. 57. It would appear, however, that this is of no consequence for the Chinese consumption, yet, possibly, it will be so some day if the home production of the Chinese fur- ther increases. Perhaps a more careful preparation of the Indian opium would at least prove of importance, not so much with regard to the smokers of the drug as to the possibility of extracting morphine from Indian opium profitably. It is not needful to point out that this would be highly desirable." MANUFAC- TURE. Chemistry. In the following table is shown the analyses of samples of Patna and Behar provision opium, Malwa opium and pasewa. These analyses are interesting, as they indicate the amount of extractive obtained by the action of cold and hot water on the drug. The amount of extractive as well as the alkaloidal content varies within narrow limits from year to year. Ana- lyses of Behar and Patna provision opium, arranged as shown in this table, are yearly placed before the merchants at the annual inspection of opium, which takes place before the first sale of the season: 74 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Manufacture of Alkaloids. MANUFAC- TURE. MANUFACTURE OF ALKALOIDS. Alkaloids. In the Pharmacographia Indica the following account of the manufac- ture of the alkaloids as practised at Benares is given, from the pen of Mr. Gregory, Officiating Principal Assistant Opium Agent: the Economic Products of India. 75 Manufacture of Alkaloids. PAPAVER somniferum. which would be equal to 14.38 per cent. The chlorine calculated as H C. amounted to 9.42 per cent., the sample was consequently deficient in com- bined acid to the extent of. 3 per cent. The ash amounted to. 063 per cent. By the action of chloroform. 812 per cent. of extractive was obtain- ed. The precise nature of this extractive was not determined; it probably contained a trace of morphia; it was tested specially for narcotine with negative results. Uncombined morphia to the extent of. 828 per cent. was detected in the sample. MANUFAC- TURE. Alkaloids. The codeine was a perfectly white powder, and tree from odour. Dried at 100°C., it lost 5.16 per cent. The ash amounted to. 056 per cent. The saturating power of the alkaloid for standard acid corresponded closely with that acquired by theory. The narcotine was in faintly yellowish crystals. It contained only a minute trace of ash, and was free from morphia." FISCAL ADMINISTRATION OF OPIUM IN INDIA AND THE REVENUE THEREFROM. ADMINISTRA- TION. Having now worked out the leading historic facts that have a bearing on the Indian and Chinese Opium question, it may not be out of place to record here the chief facts regarding the Indian localities where opium is produced; to exhibit the enactments by which the cultivation and manu- facture are controlled; to explain the degree to which the Indian Govern- ment is directly in the position of a private individual who holds the sole right to cultivate and sell an article of commerce; and to show the revenue derived by India from the drug. These objects cannot be better met than by republishing a memorandum recently issued by the Department of Finance and Commerce:76 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Fiscal Administration of ADMINISTRA- TION. Purchase of Produce. "The produce is purchased, in the form of crude opium, at a price, per seer of a standard consistence of 70 degrees, which is fixed from time to time by the Government of India, any change in the price being notified to the cultivators at the time of their entering into the annual engagements with the Department. Method of Payment. "Settlements are made with the cultivators or their accredited agents at the end of July or early in August, when the license to cultivate is granted by the Sub-Deputy Agent or his Assistant, and after the details are settled an advance is paid to the lumberdar by the gomashta in their presence. "The number of advances made during the year in the Behar Agency are not to exceed five, as follow: 77 the Economic Products of India. Bengal Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. Government having proposed to commute for a period of five years their opium rights for a money payment, it was agreed by a convention exe- cuted between the Government of India and the French authorities at Chandernagore on the 16th July 1884. to fix the annual commutation payment at R3,000. The convention terminated at the end of 1888 and was renewed for a further period of five years. By the new convention the annual commutation payment has been raised to R5,000, conditionally on the French administration undertaking that no opium, except opium provided from the Hooghly Treasury, shall be admitted for consumption or for any other purpose into Chandernagore, and that the French officials endeavour to prevent contraband dealing in opium." ADMINISTRA- TION. Regulations to prevent Contraband Traffic with French Pos- sessions in India. "The year's provision is not sold at once. Originally there were five sales in a year, then nine, but since 1848 they have been monthly. Of late years to check speculation, the quantity to be sold in any calendar year was, if the outturn was sufficient, notified in the previous year, and, as a further means of steadying prices, it was determined to accumulate a sufficient reserve for supplying a deficiency of out-turn in bad seasons. Reserve Stock of Pro- vision Opium. "The Abkari or Excise Opium manufactured in the two Agencies is supplied at R7-4 a seer to the Governments of Bengal and the North- Western Provinces, and the Administrations of Burma, Assam, and Central Provinces, who permit its sale within their respective jurisdictions in accordance with rules framed under the Opium Act, I of 1878. Excise opium is issued to licensed dealers from the different District Treasuries in quantities of not less than one seer at a time, and at prices which are fixed by the Local Governments at their discretion, but never so low as to encourage the exportation of Abkari Opium to China in preference to pro- vision opium. II. EXCISE OPIUM. Sale in India. "The consistence of the manufactured opium differs in the two Agencies. The moisture in 100 grains of crude opium being thoroughiy evaporated, the residue is weighed, each grain after dryage being taken at 1°. If the cultivator delivers his drug of standard consistence, he receives for it the regulated price, otherwise a pro ratá increase or deduction is made accord- ing as the drug is above or below standard. Consistence of Indian Opium. "The gross and net weight of a chest of opium, and the consistence of provision and abkari opium, are as follows: 78 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Fiscal Administration of ADMINISTRA- TION. MALWA OPIUM. Malwa Opium. Revenue. Regulated by Act I. of 1878. Difficulties arising from Contraband Trade with Portuguese Possessions. "The revenue derived from the trade in opium known as Malwa Opium, which is produced in Central India and parts of Rájputana, con- sists chiefly of the duty charged for passes granted at the scales to cover the transit of the opium through the British territories to Bombay for exporta- tion thence to China, or for consumption in India. The export is now regu- lated by rules framed under the Opium Act, I of 1878. The Act and the rules framed under sections 5 and 13 thereof were introduced into the Bombay Presidency on the 1st April 1878. Previous to the year 1831 the British Government reserved to itself a monopoly of Malwa opium which was purchased by the British Resident at Indore and sold by auction either at Bombay or at Calcutta. But in that year it was deemed advisable, chiefly on account of the large quantity of opium smuggled to the Portu- guese Settlements of Damaun, &c., on the Coast, to relinquish the mono- poly, to open the trade to the operations of private enterprise, and to substi- tute as a source of revenue, in place of the abandoned system, the grant, at a specified rate, of passes to cover the transit of opium through the Company's territories to Bombay. In determining the amount of transit duty it was proposed to be guided by a comparison of the cost of transit direct to Bombay with that of the transmission of the drug to the Coast by the cheapest of the more circuitous routes through the territories of Native States; and on the basis of such a comparison it was fixed at R175 per chest of 140lb each. In 1835 the results of the preceding official year having been unfavourable and the shipments of opium from Bombay having largely declined, while those from Damaun had greatly increased, the rate was red urea to R125 per chest. Increased Duty. "The annexation of Sind facilitated the levy of a higher rate. Until then a large portion of the opium of Malwa had been conveyed through Sind to Karáchi, and thence onward to the Portuguese ports of Diu and Damaun. That route being now closed, it was reasonably expected that an advance might be made in the charge for passes, without risk of loss to the revenue from a diminished demand. The rate was accordingly increased in October 1843 from R125 to R200 per chest. Upon the prin- ciple that the duty should be fixed at the highest amount which could be levied without forcing the trade into other channels, a further increase was made in 1845, when it was determined that the charge should be R300 per chest. For the same reason it was, on 1st June 1847, raised to R400 per chest and subsequently as follows: the Economic Products of India. 79 Malwa Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. and R700 if weighed elsewhere. The pass duty on all opium consumed in India is credited to Provincial Revenue, and that on opium exported to China to Imperial Revenue. Under orders issued in August 1889 the duty levied on Malwa opium imported to the Native States of the Panjáb is now assigned to those States: the concession was granted with the object of interesting the States in an excise system and the suppression of opium smuggled from Rájputana. ADMINISTRA- TION. Encourage- ment given to Native States to a more careful excise system. "The poppy is sown in Malwa in November; the plants are in flower in the beginning of February, and by the end of March the whole of the opium is collected by the cultivators and ready for sale. The village bankers, who get possession of the raw opium, retain it till the end of April, and during May and June it is bought by the large dealers who make it up into cakes of 12 ounces each, and expose it in store-houses to dry for the next two months, after which it is ready for the scales. Generally the opium is ready for export in September, but as considerable dryage takes place in its transport to Bombay while new, it is usually kept until October, unless an expected increase of duty or pecuniary difficulties of the dealer compel the owners to bring the drug earlier to the scales. Before Septem- ber 1,866 chests were sent to Bombay from Indore viá Manpur, Scindwa, and Manmad, the transit occupying twenty days on an average. In that month a new route was adopted viá Simrol and Barwari to the Great Indian Peninsula Railway at Khandwa which reduced the time of transit to eight days. The only authorised routes by which opium can now be imported by land into Bombay (after leaving the scales) are80 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Fiscal Administration of ADMINISTRA- TION. Weighment and Duty. The Government duty on opium weighed at Ajmere for export by sea from Bombay is at present R675 per chest containing 140¼lb net weight including dust and leaf. The duty on opium weighed at Ajmere was raised from R625 per chest to R675 on the 16th July 1877, and to R725 on 15th September 1870 and again reduced to R675 per chest from 28th June 1882. The hundis tendered having been received and approved, the half chests are arranged in the godown and numbered consecutively in English. The merchants provide and pay for porters, carpenters, and men for screwing up the chests opened for weighment. On the arrival of the officer who makes the weighment, he selects at hazard two half-chests out of every ten of each consignment brought to the scales. From these an average is struck; when the average falls short of the allowance made by Government, viz, 70lb 20z. per half-chest, the deficiency is allowed to be made good; when it is in excess, the number of pounds in excess is with- drawn. This is called net weighment. Guards for Escort of Con- signments. "When the net weighment is completed, the boxes are nailed up, and repacked and the gross weighments are proceeded with-that is, the chests as ready for conveyance, are weighed and marked in English. Full par- ticulars are then entered in the passport granted for each weighment. The gross weight exceeds the net by about 5olb in each half-chest. To prevent molestation on the road, a vernacular pass is granted to the person appointed by the merchant to accompany the despatch, in which the parti- culars of the consignment are inserted, and the weekly register of the passports is sent to the Commissioner of Customs, Opium and Abkari, Bombay. The passport is valid for two years from the date of its issue. The guards necessary for the escort of the consignments are supplied or paid for by the merchants or insurers. Advice of each despatch is for- warded to the Commissioner of Customs, Salt and Opium, Bombay, the day after it occurs. There are seven subordinate offices attached to the Malwa Agency (Indore),the Economic Products of India. 81 Malwa Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. which opium is procurable in this country, at a figure considerably above that at which it can be obtained in China and other parts of the world. This not only saves contraband exportation in excise opium, but makes the governing price in the country with greatest demand and highest ruling price, determine the Indian consumption. It need only be necessary. therefore, in concluding this chapter to furnish a table of the revenue derived by India from the drug. ADMINISTRA- TION. REVENUE DERIVED FROM OPIUM. The following table analyses the official returns of this subject for a period of 23 years, the figures being given in the conventional Rx. as equi valent to one pound sterling. The figures for Net Revenue are approxi- mately as shown below, a few minor details of revenue and expenditure having been purposely left out of account:82 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Excise Regulations, and ADMINISTRA- TION: Revenue. extensive, far more so than with any other single article of Indian Com- merce. Should occasion ever arise, therefore, to prohibit that traffic, the loss to the cultivators would be the least important item that would have to be considered; for no administration would be justified in bringing ruin to a large mercantile community by any sudden and arbitrary interference with a trade which it has hitherto protected and legalized. The amounts of Malwa and other opiums purchased by Government are very small, so that it is fairly safe to say that Government paid, for the past five years, an average of, say, 2½ million pounds sterling for the opium grown in British territory. The value of the opium crop to the cultivators within British territory is thus by no means inconsiderable, but the saving in taxation effected by the profits of the trade is by far its most important feature. But there are other considerations. By taking the traffic under direct supervision the Government is enabled most effectualy to check the abuses that would otherwise prevail and have prevailed. A pure article is furnished in place of an adulterated one. To the cultivators the crop is by no means unimportant. It is not represented by dividing the amounts shown as annually paid by Government by the returned acreage. The crop occupies the field for but a short period. The system of poppy cultivation enriches the soil so that ahother crop may be taken off it at a nominal cost. The cultivator has the poppy seed and other bye-products of the opium crop as an additional source of income. Opium production is therefore highly remunerative. EXCISE REGULATIONS AND THE CONSUMPTION OF OPIUM IN INDIA. Opium consumed in India. BENGAL OPIUM. Repeated reference has been made in the foregoing chapters to the consumption of opium in India. In connection with the HISTORY of the drug, it has been shown that, long before the British conquests, the practice of using opium was widely diffused throughout the country. It would be beside the scope of this work to deal with the moral aspects of the traffic or the perniciousness or otherwise of the habit of opium indulgence. The fact that opium eating, drinking, or smoking existed in the country, neces- sitated supervision and control. For many years now, it has been the habit to vest local Governments with the management of all forms of Excise Administration, and opium is, therefore, a Provincial revenue. A large proportion of the opium used in India is specially prepared at Patna and Benares under the name of "Excise Opium "; it is issued at cost price to the local Governments and Administrations. From the district authorities it is issued to the licensed dealers on payment of the excise dues. But in certain parts of India locally-grown opium is used, or specially selected Malwa opium takes the place of the " Excise Opium " of the Bengal Agencies. The table given at page 81 shows the total excise net reve- nue from opium, but, as exhibiting in some degree the relative consump- tion in each province, the analysis of the returns for ten years, given on the next page, may be cited. That table will be observed to be an elaboration of the information furnished at page 40. The three most important consuming provinces of Excise Opium may be said to be Burma, Assam, and Bengal. Perhaps the most noticeable feature of the Indian provincial consumption is the increasing traffic with Burma, a fact which is doubtless largely due to Chinese influence and Chinese immigration. It would, however, appear from other than purely statistical evidence that the Sikhs are the community of India most addicted to the use of opium, and they are certainly not an effeminate and emaciate race. The moderate indulgence authorised by religion and habit does not appear to be more injurious to them than the moderate use of wine or tobacco is in Europe.
the Economic Products of India. 83 Consumption of Opium in India. PAPAVER somniferum. Revenue on Consumption of Opium in Indio. PROVINCES. 1878-79. 1879-80. 1880-81. 1881-82. 1882-83. 1883-84. 1884-85. 1885-86. 1886-87. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. Rx. India, General. 918 522 319 381 650 1,610 2,902 2,434 2,799 2,720 3,174 5,012 Oudh 8,515 12,090 13,512 13,486 14,448 14,618 14,203 15,221 15,808 15,189 18,596 19,899 Central Provinces 64,239 75,946 83,447 89,511 92,938 94,922 94,624 95,441 93,709 88,129 90,331 93,824 Burma 151,296 162,644 180,593 177,035 179,982 181,554 176,769 164,383 197,340 209,106 226,009 229,463 Assam 154,813 156,760 163,740 155,351 164,703 165,059 169,232 166,700 166,594 162,746 163,560 173,681 Bengal 148,294 155,358 164 398 174,760 179,592 190,548 188,393 185,798 190,575 198,491 200,813 195,948 North-West Provinces 67,244 72,155 84,809 80,370 88,384 81,137 80,131 80,617 80,838 79,749 87,340 89,142 Panjáb 32,863 32,511 133,171 47,818 43,344 42,589 41,668 36,333 36,722 37,119 38,183 38,521 Madras Not recorded. 63,137 47,018 51,406 63,973 66,524 76,014 67,632 65,281 68,387 64,022 Bombay 31,861 34,691 23,837 14,760 9,070 9,624 10,208 21,236 11,056 18,847 23,587 19,416 TOTAL Rx. 660,043 702,677 810,963 800,490 819,517 845,634 844,654 844,177 863,073 877,377 919,980 928,928 Number of Abkari Chests manu- factured for consumption in India 5,605 4,221 4,378 3,959 591 2,146 4,321 2,291 2,831 3,367 3,485 6,320 ADMINISTRA- TION: Revenue.
84 Extracted from the Dictionary PAPAVER Somniferum. Fiscal Administration of Opium in India, ADMINISTRA- TION: Revenue. The above provincial shares of the Excise Net Revenue from Opium cannot, however, be accepted as exhibiting the amounts actually consumed, since the degree of taxation is not uniform in the provinces. Nor can the number of chests of Government Abkari Opium be taken as an absolute statement of the amount of opium used up in India. The figures of net revenue include the proceeds derived from all opium (i.e., Government Abkari, Malwa, locally-grown, &c.,) but it can safely be said that the Abkari opium is by far the most important item in Indian consumption. Additional information on this subject will be found in the chapter below on the TRADE IN OPIUM, more especially the sections COASTWISE and INTERNAL. MALWA The following instructive account of the Bombay opium traffic (taken from the Administration Report for 1889-90) deals with the subject of Malwa opium whether consumed in India or exported to China. It may, therefore, fitly conclude these remarks, since it links together what has been said, under FISCAL ADMINISTRATION, with the sketch given of the EXCISE OPIUM of India:- Scales and rates of duty "No change was made during the year in the number or location of the scales for the weighment of opium. The rate of duty on opium intended for export to China and other foreign countries remained at R650 per chest up to 4th July 1890 inclusive, after which date it was reduced to R600. The rate on opium imported for local consumption in the Bombay Presidency remained at R700 per chest. The rates levied at the scales at Ajmere were as usual R25 per chest higher in each case. Imports and Exports The following table shows the number of opium chests imported from Málwa, Meywár, Márwar, and the territories of His Highness the Gáek- wár into Bombay, the amount of pass-duty realised and the number of chests exported to China and otherwise disposed of in the year 1889-90, as compared with corresponding particulars for the two previous years:- YEARS. Number of chests imported into Bombay. Amount of pass fee actually realised and brought to account. Number of chests exported to China. Number of chests bought for home con- sumption. Number chests otherwise disposed of. TOTAL. R 1887-88 38,716½ 25,1,31,300 36,353 1,575 119½ 38,047½ 1888-89 31,617 2,05,67,800 29,777½ 1,5714 91½ 31,440½ 1889-90 28,835½ 1,86,56,125 28,372 1,741½ 78 30,191½ The quantity of opium exported during the year to China was less by 1,405½ chests than the quantity exported in 1888-89. Fifteen-and-a-half chests were exported to African ports, 60½ chests to Cochin and Allepy, and two to London. Prices The average prices of opium in Bombay during the year under review were lower than those prevailing in the previous year, being 81,165 per chest of one year old opium, and R1,226 per chest of two and three years old opium, against R1,323 per chest of the former, and R1,380 per chest of the latter in 1888-89. Consumption in the Presidency Opium was issued from the Government depôts at the rate of R10 per lb throughout the year under review. From the Government depôts 61,702lb of opium were issued to British retail vendors or to Native Chiefs. Besides this quantity, 955½ chests, equal to 130,054 lb, were bought in the Bombay market, and 440½ chests, equal to 59,957lb, were imported
the Economic Products of India 85 and Revenue derived therefrom. PAPAVER somniferum. from Málwa by Chiefs, and vendors permitted on payment of duty to sup- ply themselves directly with opium for retail distribution. ADMINISTRA- TION. The licit sales of the year under review exceeded those of the preced- ing year by 9,664lb. The increase was noticeable in the districts of Kaira, Broach, and Khandesh, while there was a considerable decrease in the district of Ahmedabad. In the Native States of the Presidency the licit sales amounted to 154,555lb, of which 62,844lb were sold in the dominions of the Gáekwár of Baroda, 10,880lb in Cutch, 46,863lb in Káthiáwar, and 31,375lb in other States in Gujarat. The opium required by Native Chiefs in the Konkan, Deccan, and the Southern Maratha Country amounted to 2,593lb and was obtained by the Chiefs from the nearest British depôt or from the Collector of Customs, Bombay. Revenue. Malwa. The total pass-fee realisations from opium amounted to R1,87,35,185, of which R12,61,260, representing duty on excised opium bought for home consumption on account of Government by British licensed vendors and by Native Chiefs in the Bombay and Madras Presidencies, were transferred to the account head of Excise, leaving R1,74,73,925 to the credit of Imperial revenues. Adding to the latter sum the fees levied on account of the transhipment of opium chests in the Bombay Harbour and miscella- neous receipts, the total receipts for the year credited to imperial revenues amounted to R1,75,01,507 or R20,09,559 less than in the previous year. The decrease was wholly due to smaller imports into Bombay of opium from Málwa for export to China. The total excise realisations from opium allowing for refunds of duty to Native States were R11,68,269 against R12,13,858 in the previous year. They included the pass-fee on opium consumed in British territory, two-thirds of the pass-duty on opium consumed in Kathiáwar and Cutch, nine-tenths of the pass duty on opium consumed in the Sátára Jághirs, and four-fifths of the pass-duty supplied to other Naive Chiefs except those in Rewa Kántha, Mahi Kántha, Pálanpur, and Cambay. The last-mentioned States are entitled to receive opium free of duty. In Baroda consumption was confined to the opium grown in the State and no duty was paid to Government. Pass Fees. The expenditure on account of a portion of the opium establishment employed in Bombay and that employed at the Ahmedabad opium agency, which is debited to Imperial services under the head 'Opium,' amounted to R25,233 against R25,021 in the previous year. The provin- cial expenditure of the Opium Department is included in that of the Abkári Department and cannot be accurately distinguished, but may be estimated approximately at R30,000." Conf. with remarks on Revenue, p.81. TRADE IN OPIUM. In the chapter on HISTORY above, some of the leading ideas regarding the early opium trade have already been dealt with. In the succeeding chapters on CULTIVATION and FISCAL ADMINISTRATION, additional facts have been brought out, as to area and yield, manufacture, purchase of the drug, and the system under which it is sold to the highest bidder. Very little remains, therefore, to be discussed in this place. The table at page 40 shows the number of chests of Provision Opium manufactured at the Government Agencies since 1860, and the table at page 41 shows the num- ber of maunds of opium produced at the Patna (Behar) Agency during the past five years, while the table at page 42 gives the same information for the Benares Agency. As exhibiting certain facts of historic interest, the following brief account of opium may be taken from Milburn's Oriental Commerce (published in 1825, pp. 294-295). It shows the constancy of the policy pursued in the traffic, and also gives certain figures of early transactions:86 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Trade in Opium. TRADE. of the poppy, may be traced at least as far back as the commencement of the British influence in Bengal. The advantages resulting from it were for several years merely considered as a part of the emoluments of certain officers under the Government. In the year 1773, it was taken out of their hands, and the profit of the trade assumed for the benefit of the Com- pany. The provision of the article was for many years let out upon con- tract. The opium concern continued under the direction of the Board of Revenue till 1793, when it was transferred to the Board of Trade. On the expiration of the contracts in 1797, the cultivation of opium was restricted to Behar and Benares, and discontinued in Bengal; the mode of provision by agency was resorted to, and still continues in practice. In July 1799, some regulations were published 'for the guidance of all persons concern- ed in the provision of opium on the part of Government, and for prevent- ing the illicit cultivation of the poppy, and the illicit importation or traffic in the article of opium.' Under these regulations, which were further modified in 1807, the cultivation of the poppy, except on account of Gov- ernment, is expressly prohibited, but it is left entirely at the option of the cultivator to enter into engagements on account of Government at a settled price, or to decline it altogether. The quantity grown, which is limited, is sold by public auction at two annual sales at Calcutta, in December and February. It is usually about 4,000 chests. The trade in opium is liable to be affected by many contingencies, not only from adverse seasons, but by the state of the markets to the eastward, which fluctuate considerably. The superior advantages of the agency system, and the measures resorted to for securing the provision of the drug pure and unadulterated, have proved of essential service." "The Bengal opium is distinguished in commerce into two kinds, Patna and Benares; the former is most esteemed. There is another kind of India opium, less esteemed, produced in considerable quantity in the province of Malwa; it usually fetches little more than half the price of Patna opium. "The quantity of opium exported by sea from Calcutta, in 1821, was 4,337 chests, of which 3,137 were China and Macao, 632 to Penang and eastward, 420 to Java, the rest in small quantities to various parts." It is scarcely necessary to trace out the growth of the trade from 1821 up to the present time. Suffice it to say that it manifests no period of spasmodic expansion. Year by year it gradually increased, being little affected even by the troubles of 1840 or of 1857. In 1831, the total exports were 11,726 chests, in 1841, 29,432 chests, and in 1851, 52,040 chests. The following table furnishes a complete statement of the traffic from 1860 to 1890; it distinguishes the Bengal from the Malwa and shows the pro- portion of each kind sent to the chief consuming countries. One of the most striking features of the trade will be seen to be the immense im- portance of the Indore exports. Should occasion arise for the Government of India to abandon its opium supervision and to discontinue the Bengal traffic, the difficulty in prohibiting the cultivation of opium in the Native States of Central and Western India would be almost unsurmountable. If cultivated it would find its way all over India and even to China in spite of every regulation that might be passed against the traffic. Such illicit traffic is at present checked powerfully by the natural effects of com- petition in trade, but were Malwa Opium to enjoy a monopoly no such restrictions would then exist.
the Economic Products of India. 87 Trade in Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. Tabular Statement of the number of Chests if Bengal and other Indian Opiums Exported to Foreign Countries. OFFICIAL YEARS. Bengal Chests sold. MALWA OPIUM PASSED ON PAYING DUTY. TOTAL OF BENGAL AND MALWA. EXPORTED FROM INDIA. GRAND TOTAL OF CHESTS EXPORT- ED. BENGAL OPIUM. MALWA OPIUM. Indore. Ahmedabad. Ajmír. To China. To Straits. To other countries. Total. To China To other countries. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1859-60 25,253 30,488 2,416 The Ajmír Agency was established in February 1877, but the scales were made use of for the first time in November 1877. 58,157 22,329 3,483 148 25,950 32,534 197½ 32,731½ 58,681½ 1860-61 21,363 43,057 3,074 67, 494 15,688 3,810 10 19,508 43,691 265 43,956 63,464 1861-62 24,063 33,719 3,328 61,110 21,332 5,192 48 26,572 35,680 110½ 35,790½ 62,362½ 1862-63 32,833 46,875 4,353 84,061 25,846 6,784 31 32,661 49,485½ 70½ 49,556 82,217 1863-64 42,620 23,351 2,324 68,295 33,815 8,765 40 42,621 28,210½ 2½ 28,213 70,834 1864-65 51,486 31,932 690 87,108 40,915 9,288 74 50,277 34.213½ ½ 34,214 84,491 1865-66 56,011 34,193 1,927 92,131 42,697 11,549 27 54,273 34,166½ 34,166½ 88,239½ 1866-67 38,680 29,260 1,332 69,272 37,279 4,444 34 41,757 33,081 17 33,098 74,853 1867-68 47,999 36,101 2,999 87,099 41,672 6,352 22 48,046 38,883 1½ 38,884½ 86,930½ 1868-69 47,235 29,787 1,185 78,207 37,985 6,167 103 44,355 30,690 10½ 30,700½ 74, 955½ 1869-70 45,680 35,828 3,543 85,051 43,054 6,680 228 49,962 38,716 7 38,723 88,685 1870-71 49,030 37,608 1,898 88,536 39,669 8,054 292 48,015 40,992½ 67 41,059½ 89,074½ 1871-72 49,695 37,591 1,163 88,449 41,569 7,843 43 49,455 39,334½ 7½ 39,342 88,797 1872-73 42,675 42,688 1,315 86,678 34,009 6,438 38 40,485 42,369 80 42,449 82,934 1873-74 42,750 42,112 2,845 87,707 34,820 8,464 53 43,337 45,301 86½ 45,387½ 88,724½ 1874-75 45,000 47,982 1,579 94,561 36,678 8,939 91 45,704 48,845½ 188 49,033½ 94,737½ 1875-76 45,510 38,753 3,051 87,314 35,673 11,005 90 46,768 41,517 9 41,586 88,354 1876-77 47,240 48,018 1,768 97,026 37,426 9,701 194 47,321 49,430½ 121 49,551½ 96,872½ 1877-78 49,500 41,617 1,493 171 92,781 40,234 9,357 115 49,706 43,083½ 30½ 43,114 92,820 1878-79 55,500 32,897½ 3,771½ 211 92,380 45,891 8,881 150 54,931 36,262 10 36,272 91,203 1879-80 59,100 46,204½ 68 459½ 105,832 48,722 10,586 79 59,387 46,114½ 6½ 46,121 105,508 1880-81 56,400 36,649 1 555 93,605 46,707 9,622 141 56,530 35,626 36½ 35,662½ 92,192½ 1881-82 56,400 32,009½ 380 88,789½ 45,731 10,005 759 56,495 32,825½ 20 32,845½ 89,340½ 1882-83 56,400 36,10388 Extracted from the Dictionary of PAPAVER somniferum. Trade in Opium. TRADE. IMPORTS.- India imports but a very small amount of opium from foreign countries; during the past five years the imports have amounted to about 250lb, valued at between R3,500 and R4,100. Of these foreign im- ports none appears to be re-exported. Foreign. EXPORTS.-Of the exports to foreign countries of Indian opium the following table may be given for the traffic during the past five years:- 1885-86. 1886-87. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. Chests 87,956 95,839 90,096 87,789 85,166 Weighing Cwt. 120,995 131,630 125,871 122,60 118,598 Value in Rupees 10,73,55,180 11,07,76,689 10,06,77,636 10,50,80,808 10,11,59,362 The table in the previous page exhibits the countries to which the above opium was consigned, and the present table has been given to show the weight of the chests and their declared values. Coastwise. COASTWISE TRAFFIC.the Economic Products of India. 89 Trade in Opium. PAPAVER somniferum. imported illicitly, especially from Nepal. The following table exhibits the traffic for the past three years: