[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918320.tif]
IP/SRL/IP ANNUL REPORT UPON THE WORK OF THE BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, GUINDY. FOR THE YEAR 1907. MADRAS PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1908. [PRICE,8 annas] [9pence.]
ANNUAL REPORT UPON THE WORK OF THE BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, GUINDY, FOR THE YEAR 1907. ANNUAL REPORT UPON THE WORK OF THE BACTERIO- LOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, GUINDY, FOR THE YEAR 1907. 4 unhealthiness of Kathiawakum is of peculiar interest to the Revenue Board as it is the head-quarters of the Assistant Commissioner, Salt Department, Chingleput Sub-division, and of the Inspector, Ennore Circle. These officials have been obliged to abandon their quarters as almost every one who lives in them contracts a very serious type of malaria which is endangering to life. The fever season begins about the end of November and often continues with great severity up to May. In September 1907 I had the opportunity of visiting this place with the Sanitary Commissioner. A careful search was made for Anopheles mosquitoes and the harmless species rossii was alone found. It was at once evident that quite half, if not more, of the population of these villages had suffered from malaria and 8 per cent. of children had parasites in their peripheral blood. As this was not the fever season it was impossible to form an adequate idea as to what the conditions are in the months from. January to May. Many recommendations have been from time to suggested but unless a thorough investigation of the exact breeding grounds of the particular species of Anopheles be made during the whole of the fever season, and an exhaustive study of other conditions favouring its propagation together with a careful study of the disease it is impossible to formulate any measures which would with certainty render this district healthy. It therefore offers an excellent opportunity for the Government to test scientifically antimalaria measures. 3. Water Samples.5 No. Type Total No. Typical and non-malignant. No. Atypical and malignant. No. 3 Muscular tissue. 3 Striated (Rhabdo-my- oma). 1 Sarcoma., round celled 1 Unstriated (Leio-my- oma). Nil. Encephaloid carcinoma 1 4 Nervous tissue. Nil. Nil. Nil. Nil. Nil. 5 Glandular tissue. 42 Adenoma 9 Adeno carcinoma of breast sphe- roidal. 24 Lymphoma Nil. ...... Lymphadenoma 1 Carcinoma of liver 3 7 ,, stomach 2 ,, pancreas 2 Malignant thyroid 1 Columnar carcinoma Nil. Lympho sarcoma Nil. 6 Mixed tissue 17 Adeno-myxoma 5 ...... Adeno-fibroma 5 Colloid cancer 1 Chondro-adenoma 1 Rodent ulcer 1 Fungoid 1 2 ...... Mycetoma 1 ...... Myxo-fibroma 2 ...... 7 Cysts 7 Dermoid 4 Cysts with carcinomatus growth (ovarian). 1 Hæmatogenous 1 ...... Probably lacteal 1 ...... 8 Granulomata 31 Tubercular 4 ...... Avian tuberculous 1 ...... Lupus 2 ...... Syphilitic (gumma) 5 ...... Infective granuloma 3 ...... Inflammatory and gran- ulation tissue. 16 ..... 9 Nature unknown. ... Psorosperms 1 ... Tumour cornea of a child masses of epitheliium in fibrous matrix. 1 Cancer bodies 2 ... ..... Fungus eye 1 ..... Growth rectum prob- ably sebaceous ade- noma. 1 ... Tumour iliac forsa granulation tissue with large cells suggesting possible malignancy. 1 Diseased testis large cells in granulation tissue 1 ... Growth cheek probably sarco- matus. 3 Tumour neck inflam- matory adenoma 1. ... Enucleated eye conver- sion of vitrious into cellular tissue 1. ... All the specimens referred to above which were sent during the year are as follows:6 by routine work, laboratory examinations for the diagnosis of human diseases, analyses of the waters of this Presidency and the want of more skilled assistance has left comparatively little time for research. A reference to the papers appended to this report will however show that some special studies have been undertaken. Mr. T. Seethapathy Iyer, Senior Laboratory Assistant, has been unremitting in his work and without his services it would have been impossible to have accomplished the work that has been done. 2. Protozoology.7 birds). Another important point is that the trypanosomes may have been present in the blood of the cattle in another stage and this is certainly suggested by the recent observations of Moore and Breinl 1 on Trypanosoma gambiensi. These observers have found the non-flagellate stage of this trypanosome in animals inocu- lated with the parasite; a similar stage may quite well occur in the blood of animals infected with other trypanosomes. Until the life history of Piroplasma parvum is traced out in the tick, these observations of Miyazima must be accepted with some reservation. A new species of Mammalian hæmogregarine has been discovered in the blood of the South Indian hare Lepus nigricollis; it is proposed to name it Leucocytozoon leporis. This parasite is shortly described in Volume I, No. VI. Further observa- tions have also been made on Leucocytozoon funambuli, its method of reproduction in the squirrel Funambulus pennantii has been found to take place only in the lungs of the animal. This cycle which is shortly described in Volume I, No. VI, clearly shows that although the parasite is related to the H8 were obtained from the roosting place of Scotophilus kuhli.- These have been sent to Mr. Newstead of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine for description. (iii) EDUCATIONAL. The sanitary system of this Presidency owes its origin to Lieutenant-Colonel W. G. King, M.B., I.M.S., late Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, who in 1895 formulated a scheme for the better education of the Sanitary Inspectors; in 1904 Colonel King suggested an additional course of training for the Inspectors, as he considered it was very essential that they should undergo a course of Minor Sanitary Engineering which would enable them to frame estimates for sanitary works. At Colonel King's suggestion the Assistant Sanitary Engineer, aided by an office Assistant, was directed to give the necessary instruction at the King Institute. The course begins in January and consists of lectures and practical work which is continued for five months. The course was primarily intended for candidates for Sanitary Inspector's posts, Vaccinators and Plague Inspectors but by a recent Government Order certain officers of the Assistant Surgeon's class are selected to attend the course. In addition to the above there is a course of instruction inSPECIAL STUDIES FROM THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE. VOLUME I. 1907. No. I. REPORT ON THE COMPARATIVE VALUE OF PESTERINE AND OTHER FLEA DESTROYING SUBSTANCES. By Captain S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. In deciding upon the best contact poison for general use against fleas it is necessary to bear in mind that disinfectants or poisons have not necessarily any particular effect in destroy- ing insects, as they are protected against watery solutions of metallic salts such as perchloride of mercury and many other active chemicals by their impervious chitinous coats. But there are substances, on the other hand, notably certain volatile and oily substances, such as xylol, benzine, napthah, petrol and kerosine which without being disinfectants or even active poisons in the ordinary sense have a peculiarly fatal action on insects. The most easily obtained substance of this kind is ordinary kerosine which has been used as a rule whenever insect destruction on a large scale has been attempted. Of other cheap substances certain phenyls seem to be active insect destroyers, Hossack having found these effective under the conditions of his experiments in dilutions as low as 1 in 800; Saigol also gets good results with petrol in phenyl. But as will be shown later the immersion tests of these authors are very severe and equally high figures are given by common kerosine diluted in the form of emulsion. On the whole it is very doubtful, whether on the basis of costliness, which must mainly determine the choice of a substance for general use there is anything more potent than kerosine in some form or another. In the destruction of ticks in South Africa and elsewhere kerosine is used in the form of a spray consisting of about one part of oil to four parts of water thrown by means of oil water spray pumps and its use is said to be effective beyond all other remedies tried. Judging from what one knows of the action of kerosine on insects it is almost certain that similar spraying would be effective against fleas. But as will be shown later there is a still cheaper and equally effective way of using kerosine which has the advantage that special spray pumps are not required and that pure oil is not placed in the hands of coolies and others likely to misappropriate it. With a view to reduce cost it has been recommended that the crude oil which is extremely cheap be used against insects and it is even claimed that crude oil is a still more active insec- ticide than the refined oil. But this I very much doubt, the cheap yellow kerosine oil costing about one rupee eight annas a tin being in my opinion more active than the crude oil, especially when the two are contrasted as emulsions in different dilutions. Pesterine appears to be some form of crude oil. It is a fluid resembling thin coal tar quite incapable of admixture with water and fouling all with which it comes in contact. Though cheap its application is really an expensive method of flea destruction since it is used undiluted. Its unpleasant character alone is sufficient in my opinion to condemn the use of Pesterine or any form of crude oil as a substance for general use in the disinfection of houses. By the use of soap solution Pesterine can be converted into a fluid perfectly mixable with water in any proportion; and in this form it is very effective against fleas. But even in 1 in 10 dilution the emulsions is very dirty and is in many ways less satisfactory than the emulsions of refined oil discussed later. It was also not found possible to make a " saturated " emulsion of Pesterine that mixed well with water and the cost of soap required to make the " unsaturated " emulsion used in the experiments given later brings up the price of effective solution to that of refined oil emulsion. An emulsion of crude oil known as " Crude Oil Emulsion " is recommended by the Govern- ment Entomologist in a pamphlet on flea destruction and is procurable at the rate of Rs. 6-14-0 for a five-gallon drum exclusive of carriage. A sample of this substance was obtained and its effectiveness against fleas tried. It is a jelly somewhat resembling soft soap
2 and easily mixable with water. Used in the dilution of 1 in 10 which is recommended I have found it far less effective than 1 in 25 dilution of refined oil emulsion and its cost works out considerably higher. Of the effectiveness of emulsions of refined oil I had already been struck in operations against the larvæ of mosquitoes. The use of a suitable emulsion therefore seemed likely to be very effective againt fleas and experiments were commenced with a view to ascertaining the best way to make emulsions and their relative effectiveness, Since commencing these experiments Captain Glen Liston, I.M.S., informed me that there is already an emulsion of kerosine on the market called "Plunas" which costs Rs. 3-8-0 per gallon and is stated to be effective in a fifty fold dilution. A sample of this substance was forwarded by him and its action upon fleas has been tried in this laboratory. I am inclined for various reasons to believe that Plunas is an emulsion made with mucilage which may account for its cost. Whatever may be the means used it is an excellent emulsion mixing at once with water to form a milky fluid and showing no tendency to separate into its component parts. It is however very costly and the making of a similar emulsion at a cheaper rate is I am told engaging the attention of the Bombay Labo- ratory. In the meantime I have been able to prepare on a scale suitable for manufacture an emulsion equal in every respect to Plunas containing over 80 per cent. oil at a cost not exceeding eight annas per gallon. This for purposes of description I have termed "Emulsion A." To determine the effectiveness of the different substances their action in various dilutions upon fleas was tried. Fleas for these experiments were collected without the use of chloroform from rats killed by a blow on the head and placed in an inverted bell jar; after a time when the fleas commence to crawl on the surface of the fur they are easily caught in test tubes; to approach as nearly as possible actual conditions experiments were made by pouring on fleas in a test tube a small quantity of the fluid to be tested giving one shake and as rapidly as possible throwing out the contents on to an inclined filter paper, the fleas being kept under observation until it was certian they would not recover. Other experiments were made by spraying fleas upon filter paper in inverted bell jars just sufficient to ensure a good wetting and observing the effect. A certain number were made by momentarily dipping flea infested rats killed by a blow on the head into the dilution to be tested and then immediately placing them and a filter paper to drain. The momentary immersion and spraying experiments gave very similar results and the dilutions found effective in this way are more likely to be found of use in practice than dilutions effective in such long immersions as are employed by Hossack and Saigol. When immersion of half a minute or more was tried the substances were found to act in much greater dilution than in the other methods3 Substance. Dilution. Nature of experiment. Duration of immersion. Fleae used. Fleas re- covered. Effective. Remarks. Plunas 1-100 Dipping rat ... ... ... Yes All fleas killed. " 1-50 Immersion Momentary 3 0 Yes " 1-50 Spraying ... 8 6 No " 1-50 Dipping rat ... ... ... Yes All fleas killed. " 1-25 Immersion Momentary 2 0 Yes " 1-25 Spraying ... 4 0 Yes " 1-10 Immersion Momentary 3 0 Yes Emulsion A 1-1000 Immersion 30 seconds 4 0 Yes Acted quite rapidly. " 1-1000 " 60 seconds 3 0 Yes " 1-800 " 60 seconds 2 0 Yes " 1-100 " Momentary 3 1 No One recovered quickly. " 1-100 Spraying ... 7 3 No Appeared dead but re- covered. " 1-100 Dipping rat ... 9 0 Yes Fleas were unable to leave the rat. " 1-50 Immersion Momentary 4 2 ... Took some time to recover. " 1-50 " " 3 1 ... Do. " 1-50 Spraying ... 5 0 Yes " 1-50 " ... 4 3 No Appeared dead but three recovered. " 1-50 Dipping rat ... ... ... Yes Many dead fleas in fur. " 1-25 Immersion Momentary 3 0 Yes " 1-25 " " 3 1 No Took some time to recover. " 1-25 " " 4 0 Yes " 1-25 Spraying ... 2 1 No Appeared dead but re- covered. " 1-25 " ... 8 0 Yes " 1-25 Dipping rat ... ... ... Yes Many dead fleas in fur. " 1-10 Immersion Momentary 4 0 Yes " 1-10 Spraying ... 25 0 Yes. Fleas killed almost instantly where caught by fluid. " 1-10 Dipping rat ... ... ... Yes TABLE B. The cost of the substances tried above per gallon of effective solution is as follows:4 It is evident that none of the substances except Pesterine Emulsion approach Emulsion A in cheapness of effective solution and it remains only to be seen whether this can be made and used in a practical manner. To emulsify refined oil is very easy and emulsions described as being made by churning up oil and strong soap solution are stated by Lefroy to be in common use against insect pests; whether what I have termed saturated soap emulsions have been employed I do not know. What I have called a non-saturated emulsion requires so much soap that the cost of this item is very considerable. In the saturated emulsion the cost of soap is an almost negligible quantity. If equal quantities of oil and soap solution are shaken up a milky fluid at once forms. On standing this separates into two layers an upper white stratum of emulsified oil and a lower stratum of clear soap solution. In other words it may be termed a:non-saturated emulsion since there is still soap solution left presumably capable of emulsifying more oil. If saturation is attempted by adding in the first place to the soap solution much in excess of its own volume of oil emulsification either does not take place or takes place with great difficulty and imperfectly. But if oil be added from time to time in small quantities a soap solution if well shaken is capable of converting as much as twenty times its volume of oil into an emulsion being a thick cream or even semi-solid which shows no tendency to separate into layers. The addition of a trace more oil beyond a certain amount has the effect of destroying the emulsion, the point at which over saturation point is reached varying with the soap used, the strength of solution and the method of agitation employed. Cost being an important point and soap compared with the original oil being an expensive addition to the cost, the effect of a number of soaps in making emulsions was tried. The soaps experimented with were5 The emulsion recommended for use is emulsion A which can be made in bulk in the following manner:6 cause and nature of the prevalent fever and to make some specific recommendations for the improvement of the health of these villages. As our time was limited only a few selected villages which were said to be highly feverish were inspected. With the advice of Captain Christophers, I.M.S., we drew up a plan which had for its object the elucidation of the following points:7. The spleen percentage of Lighthouse Kuppam is as follows:8 few, chiefly of Muhammadan class, are employed in boat making. A certain number of persons from the inland villages are employed as coolies in boat making. Percentage of Spleens.9 Breeding Places.10 leakage at Kathivakkam opposite the glass factory where the water is quite stagnant. Seeing that a large amount of traffic is carried on in this canal, that it is periodically flushed out by the ebb and flow from the sea through several bars and that it is also cleaned periodically it is not difficult to believe that it is unsuitable for the breeding of Anopheles larvæ. The pools which contained.Anopheles larvæ had no connection whatever with the canal. Nevertheless it may be noted that when we inspected Vayalur salt factory we found that all the coolies who come from distant villages over a radius of 3 miles had no splenic enlargement, nor did they give a history of fever, while the few coolies who come from the villages on the canal invariably had enlarged spleens. It is, therefore, possible that the canal, in spite of our not finding larvæ still bears some relation towards fever. That such may be the case is evident when we consider certain factors in the spread of malarial fever in these villages11 evident there were grave sources of error in Schaudinn's experiments. Ross, Novy, MacNeal and Torrey have recently pointed out that although Schaudinn referred to Leger's observations on Crithidia fasiculata from Anopheles maculipennis, he makes no mention of the similar parasites of Culex mosquitoes and as the species Culex pipiens which he was dealing with was presumably captured at large at Rovignio, it was necessary to first exclude the possibility of it harbouring these natural flagellates. Schaudinn's work has led to the erroneous belief that these insect flagellates when occurring in blood-sucking insects represent the further development of some unknown H12 It will be remembered Leger in his description of Crithidia fasciculata based the generic name on the short oat-like appearance of the parasite of Anopheles maculipennis. This stage as I have pointed out in my paper on Crithidia gerridis is undoubtedly a young form of the parasite and as the immature forms of many Herpetomonas have very much the same appearance it is not possible to distinguish beween the two especially when they both occur in the same insect. The adult flagellate of Crithidia is very characteristic, the anterior end instead of being blunt as in Herpetomonas is attenuated being drawn out along the flagellum to which it is attached by a narrow undulating membrane. Further the blepharoplast is always situated much closer up to the nucleus than in the adult flagellate of Herpetomonas. Throughout their life-cycles these Crithidia have their blepharoplasts either at the anterior end or close up to the nucleus and in some instances posterior to it. The generic name Crithidia is therefore an unfortunate one as it does not accurately describe the peculiar structure of the parasites. Recently Novy has studied the flagellates found by Koch, Gray and Tulloch in Glossina palpalis in Uganda; he believes these flagellates are true insect parasites and have no connection with Trypanosoma gambiense; he bases this view on the following facts:13 No. V. MAMMALIAN LEUCOCYTOZOA. By the SUPERINTENDENT. Within the last few years a number of parasites which have been classed with the H14 Laveran's view who regards these parasites as being allied to the H15 It has been found that during the colder months (December and January) this change hardly ever takes place, while in a leech taken from a frog in September the parasites had not only immediately left the red cells, but had also passed out of their capsules. These observa- tions suggest that the further evolution of the parasites will best be studied during the hot weather when it is hoped to make an exhaustive study of their life cycles not only in the leech but also in the frog. No. VII. BATRACHIAN TRYPANOSOMES. By the SUPERINTENDENT. We owe our exact knowledge of the morphology of the trypanosomes of frogs to the researches of Laveran and Mesnil on the trypanosome of Rana escalenta which was the parasite originally studied by Gluge, Mayer, and Grnby. Trypanosoma rotatorium vel sanguinis of Mayer and Gruby undoubtedly exhibits marked pleomorphism in its vertebrate host and as Laveran and Mesnil suggest many of the trypanosomes of frogs described by subsequent observers as distinct species may quite well be special forms of this parasite. Trypanosoma inopinatum described by the brothers Sergent has been accepted by most authorities as a new species; this also applies to trypanosoma nelspruittense of Laveran, Trypanosoma borelli of Marchoux and Salimbeni, trypanosoma solomalense of Brumpt and trypanosoma belli Nabarro. Franca and Athias have recently suggested that the species rotatorium of Mayer-Gruby should be divided into two species; (1)T. loricatum or costatum (Mayer) in which the body of the parasite is ovoid and the blepharoplast is situated near the nucleus; (2) T. rotatorium (Mayer) in which the body is more slender, the blepharoplast is situated at the posterior end and the undulating membrane is well developed. These observers have also described two new species T. undulans and T. elegans. In Rana tigrina and Rana hexydactyla I have found the typical Trypanosoma rotatorium vel sanguinisof Mayer-Gruby as well as forms allied to Trypanosoma mega and Trypanosoma karyozenkton of Dutton and Tood and the T. undulans of Franca and Athias. In addition to these forms I have also seen a small trypanosome in the blood of Rana tigrina measuring from 27 v to 28 v including the free flagellum which is about 7 v to 8 v in length; its posterior end is markedly pointed and beak-like, its body is narrow and the undulating membrane is of medium breadth. The blepharoplast is situated about 2.5 v from the posterior end; the nucleus is small and oval and lies about the centre of its body. The parasite stains pink throughout and exhibits no striations or granules. It appears to differ from the two other small trypanosomes of frogs Trypanosoma inopinatumm and Trypanosoma belli, I therefore propose naming it provisionally Trypanosoma hendersoni after Dr. Henderson through whose kindness in obtaining the frogs I had the opportunity of studying this parasite. An interesting question arises as to the possibility of these small trypanosomes having some connection with Trypanosoma rotatorium? I have always found Trypanosoma hendersoni associated with rotatorium and never in large numbers. It is not possible to answer this question finally until the development of the two parasites in leeches is thoroughly worked out, further a large number of feeding exerperiments would also be necessary to see whether soon after infection it is possible to trace any connection between the two forms. In the blood of Rana tigrina and Rana hexidactyla infected with Trypanosoma rotatoriumI have seen all the curious forms figured and described by Franca, Athias, Dutton, Todd and Tobey; it is not possible as yet to say what part of its life cycle they represent. In the leech (Clepsina), more particularly in the embryos, I have been able to study the development of a flagellate, which appears to be a true parasite of the leech. Twenty-four hours after feeding on an infected or uninfected frog round non-flagellated forms are seen lying free in the crop diverticula; in many of these early forms I have seen yellow granules exactly similar to the well known pigment granules of the H16 Crithidia-like flagellates. Owing to the want of time I have not been able to follow these observations further. It is hardly necessary to point out that the flagellates in the leech have no connection whatever with the hNos. 693, 693A L., 14TH MAY 1908. GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. READ2 Nos. 693, 693A L., 14TH MAY 1908. Referring to the preventive measures I can heartily endorse the view that quinine should be popularized and should be always obtainable from such people as schoolmasters and mistresses, munsifs, etc.; but before the other suggestions can be adopted a good deal more investigation is required. Thus, I do not consider it estab- lished that the casuarina trees have any direct influence on the "malariosity" of the place, and further that considering the cost and trouble of antimalarial measures it might be found cheaper to remove the villages to other sites as the area of infec- tion is very small. (5) As regards the parasites described in papers IV, V and VI very little need be said. The protozoa are becoming very important in the field of medicine and a study of the life history of as many different species as possible is of the greatest importance. The life history of the non-pathologenic protozoa is in some instances compara- tively easy to work out and affords valuable information in the study of the more important pathogenic varieties. Of these, the life cycle of the malaria parasite is now certain, but not so the Leishman. Donovan body. A study of the other species of Herpetomonas, such as occur in some animals, affords most valuable information as to what probably occurs in the extra corporeal life of the parasite of Kala Azar. Another interesting point is brought out in Captain Patton's work, viz., that many of the sanguivora, be they mosquitoes, flies, lice or leeches, have in their bodies two kinds of parasitesAGENTS FOR THE SALE OF MADRAS GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN THE EAST R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. T. COOPOOSWAMI NAICKER & Co., Madras. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Mount Road, Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Esplanade, Madras. S. MURTHY & Co, Kapalee Press, Madras. G.A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. P.R. RAMA IYAR & Co., 192, Esplanade, Madras. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGUN, Bombay. E.SEYMOUR HALE, BOMBAY. * T.K. SITARAMA AIYAR, Kumbakonam. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., Bombay. TEMPLE & Co., Georgetown, Madras. THACKER & CO,( Limited ), Bombay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. IN ENGLAND. E.A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W., London. B.H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. CONBTABLE & Co., 10,Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C., London. DEIGHTON, BELL & Co., Cambridge. T. FISHER UNWIN,1, Adelphi Terrace, W.C., London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S.W., London. Henry S. KING & Co., 65, CORNHILL, E.C., London. P. S. KING & SON, 2 AND 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, S.W., London. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co.,43, Gerrard Street, Scho, W., London. B. QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, NEW BOND Street, W., London. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, E.C., London. ON THE CONTINENT. FRIENDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. RUDOLF HAUPT, Halle-a-S, Germany. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NISHOFF, The Hague, Holland. *Agent for sale of the Legislative Department publications.
IP/25/KZ.3 ANNUAL REPORT UPON THE WORK OF THE BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE FOR THE YEAR 1906. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 1 rupee 4 annas.] 1907. [2 Shillings.]
ANNUAL REPORT UPON THE WORK OF THE BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE FOR THE YEAR 1906. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1907.
ANNUAL REPORT UPON THE WORK OF THE BACTERIO- LOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE FOR THE YEAR 1906. 1. The work of the bacteriological section has formerly been incorporated in the annual report of the work of the King Institute for the official year; so that the present separate report, which it has been decided to make at the end of the calendar year, has, in the present instance to some extent, to cover ground already gone over. But a fuller treatment of the subject-matter is intended and a certain amount of repetition should not detract from its value. 2. The work of the section may most conveniently be divided into2 large numbers and give a characteristic appearance to the specimen which enables the pneumonic type of plague to be detected readily by microscopical examination. There is in sputum, however, always the possibility- (1) That it is not derived from the lungs at all, but only from throat or even the mouth. (2) That plague organisms are scanty and cannot with certainty be detected on account of the multitude of other organisms. (3) That bacilli bearing a close resemblance to plague may be present and so render a guarded opinion necessary. " 3. Microscopical examination of a bubo prior to suppuration gives almost certain evidence as to plague. The only error likely to occur is that fluid supposed to be from the gland is really from the tissues around it or even blood from the skin sucked in when the needle is withdrawn. " It is on account of the uncertainty attaching to puncture that cutting down upon the gland is so much to be preferred when a great deal turns upon the diagnosis. "Old buboes which have become purulent may or may not show the plague bacillus since this organisms is apt to be killed off." 4. Water samples. 3 naturally yielded the more valuable scientific results, bacteriological work the more directly utilitarian. 2. The scope of the work can be best gathered from the papers, which discuss under separate headings the different results achieved. Some explanation is how- ever required as to the reasons or circumstances which have directed research on the lines it has followed. 3. Bacteriological research has in the main been devoted to the bacteriology of Indian waters for, though other problems also demand attention and will be taken up in turn, none seem to be of more immediate urgency In Europe the bacterio- logical examination of waters has been pushed to a high degree of delicacy enabling the larger corporations to control with certainty the purity of their water supplies. The idea that this should be applied also to India naturally occurs, but a moment's consideration will show that there are certain initial difficulties, in so much as all the standards and even the choice of the organisms used to denote the standards have been worked out in the waters of temperate climates. So far as I am aware observations upon tropical waters are very few, though the difference in temperature must enormously modify bacterial processes and there is no guarantee that tests found satisfactory in Europe should be equally satisfactory in India. In the course of examination it was found that the great majority of Indian waters showed according to European standards what has generally been taken as meaning definite pollution, i.e., the presence of both, the bacillus sporo- genes enteritidis and the bacillus coli communis in comparatively small quantities of water. This fact at once brings to mind certain conditions existent in India likely to influence bacteriological results, the presence of dust, of dried cattle droppings, of chatties and other receptacles used to draw water and to make one wonder whether for routine use the extremely delicate bacteriological tests are not too delicate, condemning waters which were for all practical purposes good. Against this it may be said that pollution by any of the above methods is none the less pollution, able to give rise to disease should the germs of this be present, it being obvious that a single apparently clean chatty may, for example, inoculate a well with cholera. In water supplies therefore pollution however small in amount cannot be passed over, and the bacteriological tests provided they do actually demonstrate pollution cannot be too delicate. It becomes then of primary impor- tance to ascertain the reliability or the reverse of the tests used in Europe as applied to tropical waters. This has been the line of research during the year and the results achieved have already given a certainty to reports upon water samples which was not at first possible. As year by year the value of further tests is indicated it is hoped that results will be of corresponding greater practical utility. Other bacteriological researches have been upon matters which have arisen from time to time in connection with sanitary work in the Presidency. That upon the bacteriology of vaccine was deemed advisable in order to assist, when this was required, the vaccine section. That upon cyllin was undertaken as a result of the request of the Government of Madras for a report on the value of this substance as an antiseptic. In bacteriological work the services of Mr. Seethapathi Aiyar, the Senior Bacteriological Assistant, have been invaluable and it is mainly due to the work of this officer that the work has been possible. 4. Protozoological research has dealt mainly with questions connected with the part played by insects and other bloodsuckers in the transmission of disease. Captain Patton, I.M.S., who has been attached to the Institute during the past year, has been able to devote his time to the study of the Leishman Donovan body. His researches started from the fact that the parasite had been recorded by two previous observers, Major Donovan and myself in the leucocytes of the peripheral blood and the hypothesis then put forward that by this channel they reached the gut of some bloodsucking insect. They have showed in the first place that at certain times parasites are present in the peripheral blood in large numbers and finally that such parasites do, as a matter of fact, undergo development in the gut of the bug into the flagellate bodies described by Rogers, the almost certain presumption being that this insect acts as the transmitter of the disease. A study
4 in relation to this is that undertaken by Captain Patton with regard to the distribution of the different species of bedbug. 5. My own researches have chiefly directed to the discovery of the means by which the extraordinary hereditary transmission of piroplasma through the tick takes place. The direct study of human disease necessitating time to obtain material at present presents difficulties and of other researches none appeared to have a wider importance and greater interest at the present time than the one undertaken. Its successful issue whilst finally disposing of the affinities of the Leishman Donovan body to the piroplasmata yields the next instance, after that of the development of material parasites in the mosquito, of a complete cycle of development of a pathogenic protozoon in the body of a blood sucking insect. This research has entailed certain preliminary investigations upon ticks and the piroplasmata and has in its course led to the discovery of a portion of the cycle of development of the hæmogregarine of the dog in the tick. 6. A line of research which has more or less thrust itself upon both Captain Patton and myself is that upon the mammalian hæmogregarines a subject to which we have contributed a large proportion of what is known to science. The interest attaching to the presence of these forms, which were previously supposed to be confined to the cold blooded vertebrates, in mammals such as the dog, cat, rat, squirrel and others is obvious. It was also thought at one time that some such parasite in the human subject might be the cause of an important disease of the white blood corpuscles. 7. A certain amount of work on gregarines by Captain Patton has been of great utility since it is evident these forms naturally common in insects are very frequently the cause of error in efforts to trace the extra-corporeal development of pathogenic protozoa. The same applies to the brief work done upon normal flagellates of the mosquito, tick, leech, etc. 8. The article by Mr. P. Narasimha Rao Nayudu, the Junior Bacteriological Assistant, on a new mosquito records a species which by the character of the head scales is a typical culex but which both looks like a stegomyia and behaves like a stegomyia. Its eggs are those of the stegomyiæ and the same applies to its larva and nymph. This mosquito is being sent to Mr. Newstead of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine for identification, but I believe it to be a species already forwarded by the Assistant Surgeons lately engaged on malarial investigation in Madras and if so it is a new species. It will be interesting to hear under what genus it is eventually classed, the classification by scale characters in this case being far from satisfactory. (iii) EDUCATIONAL. A course of minor Sanitary Engineering has been held at the institute by Mr. H. Nowroji, the Assistant Sanitary Engineer to Government, and has been attended by over 100 students, many of whom have come from Mysore and distant parts of the Presidency. A class for instruction of Plague Inspectors was conducted in September and October by Captain W. A. Justice, I.M.S. Lectures and practical instruction in human and animal vaccination, and an elementary course of lectures on bacteriology (asepsis), have been given by the Superintendent. OFFICE OF THE SUPT., K.I.P.M., GUINDY, 14th Feb. 1906. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., Captain, I.M.S., Superintendent.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918437.tif] P. 1. = Area under Sewage from Debden Filter Beds. P. 2. = " " " " Sand Filter. P. 3. = " " Crude Sewage. P. 4. = Land atpresent out of use for want of means of irrigation. P. 5. = Land under ordinary picottah irrigation Area irrigable by single picottah. P.6. P.7. P.8. Quarantine plots kept irrigated for grazing till June when water not available.
5 APPENDIX I. REPORT ON THE WORKING OF THE SEWAGE INSTALLATION AT THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE. By the SUPERINTENDENT. 1. The sewage works and the farm connected with it, which are the subject of the present report, were devised by Lieutenant-Colonel W. G. King, I.M.S., then Sanitary Commissioner, with the idea that, whilst they should prevent all nuisance arising from the institute sewage, they should also be of use in deter- mining experimentally the best methods of disposal and utilisation of sewage in India, especially those methods most suitable to Municipalities and most valuable to ryot cultivators. Apart therefore from the demonstration that a sewage could be disposed of easily and without nuisance, the main question which the system had to determine was whether, agriculturally, filtered sewage had advantages to the ryot over unfiltered sewage. This question has been answered in the case of the institute Sewage in the negative, but, as will be seen later, this cannot be applied to all sewage, and the working of a sewage plot in connection with Government House, Guindy, has shown that here treatment of the sewage is a necessity, not only to prevent nuisance in its disposal, but in order to get the benefit of its manurial value agriculturally. 2. It will be desirable, before describing the results of experiments with this system, to outline briefly the general principles of the disposal of sewage by bacterial methods. 3. It will not be necessary to go into the various steps by which such methods have been built up or modified in the light of experience. It will be sufficient for the purpose of this report if we indicate broadly what is at present known on the subject. 4. If sewage be run directly upon soil, a very large area of land is required to dispose of it, owing to the fact that the organic matter in suspension would, if in any quantity, quite prevent the growth of vegatation, or indeed allow of any other process but ultimate putrefaction of such matter in situ. Could the organic matter of sewage be first broken down into chemical bodies more suitable for plant life, the question of its disposal would be enormously simplified. 5. The bacterial methods have as their object the achievement of this result. (a) In certain systems of bacterial treatment of sewage, the sewage is run direct upon coke beds of special construction, where, as it trickles down, it is subjected to the action of organisms (aerobes), which convert all the contained organic matter into simple non-putresible compounds. Even such resistant sub- stances as paper are said in these beds to undergo rapid solution. As a rule, however, the direct treatment of sewage by the aerobic bacteria of a filter bed is rendered impossible by the fact that the solid matter of the sewage sooner or later clogs the filter. (b) it is here that the function of a septic tank comes in. It has been found that, if sewage he allowed to remain undisturbed one or two days in bulk, most powerful fermentative changes go on, which result in the solution of all solid organic matter. These fermentative changes are the result of the action of anaerobic bacteria, or those which flourish best where oxygen is absent. A septic tank is merely a closed receptacle devised to allow sewage to be subject to this fermentation. As it leaves the septic tank sewage may quite well be as full of bacteria, if not more so, than when it went in, but it is free or almost free from solid matter.
6 (c) Though the solid matter has been removed, it is only converted into matter in solution, and the effluent from a septic tank is therefore subject to renewed putrefaction, with all the nuisances of the original sewage. The effluent can, however, now be run without difficulty upon coke beds, where all organic matter is finally reduced to simple inorganic compounds such as carbonic acid, nitrates and so on. (d) This effluent from the beds is, or ought to be, not only free from the possibility of further putrefaction, so that it can if necessary be allowed to run into a stream or river, but its constituents are more adapted than those of the original sewage for the growth of plants, and, subject to certain modifying conditions, its manurial value is increased. 6. The general arrangement of the sewage system under discussion is shown in the accompanying sketch map. The "farm" occupies a small depression, which debouches upon the flat land along the bank of the river Adyar. The sewage from the institute enters the septic tank at "A". A is the septic tank proper and B a storage reservoir for use in working the filter beds. C and D are two Dibden filters. At "B" there is a bye-pass, by means of which crude sewage can be passed directly upon the farm, and at E there is a model of a Massachusets sand filter. Plot 3 (shown on the plan) has for over a year received only crude sewage, plot 2 septic tank effluent passed through the sand filter, and plot 1 septic tank effluent which has been filtered through the Dibden beds. 7. The farm has been run by an overseer on Rs. 40, and four menials. The ground has been levelled, and terraced, and cleared of jungle. Up to quite recently the farm was utilised strictly for experimental purposes, the quantity of sewage run on, and the produce from the different beds being carefully weighed, and the amount recorded by the overseer7 13. The amount of water pumped from the well which supplies the institute averages 10,000 gallons per diem. The great bulk of this apparently enters the closed sewerage system and enters the septic tank or is allowed to pass direct upon the farm, but only 5,000 to 6,000 gallons are recoverable (vide later). The major portion of the sewage is derived from water used in wahing down the calf stalls, but there are in addition several latrines and other feeders, etc. The sewage as might be expected is a dilute one and comparatively free from human excreta. As seen in the sewers it is a thin fluid containing particles of dung, paddy husks, etc. Though not objectionable when freshly collected, it, quickly becomes so when kept. In the septic tank it, becomes covered with a frothy greyish brown scum which contains a good deal of solid matter. Collected and observed in the laboratory the fermentating action is beautifully displayed, masses of material alternately rising, and falling as bubbles of gas form or detach themselves. After passing through the septic tanks the sewage is a darkish clear fluid containing black amorphous granular matter. After filtration the effluent is slightly turbid but has practically no odour, and kept it does not become objectionable. 14. For demonstration purposes nothing can more strikingly illustrate the value of the bacterial method of sewage disposal, and in the perfection of its results the present installation has subserved its object. 15. An instructive contrast in this respect are the arrangements for the disposal of sewage at Government House. This is a concentrated sewage containing much human excremental matter, soap, etc. It is received direct from an open channel without any septic tank. There is a small sand filter, and a plot of land for the utilisation of the sewage in growing lucerne and guinea grass. In a very short time it was found necessary to leave the sand filter severely alone as any attempt to get the thick sewage through this led to the greatest nuisance from the odour and the necessity of constantly removing the sand which had then to be buried. The two overseers who have at different times had charge of the farm have, in self-defence, found it necessary to allow the solid matter to sediment and bury this in pits. Allowed to run direct upon the beds the crude sewage has to be used with the greatest care to prevent clogging of the soil, nuisance, and death of crops. 16. Here the disposal of sewage without nuisance is not automatically carried out, but is managed only by constant attention and by such an archaic method as burying solid matter in pits. The use of a septic tank, which probably would not, as we shall see later, need to be a large one, is in this case therefore highly desirable. 17. Though the installation has done all that could be desired in disposing of sewage passed into it, yet there are certain matters in its working which are worthy of note, as they have an important bearing on the putting up of similar installations in India. 18. The septic tank has a capacity of about 1,600 cubic feet or 10,000 gallons and the reservoir of about 1,200 cubic feet or 7,500 gallons, the total capacity of the system being about 17,500 gallons. This is far more than is necessary for the institute sewage even were the quantity of this doubled, a sojourn of 24 hours in the tank, even in Europe, being now considered sufficient, whilst at the temperature of Madras fermentation is certain to be far more rapid in its action. 19. The filter beds again measure 37 feet by 35 feet and are 4 feet deep. These are even more out of proportion large to the amount of sewage than the septic tank, though I have no doubt they were arranged to suit requirements judged by English standards. 20. In the intensely dry conditions of India, where, especially in porous soil, an immense amount of fluid can soak in leaving scarcely a trace, a much smaller sewage installation than is generally supposed requisite will probably be found ample for institutions, small municipalities and so on. 21. To draw conclusions from the present experiments regarding sewage disposal on a large scale would not however, I think, be justifiable, and this is especially so where the question of the utilisation of sewage is at stake.
8 22. Where small installations such as those at the institute or at Government House are concerned, experience makes it very doubtful whether the utilisation of the sewage is worth the labour expended upon it since if produce is required it can, as shown in the present instance, be obtained with infinitely greater ease and cheapness by simple irrigation from a well or river. 23. The reason is obvious once the practical working of an installation is taken in hand. It has already been remarked that the conditions in India are such as tend to make the volume of sewage less than it would be in Europe. Not only so, but wherever the sewage is allowed to come in contact with the soil, it is sucked up in astonishing quantities. Thus not only does every leak in the system tell in a way it would not otherwise do, but in the filter beds, and in the distributary channels, the loss is enormous. Starting with what seems a considerable inflow into the sewerage system, it is remarkable how little ground it is possible to irrigate. Then, again, to irrigate dry and porous soil in India very large quantities of water are required. 24. The result of this is that sewage, which on account of its constituents would suffice to manure a considerable area, is capable of irrigating only a very much smaller area. 25. The appreciation of these conditions suggests their remedy and the combination of a Sewage outflow with well water irrigation is an experiment well worth trial. Though the institute sewage on account of its nature is not very dilute adapted to such an experiment, yet in the future it is proposed to utilise the sewage not by itself, but in conjunction with irrigation from a large well which was found buried in the jungle which originally covered the greater portion of the farm With two bullocks the whole area could be irrigated (vide sketch map) and all the manurial value of the sewage utilised in producing a patch of grazing ground which would be of great use to the vaccine section. 26. In the case of the institute sewage the cultivation of crops is not necessary to avoid nuisance, since the effluent, with practically no attention, can be allowed to find its own way into the soil and being non-putrescible it causes no nuisance. 27. In the case of Government House the cultivation of crops is at present necessary, though it is doubtful if it is economical, but it would not, be necessary nor I think desirable to cultivate crops if a proper bacterial system producing a non-putrescible effluent were put in existence. If crops are desired they should be grown where they can he done most economically. Sewage having a manurial value, it is desirable of course to utilise it, but if this is done it should be carried out in conjunction with well irrigation. 28. Whether filtered sewage gives better results agriculturally than crude sewage, which was the chief question the experiments were designed to answer, has been put to the test by irrigating continuously for over a year three exactly similar plots of ground, plot 3, plot and plot 1, respectively, with crude sewage, sewage passed through the septic tank and a sand filter, and sewage which had been through the tank and Dibden filter beds. Neither by inspection, nor as the result of the produce given, was any superiority noted. If anything the superiority lay with the crude sewage, probably because here wastage was less and more actual water reached the crops. 29. Table I gives in detail the conditions for one month in the dry weather. Table IT gives the crops grown in one month (June) with the aid of a small picottah worked by two men also in the dry weather. 30. In the case of the institute the crude sewage was sufficiently dilute not to clog the soil, and its quantity insufficient to lead to stagnation. It is quite certain that the sewage from Government House could not, in an untreated state, have been run on to grass beds, as was the institute sewage, without giving rise to grave nuisance. 31. The question of the passage of pathogenic organisms through the septic tank has not been touched upon, since the subject is one which has been taken up by many workers and one which did not seem called for in the present instance,
9 when more urgent matters have required attention in the laboratories, and since it requires no staff to undertake such experiments should they at any time be desirable. 32. As stated before it is not the business of a septic tank or even filters in the case of sewage to remove or reduce the number of organisms. Nevertheless several estimations have shown some reduction in certain test organisms, i.e., B. Coli communis and B. Sporogenes enteritidis. The accompanying table III shows that this reduction is most marked in the case of the former organism:10 TABLE I11 TABLE II12 APPENDIX II. THE BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF INDIAN WATERS. By the SUPERINTENDENT and Assistant Surgeon T. SEETHAPATHY IYER, L.M.S., Senior Bacteriological Assistant. The existence of pollution in water is generally deduced from the presence of one or more of the following organisms:13 it is not impossible that bacteria from the intestinal canals of these may yield. results similar to those given by human pollution. In piped supplies such organi- cally impure water almost presupposes massive incrustations largely of organic material in the pipes and the putrifaction of this at high temperatures may quite well give rise to results difficult to differentiate clearly from fæcal pollution. Where waters are more or less free from organic impurity it is not unfrequent to find a few green vegetable cells. In open waters the presence of such cells has little or no significance, but in filtered waters not exposed to light after filtration they show filtration to be inefficient, and in a well they argue either imperfect protection or pollution by the direct entry of surface waters Many samples are practically free from sediment, and these have to be judged on purely bacteriolo- gical standards It is obvious that, with the significance of the tests still undecided, such samples offer the greatest difficulty of all. To arrive at the clearest results, it is advisable to divide samples into four groups as given below, and to discuss each group separately in relation to purely bacteriological tests. Group A.14 but the filtered did not. Guntur unfiltered water was placed in class B with "sporogenes." The filtered water though free from organic material still showed "sporogenes." There is in these samples very considerable evidence to show that the presence of sporogenes in 100 c.c. of the sample is associated especially with polluted waters. What the exact nature of the pollution may be and how far it is fæcal cannot at present and without the aid of other tests be determined, but the presence of the reaction would prevent one from returning a sample as free from pollution, and it promises to form therefore a very reliable initial test in the bacteriological examination of samples. The absence of the "sporogenes" reaction is presumptive evidence of purity, but associated with certain conditions which will be discussed later suspicions of such purity may exist. So far the presence of the bacillus coli communis has in the main served to strengthen the above observations on the value of the "sporogenes" reaction but some important departures from such a course have been observed. The significance of the presence of the organism, however, will be discussed only after observations upon it are more complete.
15 TABLE I. Number of Sample. Description. Date of receipt. Sediment B. Sporogenes as indicated by typical milk reaction. Remarks. Showing obvious pollution such as coloured cotton fibres, etc. Not showing definite pollution but containing much organic matter or infusoria. Not containing much organic matter, but showing occasional green cells. Absent or very small in amount and not showing organic structure. Present in 25 C.C. Present in 50 C.C. Present in 100 C.C. 1 Central Jail, Rajahmundry 17 Feb. 1906. Cotton fibres, infusoria, oily globules and green vegetable cells. ...... ...... ...... + + + Class A. Tanjore Water Works16 TABLE I5 Kodappamund18 TABLE I19 Conjeeverain Water Works20 TABLE II. Class A. Class B. Class C. Class D. Number. With Sporogenes reaction. Number. With Sporogenes reaction. Number. Without Sporogenes reaction. Number. With Sporogenes reaction. Number. Without Sporogenes reaction. Number. With Sporogenes reaction. Number. Without Sporogenes reaction. 1 Rajahmundry Central Jail. 9 Cannanore Central Jail. 3a Conjeeveram, unfil- tered. 47 Poonamallee, Station Hospital well. 2b Tanjore, filtered. 5a Dindigul, unfiltered. 3b Conjeeveram, filtered. 4a Trichinopoly, unfil- tered. 11 Coimbatore, Noyel river. 17a Rajahmundry Central Jail, well 8. 56a Conjeeveram. unfil- tered. 2a Do. unfiltered. 10 Pallávaram. 5b Dindigul do. 6b Madura, filtered. 14 Madras lap, water. 32 Sittapakam, Camp well, St. Thomas' Mount. 4b Trichinopoly, filtered. 20 Cannanore Jail well. 8 Bunder, water-supply well. 7a Anantapur, well of Narasimhachari. 18a A. B. & Co.'s, unfilter- ed, Madras. 34 Rajahmundry Central Jail. 6a Madura, unfiltered. 29 Coonoor, hydrant. 13 Tanjore Central Jail. 7b Anantapur, Yara- bhavi. 18b Do. filtered. 52b Cuddapah, pipe water. 24 Old Ootacamund, impounding cistern. 35 Rajahmundry, storage tank. 15 Fort St. George. 7c Anantapur, Baliah's well. 19 A well in Cattle-yard, Madras. 53b Tirupati, filtered. 26 Tiger Hill Reservoir, Ootacamund. 37 Old Ootacamand im- pounding cistern. 16 Cannanore Central Jail. 12 Cannanore Central jail. 21 Rajahmundry, block well 2. 62a Coonoor, head pipe 28 Dodabetth Lower Reservoir. 42a Guindy Government House (drinking water). 22 Coonoor, pipe. 17b Rajahmundry, Pipe from store tank. 30 Royal ærated water. 23 Ootacamund, Marli- mund. 33 Marlimund, Ootaca mund. 43b Rajahmundry Central Jail, storage tank. 25 Kodappamund. 36 Church of England, St. Thomas' Mount. 31 Bellary Central Jail. 55b Do. 6th Jan. 1907. 48b Guntúr, filtered. 27 Dodabetta, upper. 51b Adóni, filtered. 33 Vellachi, St. Thomas' Mount. 59a Dindigul, unfiltered. 63a Central Jail, Rajah- mundry, storage tank. 40 Cannanore Central Jail, second well. 39 Central Jail, Canna- nore. 43a Rajahmundry Central Jail, No. 8. 41 Virddháchalam. 46 Coonoor, pipe. 42b Guindy, Government House, filtered. 50 Cannanore Jail, tope well. 44a Coimbatore, Noyel river. 52a Cuddapah, unfiltered. 44b Coimbatore, irrigation tank. 54b Cocanada, filtered. 45 Poonamallee Barrack, well. 55a Ootacamund Tiger Hill. 48a Guntfúr, unfiltered. 56b Conjeeveram, filtered. 49a Kurnool do. 57b Madura, filtered. 49b Do. filtered. 59b Dindigul do. 51a Adóni, unfiltered. 60a Vizagapatam unfil- tered. 53a Tirupati do. 60b Vizagapatam, filtered. 54n Cocanada do. 61b Tanjore do. 61a Tanjore do. 62b Coonoor reservoir. 63b Rajahmudry well block 8. 57a Madura, unfiltered.
21 APPENDIX. III. REPORT ON THE EFFICACY OF CYLLIN AS A DISINFECTANT. By the SUPERINTENDENT. The method of accurate comparison of the effects' of a disinfectant with that of phenol, on which stress is laid by the manufacturers of cyllin, is, so far as I am aware, at present the most reliable means at disposal for forming an opinion as to its efficacy. I have under taken therefore in the first place experiments to determine the carbolic acid co-efficient of cyllin. Carbolic acid co-efficient.22 TABLE II. Organism. Disinfectant. Dilution. Time. 1 per cent. .25 per cent. .0625 per cent. .0156 per cent. Typhoid Cyllin x 2½ m. Do. Carbolic x x x Do. Cyllin x 5 m. Do. Carbolic x x x Do. Cyllin x 10 m. Do. Carbolic x x x Do. Cyllin x 20 m. Do. Carbolic x x x Staphylococcus aurens Cyllin x x 2½ m. Do. Carbolic x x x x Do. Cyllin x x 5 m. Do. Carbolic x x x Do. Cyllin x x 10 m. Do. Carbolic x x x Do. Cyllin x x 20 m. Do. Carbolic x x x In this series it will be noticed that the dilution used practically determined, apart from the time of exposure, the result of the experiment. To bring out more clearly the effect of time of exposure, a less abrupt scale of dilutions between the limits of 1 per cent. and .01 per cent. was employed (videTable III):23 Though there is still very little variation dependent on time, the results enable one to determine with some accuracy the carbolic acid co-efficient employed by Rideal and Walker. For the sake of clearness the results are given in Tables IV and V in the same tabular arrangement as is employed by these authors:24 TABLE V25 TABLE VI. Organism. Disinfectant. Dilution. Time. .25 per cent. .125 per cent. .06 per cent. .04 per cent. .02 per cent. .01 per cent. Typhoid Cyllin x x x x 2½ m. Do. Perchloride Do. Cyllin x x 5 m. Do. Perchloride Do. Cyllin x x 10 m. Do. Perchloride Staphylococcus aureus. Cyllin x x x x 2½ m. Do. Perchloride x Do. Cyllin x x x x 5 m. Do. Perchloride x TABLE VII. Organism. Disinfectant. Dilution. Time. .01 per cent. .005 per cent. .002 per cent. .001 per cent. Typhoid Cyllin x x x x 2½ m. Do. Perchloride Do. Cyllin x x x x 5 m. Do. Perchloride Do. Cyllin x x x x 10 m. Do. Perchloride Staphylococous aureus Cyllin x x x x 2½ m. Do. Perchloride x x x x Do. Cyllin x x x x 5 m. Do. Perchloride x x x Do. Cyllin x x x x 10 m. Do. Perchloride x x Cyllin is shown by these results to be weaker than perchloride, when acting on the typhoid bacillus, more than 60 times, though in the case of staphylococcus pyogenes aureus it is only 3 times weaker. The former figure, though experiments repeated on a different occasion gave an identical result, cannot, unless perchloride has a remarkably selective action upon the typhoid bacillus, be a true value, and as will be seen later the result as shown on the staphylococcus is more likely to represent the comparative values of the disinfectants for general purposes. The action of cyllin on spore-bearing organisms.26 .25 per cent. .125 per cent. .06 per cent. .04 per cent. .02 per cent. Cyllin x x x Perchloride x Attempts to cause complete sterilisation of the surface of cowdung floors by the use of either disinfectant were without effect. One hour after thorough drenching with either 1 in 500 perchloride, or 1 in 150 cyllin, innumerable organisms could be recovered by plating small fragments of the mud. General properties of cyllin.27 The comparative cost of cyllin and perchloride can be shown by a comparison of the cost of 100 gallons of equally effective solution of each, English rates and the cost of crude perchloride in bulk being taken as the basis:28 It is often present almost in pure culture, and it is the only organism invariably present in vaccine. The same organism appears to be equally universal upon the human skin. 2. The next most frequent colonies are round, flat opaque colonies of a yellow colour having a raised centre and entire edges. Microscopically it is a coccus taking ordinary stains and. Gram's stain. On agar it forms a yellow streak and is facultatively anæobic It has been considered to be the Staphylococcus pyogenes citreus. 3. Almost as frequent as the last are colonies which develop a deep golden yellow and which must be considered the Staphylococcus pyogenes aureus. 4. The only other organism at all abundant is a bacillus. Colonies are round, flat, thin, rather opaque, yellowish with raised centre and entire edges and very tough. These colonies when examined show round coccus-like bodies which do not take analine stains and which are evidently spores. On fresh agar slopes a thick non-motile bacillus which forms centrally situated spores on or about the fifth day. It is much more strictly ærobic than the staphylococci. 5. By no means often colonies having irregular edges with branching processes are present. These are an actively motile, rapidly growing, spore forming bacillus probably belonging to the b. subtilis. group. 6. Moulds are occasionally present. Plates incubated under strict anærobic conditions show only feebly growing colonies of the three staphylococci and strictly anærobic organisms have never been met with. These results being very constant suggested the advisability of trying the action of preservatives such as glycerine and lanoline on each type of organism. They also showed that in dealing with vaccine manufactured under cleanly condi29 The resistance of the bacillius No. 4 to even pure glycerine is no doubt due to the formation of spores by this organism and causes it to assume a relatively greater abundance in glycerinated paste than in the original vesicular matter. The use of lanoline as a preservative gives in practice very good results, and whether affecting the organisms as glycerine does or not it certainly prevents the putrefaction of the vesicular matter which would otherwise take place. Some experiments made by rubbing up pure cultures in lanoline afterwards kept in closed tubes have however shown that after several weeks a distinct reduction in the number of contained organisms may take place. Organism. Colonies in one 1oupful of mixture. End of first week. End of second week. End of third week. End of fourth week. Staphylococcus albus 1,424 437 27 22 staphylococcus aureus 6,782 1,632 693 86 staphylococcus citreus 1, 437 642 123 756 Bacillus No. 4 12,325 8,437 2,575 2,086 The experiments have from pressure of other work not been further pursued, but they serve to indicate some important points in connection with the bacterio30 which suggested that these parasites had affinities with the flagellata, and by those of Koch and Kliene, who described certain very peculiar developmental forms in the tick. In tracing a protozoon parasite through its intermediary host there are in practice many difficulties which I need not refer to here, and those in connection with piroplasma were especially great on account of the small size of the parasite and the fact that the examination of the tick is more difficult than that of other insects. Before taking up the research it was found necessary to make a preliminary study of the anatomy and histology of ticks. Again it was necessary to be certain that the right species of tick was being investigated and since H. leachi, the only species of tick actually known to transmit Piroplasma canis, does not occur in India, the claims of other species had to be considered and their pathogenicity worked out. After months of work it became clear that the species R. sanguinens (Latrine) conveyed the disease, and a minute investigation of ticks fed upon infected dogs was commenced. In spite however of the most laborious examination of the contents of the gut of ticks fed on suitable cases nothing was to be found suggesting development. Work was therefore directed to the question of the existence of sexual forms in the blood and the varieties of the parasite seen at different stages of infection, but without result. Cultures were then undertaken on lines previously adopted with the Leishman- Donovan Body, but as in the hands of other authors nothing definite was obtained; nor was the examination of preparations kept in the warm chamber, as for demonstrating the flagellation of the malarial parasite, more successful. Koch's and Kliene's researches stimulated me to renewed efforts, which were at first directed to the obtaining of the cultural forms of Kliene, but though some results were obtained they were indefinite and unsatisfactory. Curiously enough development was first seen when I was endeavouring to follow up the cycle of development of the hæmogregarine Leucocytozoon canis in ticks fed on a dog who during the experiments developed a severe attack of piroplasmosis. In a preliminary note in the Indian Medical Journal I described the club shaped bodies of Koch and some other appearances suggesting the conjugation described by this author. A little later in a preliminary note in the British Medical Journal I gave a description of developmental stages leading up to the formation of swarms of sporozoit-like bodies in the salivary glands of the nymph and adult of the second generation. Since then many gaps have been filled and certain errors of interpretation have been corrected, with the result that the cycle of development can be followed concisely and clearly. A complete description of all the forms observed would occupy too much space in this report, but a summary may be given. Parasites not differing from ordinary forms in the peripheral blood, when in the gut of the tick, enlarge and form round or oval bodies 4 µ. to 5 µ. in diameter in which the chromatin still resembles that of the original piroplasma of the blood. Before they have reached their full size these bodies often show irregularities, but the long processes described by Koch do not seem a neces- sary part of development. After reaching the size noted an achromatic line appears giving rise to some peculiar appearances wrongly interpreted by me in my first note. This line divides the parasite approximately into two halves, one containing the chromatin mass, and the other no chromatin. The two halves eventually separate except at one point and the portion without chromatin swings round to become the tail of a club shaped body, the half with chromatin forming the anterior portion. The club shaped body at first somewhat irregular in shape takes on, as it becomes more mature, the appearance of a vermicule and develops a peculiar apparatus at the anterior end. The club shaped bodies then sooner or later leave the gut and are found about the ovary and oviducts. It was somewhat of a surprise to find that this development which takes place in the gut of the adult tick also takes place in the gut of nymphs fed on infected dogs. My experiments have not yet proved that infection can be transmitted otherwise than hereditarily, but there can be little doubt from the microscopical
31 finds that infection taken in by the nymph can be transmitted by the adult, a fact which somewhat confused my earlier interpretations of the cycle of development. Later work has made it quite clear that club shaped bodies may arise as a result development of the forms seen in the blood either in the gut of the adult or in that of the nymph. In the adult they find their way to the ovaries and oviducts, where they may sometimes be seen in swarms, and finally embed themselves in the ova. In the nymph they wander indiscriminately into the tissues and embed themselves in the protoplasm of the embryonic tissue cells which are already beginning to shape the future adult. Whether in the ovum or in tissue cell the club shaped body swells up and becomes a characteristic round body which for convenience of description and because it offers certain analogies with this stage of the malarial parasite I have called the " zygote ". The zygotes quickly undergo a great increase in size, reaching eventually as much as 25 µ. In their growth they exhibit some changes in the chromatin of a very peculiar nature. Eventually they split up into a number of bodies which I have for the time termed " sporoblasts " and these again sub-divide to form bodies resembling very closely piroplasma in the blood, which since they are found collected in the salivary glands I have called "sporozoits". Thus far, supposing fertilisation to take place prior to the formation of the club shaped bodies, for which there is a certain amount of evidence, piroplasma in the main outlines of its development resembles the malarial parasite, but in certain details and in the relation of the parasite to the tissues of the host there are some striking differences. Only in a few cases do zygotes as in the malarial parasite go through division into sporozoits in the cell originally invaded. Much more commonly the sporo- blasts become separated by the division of the rapidly growing embrionic cells, and possibly also by their own movements, so that the sporozoits when formed are more or less disseminated through the tissue. In the developing adult, parasites are commonest in the embryonic tissue which will eventually form the salivary gland, and when sporozoits are formed they are ready in sitn in the cells of the salivary acini. But is quite common for parasites to invade other embryonic cells than those which will eventually become salivary cells and possibly in this case the sporozoits reach the gland by their own movements. The final result is the packing of many of the salivary cells with thousands of sporozoit forms. In a previous publication I called attention to the fact that the nymphal and adult glands contained forms which appeared to be of different types, This difference is, however, not a very fundamental one and is due only to the fact that in the salivary glands of the nymphs I had then examined the process of sub-division into sporo- zoits was not complete. In my previous note I described from a wrong interpre- tation of the nature of the "sporoblasts " what seemed to be two cycles leading to the formation of sporozoits, but it is clear that one cycle only exists as described. Stated briefly the hereditary cycle of piroplasma is as follows: 32 APPENDIX VI. KALA AZAR. By Captain W. S. PATTON, I. M.S. Since the discovery of the Leishman Donovan body by Lieut.-Col. Leishman, R.A.M.C., at Netly and later by Major Donovan, I.M.S., in Madras, an important contribution to our knowledge of the parasite was made by Major Rogers, I.M.S., who succeeded in observing the development of the parasite into a flagellate in citrated splenic blood incubated at a low temperature. Captain S. R Christophers, I.M.S., Lieut.-Col. Leishman, R.A.M.C., and Captain Statham, R.A.M.C., have confirmed and still further added to Major Rogers' observations. Major Rogers has recently improved his method of cultivating the parasitesby adding a small quantity of citric acid to the citrated splenic blood and found that the development under these conditions appears to be more uniform, so that the majority of the parasites can be found in nearly the same stage on a given day, most having developed flagella on the third clay. Nothing further is known regarding the life history of this parasite, and the important problem as to how it enters the human body has yet to be solved. Many theories have been suggested to explain the method by which the parasite leaves the human body. Manson and Low failing to find the parasites in the peripheral blood, but observing them in the liver thought the biliary ducts might possibly be the channels by which they passed into the fæces; later finding the parasites in the ulcers of the large intestine concluded they might escape directly from them into the fæces. Manson, Low, Statham and others have, however, failed to find the parasites in the stools, and it is well known that they readily die out in cultures of splenic blood-should these become contaminated. Manson has recently suggested that the parasite probably leaves the body in the discharges either intestinal or cutaneous that it is ingested by some foul feeding fly in which it undergoes multi- plication and is then implanted in the human host by this insect by bite or by contact with broken skin surface. Both Christophers and Rogers have suggested that the parasite is ingested by some blood-sucking insect, the latter mentioning the bed-bug as a probable intermediate host, and in support of this hypothesis both Christophers and Donovan have found the parasite in the leucocytes of the peri- pheral blood. A careful study of films of finger blood of patients suffering from Kala Azar in the General Hospital., Madras, has shown that the parasite can be found in the majority of cases, while in those suffering from extensive ulceration of the large intestine they were found in large numbers. In order to test the truth of the above hypothesis a number of feeding experiments with the common blood-sucking insects of Madras were carried out, and at the outset it was found that the parasite could be recovered from the midgut of the louse Pediculus capitis and the Indian bed-bug Cimeæ rotundatus fed on suitable cases; in the louse, however, no develop- ment was observed, while in the bed-bng all stages up to the mature flagellates have been met with. The parasites are ingested by the bug, while in the leucocytes and the majority remain unchanged until the second day. While still lying in the degenerating leucocytes the parasites begin to enlarge, the protoplasm increases in volume staining deep blue with Giemsa's stain and contains many vacuoles; at the same time the macro-nuclei increase considerably in size and have a granular appearance, while the micro-nuclei slightly enlarged retain their original characters. One of two important changes may now take place in these enlarged forms; they may either.
33 rapidly pass on to flagellation, flagella being seen in all stages of development, or as is more commonly the case they may further enlarge, the macro and macro-nuclei dividing again and again and thus producing a large round cell containing from four to eight macro and Micro-nuclei. Flagella now develop in close relation to the micro-nuclei and pass out from one side of the cell which now begins to divide up into separate flagellates. This is the true resette and is analogous to that of Trypanosoma avium described by Novy and McNeal in so far that they are produced by the consecutive division of one cell in situ. These flagellates when free further multiply by longitudinal division and by the fifth day attenuated forms are seen. APPENDIX VII. THE PIROPLASMATA OF MADRAS. By the SUPERINTENDENT. In cattle two species of piroplasmata occur, a large species indistinguishable morphologically from p. bigeminum and a minute bacillary type of parasite resem- bling that of East Coast Fever, p. parvum. The latter is very common and nearly 50 per cent. of deaths among calves at the Institute are due to this disease which must be considered closely related to, if not identical with, African East Coast Fever. Although, so far as I am aware, the presence of this parasite has not been recognised, it must have a very considerable economic importance. Piroplasma Canis was reported by me from India in 1904 when investigating the Leishman-Donovan. Body in Madras. It was shortly afterwards recorded by James in Assam, so that it probably occurs throughout India. An important feature of infection in India is that it occurs among the indigenous pariah dogs. It does not differ morphologically or in any other recognisable way from the para- site in the South African and European forms of the disease. It is transmitted by the tick R. sanguineus (Latreille) which is the common dog tick of India. Trans- mission takes place either hereditarily through the egg, the nymphs and adults of the second generation being infective, or apparently from stage to stage. Piroplasma in the sheep- When examining the blood of half-grown lambs grazing about Guindy a very minute type of piroplasma was encountered. This resembled most closely the bacillary p. parvum of East Coast Fever, but it showed certain quite recognisable differences, being still more minute and showing a greater tendency to form minute round and oval forms. From want of time the species has not been further investigated, but it is in all probability a new species since p. ovis described in Europe and elsewhere is a large parasite of the p. bigeminum type. Piroplamosis in man-The Leishman-Donovan Body is still considered by some authors as having a relation to piroplasma. My own researches on the develop- ment of piroplasma show that there is no flagellate stage in Piroplasma as there is in Leishmania and the two can have little or no connection. At the same time such researches as have related to Leishmania are against the view that it is merply a human trypanosomiasis. 9
34 APPENDIX VIII. THE ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY OF TICKS. By the SUPERINTENDENT. In order to prepare the way for researches upon piroplasma and the spirilla a minute study was made of the Anatomy of Rhipicephalus annulatus and of Ornithodoros savignyi, the first being a type of the ixodid35 The tick is mainly nocturnal in its habits and behaves like the bed-bug. It, however, reaches much larger proportions and must be an extremely noisome and disgusting human pest. Not only so but it is possible that it plays a part in the transmission of spirilloses as does the African species 0. moubata. Argas vespertilionis (Latreille).36 Hyalomma 37 APPENDIX XII. LEUCOCYTOZOON FUNAMBULI. By Captain W. S. PATTON, I.M.S. This mammalian hæmogregarine was found in the blood of the Kathiawar Palm Squirrel Funambulus pennantii and has been fully described in a recent memoir. When stained by Roamnowsky's stain it is seen as an oval body measuring 10 µ in length and 5 µ in breadth lying in the protoplasm of the large mononuclear leucocytes. One end of the parasite is rounded, and the other is more attenuated and bent up in the form of a tail; its nucleus is a large irregular quadrilateral mass lying about the centre of the body. The protoplasm stains dark blue by Giemsa's method and is seen to contain six to eleven large chromatic granules scattered irregularly. Free vermicules are readily seen in fresh preparations from heavily infected animals. So far I have been unable to find any evidences of schizogony in the liver, spleen or bone marrow; the free vermicules were easily recovered from the mid- gut of a species of Hæmatopinus found on the squirrel, but no further evidences of development were found. It is interesting to note that in animals with many parasites there was a marked increase in the number of the large mononuclear leucocytes. APPENDIX XIII. THE HÆMOGREGARINE OF THE DOMESTIC CAT. By Captain W. S. PATTON, I.M.S. In October 1905 I found the above parasite in the blood of a cat caught in the grounds of the King Institute, and since then I have examined over one hundred cats, of which five were infected. The parasite when stained by Giemsa's stain is seen as an oval body measuring from 10 to 12 µ in length and from 4 to 6 µin breadth lying in the protoplasm of a leucocyte. One end of its body is more rounded and contains a large circular nucleus, the other is more pointed often containing one or more vacuoles and many small chromatic granules are scattered throughout the protoplasm. The parasite frequently appears lying between two halves of the nucleus and in some cases it was seen lying almost buried in the nucleus. A paper describing this new mamalian Hæmogregarine is in preparation and will be published later. APPENDIX XIV. SNAKE HZMOGREGARINES. By Captain W. S. PATTON, I.M.S. It is well known that sporozoa belonging to the genus Hæmogregarina are found in the blood of snakes in different parts of the world, and that authorities differ as to whether these parasites represent a single species or a number of distinct ones. Langmann and Lutz regard the hæmogregarines of snakes studied 10
38 by them as belonging to one species, while Laveran believes they represent separate species on account of the variation in their size and appearance and in his classifi- cation of the Hæmocytozoa gives a list of eleven species. In Madras I have found Hæmogregarines in the following snakes:39 A species of crithidia in the rectum and hind gut is also common. In the tick a large species of trypanosome has been found which Prof. Novy suggests may have a mammalian origin. At present its investigation has for want of time been left over. In a small leech (Clepsina?) common on turtles a trypanosome resembling t. inopinatum is common. As trypanosomes are common in the turtle it is possibly derived from this source. On the other hand, no definite connection could be traced and the species may be a normal parasite of the gut of the leech. Captain Patton records flagellates in the cat flea and these also occur in the larva. Since the parasite of Kala Azar is more nearly related to these herpetomonas- like parasites than to any other known forms it is obvious that their study is of considerable importance and some systematic research on the subject is meditated. APPENDIX XVI. HÆMAM40 APPENDIX XVIII. NOTE ON A NEW SPECIES OF STEGOMYIA MOSQUITO FOUND IN MADRAS. By Mr. P. NARASIMHA RAO NAIDU, Second Bacteriological Assistant. Whilst investigating the stegomyia mosquitoes of Madras, a species having the head. scales like those of a culex but all other characters like those of stegomyia was encountered. Description of Adult. MALENos. 523, 524 L., 17TH APRIL 1907. GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. READIP/25/KZ.3 IP madras THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN- DONOVAN PARASITE IN CIMEX ROTUNDATUS. APPENDIX TO ANNUAL REPORT OF BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE, GUINDY, FOR 1907. BY CAPTAIN W. S. PATTON, M.B., I.M.S. VOLUME II. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1908.
IP/25/KZ.3 IP THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN- DONOVAN PARASITE IN CIMEX ROTUNDATUS. APPENDIX TO ANNUAL REPORT OF BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE, GUINDY, FOR 1907. BY CAPTAIN W. S. PATTON, M.B., I.M.S. VOLUME II. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1908.
APPENDIX. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN-DONOVAN PARASITE IN CIMEX ROTUNDATUS. SECOND REPORT. IN my first report1 I gave a short account of the researches of different investigators on the extracorporeal stage of the Leishman-Donovan body, and examined the hypotheses advanced to explain the method of infection of the human body by this parasite, pointing out that the disease is most probably transmitted by the bite of some blood-sucking insect. In support of this hypothesis it was shown that Kala Azar is usually contracted by people living in close contact with others suffering from the disease; that the parasites occur in the peripheral circu lation in a suitable condition for further development and that in those cases with extensive ulceration of the large intestine they are often found in large numbers. In order to prove the truth of this theory a number of feeding experiments were carried out with the common blood-sucking insects of Madras, and at the outset it was shown that the parasite could be found in the midguts of lice, Pediculus capitis, fed on patients suffering from Kala Azar, but no changes towards development were observed. In the bed-bug, Cimex rotundatus,* however, the parasites were not only frequently found but had in a few instances shown evidences of considerable development. Since writing my first report I have been able to study in the bed-bug all the intermediate stages of the development of the parasite up to the formation of the long free swimming flagellates, and in the present paper I propose to describe these changes and some further observations on the peripheral blood of cases of Kala Azar. I have had the opportunity of examining three more patients in whose peripheral blood parasites occurred in large numbers. In each case diarrh4 cell containing six parasites and Fig. 3 on the same plate an eosinophil cell containing two in this film I also found a large cell (Plate I, fig. 2) containing forty-nine parasites and a large mononuclear cell (Fig. 6) containing ten. In the large cell one of the parasites is seen to be dividing longitudinally; it is oval in shape measuring 4.5µ and contains two macronuclei at one pole and two micronuclei lying at opposite sides of the periphery; its protoplasm stained faintly blue and had three vacuoles in it. The close apposition to each other of many of the parasites in this cell suggests recent division of the parasites. A similar cell (Plate I, fig. 4) was found in a film of finger blood taken from the second patient two days before his death. This cell contains thirty-two parasites, six of which are seen lying superimposed on the nucleus; its protoplasm stained dark blue with Romanowsky's stain and was much vacuolated. Christophers4 had previously found similar cells in films made from the blood in large veins, femoral, portal, and hepatic, some hours after death; and from a study of sections of the spleen and liver of cases of Kala Azar he concluded that these cells are derived from the vascular endothelium and that they represent the final stages of an endothelial cell which has become distended and modified by the presence of a large number of parasites. He was able to trace every gradation of flattened endothelial cell containing only a few parasites to the enormous cells almost blocking the capillaries in which they lie. Statham5 who has studied the distribution of the Leishman-Donovan body in the tissues confirmed these observations of Christophers and pointed out that these swollen endothelial cells are met with in the liver, spleen, bone marrow and lymphatic glandsin toxæmic affections and hyperplasias of these organs; the researches of Werigo,6 Gilbert and Carnot7 and others have shown that these vascular endothelial cells are phagocytic in character and that they take up bacteria and malarial pigment. Marchand and Ledingham,8 who also noted the occurrence of the parasites in these large cells, consider that only same originate from the vascular endothelium and that the majority are in reality enlarged splenic cells which have taken on a phagocytic action. It is of interest to note that these large endothelial cells occur in the peripheral circulation of cases of Kala Azar some days before death, and it seems most probable that the rupture of these cells and the liberation of the parasites they contain, explains the occurrence of the large numbers of parasites in the peripheral blood of patients suffering from ulceration of the large intestine. Once the parasites are set free in the plasma they are immediately taken up by mononuclear, eosinophil or polymorphonuclear cells. The presence of these large cells containing numerous parasites in the circulating blood further suggests the mode of formation of the brawny swellings which often develop in the later stages of the disease. Captain Long, I.M.S., first drew my attention to a patient in his ward who developed such a swelling on the lower part of the left leg. This patient had many parasites in his peripheral blood and was at the time suffering from diarrh5 blood corpuscles altered by the presence of the parasite. Christophers1 who studied and described the various appearances assumed by these bodies states they are detached buds of mononuclear cells or macrophages containing parasites. Treutlein12 examining some of Rogers' preparations has recently stated he has seen the parasites in red cells, but no other observer as far as I am aware has recently described the parasites as occurring in the red corpuscles. All investigators who have studied the parasites in the human body are agreed that in sections of the organs they are never seen in the red cells. The Development of the Parasite in the Bed-Bug. On December 27th, twelve bugs were fed between 9 and. 10 P.M. on the patient mentioned. above, and on the 31st one male and three adult females were dissected between 8 A.M. and 12 noon, the midguts and their contents being smeared out on slides and stained by Giemsa's method. In these films parasites were found in an unchanged condition (Plate I, fig . 7 a) and in all stages of development up to the mature flagellates. The leucocytes were seen as indistinct granular masses, with or without a central deeper stained area, the remains of the nucleus such disintegrating cells may sometimes be seen in the midgut as late as the fourth day, but as a rule they disappear by the end of the third. The parasites are ingested by the bug while lying in the polymorphonuclear, eosinphil, large mononuclear, and endothelial cells, and from a number of earlier observations it appears that the majority remain unchanged until the second day. While still lying in the disinte- grating leucocytes they begin to show the earliest signs of development the protoplasm increases in volume, is more granular and instead of staining a faint pink with Giemsa's stain, now appears blue throughout and contains either one large central vacuole (Plate I, fig. 7 b) or a number of smaller ones (Plate I, fig. 7 d,e,f). Coincident with these changes the macronucleus becomes enlarged and stains less deeply; its central dark chromosome divides into a number of rods which are distributed throughout. its substance. It may now be either circular in shape or oval with one end more pointed, and may lie at the periphery or across the centre of the parasite. The micronucleus, still rod like and staining almost black, increases in size and is usually seen lying towards the periphery of the cell. Parasites more advanced towards development have a very characteristic appearance; their protoplasm has still further increased in amount so that the body of the parasite is made up of granular blue staining protoplasm. The vacuoles also appear more distinct measuring from 6 in none of the specimens was it directly attached to this structure (Plate I, fig. 9 b, c, e and f), The protrusion of the brush of filaments progresses rapidly and is seen in all stages from a relatively short curved rod (Plate I, fig. 9 c, e and f) to the long fully developed wavy flagellum measuring from 15µ to 20µ (Plate II, fig. 1 a). From a careful study of the formation of the flagellum 1 believe that it forms within a vacuole and that the pink area seen when parasites are stained by Giemsa's method is due to the deposition of colouring matter in the vacuole. The fact that after the extrusion of the tlagellum the vacuole collapses and then appears as a pink band on either side of the insertion of the flagellum further suggests its relation to the flagellum, and I therefore propose adopting the name 'flagellar vacuole' given it by Leishman. Many of the round or Oval parasites are seen in all the stages of flagellation while lying side by side and in some the division of the macronucleus has already taken place (Plate I, fig. 9, f). In some of these parasites the flagellum was seen to end in an achromatic zone close to the micronucleus and Plate II, fig. 1 a, shows a parasite in which the flagellum passes a little beyond the micronucleus to end in a pink dot. MacNeal16 who has studied the attachment of the flagellum of Trypanosoma lewisi states that in favourabe specimens it can be traced to an achromatic space in close proximity to the micronucleus; Laveran and Mesnil1 have also noted this appearance in the same trypanosome. Considerable variation is met with in the further stages of the first type of development described. In many parasites, as has been mentioned above before flagellation has begun, the macronucleus divides into two, and this is followed by the enlargement and division of the micronucleus. Two flagellar vacuoles develop close to the micronuclei and in some cases are seen fused together; the two flagella rapidly pass out of them and as division proceeds the flagellates are seen attached by their flagella alone (Plate II, fig. 1 c) or by both poles. In other cases the parasites increase in size and become much vacuolated, the macronucleus enlarges and shows signs of division while the micronucleus has already divided. Two flagella now develop a little distance apart and later become extruded and on completion of the division of the macronucleus the parasite splits longitudinally into two spindle-shaped cells (Plate II, fig. 1 b). Some of the enlarged oval flagellates also showed signs of elongating into these spindle-shaped forms (Plate II, fig. 1 a and c). It will thus be seen that a certain percentage of the developing parasites pass on to flagellation and then divide longitudinally to form oval or spindle-shaped flagellates, there being no regularity observed in this process. In the second type, development which results in the formation of rosettes consisting of from four to eight flagellates also follows on the early enlargement of the parasites. The macro- and micro-nuclei divide and pass to the opposite sides of the cell (Plate I, fig. 10), which has a globular appearance and is rich in granular protoplasm. One of these macro- nuclei divides again while the other may as yet remain unchanged or only show an increase in size; but the micronuclei during this time divide rapidly so that while there may be only two macronuclei, there may be three or more micronuclei (Plate I, fig. 10 e), Fig. 10 d and f shows the method of division of the micronucleus; after it has become thickened and considerably elongated it divides transversely into two, a method of division which is maintained throughout all the later stages of the development. The division of the macro- and micro-nuclei and the further growth of the cell result in the formation of a body measuring from 10µ to 12µ in diameter; its protoplasm stains reddish blue with Giemsa's stain and contains groups of vacuoles (Plate I, fig. 10). Such a cell may contain from four to eight macro-and micro-nuclei grouped about its centre. The flagellar vacuoles now develop close to the micronuclei and later all the flagella pass out from one side of the cell (Plate II, fig. 1 d and e). Separation of the flagellates now begins at the flagellar end and transparent lines pass up through the cell, and from four to eight fully developed flagellates become separated and swim away. These flagellates vary from 6µ to 12µ in length and from 4µ to 5µ in breadth, their size depending on the rapidity with which the rosette breaks up; the majority are elongated and it is from further growth of these that the long free swimming forms are produced. It is important to note that equal longitudinal division of these flagellates while still attached or when free was not observed. Plate II, fig. 3 c, shows a rosette in the process of division; the macronuclei are seen in the two parts undergoing further division, while distributed along the sides and periphery of the cell there are eight micronuclei and six flagella. Such a cell, it could be readily understood, might produce even more than eight flagellates. Plate II, fig. 3 b, also shows a small rosette of four elongated flagellates and two cells which have become separated from a rosette containing six parasites. The oval or spindle-shaped parasites which are formed either from the round flagellates or from their further division exhibit very characteristic appearances. When stained deeply by Giemsa's stain they contain dark blue granular protoplasm and a number of vacuoles of varying size; their macronuclei, usually circular in shape and situated about the centre, stain deeply
The Development of the Leishman - Donovan parasite in cimex Rotundatus. Appendix to Annual Report of Bacteriological section of The King Institute, guindy for 1907. By captain W. S. Patton, M. B. I. M. S. Volume II 1908.
7 pink aad contain a number of dark chromatic rods. The micronuclei generally lie across the long diameter of the cells near the macronuclei, seldom at the anterior ends (Plate II, fig. 2). This position of the micronuclei, as I shall mention later, indicates that the cells are about to undergo further division. The flagellum, which stains deep pink, consists of a number of filaments adhering closely to each other and they are inserted in a pale area close to the micronucleus; in none of the specimens was the flagellum seen attached along the side of the cell. In these oval and spindle-shaped parasites further changes soon begin to take place; the macronucleus enlarges and spreading to the sides of the parasite occupies the whole of the centre of the cell, and its chromosomes become distributed throughout its substance. The micronucleus at the same time enlarges and later elongates, changes which are seen preparatory to division. The flagellum thickens and commences to divide. If this is relatively short the split extends throughout its length; but if it is long the basal portion alone thickens and the division then. extends through about a quarter of its length, the new flagellum beginning to separate first at its anterior end (Plate II, fig.2 a). In parasites showing a later stage of division the two flagella are completely separated and end close to the micronucleus. Preparatory to division the macronucleus in many of the cells shows a dumb-bell appearance and the two portions of the micronucleus which has divided transversely are seen side by side. Eventually a transparent line developes through the centre of the parasite, the micronuclei separate further, the macronucleus divides, and on the line of separation passing through the parasite two oval cells are produced (Plate II, fig. 2). If a spindle-shaped flagellate is an unusually large one, its division generally results in two smaller spindle-shaped cells, though it may produce two elongated parasites which are either seen still attached by their anterior ends or by both poles (Plate II, fig. 2 c) In some of the spindle-shaped cells a process of unequal longitudinal division was observed, a thinner parasite splitting off as described above (Plate II, fig. 2 b). The majority of long flagellates shown in Plate II, fig. 4, are formed from the rosettes, a smaller number, however, particularly the thinner ones, may result from the division of the spindle-shaped cells. These long flagellates vary from 12µ to 20µ in length and from 4µ to 5µ in breadth, their macronuclei are oval in shape, stain dark pink and contain a number of rod shaped chromosomes. The anterior poles of the cells are rounded, their bodies exhibit undulations and end posteriorly in pointed beaks; their protoplasm stains dark blue containing a number of lighter areas but no vacuoles or chromatic granules. The flagella are thick filaments measuring from 16µ to 24µ in length; they originate in one or two chromatic dots usually close to the micronuclei and pass out of the cells through the centre of the anterior ends. The micronuclei are always seen lying transversely to the long axis of the parasite about 18 which pass into a large flagellar vacuole just anterior to the micronucleus. The macronucleus of the smaller cell is also situated at the posterior pole and its micronucleus lies close up to it. Its flagellum is almost separated from that of the parent cell being attached by its end alone. The commencing division of the flagellum and macronucleus of the parent cell and the position of its micronucleus show that it is about to divide longitudinally. On January 2nd the remaining bugs, three adult males and one female, wore dissected between 12 noon and 1-30 P.M., the midguts being dissected out and prepared as described above; in addition smears were made from the crops and salivary glands of all the bugs. In two films, one prepared from the midgut of a male and the other from that of a female, there were a number of parasites, some exhibiting the earliest changes towards development, others more advanced, as well as a few rosettes and small flagellates. Plate II, fig. 5 e and f, shows two parasites in the early stages of development; in the smaller the flagellar vacuole is seen as a small pink area lying near the micronucleus. The larger parasite measures 8µ in length and 4.5µ in breadth, one end being rounded and the other pointed; its protoplasm stained dark blue with Giemsa's stain and contained some small pale areas, but none of the distinct vacuoles usually seen at this stage. Its micronucleus a little enlarged lay close to the macronucleus which is round and compact staining deep red. Plate II, fig. 6 a, shows another cell of a similar nature, though it is almost round; its protoplasm is less deeply stained and contains a few indistinct vacuoles. Its macronucleus lying near one end is almost divided into two, while the micronucleus is situated about the centre and lying near it is a faint pink mass suggesting the early development of a flagellum, These parasites clearly show that the Leishman-Donovan body may remain in the midgut of the bug for at least five days before they begin to develop. The rosettes seen in these slides are similar to those described above, the majority consisting of fully developed flagellates. Plate II, fig. 5 c, shows a long flagellate which measures 9.5µ in length and 2.5µ in breadth; its oval macronucleus is situated about the centre of its body and lying close to it and about 1.5µ from the anterior end is the micronucleus. The posterior end of the parasite is pointed and situated about 3µ from this end there are two small pink masses which on higher magnification are seen to consist of a number of chromatic granules. This is the first parasite that has shown this appearance, though in another long flagellate (Plate II, fig. 4) there was a suggestion of the same structure. From these isolated specimens it is impossible to say what this represents, but further reference will be made to it later. Plate II, fig. 5 d, represents two attenuated flagellates attached by their poles, and from the outer side of one of the cells a spirilla-like parasite is seen splitting off. The macronuclei of the two parasites are circular and compact staining uniformally dark red or almost black with Giemsa's stain; in one cell the macronucleus is near the anterior end and in the other towards the posterior pole, and in each case the micronuclei are lying close up to their respective macronuclei. The protoplasm of these cells stains dark throughout and is devoid of granules or vacuoles. The spirilla-like parasite is 5.4µ in length and l µ in breadth, and in its protoplasm there are two small chromatic granules, the anterior being distinctly rod shaped. These pairs of attenuated flagellates are seen in all stages of longitudinal division; some are without flagella and are similar to those described and figured in my first report which therefore represent a very late stage in the development of the parasite. Plate II, fig. 6c, represents one of these attenuated flagellates lying free; it measures 9µ in length and 1.29 chromatic dot. One micronucleus is 2µ from the anterior end and the other about 5µ, and the flagellum is inserted near the anterior one. Two chromatic filaments are seen extending from the vicinity of the macronuclei, and uniting lower down pass into the flagellum. This was the only flagellate, exhibiting these appearances, and later when discussing the development of the parasite reference will again be made to it. I was unable to find any parasites in the smears made from the crops and salivary glands of the bugs. There can be no doubt from the above description that the Leishman- Donovan bodies had undergone marked developmental changes in the bed-bug (Cimex rotundatus), the following being a summary of the nature and order of sequence of these changes. On the second day after being ingested by the bug the parasites begin to develop, their protoplasm increasing in volume; at the same time the macronuclei enlarge and show signs of commencing division. The parasites may now either pass on to flagellation, or further growth followed by the consecutive division of the macro-and micronuclei may result in the formation of rosettes. The single flagellates enlarge and begin to divide longitudinally to result in oval or spindle-shaped cells; while the rosettes after flagellation begin to divide up into separate elongated flagellates. The oval or spindle-shaped parasites divide repeatedly either by equal or unequal longitudinal division and result in smaller and more irregular forms. All these changes may be seen in the bug during the first three days. Still later longitudinal division of the oval and irregular flagellates progresses rapidly, so that by the fifth day the majority have become small or spirilla- like flagellates. As the bugs were dissected at intervals of about 24 hours it was difficult to follow some of the later stages of the development. For instance, it is probable many spindle-shaped or oval cells are produced directly from the rosettes, and further the long fully developed flagellates may be formed from these spindle-shaped cells. I was also unable to find any evidence to show that the long flagellates may divide longitudinally, and none of them had the spirilla-like forms splitting off as described by Leishman. The small irregular flagellates containing more than one macro-and micronucleus figured in Plate II, fig. 6, result most probably from the rapid and irregular division of the oval forms. produced from the spindle-shaped parasites. Further, it must be remembered that the bugs had not fed for five days, so that it is quite possible some of the later changes were considerably modified by the absence of blood. During the six days the parasites were developing the bugs were kept in an open verandah where the average temperature was 72&#176; F. From the fact that in cultures the parasites only develop below a temperature of 75&#176; F., Rogers 13 believes that the majority of patients become infected with the Leishman-Donovan body during the cold season. He finds from an analysis of two series of cases in Calcutta, that the disease commenced during the cold or early in the hot weather. Dr. Dodds Price18 also states that in his European cases and in the majority of his native patients the disease began during the cold weather. From these observations it appears that the disease usually begins in the cold season, and if; as Rogers states, the incubation period is probably a long one, it is natural to conclude that the patients were infected months earlier in the hot season. As stated in my first report1 I found that the parasites developed into flagellates when the temperature was between 80&#176; and 82&#176; F.; and as we do not know even the approximate length of the incubation period, it seems premature to conclude that the infection can take place only during the cold season. A large number of experiments with infected bugs kept at different temperatures are necessary before we can hope to solve this point. On comparing the development of the parasite in the bug with that seen in cultures in vitro as described by Rogers15, Christophers13, Leishman and Statham14, it will be seen that though they agree in many points, they differ considerably in others. Vacuolation of the protoplasm in the earlier stages of development is seen in both the bug and in the cultures, but it was absent in the later states in the development in the bug. The chromatic dots which Leishman has described occurring in pairs in the protoplasm both in the younger stages prior to exflagellation as well as in the mature parasites were not seen in any of my films. Christophers and Leishman have described the formation of two or more parasites resulting from the consecutive &#8226; division of the macro-and micronucleus of a single cell, and the latter mentions that these cells may give rise to three or even four individuals by a process of further sub-division of the macro-and micronuclei. This process is apparently a marked feature of the development in the bug resulting in the formation of rosettes of from four to eight flagellates. In the bug longitudinal division of the round or oval parasites was not seen prior to flagellation, though in some of the parasites the macronuclei showed evidences of division; all the twin parasites had grown to maturity while lying side by side. This method of multiplica- tion is therefore entirely limited to the flagellate stage. In the majority of the spindle-shaped and oval flagellates the micronuclei were seen close up to the macronuclei, seldom at the anterior end; in the long mature flagellates and spirilla-like forms, however, the mircronuclei were situated some distance from the macronuclei and about 1.5µ to 2&#181; from the anterior ends. In the case of Trypanosoma lewisi when a parasite is about to divide the blepharoplast passes close up to the nucleus, only resuming its final position when 3
10 the cell assumes its adult form. When this position of the micronucleus is seen in a young flagellate of the Leishman-Donovan body, it indicates that the cell has not yet reached maturity and that farther division is about to take place. In my first report I drew attention to a few instances of parasites showing this appearance, but I was not then able to explain its significance. > A number of attenuated parasites were seen free, and in one case a thin cell containing two chromatic dots was still attached to a small flagellate. Multiple division of the macro-and micronuclei of the small oval flagellates takes place in the bug about the fifth day resulting in the formation of still smaller flagellates which are themselves capable of further longitudinal fission. So far as I am aware, this process has not been seen in cultures. In the later stages of the development of the parasite in the bug two distinct types of flagellates were seen; a long relatively thick form measuring from 9µ to l5µ in length and 2µ to 3µ in breadth, and a small irregular flagellate measuring from 4µ to 6µ in length and 1µ to 4µ in breadth. In both the micronuclei are situated about 2µ from the anterior ends through the centre of which the flagella pass oat. > There was no evidence to show that the thin parasites originated from the larger ones, though Leishman has observed this process in cultures, and further, as no sexual cycle was seen, it is not possible to say whether they represent two distinct sexes. In one of the large flagellates (Plate II,fig. 5 c) two pink areas containing a number of chromatic granules were seen; it is probable they represent the diplosome observed in other flagellates. In another parasite (Plate II, fig. 6 g) there was a suggestion of a similar structure at the posterior end, and from its vicinity a chromatic thread passed forwards and joining a similar filament termi- nated in the flagellum. In Herpetomonas musc11 gradually becomes narrower towards the end where it is covered with long hairs. In the male the penis is seen flexed in a notch between the seventh and eighth segments. This bug is distributed throughout Europe and North America, and is also found in Suez, Egypt, the Sudan, the North-West Frontier Province of India, China, South Africa and Australia. Cimex rotundatus Sign or the Indian bed-bug is darker than the above species being of deep mahogany colour; its head is not as long or as broad as that of lectularius. Its prothorax is also narrower and shorter, is more rounded and not flattened at the sides as is the prothorax of the type species. Its abdomen is less orbicular, being broadest at the second segment and tapers more abruptly towards the end; in all other respects it is similar to Cimex lectularius. Cimex rotundatus is distributed throughout India, Burma, Assam, Malay, and is also found in Aden, Sierra Leone, the Islands of Mauritius, Reunion, St. Vincent and Porto Rico. Cimex pipistrelli Jenyns is similar in colour to rotundatus, its prothorax is also less marginal and in all other respects it is more closely allied to the Indian bed-bug. Climex columbarius Jenyns has a similar prothorax to lectularius and is also of the same colour. Dissection of the bed-bug. The following method of dissecting the bed-bug has been found satisfactory. After having killed the insect by placing it in a tube with a plug of cotton wool containing a few drops of chloroform, it is taken up with a fine pair of forceps and the legs are pulled off. In removing the fore legs it is necessary to be careful not to injure the prothorax, as they are firmly fixed in concavities on its under surface. The elytra are next removed by raising them with a fine pair of forceps and gently twisting them off from their joints at the angles of the mesothorax. The bug is now placed in a drop of normal saline solution with its head directed towards the dissector. A fine needle is inserted with the left hand into the right side of the prothorax, while with another fine needle in the right hand the joint between the prothorax and mesothorax is separated. By gently drawing the needle in the left hand and by exerting pressure on the dorsal surface of the abdomen with the other needle, the 12 REFERENCES TO LITERATURE. 1. Patton.PLATE I. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN -DONOVAN PARASITE IN CIMEX ROTUNDATUS. (SECOND RED) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918605.tif] Photogravure. Survey a India. Offices, Calcutta
13 EXPLANATION OF PLATE I. Figure 1.14 EXPLANATION OF PLATE II. Figure 1.THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN-DONOVAN PARASITE IN CIMEX ROTUNDATUS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918614.tif] Survey of India Offices. Calcutta. September 1907.
IP/25/KZ.3 I.P. ANNUAL REPORT UPON THE WORK OF THE BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, GUINDY, FOR 1908-1909. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1909. Not for sale
ANNUAL REPORT UPON THE WORK ON THE BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, GUINDY, FOR 1908-1909. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1909.
REPORT UPON THE WORK OF THE BACTERIOLOGICAL SECTION OF THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, GUINDY, FOR 1908-1909. IN July 1908 Captain W. S. Patton, I.M.S., the Acting Superintendent, was so unfortunate as to suffer from a break-down in his health, and had to apply for leave. Dr. F. Maitland Gibson., M.B., B.Sc., was appointed to act as Superintendent in place of Captain Patton. While the various functions of the laboratory have remained unaltered, it is not possible to classify the work under the headings of " Routine," " Research " and " Edu- cational " as in previous years. This is mainly due to the fact that a preponderating amount of the routine work carried on in the laboratory has been in connection with the investigations presently being made by Major W. W. Clemesha, I.M.S., on the " Town Water Supplies of the Madras Presidency." This work has absorbed almost all resources of the laboratory both as regards energy and material. The examin- ation of pathological and other material formed but a minor portion of the work of the laboratory. Major Clemesha's investigations are of great importance and may have far reaching results. This is the first attempt that has been made in India to determine standards of purity for potable waters. The standards that have been arrived at in Europe, after years of experiment, are far from being consistently fixed and in any case are probably not adapted to Indian conditions. The branch of Major Clemesha's investigations dealing with the resistance of various forms of organised pollution to the influence of sunlight, etc., is also of great interest, and is likely to yield important information as to the origin, both as regards where and when, of such pollution. In its bearing on the " causation " or avoidance of epidemic disease the " when " of pollution is of very special importance. It is not however my purpose to discuss here the results of these investigations, which will be published separately in appendix form, except in so far as they yield information in regard to the working efficiency of the Bacteriological Section of the King Institute. Serious deficiencies in equipment have been brought to light. The most important of these is the want of a large steam steriliser. An investigation such as the one under discussion demands a very large supply of very varied culture media. With the present equipment of the media department, it has not been possible to prepare media for more than one or two days in advance. Such a hand-to-mouth existence is far from desirable, and renders the work very liable to involuntary interruption. That such interruptions have not occurred says much for the carefulness and willing energy of the staff. On more than one occasion it has been necessary to work double tides so as to recover the ground lost by accidental occurrences. From the point of view also of economical working the present system leaves much to be desired and that a large steam steriliser would be of great, indeed of almost essential, service in the Vaccine Section is not open to question. Before going on leave Captain Patton, I.M.S., was able to carry out two protozoological investigations which are printed in Appendix 2. They are (1) The Life Cycle of Crithidia gerridis and (2) The Life Cycle of Herpetomonas lygæi. As noted by the Acting Sanitary Commissioner in his letter accompanying the report of 1907, investigations of this description are especially important from two points of view. Firstly from the light they may throw on similar processes in the life history of protozoa, pathogenic to man and the domestic animals, and secondly in extending our knowledge of the protozoological parasites special to blood-sucking invertebrates.
2 In the past, not a little confusion has resulted from mistaking parasites, special to blood-sucking invertebrates, for stages in the life history of pathogenic parasites absorbed with blood from vertebrate hosts harbouring such. In both these respects Captain. Patton's recent work yields important information. With regard to the examination of pathological and other material sent for report it has to be remarked that from July 1908 onwards all specimens, the examination of which involved the cutting of sections, have been transferred to the Pathological department, Madras Medical College. In spite of this, however, the number of specimens examined during 1908 was considerably in advance of that for 1907 which yields gratifying evidence that the laboratory is meeting a felt-want. The numbers for the two years were 2,907 and 1,893, respectively. For the first quarter of 1909 an additional 383 have been examined which brings the number now under report to 3,290. TABLE. Number. Description of specimens. Number of positive results. Number of negative results. Total. 1 Plague3 2. Plague in Human Beings.4 so doing, and it is not too much to ask that in all fever cases one or more films of the blood should be prepared before quinine is administered. If, subsequently, the case runs a simple straight forward course, well and good; the slide may be cleaned and Kept in readiness for the next case. Should the case however not prove so simple it will be relief to the practitioner to know that he has a record of the condition of the blood from the beginning. 7. One film of camel's blood showing trypanosomes was submitted for report. It is still sub judice. 10. Before the systematic quarterly analysis of town water-supplies initiated by Major. Clemesha, I.M.S., was started, 137 samples of water were examined. The results were probably of very small value. 12. Spiroch5 With regard to the parasites isolated from the case showing black granules it is probably similar to that described by J. H. Wright (2), but unfortunately that author's paper was not available for consultation. It corresponds partly also to the description given by Boyce and Surveyor (3). It may also be the same as. Brumpt's Madurella (4). The branched filaments of the parasite are very much thicker than those of streptothrix. They have a well defined sheath and septa which can be differentiated from the granular protoplasm by staining. It takes gram but is not acid fast. It grows very well on media made with acid vegetable infusions. On agar prepared from such the growth forms a prominent felted grey mass. Growth also takes place in the depth and there a dark green almost black pigment is formed. Growth however does not take place if the colony is completely cut Off from the air. Subculturing is not readily obtained unless some of the deep growing fibrils are taken. The colonies seem to spread peripherally by means of fibres with burrow radially and then come to the surface. After several months growth no trace of fructification has been made out. On alkaline agar the growth is not so luxuriant, it forms a felted mass almost flush with the surface of the medium and the pigment in the depth is brownish rather than greenish black. Kerosine-oil emulsion.6 No. 1271GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. READ2 OrderA STUDY OF THE BACTERIOLOGY OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLIES IN TROPICAL CLIMATES BY MAJOR WM. WESLEY CLEMESHA, M.D., D.P.H., I.M.S., Acting Sanitary Commissioner for Madras. ASSISTED BY ASSISTANT SURGEON T. SEETHAPATHY AIYAR,L.M & S., Senior Laboratory Assistant, King Institute, Guindy. AND V. GOVINDARAJU MUDALIYAR, B.A., Junior Laboratory Assistant, King Institute, Guindy. BEING APPENDIX No. 1 TO THE ANNUAL REPORT ON THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, MADRAS, FOR 1908. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918672.tif] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1909.
CONTENTS. PART I.PART I. RESEARCH WORK
A STUDY OF THE BACTERIOLOGY OF DRINKING WATER-SUPPLIES IN TROPICAL CLIMATES. CHAPTER I INTRODUCTORY ALL who have had anything to do with the bacteriology of water in India must entertain considerable doubt as to whether the standards of purity in common use amongst sanitarians in England are suited to this country. One is struck with many serious and radical differences between the waters, that are used for human consump- tion in the two parts of the world, as a reference to what follows in this report will demonstrate beyond all shadow of doubt. The simpler tests, that give a rough estimate of the total fæcal contamination of any sample, show that most of the waters, which have to be used. in this country, are simply loaded with fæcal contamination, so much so that no analyst in England would ever dream of passing them as fit for human consumption. It may be stated that such drinking water is the rule in India and not the exception. The ordinary rural population possess absolutely no idea whatever of what constitutes either an undesirable or dangerous contamination, and it is within the experience of all officers in this country, that a village water-supply may serve the purpose of a drinking supply for the inhabitants, a place where clothes and cattle are washed, and in not a few cases, the immediate neighbourhood is used by the villagers as a latrine in the early morning. It is hardly credible that people are so backward as to raise no serious objection to throwing cholera corpses into the only available water-supply for a large village, and yet such occurrences are common in some parts of this country. The extraordinary part of this state of affairs is, that the results of using sewage as a drinking water are not always apparent, even on enquiry. True we have frightful epidemics of cholera, that dysentery is nearly always present to some extent, and bursts out at certain periods of the year; true also that the infant mortality is 178 per thousand children born; but when one considers that most of the water used by the people is utterly unsuitable, according to our ideas, one cannot but be struck with the fact that the results do not appear to be in proportion to the cause at all times. This contention is better exemplified by a study of the analyses in the following report; of the 18 towns that are all provided with a protected supply, the water supplied in a large percentage of the samples, is so bad that no Sanitary Officer in Europe would pass it as fit for human consumption, and yet a reference to the health statistics of these towns show that the people are distinctly favoured as compared with their brethren in rural areas, and that their health is broadly speaking satisfactory. Cholera is rare on the whole; dysentery and diarrhæa are moderately prevalent, and the death rate is fairly low. This being so, it would be an entirely mistaken policy on the part of sanitary advisers in India to condemn these supplies, or to insist that all water must fulfil the require ments, that are usually accepted as necessary in England, before it is distributed to the inhabitants of a town. Were this to be insisted on, out of the 18 protected supplies that we possess in the Madras Presidency, not one would pass muster at all times of the year. Another important point of difference in the East is, that on inspection, we are sure that a great deal of the pollution of surface waters is caused by excrement of animals, mostly cattle and goats, whereas in England the pollution that is most common in rivers, has its origin in sewage from large towns, which we know to be derived from man. It is by a careful study of this latter kind of contamination that the working standards have been arrived at in England, consequently, we have here another reason for doubting if the application of such standards to Indian conditions is likely to be satisfactory.
4 Obviously therefore we have different conditions to deal with; the constitution of the people is different; our definition of the term "dangerous pollution" must also be changed; and the inferences to be drawn from the relation between quality and quantity of pollution require re-adjusting. The query that we are face to face with in India is, what indicates a dangerous pollution, and at what point should a water be condemned as unsuitable for human consumption ? It has been our endeavour to so model our work, that, by a careful study of the natural conditions obtaining around us, we may be able to put a correct interpretation on the phenomena observed, and by studying things as they exist, to be able to answer the above query. The actual arrangement of the work has served a dual purpose. Firstly, to carry out that essential duty of Sanitary Department of keeping a watch on the quality of the water, provided in these protected supplies, and if possible to improve it; and secondly, to establish some working standards, that may be of use to ourselves, and to other water analysts in India, in giving an opinion on the suitability of a sample of water for domestic purposes. From what one can gather there has been little or no detailed research on these lines carried out in this country. The various workers, who have made bacteriological analysis of water have either accepted European standards as applicable, or have in some way modified them to suit what they consider to be the needs of this country; but apparently nobody has published these modifications, and it is highly probable that no two analysts use the same method, or would hold the same opinion as to the inference to be drawn from the presence of certain organisms in a given sample. It is obvious therefore, that if some uniform method of work can be arrived at, the opinions of different workers will rest on a much sounder scientific basis than at present, and will be comparable one with another. In this way experience as regards the use of local standards will accumulate rapidly. Our next difficulty was to find a method of work that would be most successful in solving these very considerable problems. As we were setting out to study the organisms found in contaminated water, a method of analysis that told us most about the f5 CHAPTER II. A DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD EMPLO YED. As it is hoped that the publication of this work will induce officers in other parts of India, to carry out their water-analysis on these lines, so that comparable results may be obtained, we give a detailed account of the method, which has been adopted as standard in the laboratory of the King Institute, for all water samples that we intend to examine completely. We wish at this point to say that we have been greatly assisted by the kind advice of Dr. A. MacConkey himself, the originator of this method, and we are also indebted to Dr. A. C. Houston, Bacteriologist to the Metro- politan Water Board, London, for many practical hints, as to the best methods of working through a large number of samples with as little delay as possible. We are greatly indebted to these two gentlemen and we desire to tender them our sincere thanks. All samples of water are taken by a special sample taker (a certificated Sanitary Inspector on Rs. 25 per month) who is a servant of the King Institute, and who visits the various supplies himself. Samples are taken in sterile bottles, and are immediately placed on ice; 250 cc. of water being sufficient for bacteriological purposes, and a Winchester quart for chemical. The practice of sending bottles of water for bacteriologi- cal analysis by train has been given up as perfectly hopeless in this country. It is not necessary for me to point out the many possibilities of delay, and the accidents, that may occur to a sample that is sent by train; we have always held that the only satisfactory way of obtaining samples for this work, is to send our own man for them, and provide him with the necessary quantity of ice. The only objection to this method is on the score of expense. But with forethought, this need not be excessive, for two sets of samples can sometimes be brought on a single journey. The budget allotment for the travelling expenses and contingencies of the sample taker of the King Institute, who visited all the, water-supply schemes in the Presidency three times during this year, and took a large number of extra samples for research purposes, was only Rs. 1,300. On arrival at the laboratory three separate series of bacteriological analyses are at once started, the bottles having been well shaken. These are (i) total colonies count in 1 cc. of water, (ii.) sporogenes enteriditis milk test in 20 cc. of water, and (iii) inoculating of tubes or MacConkey's bile salt broth with various quantities of water:6 up to 80° for 20 minutes, and a plug of hot vaseline is run on to the surface of the milk so as to render the conditions of growth anærobic. The tubes are incubated at 37° for 48 hours. When sporogenes spores are present the characteristic gas formation and clotting of the milk result. (3)Bile salt broth.7 put the plates into the incubator upside down for the 24 hours, so as to get the surface of the Medium nice and dry, otherwise the colonies become confluent, and the plates are useless. As already stated a loopful from the diluted bile salt broth (tubes 2 and 3) is placed in the centre of these plates and wiped over the entire surface. The plates are incubat at a temperature of 42Â° for 24 or 48 hours. The method of dilution given above usually produces plates containing about 10 to 20 colonies per plate from tube 3, and something between 50 and 200 from tube 2. The object being to get a plate which does not contain more than about 20 colonies, for if this is done successfully, it becomes a very easy matter to take either all the colonies, or half of them, for putting through the sugars, and by this means it obviates all selection, so reducing the "speculative venture" as Houston rightly describes this selection, to a minimum.* The colonies present a very great variety of appearances on this solid medium. Some are bright red; some have a red centre with a pale rim; others are white, or yellow and some have a transparent look. The red colonies usually cause a precipitation of insoluble bile acid in the solid medium producing a haze round the colony. The appearance of any particular colony on the medium is of little or no use for identifying the bacillus present; very little reliance can be placed on the naked eye appearance. Two colonies as different as it is possible for them to be in appearance, the one bright red with haze of precipitated bile salt round it, the other pale yellow, will on further investigation turn out to be the same organism. The reason for this is probably due to the fact that acid and alkali may be both produced by colonies at different times, sometimes the one predominates, and sometimes the other. Having obtained a good plate with, say, 10 or 12 discreet colonies on it, each separate colony is now put through the various sugar reactions. If the colonies are small, and are crowded together, or if, as sometimes happens, instead of getting a plate containing 10 colonies, it contains 100, it is advisable to pick off 10 or 12 colonies, while they are small, and inoculate agar slope tubes from each one. In doing this care should be taken notto select 10 colonies from all over the plate, otherwise the tendencies to get them all of one kind is natural, and the "speculative venture" factor comes in, but it is better to mark off a segment of the plate and take all out of the part marked. If, on' the other hand, the plates have been successful, and colonies are separate, it is possible to inoculate the six tubes from each colony, without passing through the stage of growing it separately on agar. If this latter method is going to be carried out the first thing to do is to number the colonies on the back of the plate with a pencil, otherwise confusion will occur. Six separate tubes containing the various materials are inoculated from each colony. The safest and quickest method of carrying out this operation is to scoop up the whole colony with a loop, put the growth in a small test tube (3" by Â½") containing a few drops of sterile water, mix well, and place six sterile iron wire loops in the mixture8 very seldom that there is any doubt about the result, but when this does occur an extra 24 hours in the incubator usually settles the matter definitely one way or the other. This may be taken as the working details of the method used in the following report, the various media will be found in the table given in the appendix. The method, it will be observed, does not differ materially from all others in daily use, the important improvement being that the organisms, that grow in the bile salt broth, are, by the use of MacConkey's system of passing each organism through certain fermentation tests, separated out into their individual species. It may be well to discuss the value of the several tests in a little greater detail:- (1) The total colonies on agar.9 according to their reaction in certain sugars. Considering that we know so little about the bacteriology of the waters of this country, and considering also that there is very little doubt that very material differences exist between the bacteriological flora found in the tropics and in cold climates, it is obvious that the more information we obtain, the better we shall be able to formulate working standards. Indeed we consider that it is necessary to begin at the very beginning in this research, and in order to do so it is important to separate individual bacilli and not sub-divide them into certain arbitrary groups. Of course it may be argued that the method is much too long, complicated and expensive to be used in the laboratory where large number of samples have to be worked through. We are prepared to admit the truth of this statement up to a certain point; in the future, when we have accumulated sufficient data to justify us in formulating certain broad rules, it may be possible to shorten the method to a considerable extent; but until such time it is necessary to go into detail up. We do not propose to discuss the problem of the constancy of the reaction of organisms in the various sugars; for the purpose of this report, it is accepted that the same species of bacilli always ferments the same sugar. If further information be required, the discussion of this subject will be found in MacConkey's paper already referred to (Journal of Hygiene, Vol. VI, No. 3, July 1906). (4) Voges and Proskauer Reaction.10 There are one or two practical hints on laboratory organisation, which make the method given above a very simple matter, although the description would seem to indicate that it is most tedious and complicated. For these "tips" we are indebted to Dr. A. C. Houston11 TABLE III. Number. 12 CHAPTER III. THE "COLI" STANDARD AS APPLIED TO INDIA. Before going further, it is necessary to clear up certain difficulties as regards the terms used in this report, and to say a few words on the subject of the value of the so-called "coli" as an indication of pollution. The term "Colicommunis" unfortu nately does not possess the same significance when used by different workers. In fact there are scarcely two bacteriologists whose definition of "Coli communis" agrees in all respects. Of these many interpretations four will be considered here13 (2) That taken up by MacConkey, Drs. Bergey and Deehan, of the Pennsylvania University, Dr. Orr (in his recent work on the contamination of milk) and ourselves, who apply the name bacillus coli communis to Escherichs organism only, calling all.. bacilli that differ from it in any " permanent " test, different species, to which different names or numbers are applied. We in India consider the position maintained by the former authorities is open to two objections: ( 1 ) That it is inadvisable to apply the term " coli communis " to a group of organisms, or even so-called varieties, and (2) The tests laid down as essen tial according to the definitions quoted, do not go far enough; that the list contains too, many that are of doubtful significance and utility, and too few that are admittedly of greater importance in the identification of a bacillus. To discuss this last objection first: Houston, Savage and all experienced bacteriologists admit, that the tests given above are not of equal value in the identification of what they term " coli." Thus to quote from Savage, " Different characters have not an equal value. Some, such as the fermentation of sugars, liquefaction of gelatine, and acid production in milk are of so permanent a type that for an isolated organism to show divergence from a typical bacillus coli in any one of these particulars would be to throw grave doubt on its being excretal at all, while others, such as the gelatine surface colonies, and the exhibition of motility, are so subject to variation that comparatively little significance can be, attached to their, perhaps temporary, absence or modification." And again in another place he says: " Organisms that differ from the typical excretal type (bacillus. coli communis) only in the fact that they show no motility and that their gelatine colonies are atypical may be regarded as not having their significance diminished on these grounds. Similarly the loss of Indol-production power would not reduce their significance very markedly. On the other hand the absence of glucose or lactose fermentation would at once, in the writer's opinion, exclude the organism isolated from being bacillus coli at all." The obvious inference 'from these opinions is, why not do away with some of. these doubtful tests and substitute for them the more important fermentation reactions in sugars such as dulcite, adonite and inulin ? These are entirely on a parallel with the glucose and lactose fermentation referred to as being " of a permanent character." This is practically the position taken up by MacConkey, in his paper on the Bac teriology of Milk (Journal of Hygiene, Vol. IV, No. 3, July 1906), and, following his recommendations, by ourselves in the work under report. But the real objection to calling a group of bacilli, made up of definite and distinct species, by the single term " coli " becomes more apparent when an attempt is made. to interpret the results obtained by these methods. It is accepted that as long as a bacillus fulfils all the tests in the previous quotations it is looked upon as fccal; but the difficulty arises when bacilli are isolated which either do not fulfil all the above conditions, or possess additional characteristics. Thus a fair number of the so-called " coli group " are non-motile; some do not produce indol; others ferment saccharose. The difficulty is to estimate what is the significance of these aberrant or atypical varieties, and. it is this point which demonstrates the weakness of the above system. Thus authorities interpret these facts differently: Houston says that the saccharose fermenting organisms are not to be looked upon as so " significant of undesirable pollution " as the non-saccharose fermenters. Savage, on the other hand, says that they are equally significant of fecal contamination. Here we have two contradictory opinions on a most vital point. In discussing this difficulty in estimating the value of these aberrant types, Savage says: " undoubtedly this question of variation and loss of atributes complicates the subject and detracts from the value of this indicator " (i.e., " coli " as an indicator of f14 study the relative frequency of these organisms in human and animal fces, their power of resisting the forces in nature inimical to bacilli, and to attach to them their relative significance as indicators of faecal contamination. Thus A might be an 'extraordinarily sensitive organism, that disappeared from contaminal ed water after a very .few minutes exposure to sunlight. D, on the other hand, might be a very persistent bacillus, that Was only found to disappear after weeks of storage and exposure to a tropical sun. Obviously therefore the significance of D and A would be very different if found in any given water sample, and, presuming that the separate characteristics of A and D rests on a sound foundation of experimental proof, it would be advisable to use the extra fermentation tests necessary for the recognition of A and D on account of the valuable information that their presence in any sample indicates. But as long as the method of calling all organisms, that fulfil a few tests, "coil," and those that do not fulfil them, or only fulfil them in part, "atypical coli," the possibilities of progress are very much reduced. Although it may be true that this method has, in skilful hands in Europe, given satisfactory results, it is obvious that unless each species of bacterium is isolated and studied separately, both as regards its position in nature, and as regards its prevailing characteristics, we shall remain in our present position, talking of " coli" and " atypical coli " permanently. In order to demonstrate the unsuitability of the definition of "coli," and of the standards made use of in common practice in Europe and America, when applied to the Madras Presidency, it will be well to observe the result of applying them to the samples examined in our laboratory. Houston's "true coli" ferments lactose, ferments glucose, does not ferment saccharose, gives indol reaction, and the other tests already described. Organisms that fulfil these tests are indicative of fecal contamination and are more objectionable than organisms that ferment saccharose. By making use of the additional reactions of, fermentation of dulcit, adonit, inulin and Voges-Proskauer test, it is possible to split up this "true coli" of Houston into about 10 different bacilli (vide table I I I) and if we add his " non-typical coli " (that is to say those that do not give the indol reaction) more are added. Now it must be remembered that all these organisms are looked upon as indicating the worst form of contamination. Apart from the objection of classing 10 different organisms under the term " true coli," it has never been demonstrated that the members of this group are equally objectionable, or in other words equally represent recent and serious contamination. Savage's definition of "true coli" is virtually the same as Houston's, but as regards the interpretation, he makes this statement " all workers class both groups (saccharose and non-saccharose fermenters) of equal value as excretal indicators." Consequently all lactose fermenters except, such as liquefy gelatine, do not give the indol reaction, and are non-motile (vide his previous remark on motility, indol, etc.) may be said to be of equal value as indicators of fcal contamination. Therefore there .are, according to the table, 10 or 12 organisms that fulfil all these necessary conditions, if motility and indol are left out, there are more than 20 bacilli, to be regarded as equally objectionable in a water sample. To take Houston's definition of true coli first: of the 239 samples, which have been worked through in our laboratory, derived from 18 different water-supplies, in 3 separate quarters, only 84 would show no " coli." If Savage's wider statement be accepted, it means that we have practically not a single supply in the Madras Presi dency that does not show objectionable fwcal contamination. Is it reasonable to urge that we in India should have condemned all these different water-supplies ? There is another point that demands notice. Take the organism bacillus cloacæ as an example; it will be observed that this organism does not come within Houston's definition of " true coli "; because it ferments saccharose, nor within Savage's group that indicates f15 The weak point of the above method lies in the statement that a large number of what we believe to be entirely different species of bacilli. equally represent dangerous f16 We do not suppose that two such skilful workers as Drs. Houston and Savage would have overlooked the great increase in the number of organisms that gave acid and gas in lactose broth without some inquiry, for the futility of giving an opinion without inspection has been frequently insisted on by both, but less skilled analysts, who accepted their statement of what indicated dangerous excretal pollution, might have been misled; at any rate this case demonstrates that the generalization concerning the interpretation of so-called "true coli" not infrequently misses the mark. Therefore we think it will be conceded that it is not satisfactory to arrange differ- ent organisms into groups under one name, and that it is still More dangerous to make statements relative to the significance of the group as a whole, because these statements may prove incorrect for the individual members. The division of organisms into groups according to fermentation reactions is a necessary part of laboratory routine; but it should not be forgotten, that this method of classification tells us very little of the many characteristics of the organisms. Thus taking the group of lactose fermenters as a whole, they may be split up into sub-groups innumerable, but it is none the less necessary to separate species and to study their natural characteristics. The danger in generalizing, with the fermentation method as a basis of classification, applies to all groups of organisms, including those suggested by MacConkey and mentioned in Chapter I. From these criticisms of European standard methods two queries will naturally arise in the mind of any one reading this report:-Firstly, supposing these objections to be true what alternative is offered? And, secondly, how does it come about that English methods have given such satisfactory results, as to have led to their general adoption? The reply to the first of these queries will be found further on in this work, and, without wishing to anticipate, it may be stated, that, for the purpose of water analysis we propose to classify all lactose fermenting organisms according to their ability to resist the action of sunlight. It will be demonstrated that this arrangement possesses many advantages over all grouping of organisms that is based on fermentation reactions, and that it is of great service to water analysts in tropical countries. It is not however claimed that it will be equally satisfactory in all parts of the world. As regards the second of these queries, we wish it to be clearly understood that the primary object of this report is to set water analysis in India on a proper footing, and not to attempt to criticize the work of others, who may be situated in surroundings very different from our own. There can be no reasonable doubt that the actual results obtained by the methods used in England have given satisfactory results, though everybody is prepared to admit that there is considerable room for improvement. Now the reason why these results have been so satisfactory is extremely simple. Firstly, the majority of the contamination in surface and river waters is due to human excrement in the form of sewage from towns. Secondly, the guiding principles that assist a water analyst in arriving at a conclusion are based on the study of organisms present in sewage, that are human in origin. Thus, the reason Houston gives for saying that saccharose fermenters do not represent so objectionable a form of pollution as the non-saccharose fermenters, is, because the non-saccharose fermenters greatly preponderate in sewage. It should be noted that this kind of reasoning would obviously lead us into serious error in India, where much of our pollution is due to animals. Thirdly, there is very little doubt that coli communis of Eseherich (dulcit +, saccharose, adonit, inulin, Voges and Proskauer -) is probably the commonest organ- ism found in human forces, and in rivers polluted with town sewage. The work of MacConkey supports this view. Fourthly, B. colic communis of Escherich is a very susceptible organism to the forces of nature, that are inimical to bacilli generally, and its presence therefore does actually represent a recent and dangerous contamination. Evidence in support of this statement can be found in Houston's annual reports, where the ratio between his "true colic," "confirmatory" and "presumptive" tests varies with the time of the year. Thus in summer the actual number of "true coli" is much less than in winter, due undoubtedly to the action of the sunlight in killing off these susceptible organisms.
17 Consequently when an analyst in England finding " true coli " in 1 cc. con- demns a water, because it shows recent pollution, he is right in a great majority of the cases, and in the remainder the worst that can be said of his opinion, is, that he has slightly erred on the side of overcaution, for it must be remembered that the whole of the 10 organisms comprising his " true coli " are originally of f18 CHAPTER IV. STUDY OF BACTERIOLOGY OF EARTH KNOWN TO BE HEAVILY POLLUTED. The study of the effect of gross animal pollution on the soil, and the way in which mature gets rid of the effects of this pollution, is a subject which is very intimately bound up with that of the bacteriology of water, particularly in rural areas of India, where surface wells are the commonest source of drinking water. Houston and other bacteriologists have shown that f19 samples were then taken and analysed. The method of analysis followed in this case is as follows:20 Sample (a) was taken from the trench filled in May 1908. The whole of the trenching ground was more or less under water during part of June and again for many days in October. The trench was opened at the end of November 1908. The night- soil was found to be in a black sticky mass not unlike tar. It had an odour of manure, but did not suggest fresh f21 The analysis of one gram of the black mass taken from the soil shows no lactose fermenters at all. No acid and gas reaction could be obtained in the bile salt medium. Sporogenes enteritidis spores were absent. Sample(a-1).22 isolated from 1 gram of the earth, whilst in (c-1), one solitary colony of acidi lactici was found. Sporogenes enteritidis spores, however, still persisted and were isolated. From sample (b) the night-soil having been in the ground something between four and five years, a single bacillus cloacæ was isolated. This may have been an accidental contamination. In (b-1) no lactose fermenters could be found. Sporogenes enteritidis spores were absent. In sample (a) and (a-1), no lactose fermenters were found and no sporogenes enteritidis. Consequently from this series of analyses it would appear that the more persist ent of the f23 organisms had disappeared. Consequently, in order to ascertain the period during which coli communis will remain living in the ground, investigations on trenching grounds probably do not constitute the most satisfactory method. A comparison should be made between the results of all the older samples of trenching ground earth and those of the Ootacamund sewage farm earth; a striking difference will be apparent at once. The longer the night-soil remains in the ground the smaller the number of varieties of organisms are isolated. Thus the freshly contaminated earth in the sewage farm contains no less than nine varieties of lactose fermenters. The oldest samples seldom contain more than one, or at the most two, varieties. It would, we consider, be reasonable to conclude that these organisms have outlived the other varieties, and are better able to resist the various forces that are active in soil. Now referring to the organisms which have been found to persist, it will be observed that bacillus cloacæ is the commonest of these. Bacillus grunthal and bacillus coscoroba and bacillus No. 73 appear to be very resistant organisms and are capable of maintaining their existence, under favourable conditions, for very consi- derable length of time, probably up to 3 or 4 years or even longer. These facts are very important in themselves, and if the investigation of these polluted earths had revealed nothing else it still would have been worth undertaking. On the other hand, whilst not laying too much importance on the negative result obtained in the course of this work, it is very striking that in no case has coli communis been isolated. There can, however, be no doubt that the entire absence of this organism from these analyses, supports the opinion, arrived at by Houston and other workers, that bacillus coli communis (Houston's " coli " was probably very largely made up of coli communis), does not remain alive for any very considerable length of time, when introduced into the soil. The obvious objection to drawing conclusions from so artificial an arrangement as that of a trenching ground have already been referred to viz., the enormous volume of night-soil put into a trench; this could scarcely be said to be on a parallel with the usual method by which f24 Sample (8) taken on 30th March 1909, showed the following analysis: 1 coli communis, 9 coscoroba. Of course it is much too early to draw conclusions from these experiments; but the results given are extremely interesting. The following points should be noted: that although coli communis was not isolated in the first two specimens, it was found in the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 8th; hence this bacillus can exist in the ground for 97 days at least.* Another interesting point is that quite late on (that is to say, 82 days after the trench was started) the rare organism No. 33, which belongs to MacConkey's group No. 2 made its appearance in that sample, though it was not isolated in subsequent specimens. Up to the present (97 days) we are still obtaining the common f25 CHAPTER V. CHANGE IN THE BACTERIOLOGICAL FLORA OF WATER AND F26 met with, but the commonest and best known amongst them was undoubtedly oxytocus perniciosus. This is an organism that is associated. with stale milk and. improperly cleaned milk cans, but there can be little doubt that it is in reality a normal, though rare, inhabitant of the intestinal canal of cattle. The other organisms that were found plentifully at this time appear to be somewhat nearly allied to this species; some are recorded as found in excrement of animals and men (vide MacConkey's table); but all do not appear to have been described by other bacteri- ologists. In order to demonstrate the remarkable prevalence of these organisms at this particular time, table No. V (a) has been made out. All the samples that came to our laboratory between 1st to 31st October are here tabulated with the amount of rain that fell in each place. It will be observed that in the towns of Vizagapatam and AdÓni no rain fell prior to the samples being taken; these therefore serve as a control, for these rare organisms were absent in the samples taken in these towns. To discuss the various samples in greater detail: the samples of the town water- supply obtained from Madura were particularly good this quarter; they contained very few f27 In the town of Madras itself the water samples taken from the two sources, that are kept under regular weekly scrutiny, viz., the King Institute well and the Red Hills lake, both showed the presence of oxytocus perniciosus. In the former of these, the sample of 24th October, after a fall of 15 inches of rain in 24 hours, showed almost a pure culture of this organism, but a week later, 3rd November, the latter had disappeared though an additional 13 inches of rain had fallen in the interval. A full description of the King Institute well is given in Chapter VI, from which it will be seen that no flood water could get into the well except by percolating through some 30 feet of porous earth. The Red Hills lake is a very large sheet of water being about 14 miles round. It rose suddenly about 4 ½ feet in one night, in consequence of the heavy burst of rain, the whole volume of this water being flood water washed from paddy lands and from the more barren parts of the catchment area, which must be at least 20 square miles in extent. The sample taken on 25th October, after 15 inches of rain had fallen, contained. oxytocus perniciosus and also a second rare organism. The one taken on 31st October after 10 inches more rain showed that the organisms were disappearing rapidly and from next sample, taken on 7th November, all had disappeared. The water of the lake at this time was not very clear, so that the action of the sun's rays could not have been very effective at any depth; further the sky was mostly overcast, yet these organisms only survived for a short time in the lake, so that it seems fair to conclude that they were not in a very congenial environment. It should be noticed that these places, from which samples have been taken, are situated hundreds of miles apart over the southern part of India, and that lakes, rivers and wells equally showed. the presence of these rare organisms. Considering the very few occasions on which these organisms have been met with, except in this month of October, it is very remarkable that they should suddenly become so very common over so very large an area. Now another extraordinary fact became apparent at this juncture, viz., that at the same time when these rare organisms were found in the water-supplies, a similar set of bacteria suddenly made their appearance in large numbers in human f28 The explanation of this extraordinary prevalence in the water of these rare orga- nisms during October is probably as follows: that the monsoon condition washed a large quantity of fresh f29 CHAPTER VI. SYSTEMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE WATER OF THE KING INSTITUTE WELL. The subject of the influence of meteorological conditions on the bacteriological flora of a shallow well, is one of surpassing interest in India, where the great proportion of the rural population depends on such sources for their drinking supply. Conse- quently a weekly analysis of the King Institute well since July 1908, studied in relation with the rainfall, should give much valuable information. The King Institute well falls under the category of what are termed shallow wells, that is to say, there is no impermeable layer of soil or rock between the water bearing strata and the ground level, so that surface water can find its way into the well, by percolating through the soil. The geological formation in the neighbourhood is disintegrated laterite gravel; it is extremely porous. The well is thoroughly satis- factorily built of masonry to a depth of 33 feet, so that any surface water, that may its way into the well, has to pass through 30 feet or more of soil. The floor of the well is actually in a layer of river sand. The well is provided with a pump and oil engine capable of lifting 7,000 gallons per hour; every day 25,000 gallons are pumped out and discharged into the cistern in the King Institute compound, some 1,000 yards away. Careful account is kept of the amount of water drawn and it is found to vary very little from day to day. The surroundings of the well may be described as fairly good and clean. It is situated in the midst of a thin scrub jungle, where cultivation is impossible, and there is little vegetation that would attract any animals except goats. The immediate surroundings are not fenced in, so that there is slight possibility, though no great probability, that animals may stray into the neighbourhood. The river Adyar is situated about 200 yards away from the well. This river is considerably polluted in its whole course, but the grossest pollution takes place below the King Institute where some hundreds of dhobies wash clothes. Engine attendants are daily present in the engine house, but arrangements are made to see that they pollute the ground as little as possible. The analyses were begun early in July 1908. Previous to this there had been little or no rainfall for six months. The rainfall for April, May and June was only .3 of an inch. Consequently the early analyses were begun under what may be termed typical hot weather conditions. At this time of the year the level of the sub-soil water was 16 feet below the surface of the ground, the depth of the water in the well being also 16 feet. Sample No. 1.30 King Institute Well. Sample I31 hour and was very heavy while it lasted. The consequence would be that a very considerable volume of this water would run off the land into streams. Had the rainfall been spread over a longer period than half an hour or so, the water would probably have found its way into the subsoil waters. F32 Sample V33 Sample No. 1034 Sample IX35 Presumably this state of affairs is due to the last rains. It is not easy to explain why the pollution should be present nearly a fortnight after the rain has ceased, as in former occasions an improvement was usual about this time after rain. Sample No. 26.36 Sample XIII37 Chemical Analysis of King Institute Well water. Parts per 100,000. Sample No. 19 No. 23 No. 27 No. 28 No. 33 Date 26-11-08 5-1-09 4-2-09 23-2-09 30-3-09 Colour Clear. Clear. Clear. Clear. Clear. Smell None. None. None. None. None. Total solids 38.000 47 600 45.800 42.400 40 400 Temporary hardness 14.500 16.500 16.000 14.500 15 000 Permanent do. 0.500 0.500 0.500 1.500 1.000 Total do. 15.000 17.000 16.500 16 000 16.000 Chlorine 4.615 6.035 5.680 4.615 4.615 Free ammonia Trace. Trace. 0.004 0 006 0.006 Albuminoid ammonia 0.003 0.003 0.007 0.003 0.007 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's process) 0.007 0 003 0.010 0.006 0.006 Nitrates (N2 O5) Trace. Trace. 0.135 Trace. Trace. Nitrites Nil. Nil. Nil. Nil. Nil. Sulphates Present. Present. Present. Present. Present. Phosphates Nil. Nil. Nil. Nil. Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil, Nil. Nil, Nil. Nil, Nil. Nil, Nil. Nil, Nil. Conclusions.38 Sample XVII39 Sample XXI40 Sample XXV41 Sample XXIX42 Sample XXXIII43 CHAPTER VII. A STUDY OF THE BACTERIOLOGY OF THE F44 Series No. 5.45 is met with in 5 of the series (excluding 3 and 4); it is entirely absent from 1 only. Cloacæ has been found occasionally [vide table VII-(c)]. The proportion between saccharose and non-saccharose fermenters is 147 to 604 (about 1 to 4). This increase in the non-saccharose fermenters in India, coupled with the fact that coli communis is frequently a rare organism in f46 TABLE VII (c). Percentage Prevalence of Lactose Fermenters in Human F47 To proceed with the study of the various bacilli; it will be seen that table VII (c) goes into much greater detail, and gives the percentage prevalence of separate organisms in the various series. A large number of very interesting points are demonstrated by this table. The most striking feature is the continual and steady presence of the Grunthal group, the coscoroba group, and, to a less extent, the coli group. Wide variations in percentage occur however, and even entire absence of these bacilli is recorded in some series, but these organisms undoubtedly form the bulk of those present in dejecta of man and cattle. The main interest of this study however lies in the presence or absence of the rarer bacilli; in this connection much has yet to be discovered. Great variation, both in number and kind, occur in the flora of f48 quarter, in all the water-supplies, there was a great falling off in the number of cloacæ, accompanied by a decline of its numbers in cowdung and f49 In the light of these remarks nothing more need be said on the utility of attempt- ing to establish an approximate percentage composition of the intestinal bacilli in the dejecta of different animals. Even the percentages in the four large groups, described. by MacConkey, are so variable that only the vaguest generalizations are possible. There is one other point we wish to allude to. Our experience in all the work on f50 CHAPTER VIII. THE EFFECT OF SUNLIGHT ON F51 This series of experiments are admittedly of a somewhat unsatisfactory nature; they were undertaken just to give us some idea as to what we might expect in future work. Experiment No. 1.52 TABLE VIII (a)53 that (i) the organisms present in cowdung were more rapidly killed by the action of the sun than were those derived from human f54 TABLE VIII (b). Experiment No. 9. .001 cc. 01 cc. .1 cc. 1 cc. 5 cc. 10 cc. 20 cc. Remarks. Cowdung Experiment. 7th Jan. 1909, 12.45 unex55 The next series of experiments that were carried out were performed on somewhat similar lines. Four cc. of cowdung or human f56 the emulsion a fine flocculent mass, that held the organisms entangled in its meslies; this substance protected the bacilli from the action of the sunlight and gave most erratic results. The unfiltered emulsions of human f57 Experiment No. 1758 After 2 hours' exposure showed 1 cloacæ, 5 coscoroba, 4 No. 67. " 3 " " 10 coscoroba. " 4 " " 9 acidi lactici, 1 grunthal. " 5 " " No organisms. Noon of the second day showed 7 cloacæ, 1 grunthal. Subsequent samples contained no organisms in 20 cc. Note.59 In the following experiments a single specimens of cowdung was taken, but a layer of sterile sand was placed at the bottom of the dish:60 After 2 hours' exposure showed. 2 cloacæ, 3 No. 67, 2 coscoroba, 1 neapolitanus, 1 grunthal, 1 No. 101. " 3 " " " 4 grunthal, 1 acidi lactici, 1 cloacæ, 1 lactis. ærogenes, 1 coscoroba, 1 No. 67, 1 No. 101. " 5 " " " 2 coscoroba, 1 acidi lactici, 2 No. 67, 5 No. 101. Noon of second day " 4 cloacæ, 4 grunthal, 1 acidi lactici, 1 cos- coroba. Evening of second day " 7 grunthal, 2 acidi lactici, 1 coscoroba. Evening of third day " 2 acidi lactici, 8 grunthal. Evening of fourth day " 10 grunthal. Evening of fifth day " 10 grunthal. Subsequent samples proved sterile in 20 cc. Note.61 Experiments No. 32. A single sample of human f62 Evening of the fifth day 3 acidi lactici, 7 grunthal. Evening of the sixth day 8 grunthal, 2 No. 101. Evening of the seventh day No organisms. Note.63 drawn from the whole experiment would not be altered very materially, viz., that the majority of A was more susceptible to the influence of the sun than the majority of B and C. If however two very extreme cases were taken, such as a very delicate organism and a very resistant one, it is highly probable that all the delicate organisms would have disappeared before any great number of the very resistant ones had succumbed to the action of the sun. It may be objected that, if we intend to formulate any law as to the viability of bacilli, this law must obviously apply to all specimens of the same variety, in what- ever situation they may be found in nature, otherwise the statement is of no value in itself. We have no intention of doing anything so unwise as to lay down any hard and fast rules, for our experience teaches us that such do not exist in nature. We are quite content with the very widest generalization, provided these are based on observations from nature, and on the results of experiments carried out as nearly as possible under natural conditions. Imperfect as these experiments are, they are amply sufficient to prove the correctness of certain wide conclusions. Even if we have only succeeded in showing, that there does exist in f64 the organisms No. 69 and cloacæ. If the above theory were correct, Grunthal should have survived No. 69 and cloacæ, as neither of the latter were obtained at the start. Experiments Nos. 26, 31 and 34 all show that the grunthals kept about the same for the first few analyses, but predominated at the end, there being no great numerical superiority at the commencement in these cases. As regards Experiment No. 27: The composition before exposure in Experiment No. 18 is almost identical with that of No. 27 (coscoroba greatly predominating), yet in spite of this numerical superiority to start with, this organism did not survive at the end to the exclusion of other organisms, but fell off in numbers, and was at the last analysis entirely outnumbered by cloacæ, bacillus grunthal also being present65 CHAPTER IX. EFFECTS OF SUNLIGHT CONTINUED66 TABLE IX (a). Tabular Statement of Results of Analyses of Red Hills Lake. Sample number. Date of taking Sample. sample taken from Total colonies Agar 37°C. F67 TABLE IX (a)68 Samples Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 show that practically the whole volume of water in the lake is full of contamination washed off the land, and that up to this point, the only sign that any purification has commenced is the rapid disappearance of oxytocus perni- ciosus and organism No. 69. During these three weeks from October 28th to Novem- ber 23rd a very large quantity of rain fell, about 30 inches, and for a considerable portion of this period the sky was very overcast. Further, up till nearly the end of November the supply channels were bringing in a very large volume of highly polluted water washed off " paddy fields "; analysis 4 (a) shows that even the surface sample contained a considerable amount of silt. It should be observed that coli communis was only once isolated in this period, in spite of the fact that a constant stream of this bacterium was coming in. Note the great number of varieties present, and the truly f69 show that bacillus coli communis was present in them. It should be noted that this organism was present in all the samples, surface, middle and bottom consequently they must have been very numerous. By December 13th (that is to say, one week afterwards) no coli communis could be found in the lake at all. The surface samples showed no f70 CHAPTER X. THE EFFECTS OF SUNLIGHT CONTINUED: THE RESULTS OF ANALYSES OF THE WATER OF THE TAKES AND RESERVOIRS IN THE PRESIDENCY. A third source from which the action of sunlight and storage can be demonstrated, is by a study of the results of analyses, obtained from the various impounding reservoirs, lakes, and storage tanks, taken at different times of the year, and considering these in relation with the meteorological conditions obtaining at the time. In the Madras Presidency 7 out of 18 water-works derive their supply from lakes; 2 others, namely, Kurnool and Cocanada, possess storage reservoirs, which for 9 months of the year are used as settling tanks only, holding about 6 or 9 days' supply; but which at the com- mencement of the hot weather are pumped full, and act as storage reservoirs for the town, containing as much as 2½ to 3 months supply, for the period when the irrigation canals are empty. The results obtained in these two storage reservoirs have been included in these results. In order to save long discriptions tables X (a) and X (b) have been compiled. TABLE X (a). Tabular Statement of Results of Analyses of Lake Waters. Town supply. Quarter ending 30th September 1908. Quarter ending 31st December 1908. Quarter ending 31st March 1909. F71 TABLE X (a)72 which are not strictly speaking lake water, and therefore should not be included;in Oatacamund also, two or three samples, that are in reality spring waters, have been wrongly inserted. The results of the settling tanks from Kurnool and Cocanadam have been added to table X (a), they are not found in table XIII (b). Consequently the figures given in X (a) are actually more accurate, from the point of view of con- taining the results of analyses of stored water only, than those given in Chapter XIII. A comparison between the two sets of figures will show that the difference between them is not great. It is necessary to make a few remarks about the meteorological conditions obtaining in each quarter::73 in 100, or 1 in 50 cc. But even admitting this objection, it will be observed, that out of 12 different water-supplies examined, either cloacæ, or grunthal, or both, were present in 11, and greatly predominated in no less than 8. The extraordinary numeri- cal predominance of these organisms over all others, may be taken to be very strong evidence in favour of the truth of the statement, that these organisms are resistant to the action of sunlight and storage. Coli communis was isolated once in this quarter, from the Marlimund reservoir in Ootacamund. Inspection has shown that the catchment area was contaminated to a considerable extent by wood-cutters, in the immediate neighbourhood of the lake, and that light rain was actually falling at the time when sample was taken. Coli communis was entirely absent from all other samples. Second quarter.74 only the most resistant organisms were found commonly in water, and when all susceptible bacilli had long since disappeared, would be the one of greatest prevalence of these diseases. Undoubtedly the scarcity of water at this time is a factor. But it demonstrates a point of difference between the sanitary problems in the East and in Europe; namely, that in this country we have two dangers to look after: (1) Diseases such as enteric, diarrhæa, and to some extent cholera, indication of the relation of which to the water-supply is to be looked for in the presence of the susceptible organisms, such as coli communis and (2) cholera and dysentery, which are frequently, though not always, connected with the lowering of the level of lakes, and are associated with the presence in the water of the very resistant organisms. It is well-known, amongst sanitarians in this country, that, as lakes, reservoirs, etc., reach a certain level, cholera has a tendency to appear. There are at least two examples in the year under report; viz., epidemics in Adóni and Madras city. These will form the subject of a subsequent chapter. Hence it is evident that the mere presence or absence of organisms, usually accepted as being indicators of recent pollution, is not the only point to be borne in mind by a water analyst in the East. Of course it is not maintained that in every ease when the resistant, and what may be termed, harmless organisms, such as cloacæ and grunthal predominate in a lake, that cholera necessarily results, any more than that enteric is always epidemic when eoli communis are found in the water. But experience has shown that the conditions in the lake have become such as to render the dissemination of the disease probable, if, the specific organism happen to be present. The relation between these resistant organisms and the vibrios of cholera will form the subject of a future investigation. The following conclusions are considered justified by these results:75 CHAPTER XI. THE CLASSIFICATION OF F76 TABLE XI (a)77 to point out, that it seems probable that there is some difference in the power of resistance of the various members of this group, and that one or the other may subsequently be demonstrated to be rather susceptible. Bacillus No. 9.78 Bacillus Pneumoniæ and Rhinoscleroma No. 68.79 though not often, entirely absent. At certain times of the year it is by far the com80 CHAPTER XII. PROPOSED BACTERIOLOGICAL STANDARDS FOR DRINKING WATERS IN INDIA. Before dealing with the subject matter of this very important chapter, we wish it to be clearly understood, that the standards we propose to lay down are tentative only; and we put forward these suggestions thus early, in order that other workers may test them in different surroundings, and in other parts of the country. Although we have accumulated a fair amount of information in the Madras Presidency, and, although we are ourselves satisfied that the lines on which we are working are sound, we are fully prepared to admit that objections to our standards may be brought forward, and that a great deal more experience is necessary before these standards can be considered to be completely established. The classification of organisms according to their power of resistance to the action of sunlight, given in the preceding chapter, will show pretty clearly the line which we propose to adopt. If this subject is to be thoroughly understood a few points must be cleared up. In Chapter VIII we have carefully laid down, that it is not to be supposed, that hard and fast rules can be formulated when dealing with a subject like the power of resistance of organisms to the action of sunlight. All we claim to have established is, that, in any naturally occurring mixture of micro-organisms, a certain proportion (how great a proportion, we have at present not much idea) of one or more species will be found to survive the others when the mixture is exposed to prolonged sunlight. But it is with this resistant residuum that the sanitarian in India is most frequently called upon to deal. Hence the great importance and utility of this classification. In nearly all the water schemes for a large population, and in a fair proportion of village supplies, surface water, in the shape of lakes, tanks or rivers, provides the supply. In lakes it has been demonstrated that storage and sunlight are the paramount factors in the purification of the water. To rivers also the same applies, though in a less degree. It is generally accepted that sunlight plays a considerable part in the purification of river waters. Further, most of the rivers in India, for at least 9 months of the year (if they do not run dry altogether), are extremely shallow, and really do not depart very widely from the conditions made use of in our experiments, when emulsions were placed in the sun with a layer of sterile sand at the bottom of dish. In many of the great rivers in the Madras Presidency, it is not uncommon to find enormous stretches of water not more than 12 or 15 inches deep. The same also applies to the Ganges. Consequently, there can be no reasonable deubt that in a river the susceptible individuals among organisms present will die off with great rapidity, and that the bacilli, which the analyst finds, can be compared with those whose powers of resistance hos been studied in the experiments quoted. No analyst, in any country, would ever venture to give a definite opinion, without knowing a few elementary fact concerning the source from which a sample has been taken. Such questions as, whether the samples was drawn from lake, river, well or spring81 Now although it is essential that the data submitted with each sample should be sufficient to enable the analyst to estimate roughly the length of exposure, in not a few cases the result obtained gives very valuable evidence, as to the amount, of sunning and storage that the water has undergone. A reference to the analyses of the water of lakes, for the first quarter dealt with in this report [vide table X (a)], will show the frequency with which analyses occur, demonstrating, in our opinion beyond the shadow of doubt, that one is dealing with a thoroughly well sunned water. Thus we think it my be taken as certain that when a water shows f82 In such a sample as this, one would be guided by the relative number of such orga- nisms as lactis ærogenes. It has been shown that, in the ordinary fresh mixtures of faces and water, laotis ærogenes is not particularly common. Therefore a water showing a mixture, rich in varieties, and yet containing few or no lactis ærogenes, would be judged to have undergone very little settlement or purification. If, on the other hand, one found the sample containing f83 possibility of the entrance of the f84 this indicates that the lake is very low and conditions are suitable for the spread of cholera. River Waters. Good river water should not contain more than 100 colonies (on agar at 37°C.). F85 Analyses characteristic of certain natural conditions in water. (1) SAMPLE IV.86 Analyses characteristic of certain natural conditions in water87 Analyses characteristic of certain natural conditions in watercont. (7) Sample II.DODABETTA LOWER RESERVOIR88 Analyses characteristic of certain natural conditions in water89 Analyses characteristic of certain natural conditions in water90 Analyses characteristic of certain natural conditions in water91 CHAPTER XIII. TABULAR STATEMENTS OF RESULTS OF WATER ANALYSES AND REMARKS THEREON. A very few words are still necessary on the results of the analyses of water samples as a whole. The reader is at this point recommended to glance through Part II of this report. There will be found the results of three quarterly analyses of each supply, placed side by side, for reference. It may not be apparent why all these are included in this report, but as all this work is in its infancy at present, it has been considered necessary to give all the details on which our conclusions are based. The method of reading these results will present no difficulty. In giving an opinion we have avoided making strong statements because it is only quite recently that we have arrived at conclusions to warrant these. Tables 4 (a), (b) and (c) require explanatory certain remark. The water supplies in this Presidency are grouped into three classes according to the sources whence the water comes. The figures given in these tables are of interest, the important ones being those relating to the natural or unfiltered water. Group A.92 Water that has been in pipes.93 there is an extremely strong subsoil stream, the water being fairly pure; and in cases where there is no sub-soil stream the river itself acts as the supply, the water percolating through the sand into the pipes placed below the sand of the bed acting as a natural filter. When the river bed is dry it should be carefully protected from pollution for at least a mile above the gallery. The advantages of this arrangement are (1) it is cheap, (2) the fact that the river contains no water for several months in the year or for several years consecutively does not affect the supply when there is a subsoil stream. (3) There is no necessity to filter the water as it is usually free from silt. The difference between a true sub-soil water and a filtered river water can nearly always be demonstrated by the chemical tests (vide the infiltration gallery in Madura), the chloride and nitrate figures in the river water and the gallery water showing con- siderable difference. In cases like Trichinoply and Tanjore, where a river water is obtained, the results of the chemical analyses of both river and gallery water are the same in these particulars. The disadvantage of this arrangement is that the amount of purification which goes on in the sand varies considerably with many factors such as the rate of pumping. It can never be absolutely guaranteed that the coarse sand in the river bed will filter the water adequately. Experience has shown, that the best water is obtained, when there is slight trickle in the river; this washes away the added pollution rapidly, but keeps the sub-soil supply well filled up. Therefore though this arrangement possesses many advantages, the quality of the water obtained may be very variable and at times dangerous. (2) Supplies derived from lakes, etc.94 GROUP A. TABLE XIII (a). River waters. 95 GROUP B. TABLE XIII (b). Surface waters impounded in Lake or Reservoir. 96 GROUP C. TABLE XIII (c). Well waters or Infiltration gallery water not in a river-bed. 97 TABLE XIII (d). Table showing the quantity pollution in each sample. QUARTER ENDING SEPTEMBER 30TH, 1908. UNFILTERED OR NATURAL WATERS FILTERED WATERS. WATER TAKEN FROM PIPES. Name of Town supply. Total colonies on agar at 37° Lactose fermenters in Sporogenes in 20 cc. True coli com. Total colonies on agar at 37° Lactose fermenters in Sporogenes in 20 cc. True coli com Total colonies on agar at 37° Lactose fermenters in Sporogenes in 20 cc. True coli com. 20 cc. 10 cc. 5 cc. 1 cc .1 cc. .01 cc. 20 cc. 10 cc. 5 cc. 1 cc. .1 cc. .01 cc. 20 cc. 10 cc. 5 cc. 1 cc. .1 cc. .01 cc. Group A.98 TABLE XIII (d)99 TABLE XIII (d)100 CHAPTER XIV. CHEMICAL ANALYSES OF WATER SUPPLIES IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY. During two quarters of the year under report chemical analyses of the various samples have been carried. out. Table No. XIV (a) gives the results obtained in a way which renders it possible to survey the results as a whole. We do not propose to enter into a long discussion of each of these several samples but just to indicate a few of the main differences which appear to exist between the waters in Europe and those of India. As a whole the waters cannot be called very satisfactory as judged. by English standards. The actual quantity of f[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918990.tif] 101 as the permissible limit for free and albuminoid ammonia are somewhat too strict for surface waters in this country. They are, however, applicable to sub-soil waters. The spring and well waters yield, as a rule, a satisfactory chemical analysis, judged by the usual standards, but bacteriological analyses show that they are, for the most part, decidedly inferior to the surface waters. Hence the danger in relying on chemical analysis only for a water sample in India. A badly contaminated well water might pass muster, when a thoroughly well-sunned lake water, might be condemned on its ammonia figures.
102 TABLE XIV (a). Tabular Statement of Chemical Analyses103 TABLE XIV (a)104 CHAPTER XV. THE HEALTH OF THE TOWNS SUPPLIED WITH PROTECTED WATER SUPPLIES. A careful scrutiny of vital statistics of the towns, whose water-supply is under examination should give valuable information as regards the correctness or other- wise of the deductions drawn from the results of analyses obtained in the laboratory. Accordingly a table has been made out which gives the figures for certain diseases whose prevalence in any town is usually accepted as being more or less connected with the quality of water-supplied. The particulars tabulated are (i) number of cholera deaths in each quarter of the year, (ii) the deaths from diarrh105 the list for the same quarter of the year. The total death-rate per mille per annum is, however, comparable with the death-rate from any town in the Presidency or in any other part of India. The Cholera figures.106 infected outside the town at a festival. As soon as rain fell and the supply became adequate for the town the disease disappeared. (c) Instances in which the filtered water-supply has been the means of disseminating cholera. Fortunately we have not many of these cases. The standing example of this lamentable state of affairs is the Presidency town of Madras. There can be no doubt that pipe supply became infected. Bacteriological and chemical analyses show that the water is highly polluted, and the vibrios of cholera were found in the supply. In Adóni there is reason to believe that during the month of August when the lake was nearly empty, that the town supply was instrumental in spreading the disease. Nearly all the cases were indigenous and practically all other sources had dried up at this time of the year. As soon as rain fell the disease rapidly disappeared. It is just possible that the epidemic that occurred in Guntúr during the months of July and August should come under this category. The analysis of some of the samples taken in August show that the water was far from pure. But, on the other hand, this epidemic may have been due, as already stated, to the pollution of the supply of the town other than the pipe water. On the whole the cholera results, in towns having pipe supply, for this year, are distinctly disappointing. The death-rate per 1,000 of population per annum is 3.0 which is above that of all municipal towns in the Presidency (2.2). But it should be stated that these 18 towns comprise the largest in the Presidency and also many of them are centres of pilgrimage, so that, supposing they had possessed no protected Water-supply, the results would probably have been much worse. Further we wish to point out that the chief offenders are to be found amongst class B, namely, in places where the quantity of water is very deficient107 Comparing the various quarters with one another it will be observed that the months of December, January and February give the lowest return for cholera. The months of September, October and November give the highest and the quarter June, July and August the next. Dysentery and diarrh108 extremely hard. It will also be observed that the infant mortality from dysentery and diarrh109 Municipal towns. Popula- tion according to the census of 1901. March to May 1908. June to August 1908. Septem- ber to Novem- ber 1908. December 1908 to February 1909. Total. March to May 1908. June to August 1908. September to November 1908. December 1908 to February 1909. Total. Explanatory remarks. Under 5 years. All ages. Under 5 years. All ages. Under 5 years. All ages. Under 5 years. All ages. Under 5 years. All ages. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. Actuals. Death-rate. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 GROUP A. River waters. Cocanada 48,096 ... ... 32 2.7 ... ... ... ... 32 0.7 17 1.4 55 4.6 17 1.4 60 5.0 11 0.9 49 4.1 12 1.0 37 3.1 57 1.2 201 4.2 Cholera cases mostly imported cases confined to one quarter. Conjeeveram 46,164 67 5.8 36 3.1 26 2.3 ... ... 129 2.8 17 1.5 44 3.8 26 2.3 45 3.9 22 1.9 34 2.9 21 1.8 52 4.5 86 1.9 175 3.8 Cholera mostly amongst pilgrims. Gudiyáttam 21,335 24 4.5 22 4.1 105 19.7 18 3.4 169 7.9 18 3.4 19 3.6 23 4.3 28 5.2 17 3.2 22 4.1 16 3.0 19 3.6 74 3.5 88 4.2 Cholera imported for most part very bad in surrounding villages, infant mortality very high. Kurnool 25,376 ... ... 20 3.2 3 0.5 ... ... 23 0.9 23 3.6 42 6.6 7 1.1 14 2.2 14 2.2 27 4.3 4 0.6 11 1.7 48 1.9 94 3.7 Original cases imported. Madura 105,984 570 21.5 18 0.7 71 2.7 197 7.4 856 8.1 66 2.5 143 5.4 57 2.2 120 4.5 51 1.9 152 5.7 75 2.8 162 6.1 249 2.3 577 5.4 Infection brought by pilgrims but spreads rapidly in certain parts of the town where pipe-water not supplied. Nellore 32,040 1 0.1 1 0.1 2 0.2 ... ... 4 0.1 4 0.5 22 2.7 3 0.4 12 1.5 4 0.5 19 2.4 3 0.4 9 1.1 14 0.4 62 1.9 Cholera imported. Tanjore 57,870 32 2.2 4 0.3 5 0.3 29 3.0 70 1.2 42 2.9 81 5.6 53 3.7 68 4.7 45 3.1 82 5.7 51 3.5 62 4.3 191 3.3 293 5.1 Cholera confined to one part of town where pipes do not run. Trichinopoly 104,721 60 3.3 ... ... 64 3.4 90 3.4 214 2.0 35 1.3 81 3.1 42 1.6 99 3.8 74 2.8 149 5.7 41 1.6 134 5.1 192 1.8 463 4.4 Cholera indigenous due to scanty supply. Tirupati 15,485 15 3.9 6 1.5 8 2.1 ... ... 29 1.9 7 1.8 36 9.3 6 1.5 37 9.6 7 1.8 30 7.7 4 1.0 27 7.0 24 1.5 130 8.4 Cholera imported by pilgrims. GROUP B. Impounded surface waters. Adóni 30,416 ... ... 46 6.0 7 0.9 ... ... 53 1.7 11 1.4 19 2.5 21 2.8 34 4.5 15 2.01 19 2.5 8 1.1 8 1.1 55 1.8 80 2.6 Epidemic probably due to pipe supply, lake very low. Coonoor 8,525 1 0.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 0.1 2 0.9 6 2.8 6 2.8 16 7.5 6 2.8 10 4.7 7 3.3 12 5.6 21 2.5 44 5.2 Imported case, high dysentery figure probably due to cold. Madras 509,346 54 0.4 490 3.8 754 5.9 18 0.1 1,316 2.6 244 1.9 660 5.2 259 2.0 719 5.6 228 1.8 870 6.8 166 1.3 616 4.8 897 1.8 2,865 5.6 Epidemic due to pipe supply, lake very low. Ootacamund 18,596 2 0.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 0.1 4 0.9 12 2.6 11 2.4 18 3.9 11 2.4 22 4.7 11 2.4 17 3.7 37 2.0 69 3.7 Imported cases. Vellore 43,537 7 0.6 13 1.2 12 1.1 15 1.4 47 1.1 11 1.0 31 2.8 12 1.1 33 3.0 3 0.3 20 1.8 7 0.6 27 2.5 33 0.8 111 2.5 Imported cases mostly. Vizagapatam 40,892 1 0.1 49 4.8 55 5.4 ... ... 105 2.6 13 1.3 37 3.6 13 1.3 53 5.2 11 1.1 62 6.1 5 0.5 18 1.8 42 1.0 170 4.2 Epidemic bad in places improved with pipe supply. GROUP C. Well and spring waters. Cuddapah 16,432 ... ... 146 35.7 11 2.7 ... ... 157 9.6 1 0.2 6 1.5 2 0.5 5 1.2 3 0.7 14 3.4 2 0.5 16 3.9 8 0.5 41 2.5 Cholera due to deficient quantity o water and use of bad wells. Dindigul 25,182 3 0.5 44 7.0 47 7.5 12 1.9 106 6.8 10 1.6 29 4.6 13 2.1 29 4.6 17 2.7 40 6.4 16 2.5 37 5.9 56 2.2 135 5.4 Cholera due to deficient supply and use of bad supplies. Guntúr 30,833 38 4.9 135 17.5 4 0.5 ... ... 177 5.7 10 1.3 25 3.2 25 3.2 56 7.3 10 1.3 20 2.6 5 0.7 7 0.9 50 1.6 108 3.5 Epidemic very suspicious of contami- nation of town supply, but as this is very deficient may be due to use of infected sources. 18, M.T.S. Total. 1,180,830 875 3.0 1,062 3.6 1,174 4.0 379 1.3 3,490 3.0 535 1.8 1,348 4.6 596 2.0 1,446 4.9 549 1.9 1,641 5.6 454 1.5 1,271 4.3 2,134 1.8 5,706 4.8 I. All Municipal towns (1907). 2,424,709 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,440 2.2 ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,574 48 II. Rural Areas (1907). 33,937,513 ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 76,125 2.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 48,752 1.4 III. Presidency as a Whole (1907). 36,362,222 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 81,565 2.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60,326 1.7 Note.110 List of Media used in the work described in this report. I. (Stock solution A).PART II. SEPARATE ANALYSES OF THE VARIOUS WATER SUPPLIES. GROUP A. RIVER WATERS.
113 Number coc. I. 08. COCANADA. Sample taken114 A. Sample I.REPORT, 115 (i) The unfiltered water in the storage tank shows pollution of a moderate amount. Fæcal bacilli are present in 1cc. (ii) The filtered water is considerably worse than the unfiltered water, as it has f117 No. Coc. II./08 COCANADA. Samples taken118 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.119 Sample V.120 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. 2. Cocanada Physical appearance Colour and Transparency. White and hazy Smell. None Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 13.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 4.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 5.000 Chlorine Do. do. 0.710 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.031 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Proess) Do. do. 0.066 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil Sample No. 4. Cocanada Physical appearance Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish but clear Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 11.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 3.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 5.000 Chlorine Do. do. 0.710 Free ammonia Do. do. Trace. Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.020 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Proess) Do. do. 0.050 Nitrates Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil
121 No. Coca. I./09. COCANADA. Samples taken122 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.123 Sample V.124 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. II. Cocanada Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 16.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 4.750 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.750 Total hardness Do. do. 5.500 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.023 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.135 Nitrates (as N2O5) Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. V. Cocanada Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish but clear Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 13.400 Temporary hardness Do. do. 4.750 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.750 Total hardness Do. do. 5.500 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.020 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.064 Nitrates(as N2O5) Do. do. 0.096 Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
125 Number Con. I./08. CONJEEVERAM. Samples taken126 Sample I.127 REPORT. (i) Sample of unfiltered river water is very highly contaminated contains f129 No. Conj. 2./08. CONJEEVERAM. Samples taken130 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 131. Sample No.1 Conjeevaram. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colorless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 33.200 porary hardness Do. do. 11.500 manent hardness Do. do. 0.500 hardness Do. do. 12.000 rine Do. do. 6.035 ammonia Do. do. 0.003 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.010 gen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.053 Nitrates Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. ites Nil. phates Present. phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil Sample No. 4 Conjeeveram. cal appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 21.000 orary hardness Do. do. 9.500 nent hardness Do. do. 0.500 hardness Do. do. 10.000 ne Do. do. 2.840 ammonia Do. do. 0.005 inoid ammonia Do. do. 0.005 absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.012 tes Do. do. 0.193 Quantitative. ites Nil. ates Present. phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil.
132 REP0RT. (i) The water taken from the sand in the river is much purer than last quarter; f133 No. Conj. I/09. CONJEEVERAM. Samples taken134 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.103 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. mple No. II. Conjeeveram. ysical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. tal solids Parts per 100,000 23.800 mporary hardness Do. do. 8.500 rmanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 al hardness Do. do. 9.500 orine Do. do. 3.195 e ammonia Do. do. 0.005 buminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 ygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.013 Nitrates (as N2O5) Do. do. 0.193 Qualitative. rites Nil. phates Present. osphates Nil. n, poisonous metals Nil mple No. IV. Conjeeveram. sical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly greenish but clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. al solids Parts per 100,000 21.600 porary hardness Do. do. 7.500 manent hardness Do. do. 1.000 al hardness Do. do. 8.500 ine Do. do. 2.840 ammonia Do. do. 0.002 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.005 gen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.012 ates (as N2O5) Do. do. 0.231 Qualitative. tes Nil. ates Present. phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil.
136 REPORT. The sample taken from the spring in the bed of the river Vagavathy contains f137 Number Gud. 1/08. GUDIYATTAM. Samples taken138 Sample I139 Number Gud. 11/08. GUDIYATTAM. Samples taken140 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. I. 141 Physical appearance. Colour and Transparency. Colourless. Clear. Smell. Nil. Quantitative. tal solids Parts per 100,000 45.800 mporary hardness Do. do. 16.500 rmanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 tal hardness Do. do. 17.500 lorine Do. do. 4.615 e ammonia Do. do. 0.008 buminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.008 ygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.014 tric nitrogen Do. do. 1.544 Qualitative. trites Nil. lphates Present. hosphates Nil. on, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. III. ysical appearance Colour and Transparency. Colourless. Clear. Smell. Nil. Quantitative. tal solids Parts per 100,000 48.000 mporary hardness Do. do. 17.000 rmanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 tal hardness Do. do. 18.000 lorine Do. do. 4.615 ee ammonia Do. do. 0.063 buminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.007 xygen absorbed (Tidy's Qrocess) Do. do. 0.014 tric nitrogen Do. do. 1.544 Qualitative. trites Nil. lphates Present. osphates Nil. on, poisonous metals Nil.
142 REPORT. The water sample taken from the suction well of the infiltration gallery is a particularly bad one. It contai f143 No. Gud. 1/09. GUDIYATTAM. Samples takenBACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. 144 Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 145 Sample No. 1. Gudiyattam. arances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 39.400 orary hardness Do. do. 15.500 nent hardness Do. do. 1.500 hardness Do. do. 17.000 ne Do. do. 3.550 mmonia Do. do. 0.005 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.009 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.027 es (as N2O5) Do. do. 0.868 Qualitative. es Nil. ates Present. phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 3. Gudiyatam. al earances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish but clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 43.200 rary hardness Do. do. 16.500 nent hardness Do. do. 1.500 hardness Do. do. 18.000 ne Do. do. 3.905 mmonia Do. do. 0.003 inoid ammonia Do. do. 0.004 n absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.008 es (as N2 O5) Do. do. 1.061 Qualitative. s Nil. tes Present. ates Nil. oisonous metals Nil.
146 REPORT. (i) The water from the infiltration gallery is considerably polluted. It contains f147 Number Kur. 1./08. KURNOOL. Sample taken148 A. Sample I.149 Sample V.151 NO. Kur. 2./08. KURNOOL. Samples taken152 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.153 Sample V.154 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. I. Kurnool. Physical appearances. Colour and Tranparency. White and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 15.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 6.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 7.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.010 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.026 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.066 Nitrates (as N2O5) Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil Sample No. V. Kurnool. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and Clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 13.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 5.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 6.500 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.037 Nitrates (as N2O5) Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
155 No. Kurn.1/09. KURNOOL. Samples taken156 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.157 BACTREIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS-cont Sample V.158 REPORT. The sample of the canal water shows a very large amount of pollution, f159 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. I. Kurnool. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 23.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 7.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 8.500 Chlorine Do. do. 2.485 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.013 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.048 Nitrates (as N2O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitatative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. II. Kurnool. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and Hazy Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 19.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 7.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 8.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.012 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.027 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
160 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. III. Ku Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 19.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 7.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 8.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.008 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.011 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.042 Nitrates (as N2 05) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No, VII. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 16.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 7.000 Permanent hardnees Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 8.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.002 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.008 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.004 Nitrates (as N2 05) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
161 Number Madr. I./ 08. MADURA. Samples taken-15th July 1908. Remarks.162 Sample I.163 Number Mad. II/08 MADURA. Samples taken164 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 165 Sample No. I. Madura. Physical appearances Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 45.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 15.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 16.500 Chlorine Do. do. 6.390 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.049 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.194 Nitric nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.096 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals 166 REPORT. (i) The Vaigai river water is very highly polluted evidently by the washing of the laud by the recent rains. The pollution is recent and is of an objectionable nature; f167 No. Mad. 1/09 MADURA. Samples taken168 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 169 Sample No. I. Madura. Pysical appearance. Colour and Transparency. White and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 66.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 20.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 21.000 Chlorine Do. do. 11.360 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.028 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.164 Nitric Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. IV. Madura. Pysical appearance Colour and Transparency. Slightly greenish but clear Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 58.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 19.500 permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 20.000 Chlorine Do. do. 11.360 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.012 oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.062 Nitric Nitrogen(as N2 O5) Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
170 REPORT. (i) The sample from the Vaigai river is of a fair quality,foecal bacilli being present in 1 cc. The organi present are not of a very objectionable nature. (ii) The sample taken very close to the pumping station shows a considerable improvement, f171 Number Nel . I./08. NELLORE. Samples taken172 Sample I.173 REPORT. (i) The unfiltered water in the Pennar River is very considerably polluted; it contains f175 No. Nel./08. NELLORE. Samples taken176 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 177 Sample No. 1. Nellore. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and opaque. Smell. None. QUANTITATIVE. Total Solids Parts per 100,000 33.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 10.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 11.000 chlorine Do. do. 4.970 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.006 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.015 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.081 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No.4. Nellore. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total Solids Parts per 100,000 48.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 21.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 22.000 chlorine Do. do. 7.455 Free ammonia Do. do. Trace. Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.014 Nitrates (as N2 05) Do. do. 0.193 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
178 REPORT. (i) The water in the river is polluted to a considerable extent; it contains f179 No. Nell.I./09 NELLORE. Samples taken180 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample ICHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 181 Sample No. 1. Nellore. Physical appearance. Colour and Transparency. White and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 50.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 13.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 15.000 chlorine Do. do. 10.650 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.011 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.019 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.138 Nitric Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 4. Nellore Physical appearance Colour and Transparency. White and clear Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 45.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 14.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 16.000 Chlorine Do. do. 7.455 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.025 Nitric Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
182 REPORT. The sample from the river is fairly contaminated. It contains f183 Number Tan. I./1908. TANJORE. Samples taken 184 Sample I.185 REPORT. (i) The river water is very highly polluted containing f187 No Tan.II./ 08. TANJORE Samples taken"188 Bacteriological analysis. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 189 Sample I. [Tanjore. Physical appearance. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish and Opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 28.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 9.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 10.500 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.016 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.104 Nitrates Do. do. trace. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. IV. Tanjore Physical appearance Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 19.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 9.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 10.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.006 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.014 Nitrates Do. do. 0.067 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
190 REPORT. The samples as a whole this quarter are better than last. The river water itself is purer and the water in the pi lline is also of better quality. The sample of water taken immediately after filtration shows that f191 No. Tan. 1./09. TANJORE. Samples taken192 Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 193 Sample No. 1. Tanjore. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and Opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 29.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 13.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 13.500 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.006 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.015 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.073 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.096 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. IV. Tanjore. Physical appearance Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 29.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 13.250 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 13.750 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. Trace. Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.013 Nitrates(as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.173 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. iron, poisonous metals Nil.
194 REPORT. The sample taken from the river bed is polluted to alconsiderable extent. It contains f195 Number Trich. 1./08. TRICHINOPOLY. Samples taken196 Sample I.197 REPORT. (i) The river water is highly polluted, fæcal bacilli existing in 1/100 of a cc. (ii) Water from close to filtration gallery is improved by the filtration, but is still far from satisfactory, fæcal bacilli present in 1 cc. (iii) The water in the distributary system, especially the sample from the Railway tap, is somewhat inferior to the sample. Multiplication of harmless water bacilli has taken place in the pipes. Recommendation.199 No. Trich. 11./08 TRICHINOPOLY. Samples taken200 Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 201 Sample No. 1. Trichinopoly. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total Solids Parts per 100.000. 23.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 7.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 9.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.016 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.104 Nitrates Do. do. trace. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No.4. Trichinopoly. Physical appearances Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 20.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 8.500 permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 10.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.001 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.029 Nitrates Do. do. trace. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron,Poisonous metals Nil.
202 REPORT The samples as a whole as compared with last quarter are very little altered. This is rather what one would expe for on both occasions there was a considerable quantity of water in the river. The only serious difference in the natu conditions is the fact that in July last all the water in the Cauvery came from the West Coast, whereas in October it is mix with local surface water, as rain has fallen in the neighbourhood of Trichinopoly. The purity of the unfiltered river water is somewhat better than last quarter; there are f203 No.Trich.1/09. TRICHINOPOLY. Samples taken204 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.205 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No.1. Trichinopoly. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100.000. 21.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 12.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 13.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.420 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.009 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.014 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.037 Nitrates(as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.077. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No.4. Trichinopoly. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 23.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 13.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 14.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.420 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.014 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.096. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron,Poisonous metals Nil.
206 REPORT. The water from the river bed is highly polluted containing f207 Number Tir. I./08. TIRUPATI. Samples taken208 Sample I.209 REPORT. (i) The sample of water from the well on bank of the Kalyani river shows that the water is somewhat polluted; ins f211 No. Tiru. 2./08. TIRUPATI. Samples takenBacteriological Analysis. 212 Sample I.213 Sample V.214 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS Sample No.2 Tirupathi Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 24.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 10.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 11.000 Chlorine Do. do. 0.710 Free ammonia Do. do. trace. Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. trace. Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.012 Nitrates Do. do. 0.289 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates trace. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 5 Tirupathi Physical appearances Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 36.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 14.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 15.000 Chlorine Do. do. 0.887 Free ammonia Do. do. trace Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. trace Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.009 Nitrates Do. do. 0.241 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates trace Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
215 No. Tiru. 1./09. TIRUPATI. Samples taken216 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSES. Sample I.217 le V.218 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. I. Tirupati Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colorless and clear. Smell. None Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 22.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 7.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 8.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.065 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0 002 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.009 Nitrates Nitrogen (as N2 O5 Do. do. 0.116 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. II. Tirupati Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colorless and clear. Smell. None Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 44.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 21.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 22.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.242 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.002 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0 003 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.009 Nitrates(as N2 O5 Do. do. 0.289 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
219 5 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. I. Tirupathi. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colorless and clear. Smell. None Quantitative. Total solids, Parts per 100,000. 36.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 16.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 17.000 Chlorine Do. do. 1.242 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.008 Nitrates(as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.154 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
GROUP B. IMPOUNDED SURFACE WATERS.
223 Number Adoni I./08. ADONI. Samples taken 30th July 1908. Remarks.224 Sample I.225 Number Adoni II/08. ADONI. Samples taken226 Sample I.227 REPORT. The water at Adóni has twice been examined, because the very unsatisfactory nature of the filtered water looked er suspicious. (i) The reservoir water (unfiltered) in both cases shows considerable pollution, f229 No. Adoni III./08. ADONI. Samples taken230 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I231 Sample V.232 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. 2. Adoni. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Greenish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids* Parts per 100,000. 20.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 6.250 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.250 Total hardness Do. do. 7.500 Chlorine Do. do. 0.710 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.009 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.062 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.320 Nitrates Do. do. trace. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates trace. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. *Contains much vegetable matter. Sample No. 4. Adoni Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly greenish but clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 18.400 Temporary hardness Do. do. 6.750 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.750 Total hardness Do. do. 7.500 Chlorine Do. do. 0.710 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.036 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.034 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.218 Nitrates Do. do. 0.096 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Trace. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
233 No. Adoni 1./09. ADONI. Samples taken234 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.e V.236 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No.I. Ad Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 20.400 Temporary hardness Do. do. 5.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 7.000 Chlorine Do. do. 0.710 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.034 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.075 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.282 Nitrates (as N2 05) Do. do. Trace Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No, IV. A Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 20.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 6.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 2.000 Total hardness Do. do. 8.000 Chlorine Do. do. 0.710 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.054 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.060 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy' Process) Do. do. 0.213 Nitrates (as N2 05) Do. do. Trace. Quantitative. Nitrites Present. Sulphates Do. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
237 Number Coon.I./08. COONOOR. Samples taken238 Sample I.REPORT. 239 The water of Coonoor being largely a surface water is contaminated to a considerable extent. There are f241 No. Coon. 2./ 08. COONOOR. Samples takenBACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. 242 Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 243 Sample No. 1. Coonoor. ysical ppearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish but clear. Smell. None Quantitative. al solids Parts per 100,000. 2.000 porary hardness Do. do. Nil. manent hardness Do. do. 0.500 al hardness Do. do. 0.500 orine Do. do. 0.284 e ammonia Do. do. 0.003 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.005 gen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.039 rates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. rites Nil. phates Nil. osphates Nil. on, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 4. Coonoor. ysical ppearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish but clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. al solids Parts per 100,000. 1.500 porary hardness Do. do. Nil. manent hardness Do. do. 0.500 al hardness Do. do. 0.500 orine Do. do. 0.284 e ammonia Do. do. Trace. minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.004 gen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.017 rates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. rites Nil. phates Nil. osphates Nil. on, poisonous metals Nil.
244 REPORT. (i) The sample taken from the storage reservoir is fairly pure water; f245 No. Coon. 1./09. COONOOR. Samples taken246 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSES. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 247 ple No. II. Coonoor. al arances. Colour and Transparency. Clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 3.000 rary hardness Do. do. Nil. ent hardness Do. do. 0.500 hardness Do. do. 0.500 ne Do. do. 0.355 mmonia Do. do. 0.004 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.007 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.056 (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. es Nil. ates Nil. hates Nil. poisonous metals Nil. No. IV. Coonoor. eal arances. Colour and Transparency. Clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 3.200 ary hardness Do. do. Nil. nent hardness Do. do. 0.500 ardness Do. do. 0.500 ne Do.do. 0.355 mmonia Do. do. 0.003 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.044 (as N2 05) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. es Nil. tes Nil. phates Nil. oisonous metals Nil.
248 REPORTS. The sample taken from the reservoir is of a fair quality only. F249 Number Mad. I. / 08. MADRAS. Sample taken250 Sample I.251 mple V.252 REPORT. The various sources of supply or the Red Hills lake could not be examined separately because some of these dried up. Samples I and III however are from two of such sources. The water in these shows a considerable amount pollution, but there are indications that it is not of recent nature. Sample IV from the discharging vent is very inferior in quality and shows contamination that is of a recent Samples VIII and V from the open channel are also highly polluted. Samples II, VI and VII are all from the distributary system show a great deal of pollution. Recommendation The whole source of supply will be thoroughly investigated next quarter. When the various supplies to the will be full.
253 No. Mad. II./08. MADRAS. Samples taken254 Bacteriological Analysis. Sample I.255 le V.256 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No.1. Sholavaram Lake Supply Chan Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 42.400 Temporary hardness Do. do. 12.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 13.000 Chlorine Do. do. 7.810 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.012 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.060 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 4 Boosikal chan Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 36.400 Temporary hardness Do. do. 11.750 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 12.750 Chlorine Do. do. 5.680 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.016 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.093 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 257 Sample No. 2. Sholavaram Lake. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 21.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 5.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 6.500 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.033 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.053 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 3 Sholavaram channel. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. White and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 19.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 5.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 6.500 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.031 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.045 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
258 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No.5. Maclean Channel Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish but clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 68.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 18.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 7.500 Total hardness Do. do. 26.000 Chlorine Do. do. 11.360 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.015 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.053 Nitrites Do. do. Trace. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 6 Red Hills La Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish but opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 13.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 2.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 2.000 Total hardness Do. do. 4.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.046 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.093 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 259 Sample No.7. Pipe line. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish but clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 11.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 2.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 2.000 Total hardness Do. do. 4.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.130 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.008 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.023 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.104 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. REPORT. I. Supply channel to the Sholavaram lake.261 Mad. 1./90. MADRAS. Samples taken262 QUARTERLY ANALYSIS. Sample I.263 le V.264 REPORT. Supply channel to Sholavaram lake.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 265 Sample No. I. Supply channel to Sholavaram lake. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 41.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 8.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.000 Total hardness Do. do. 9.500 Chlorine Do. do. 8.875 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.006 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.030 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.126 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. IV. Maclean's channel. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 49.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 10.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 3.500 Total hardness Do. do. 13.500 Chlorine Do. do. 9.585 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.023 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.048 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.141 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
266 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. II. Sholavaram lak Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 28.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 7.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 8.500 Chlorine Do. do. 5.680 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.029 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.121 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. III. Sholavaram chann Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 23.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 7.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 8.500 Chlorine Do. do. 5.325 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.033 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.096 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Trace. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
267 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. V. Red Hills lake. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 14.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 3.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 5.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.840 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.043 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.093 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. VII. Saidapet pipe line. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and hazy. Smell. Faint smell of sulphuretted hydrogen. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 15.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 3.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 5.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.840 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.020 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.016 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.067 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
269 Number Doty./08. OOTACAMUND. Samples taken270 Sample I.271 le V.272 Sample IX.273 No. Ooty. 2./08. OOTACAMUND. Samples taken274 Bacteriological analysis. Sample I.Bacteriological Analysis 276 Sample IX.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 277 Sample No. 1. Dodabetta, Upper. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly greenish and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 3.400 Temporary hardness Do. do. Nil. Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 0.500 Chlorine Do. do. 0.248 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.002 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.096 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Nil. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 2. Dodabetta, Lower. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly greenish and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 3.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. Nil. Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 0.500 Chlorine Do. do. 0.284 Free ammonia Do. do. Trace. Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.018 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Nil. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 278 Sample No. 4. Tiger . Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 2.400 Temporary hardness Do. do. Nil. Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 0.500 Chlorine Do. do. 0.248 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.007 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.014 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.032 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Quantitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Nil. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 6. Mar. Physical appearances Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 3.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. Nil. Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 0.500 Chlorine Do. do. 0.213 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.023 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.064 Nitrates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Nil. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 279 Sample No. 8. Old Ootie. cal earances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly greenish and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 3.600 orary hardness Do. do. Nil. anent hardness Do. do. 1.500 hardness Do. do. 1.500 ine Do. do. 0.497 ammonia Do. do. 0.002 minoid ammonia Do. do. trace. en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.013 tes Do. do. trace. Qualitative. tes Nil. hates Nil. phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 9. Kodappamund. ical pearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly greenish and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. l solids Parts per 100,000 2.600 porary hardness Do. do. Nil. anent hardness Do. do. 0.500 l hardness Do. do. 0.500 rine Do. do. 0.284 e ammonia Do. do. 0.002 uminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.007 gen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.040 ates Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. ites Nil. phates Nil. sphates Nil. , poisonous metals Nil.
281 No. Oct. 1/09 OOTACAM.UND Samples takenBACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. 282 Sample I.283 Sample V.284 Sample IX.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 285 ple No. III. Tiger Hill. cal earances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 2.800 rary hardness Do. do. nil. nent hardness Do. do. 0.750 hardness Do. do. 0.750 ine Do. do. 0.426 ammonia Do. do. 0.003 minoid ammonia. Do. do. 0.018 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.117 es Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. tes Nil. ates present. phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil. ple No. I. Marlimund. cal earances. Colour and Transparency. Colorless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 3.000 porary hardness Do. do. Nil. nent hardness Do. do. 0.750 hardness Do. do. 0.750 ine Do. do. 0.284 ammonia Do. do. 0.003 inoid ammonia Do. do. 0.017 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.109 tes Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. tes Nil. ates Present phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil.
286 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. IX. Old Ootacam Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 3.600 Temporary hardness Do. do. 0.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 2.000 Total hardness Do. do 2.500 Chlorine Do. do. 0.852 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.003 Albuminoid ammonia. Do. do. 0.003 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.013 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Trace Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Trace. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. VIII. Kodappa Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish but clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000 2.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. Nil. Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.750 Total hardness Do. do. 0.750 Chlorine Do. do. 0.568 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.006 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.032 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Nil. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
287 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. mple No. V. Dodabetta, upper. ysical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. al solids Parts per 100,000 2.600 porary hardness Do. do. Nil. manent hardness Do. do. 0.750 al hardness Do. do. 0.750 rine Do. do. 0.426 ammonia Do. do. 0.005 minoid ammonia. Do. do. 0.024 gen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.066 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. trites Nil. phates Nil. osphates Nil. on, poisonous metals Nil. mple No. VII. Dodabetta Lower. ysical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. tal solids Parts per 100,000 2.600 porary hardness Do. do. Nil. manent hardness Do. do. 0.750 tal hardness Do. do. 0.750 orine Do. do. 0.426 ee ammonia Do. do. 0.008 buminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.006 ygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.040 trates (as N2 O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. trites Nil. lphates Nil. osphates Nil. on, poisonous metals Nil.
289 Number Vel. I./08. VELLORE. Samples taken290 Sample I.291 REPORT. (i) The reservoir water is considerably contaminated; it contains fæcal bacilli in 1/10 of a cc.; this is obviously to pollution of the catchment area293 Number Ve1l. II./08. VELLORE. Samples taken294 Bacteriological analysis. Sample I.295 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I. [Vellore. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish. Opaque. Smell. Nil. Quantitative. al solids Parts per 100,000. 22.600 porary hardness Do. do. 5.750 manent hardness. Do. do. 2.000 al hardness Do. do. 7.750 orine Do. do. 0.532. ammonia Do. do. 0.012 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.026. ygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.104 rie nitrogen Do. do. 0.135 Qualitative writes Nil. phates Present. osphates Nil. poisonous metals Nil. Sample III. physical appearances Colour and Transparency. White. Clear. Smell Nil. Quantitative. tal solids Parts per 100,000. 15.400 Temporary hardness Do. do. 6.750 ermanent hardness Do. do. 1.750 tal hardness Do. do. 8.500 lorine Do. do. 0.532 ammonia Do. do. 0.005 uminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.009 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.033 trie nitrogen Do. do. 0.135 Qualitative. trites Nil. phates Present. Phophates Nil. ron, poisonous metals Nil.
296 REPORT. The water has in all samples very much improved in quality due to the recent rain filling the lake. The lake-water now contains f297 No. Vell. I./09. VELLORE. Samples taken298 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 299 le No. 1. Vellore. physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 23.200 ary hardness Do. do. 10.000 ent hardness Do. do. 1.500 dness Do. do. 11.500 e Do. do. 1.065 monia Do. do. 0.009 noid ammonia Do. do. 0.018 absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.052 (as N2 05) Do. do. Trace. Qualitative. s Nil. es Present. ates Nil. isonous metals Nil. No. 3. Vellore. physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish but clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. olids Parts per 100,000 21.400 orary hardness Do. do. 10.500 nent hardness Do. do. 1.500 hardness Do. do. 12.000 ne Do. do. 1.065 ammonia Do. do. 0.003 inoid ammonia Do. do. 0.010 n absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.047 tes (as N2 05) Do. do. Trace. Qualitative. es Nil. ates Present. hates Nil. poisonous metals Nil.
REPORT. 300 The sample of water from the lake is fairly satisfactory considering that heavy rains fell within ten days of being taken. F301 Number Viz. I /08. VIZAGAPATAM. Samples. taken302 Sample I.303 Number Viz. II/08. VIZAGAPATAM. Samples taken304 Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSES. 305 ample No. I. physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish. Opaque. Smell Nil. Quantitative. tal solids Parts per 100,000 27 200 emporary hardness Do. do. 3.500 rmanent hardness Do. do. 2.500 lal hardness Do. do. 6.000 orine. Do. do. 2.130 ee ammonia Do. do. 0.003 buminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.023 xygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.074 ie nitrogen Do. do. 0.038 Qualitative. rites Nil. phates Present. hosphates Nil. on, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. III physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly yellowish. Hazy. Smell. Nil. Quantitative. al solids Parts per 100 00 15.600 mporary hardness Do. do. 6.500 ermanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 hardness Do. do. 8.000 lorine Do. do. 2.10 ammonia Do. do. 0.003 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.009 xygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.012 ie nitrogen Do. do. 0.038 Qualitative. rites Nil. hlphates Present. hosphates Nil. poisonous metals Nil.
306 REPORT. The water in the lake is not improved by the recent heavy rain but is decidedly inferior in quality to the sample that was examined. This should not be the case if the catchment area was properly conserved. In other parts of Presidency the recent rains have had a beneficial effect on the supply in lakes where care is taken with the catchment area. (ii) The filtered water is very decidedly worse than last quarter. The beds are not removing anything like quantity of bacilli that they ought to do. The beds themselves have been inoculated with most objectionable f307 No. Vizag. 1/09 VIZAGAPATAM. Samples taken308 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.309 Sample V.310 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. 1. Vizagapa Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Yellowish and opaque. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per100,000. 15.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 6.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1.500 Total hardness Do. do. 7.500 Chlorine Do. do. 2.662 Free ammonia Do. do. Trace. Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.016 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.032 Nitrates (as N2O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. V. Vizagap Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Slightly Yellowish and hazy. smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 13.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 6.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 1:500 Total hardness Do. do. 8.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.662 Free ammonia Do. do. Trace. Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0 009 Nitrates (as N2O5) Do. do. Nil. Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
GROUP C. WELL AND SPRING WATERS.
313 No.Cuddap. I./OS. CUDDAPAH. Samples taken314 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.315 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS Sample No, I. Cuddapah physical apearances. Colour and Transparency. White and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 12.600 porary hardness Do. do. 2.000 anent hardness Do. do. 2.000 hardness Do. do. 4.000 ine Do. do. 0.710 ammonia Do. do. 0.003 uminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.005 en absorbed (Tidy's process) Do. do. 0.025 ates Do. do. 0.174 Qualitative. ites Nil. hates Trace. sphates Nil. poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. IV. Cuddapah. physical apearances. Colour and Transparency. White and hazy. Smell. None. Quantitative. al solids Parts per 100,000 11.400 porary hardness Do. do. 2.000 manent hardness Do. do. 2.000 hardness Do. do. 4.000 ine Do. do. 0.710 ammonia Do. do. 0.002 uminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.005 gen absorbed. (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.011 ates Do. do. 0.144 Qualitative. ites Nil. phates Trace. phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil.
316 REPORT. (i) The water standing over the gallery is not a usual condition; it is the result of heavy floods. The contaius f317 No. Cud. 1./09. CUDDAPAH. Samples taken318 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 319 Sample No.1. Cuddapah. physical apearances Colour and Transparency. White and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000 9.000 orary hardness Do. do. 1.000 ent hardness Do. do. 3.000 hardness Do. do. 4.000 ne Do. do. 0.710 ammonia Do. do. 0.004 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.024 Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. Trace. Qualitative. es Nil. tes Present. phates Nil. poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 4. Cuddapah. physical apearances Colour and Transparency. White and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000. 9.000 orary hardness Do. do. 1.250 manent hardness Do. do. 2.750 hardness Do. do. 4.000 ne Do. do. 0.710 ammonia Do. do. 0.003 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.015 Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. Trace. Qualitative. es Nil. tes Present. phates Nil. oisonous metals Nil.
320 REPORT. The water from above the Infiltration gallery shows considerable amount of pollution. F321 Number Dind. I./08. DINDIGUL. Samples taken322 A. Sample I.323 Sample V.325 No. Dind. II./68. DINDIGUL. Samples takes326 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 327 Sample No. I. Dindigul. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless. Clear. Smell. Ni1. Quantitative. I solids Parts per 100,000 46.000 porary hardness Do. do. 29.500 ment hardness Do. do. 1.000 hardness Do. do. 30.500 ine Do. do. 2.485 ammonia Do. do. 0.003 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.008 gen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.010 nitrogen Do. do. 0.675 Qualitative. es Nil. ates Present. phates Nil. poisonous metals 328 REPORT. (i) The sample taken from the well in the infiltration gallery shows a great deal of pollution329 No. Dind. 1./09 DINDIGUL. Samples taken330 Sample I.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 331 No. I. Dindigul. eal arances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Solids Parts per 100,000. 46.400 rary hardness Do. do. 29.000 ent hardness Do. do. 1.000 hardness Do. do. 30.000 ne Do. do. 2.485 mmonia Do. do. 0.003 minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.008 Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.675 Qualitative. es Nil ates Present. hates Nil. poisonous metals Nil. No. II. Dindigul. cal arances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and clear. Smell None. Quantitative. solids Parts per 100,000. 45.200 orary hardness Do. do. 29.000 manent hardness Do. do. 1.000 hardness Do. do. 30.000 ne Do. do. 2.485 ammonia Do. do. Trace minoid ammonia Do. do. 0.003 en absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.004 Nitrogen (as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.723 Qualitative. rites Nil. phates Present. osphates Nil. poisonous metals Nil.
REPORT. 332 (1) The sample of water taken from the collecting chamber in the infiltration gallery shows a considerable im ment in quality on previous quarters. The few bacilli present however are objectionable. (2) The sample taken from fountain No. 10 shows a very extraordinary state of affairs. The number of organisms is not great, but the varieties isolated are distinctly objectionable. The same remarks apply to the samples from the pipe line last quarter. A further investigation on this point will be undertaken. Chemically the water is almost identical with the last quarter. It is very hard.
333 Number Gun. I./08. GUNTUR. Samples taken334 Sample I.335 Sample V.337 No. Gun. II/08 GUNTUR. Samples taken338 BACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS. Sample I.339 Sample V.340 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Sample No. 2. Guntur. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and Clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 57.000 Temporary hardness Do. do. 5.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 16.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.485 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.004 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.010 Nitrates Do. do. 0.579 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. 5. Guntur. Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and Clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 56.800 Temporary hardness Do. do. 15.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 16.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.485 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.002 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. Trace. Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.009 Nitrates Do. do. 0.579 Qualitative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals
341 No. Guntur 1./09. GUNTUR. Samples taken342 Sample I343 Sample V.CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 344 Sample No. II. Guntu Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and Clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 61.200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 14.500 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 15.000 Chlorine Do. do. 2.485 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.002 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy's Process) Do. do. 0.009 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.772 Qualitatative. Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil. Sample No. V. Guntu Physical appearances. Colour and Transparency. Colourless and Clear. Smell. None. Quantitative. Total solids Parts per 100,000. 58 200 Temporary hardness Do. do. 15.000 Permanent hardness Do. do. 0.500 Total hardness Do. do. 15.500 Chlorine Do. do. 2.485 Free ammonia Do. do. 0.005 Albuminoid ammonia Do. do. 0.002 Oxygen absorbed (Tidy' s Process) Do. do. 0.012 Nitrates (as N2 O5) Do. do. 0.811 Qualitative Nitrites Nil. Sulphates Present. Phosphates Nil. Iron, poisonous metals Nil.
345 CENTRAL JAIL, TANJORE. Samples takenBACTERIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS 346 Sample I.IP/25/KZ.3 HERPETOMONAS LYGÆI (PATTON) AND CRITHIDIA GERRIDIS (PATTON) BY CAPTAIN W.S. PATTON, M.B., (EDIN.), I.M.S. BEING APPENDIX NO.2 TO THE ANNUAL REPORT ON THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, GUINDY, FOR 1908. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1909.
HERPETOMONAS LYGÆI (PATTON) AND CRITHIDIA GERRIDIS (PATTON) BY CAPTAIN W.S. PATTON, M.B., (EDIN.), I.M.S. BEING APPENDIX No.2 TO THE ANNUAL REPORT ON THE KING INSTITUTE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, GUINDY, FOR 1908. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74919746.tif]
APPENDIX No. 2. HERPETOMONAS LYGÆI (PATTON). In several recent papers I have drawn attention to the close resemblance between the pre- flagellate stages of certain Herpetomonads and the parasite of Kala-Azar. Although all the herpetomonads already known are considerably larger than the parasite of Kala-Azar and its two allies, the parasites of infantile splenomegaly and oriental sore, the striking resemblance between these organisms and the three human parasites has led to my undertaking a careful study of the life cycles of these insectan flagellates. In the present paper I propose recording my observations on a new species of Herpetomonas. Herpetomonas lyg4 On examining a flagellate which is about to divide longitudinally, the nucleus appears elongated and stains more deeply; the blepharoplast also is thickened and elongated (Figure 9). A small pink filament is next seen lying close to the root of the flagellum from which it appears to be entirely separate. This structure represents the early development of the second flagellum and seemingly is formed in the same way as the original one. It soon grows out towards the anterior end and on becoming free is intimately associated with the old flagellum. The blepharoplast now splits transversely and the two halves separate. At the same time the nucleus elongates and divides as described above. A clear line forms between the roots of the flagella, the anterior ends of the parasites separate and later division extends to the posterior ends (Figure 8). I have never observed any of these flagellates dividing unequally nor do they appear to divide more than once, as the majority are all about the same size and extremely thin forms were never seen. Post-flagellate stage.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74919755.tif] The Life Cycle of Crithidia gerridis.
5 considerable length. Their anterior ends are rounded and never pointed. They have three characteris- tic stages in their life cycles:6 Flagellate stage.7 immature stages of the parasite and that the adult flagellate of Crithidia gerridis is very similar in appearance to the adult forms of Crithidia fasciculata. In a recent paper (1909) I have defined the genus Crithidia as follows: