INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. No. 1369 Ex. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. FINANCE AND COMMERCE DEPARTMENT. SEPARATE REVENUE. Excise. RESOLUTION. Calcutta, the 21St March 1895. READ2 lasting from the 22nd August to the 6th October 1893, and a second tour, devoted chiefly to the examination of witnesses, lasting from the 25th October 1893 till the 25th April 1894. From this last date till August 6th, the subject was dis- cussed by the members of the Commission, and the report was drawn up. I.3 This statement is not quite accurate, as it omits the areas of cultivation of the States in Rajputana and Central India not mentioned in the table and the irregular kind of cultivation which is carried on in the Madras Presidency, the Garhjat States of Bengal, and the plains of the North-Western Provinces. There is also a considerable area of fibre cultivation in the Native States and in British territory in the Himalayas which has not been taken into account, and probably amounts to some hundreds of acres. Deducting the fibre cultivation, which yields but little of the drugs, from the total area given in the table, and making allowance for the narcotic cultivation which has been omitted, the Commission are of opinion that the total area of cultivation of the plant for the manufacture of hemp drugs in India does not exceed 6,000 acres, and this opinion may, the Governor General in Council considers, be accepted as sufficiently near the mark. Extent of cultivation and its tendency to in- crease or decrease examined province by prov- ince. 5. In Bengal the cultivation of plants from which intoxicating drugs are pro- duced is forbidden without a license from the Collector. The cultivation of the hemp plant is confined to a compact area having a radius of about 16 miles and lying in the three districts of Dinajpur, Rajshahi, and Bogra. There is a great advantage to the excise administration in confining the production to one area where economical and efficient arrangements can be made for supervising it. It is remarked by the first Assistant Supervisor of ganja cultivation that the cultivation is now included within a radius of about 14 miles, having been reduced from a radius of 20 miles since 1866, and the concentration of cultivation is accounted for by the fact that jungle has been removed and more land near Naogaon, which is the central supply depôt, has become available for cultivation. The area shown as under cultivation is the area in which the crop has finally matured. Eight hundred and twenty-four acres is the average area cultivated during the last five years. The area under ganja cultivation shows no material increase. Outside the ganja tracts the evidence gives reason to suppose that there is a certain amount of rear- ing of scattered plants. This desultory cultivation occurs everywhere, though it is not common anywhere, and is, of course, carried on secretly. In the places where the wild or spontaneous growth flourishes, detection is very difficult. This illicit rearing is most prevalent in the Bhagalpur, Patna, Dacca and Rajshahi divisions, and is rare in other parts of the province. In Kuch Behar the cultiva- tion of the hemp plant is prohibited, though secret cultivation is, perhaps, carried on to the same extent as in the surrounding British territory. In the Tributary States of Orissa it is notorious that a considerable amount of ganja and bhang is produced in the Garhjat, and it is largely consumed in the British districts of Orissa, being either smuggled or imported under pass. Although there is no regular field cultivation in the Garhjat, it is pretty clear that homestead or garden cultivation is quite uncontrolled and extremely common. In the political States of Chota Nagpur cultivation is under restrictions, which were imposed on account of representations made about smuggling into the Central Provinces; but still there is cultivation, though its extent is not known, and there is no decided evidence of increase in the cultivation. There is also some rude culti- vation in Hill Tippera. 6. In Assam the cultivation of the hemp plant is prohibited and the clandes- tine cultivation is unimportant. The plant sows itself and grows vigorously all over Assam, so that there must be some instances of desultory cultivation. In the Himalayan region, on the Northem Frontier, there is more or less skilful cultiva- tion of small patches in the immediate neighbourhood of homesteads, and this doubtless extends to the extreme north-east of the province and also to the lofty ranges towards the Hukong Valley and the north of Burma. The plant is also cultivated, both for fibre and drugs, in the Kachin Hills tract of Burma. 7. In the North-Western Provinces the hemp plant is very extensively cultivated in the Himalayan division, principally for fibre, but it yields charas, bhang and seeds as secondary products. There is also cultivation in the Farukhabad district and some cultivation in the Hardoi district, and there is scattered cultivation elsewhere. Cultivation is not actually prohibited, though there is an impression abroad that some prohibition does exist, which is based apparently on the existence of prohibition in the adjoining districts of Bengal. It
4 seems to be certain that the local production of ganja has of late years very considerably decreased. 8. In the Punjab the Himalayan cultivation resembles that of the North- Western Provinces, and in the south-west angle of the province there is a small amount of cultivation for the production of bhang, and the desultory cultiva- tion of a few plants is a widespread practice. There is no legal prohibi- tion to the growth of hemp. It is probably, however, discouraged by the fact that the sale of the produce is under regulation. Ganja is not smoked in the Punjab, its place being taken by charas. The evidence and other papers do not show that the cultivation is other than stationary. In no Native State in the Punjab is there any artificial restriction on the cultivation of hemp. 9. In the Central Provinces a system of licensing cultivation has been in force since 1873-74. Regular cultivation has been chiefly carried on in the two districts of Nagpur and Nimar, but up to 1878 licenses for the cultiva- tion of small areas were also granted in twelve other districts. Since 1890-91 it has been restricted to the western half of the Khandwa tahsil of the Nimar district. The normal area under cultivation is about 950 acres, and it has exceeded 1,000 acres only in four years. There may be some desultory and illicit cultivation in gardens and backyards, but it is never found in open fields. In the Feudatory States the cultivation is not allowed, but there may be some illicit cultivation, as in British territory. 10. In Madras accurate figures are not available and no accounts are kept; but the cultivation of the plant is not prohibited. It is impossible to arrive at any definite conclusion as to whether the area of regular cultivation tends to in- crease or decrease. The area under regular cultivation in 1893-94 was given as 345.25 acres. In the hill tracts there is no formal restriction of cultiva- tion, and cultivators are allowed to sell the produce to licensed dealers. In the Madras States the plant is found uncultivated in Travancore, and there is reason to believe that the spontaneous growth is associated intimately with cultivation, and that home cultivation may be presumed in all the States, though it is more common in Travancore than elsewhere. II. In Bombay the regular cultivation of hemp is carried on in the districts of Ahmednagar and Satara, and there is a small amount of cultivation in seven other districts. The cultivation is not burdened with any regular tax or license. Home cultivation is rare. Since 1889.90 cultivation has shown a steady decrease. In the Native States under Bombay there is no uniformity of system. In Sind the normal area of cultivation is 350 acres, and there has been a remarkable falling-off in late years in the Karachi district and the Khair- pur State. In Berar the cultivation of the hemp plant was not restricted till 1875, in which year a license fee of R8, irrespective of area, was introduced. In 1884 the license fee was raised to R10 per acre. The cultivation is in- significant, and is now confined to three districts. In the last three years there has been a tendency for the cultivation to increase, owing to the fact that the present production is not sufficient for the home market. 12. In Burma it does not appear that Burmans were ever given to the use of the hemp drugs, and there is on the whole evidence that cultivation is efficiently checked in the settled districts, though there is still some cultivation; and in the Kachin and Shan Hills there is cultivation for home consumption, and some quantity is smuggled into the settled country. In Ajmere cultivation is very small, though it is under no restriction. In Mysore the cultivation is prohibited in the station of Bangalore, but is allowed elsewhere under license. The area of cultivation is inconsiderable and the local production quite insignificant. In Hyderabad no license is required for cultivation, but the produce must be sold to the farmer of the monopoly. There are about 350 acres under cultivation. In Baroda there is very little cultivation. In Coorg cultivation is allowed under license, but no one undertakes it openly. In Baluchistan the plant is not cultivated to any great extent. In Kashmir the wild plant satisfies all requirements, and so it is said to do in Nepal, though there is some evidence of cultivation in Nepal, as from 25 to 50 maunds of Nepal charas are imported into Lucknow.
5 13. In Rajputana no attempt is made to control the cultivation except in Dholpur, and the plant is grown generally for the production of bhang wherever irrigation is possible. In Central India there are no restrictions on cultivation whatever in the State of Indore, though the area under cultivation is not large. In Gwalior there is a tax of R6 per acre on cultivation. The total cultivation is about 400 acres, and it has a slight tendency to increase, There is also some culti- vation in Dewas and other States, but most of it is irregular and probably for home consumption only. 14. From the above summary of the Commission's Report on the extent of the cultivation of the hemp plant, it will be seen that cultivation is prohibited in Assam, the Feudatory States of the Central Provinces, Burma and the Civil and Military Station of Bangalore in Mysore. The cultivation, except under license, is forbidden in Bengal, the Central Provinces, Berar, Mysore, Coorg and in the Native States of Dholpur and Gwalior. The Governor General in Council is of opinion that there should be one system throughout all the provinces of India in which the cultivation of the hemp plant is permitted, and this policy should be that of forbidding all cultivation, except under license. Cultivation should also, so far as possible, be concentrated into selected areas in each province, which should be no larger than is absolutely necessary. The same system should, so far as may be, be introduced in the Native States. II.6 sumers are classed as excessive. The yearly consumption of a moderate con- sumer is 35 tolas (9/10 lb. avoirdupois), and the individual amount consumed by each consumer is, distributing the amount taken by immoderate users over the whole number of consumers, only 40 tolas. A maund of ganja on an average suffices 15,000 persons of the total population of Bengal for a year. In the North-Western Provinces one maund of ganja suffices for 10,000 persons only, if the population of the Meerut, Rohilkhand and Kumaon Divisions, in which the drug is not used, be omitted from the calculation. In the Central Provinces 1 in 160 of the population consume ganja, and the daily ration is about ¼th of a tola. In Madras only 1 in 500 of the population are ganja-smokers, and in Bombay 1 in 220. Ganja is used principally for smoking, and so is charas. Bhang is used principally for drinking, and it is not used regularly like ganja or charas; it forms a refreshing drink in the hot weather; it is easily procurable, and it is difficult to furnish any statistics as to the extent of its use. Ganja is usually mixed with tobacco and sometimes with spices of various kinds, and occasionally, too, ganja is mixed with the seeds of the dhatura, opium, nux vomica, kanher root, hemp seeds, the root of the jowar plant (Sorghum), the root of rice, the juice of the madar, the skins and poison of snakes, and lastly with cantharides. Bhang too is mixed with other ingredients and sometimes with alcohol. Ganja and bhang are also eaten as well as drunk, and there is a considerable consumption of sweetmeats made with ganja, bhang and sometimes charas. Hemp is also sometimes compounded into cakes. 18. Confining attention to the more important provinces, it appears that the use of ganja is not on the increase in Bengal, notwithstanding that the popu- lation increased by 7½ per cent. between 1881 and 1891, and that liquor is much dearer than ganja in Bengal. In the North-Western Provinces the hemp drug revenue has increased from 4 to 7 lakhs, and it may be assumed that the use of the drug has increased. It must be remembered that the population has increased in the North-Western Provinces by five millions in the last twenty years, so that the increased consumption is in a measure accounted for. There is, moreover, an intimate relation between hemp drugs and alcohol; when alcohol is dear, the use of hemp drugs increases, and when alcohol is cheap, the use of hemp drugs decreases. Now, during recent years, hemp drugs have not grown dearer whilst the price of alcohol has been raised. In the Punjab the use of charas, which in this province takes the place of ganja, is on the increase, though the figures are open to some doubt, as the increase may be due partly to improved registration and to the increase of the population. In the Central Provinces the evidence points to an increased use of ganja. In Madras ganja is both cheap and inferior, and it is used much less than in Bengal or Bombay; the use is no doubt increasing. In Bombay little reliance can be placed on the figures of retail sale, and there is no satisfactory basis on which an opinion can be formed. As regards the minor provinces, the evidence is conflicting. It is found that there is little evidence of excessive use of hemp drugs in the Army. 19. On a review of the whole evidence the Governor General in Council is not convinced that there is anything to show that the use of hemp drugs is increasing in a greater ratio than can be accounted for by the growth of the population and by improved administration and means of information. As to the use of bhang, the information is so imperfect that no opinion can be formed whether it is increasing or not. Use of hemp drugs by religious devotees and ascetics and its employment in religious cere- monies. 20. The use of hemp drugs by religious devotees and ascetics and its em- ployment in religious ceremonies was one of the subjects to which the special attention of the Commission was directed. Paragraph 450 of the Report, in which their conclusions are summed up, may well be quoted at length7 Commission are of opinion that the use of bhang is more or less common everywhere in connection with the social and religious customs of the people. As regards ganja, they find that there are certain classes in all parts, except the Punjab, who use the drug in connection with their social and religious observances. The Commission are also of opinion in regard to bhang that its use is considered essential in some religious observ- ances by a large section of the community, and in regard to ganja that those who con- sider it essential are comparatively very few. The Commission have little doubt that interference with the use of hemp in connection with the customs and observances above referred to would be regarded by the consumers as an interference with long-established usage and as an encroachment upon their religious liberty. And this feeling would, especially in the case of bhang, undoubtedly be shared to some extent by the people at large. Regarding Southern India, the same remarks apply, with this reservation, that the difference between ganja and bhang as materials for smoking and drinking respect- ively is much less marked there, and the distinction between the two forms of the drug is much less clearly recognised, although by the term 'bhang' is generally meant the drug as used for drinking, and by 'ganja' the drug as used for smoking. ' 21.His Excellency in Council is prepared to accept the conclusions of the Commission upon this point. In this connection the following paragraph from Raja Soshi Sikareshwar Ray's dissent is worthy of attention:8 to moderate use, and when they are referring to excessive use. To say that excessive use causes harm to the smoker of ganja, is merely to say that there is a point, just as there is with the most harmless articles of consumption, where consumption becomes harmful, and therefore excessive. The real ques- tion is to what extent among the smokers of ganja the consumption of it is pushed to the point where it causes harm. And even in this respect further difficulties arise; for injurious effects, when they occur, often arise, not from the smoking of ganja pure and simple, but from the habit of smoking it mixed with other ingredients. As remarked by Raja Soshi Sikareshwar Ray in his dissent9 itself. Of 222 cases of insanity ascribed to hemp drugs in the lunatic asylum statements of 1892, only 98 are found, on careful enquiry by the Commis- sioners, to have any connection with them. The result is that of the whole number of cases admitted to lunatic asylums in that year, only 7.3 per cent. can be ascribed to hemp drugs, and if cases in which hemp drugs have been only one of several possible causes are omitted, the percentage falls to 4.5. Of course some cases in which the cause of insanity is entered as "unknown" may be due to hemp drugs, though the Commission put forward the view that there is little difficulty in ascertaining the existence of the hemp drug habit, and therefore do not reckon cases in which the cause of insanity is returned as "unknown" as cases in which the cause may be referred to the use of hemp drugs. But even if the percentage of cases in which the use of hemp drugs may be reasonably taken as one of the causes of the insanity be reckoned on the total admissions to asylums, and not only on the cases in which the cause of insanity is recorded as " known," still the percentage would be only 12.6. Moreover, the duration of insanity in hemp drug cases is shorter than in cases of insanity due to other causes, and temporary intoxication has been frequently confounded with in- sanity in the case of consumers of hemp drugs. Whilst allowing that hemp drugs do cause insanity, the Governor General in Council finds that they cause insanity in far fewer cases than has hitherto been popularly understood, and that the insanity so caused is usually of a temporary character and is of shorter duration than insanity which is due to other causes. (c) Moral effects of the use of hemp drugs. 29. The moral effects of the use of hemp drugs and the connection between hemp drugs and crime next come under discussion. Out of 700 witnesses 600 say that moderate consumers are not offensive to their neighbours, and the Governor General in Council accepts the conclusion of the Commission that moderate consumers are not offensive as a rule, and indeed are not distinguishable from total abstainers. As to the connection of hemp drugs with crime, the excessive use of hemp drugs may bring the consumer to poverty and so lead him to dishonest practices, and cases have been known in which excessive use of hemp drugs has induced to violent crime. There are, however, the Governor General in Council considers, no such marked ill-effects, physical, mental or moral, attendant on the use of hemp drugs as there were popularly believed to be before the present inquiry was made. V.10 course of time they could not fail to secure the assent of all intelligent members of the community. In the chapter of Mill's Political Economy which treats of the non-inter- ference principle, a distinction is made between two kinds of intervention by the Government-the one authoritative interference, and the other giving advice or promulgating information. And the following remarks are made regarding the former: 'It is evident, even at first sight, that the authoritative form of Government intervention has a much more limited sphere of legitimate action than the other. It requires a much stronger necessity to justify it in any case, while there are large departments of human life from which it must be unreservedly and imperiously excluded. What- ever theory we adopt respecting the foundation of the social union, and under what- ever political institution we live, there is a circle around every individual human being which no Government, be it that of one, or of few, or of the many, ought to be permitted to overstep: there is a part of the life of every person who has come to years of discretion within which the individuality of that person ought to reign uncon- trolled either by any other individual or by the public collectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space in human existence thus entrenched around no one who professes the smallest regard to human freedom or dignity will call in question: the point to be determined is where the limit should be placed; how large a province of human life this reserved territory should include. I apprehend that it ought to in- clude all that part which concerns only the life, whether inward or outward, of the individual, and does not affect the interests of others, or affects them only through the moral influence of example. With respect to the domain of the inward consciousness, the thoughts and feelings, and as much of external conduct as is personal only, involving no consequences, none at least of a painful or injurious kind, to other people, I hold that it is allowable in all, and in the more thoughtful and cultivated often a duty, to assert and promulgate with all the force they are capable of their opinion of what is good or bad, admirable or contemptible, but not to compel others to conform to that opinion, whether the force used is that of extra-legal coercion, or exerts itself by means of the law. Even in those portions of conduct which do affect the interests of others, the onus of making out a case always lies on the defenders of legal prohibitions. It is not merely a constructive or presumptive injury to others which will justify the interference of law with individual freedom. To be prevented from what one is inclined to, or from acting contrary to one's own judgment of what is desirable, is not only always irksome, but always tends, pro tanto, to starve the development of some por- tion of the bodily or mental faculties, either sensitive or active; and unless the con- science of the individual goes freely with the legal restraint, it partakes, either in a great or in a small degree, of the degradation of slavery. Scarcely any degree of utility short of absolute necessity will justify a prohibitory regulation, unless it can also be made to recommend itself to the general conscience; unless persons of ordinary good intentions either believe already, or can be induced to believe, that the thing prohibited is a thing which they ought not to wish to do,' These remarks have been given at length, because the Commission believe that they contain a clear exposi- tion of the principles which should guide them in deciding whether the prohibition of the hemp drugs should be authoritatively enforced by Government" Without feeling himself called upon to pronounce an opinion on all the psychological and moral considerations raised in the previous quotation, the Governor General in Council observes that in framing laws on sumptuary matters, Government ought to be careful to keep touch with public opinion and ought not to interfere in matters affecting the conscience of individuals, in which the exercise of individual freedom is not harmful to the public. In connection with such sumptuary matters it is also generally accepted that acts which are in themselves injurious to nobody except the doers of them should not be made penal, and also that it is not expedient to make prohibitions which cannot be enforced. Previous history of the action of Government with reference to hemp drugs, and question of prohibiting the use of these drugs because of their tendency to cause insanity. 32. The previous history of the action of Government with reference to hemp drugs is given in paragraph 556 of the Report. The policy of the Govern- ment is thus summarised:11 VI.12 Summing up the evidence, it is found that of 575 witnesses who have expressed a decided opinion on the subject of prohibition, only 99 advocate it (paragraph 569 of the Report). Amongst no class of witnesses is there a pre- ponderance of opinion in favour of total prohibition. 36. On the question of policy, the general conclusions of the Commission are contained in paragraph 585 of their Report:13 continuously for a long time, their effects are undoubtedly most ruinous. It should be remembered that it is the men of the poorest class generally, who cannot afford to pay for the luxury of spirituous drinks, who take to the use of ganja. It is also a fact that men who are naturally weak, and who suffer from some sort of bodily or mental indisposi- tion or discomfort, to obtain temporary relief generally indulge in ganja, at first in medicinal doses, and then gradually turn to be excessive consumers of the drug. This accounts for the fact why so large a number of the consumers of the drugs are often found to be in a most deplorable condition. On the whole, therefore, I am inclined to believe that the pro- hibition of the use of ganja and charas would be a source of benefit to the people." 40. He goes on to discuss the practical difficulties in the way of prohibition, and comes to the conclusion that the prohibition should, for practical reasons, be attained gradually and not immediately. After referring to a political phase of the question in a paragraph already quoted under paragraph 21 above, he says:14 Governor General in Council has arrived is that the evidence has been correctly analysed and its effect correctly set forth by the Commission in the body of their report. For this reason the Government of India, after duly considering the dissent of Lala Nihal Chand, do not find in it any reason to reject the conclusions which the Commission have reached as to the general effect of the evidence. 44. But again, even admitting to the full the arguments of the Lala as to the inconclusiveness of the evidence, the practical result must be that which the Commission have recommended. The question is whether the cultivation and sale of ganja products are to be taxed (and taxed as heavily as possible), or whether they are to be prohibited under a penalty. The prohibition of the use of ganja is, in the opinion of the Governor General in Council, an interference with individual liberty which requires for its justification the strongest and clearest evidence of the noxious character of the drug, both as it affects private persons and as it affects the public generally; it cannot be based upon evidence of which the most that can be said is that ganja is not proved to be harmful. The penaliz- ing of cultivation and sale involves, to the public generally, an amount of inter- ference, and only too probably an amount of oppression and harassment, which it would require not merely vague possibilities, but the strongest grounds of evident public advantage, to justify. 45. The Lala refers in his dissent to the decision of the majority of the Commission not to append to their report the replies given to their printed cir- cular of questions by the Commanding Officers and Medical Officers of Native Regiments, and by the witnesses who gave information as to Native States. The Commission have in their report stated the general effect of this evidence (see paragraphs 11 and 12); but as the subjects referred to were, by the express orders of the Government in one case, and by considerations of military adminis- tration in the other, placed outside the limits of the Commission's enquiry, they were unable to carry their investigations beyond the preliminary stage, or to supplement them either by local inquiries or by oral examination of witnesses; and it appears from the Commission's proceedings of 5th to 9th June, when the question of the treatment of this evidence was before them, that they felt them- selves unable to found very largely upon evidence which they had not submitted to these tests. For political reasons the Government of India do not consider themselves at liberty to publish the evidence relating to Native States; and that relating to the Army, as it contains particulars and details of a confidential character, can be published only after the elimination of names and regimental numbers. Under these circumstances, the Governor General in Council con- siders that the Commission were right in abstaining from appending the evidence as part of a report intended for ultimate publication. It has, however, been separately received by the Government. VIII.15 parts of India into harmony with these conclusions and generally improving the adminis tration, the Commission have made the following suggestions:16 miles in the Rajshahi Division. Every cultivator has to take out a license, for which no fee is charged. Within the area above mentioned, which, for the purposes of ganja administration, is placed under the jurisdiction of the Collector of Rajshahi, though it lies in the three districts of Rajshahi, Dinajpur, and Bogra, applications for licenses are granted, unless there be any valid objection, and remain in force for one working year. The average area of ganja cultivation is 2,220 bighas, equal to 740 acres. What follows is in the words of the Honourable D. R. Lyall, C.S.I., Member, Board of Revenue: 'The cultivation is inspected by supervisors throughout the period of growth, the areas cultivated being compared with the licenses. The cultivator cuts his crop not necessarily under the supervisor's eye, nor does he require to get permission, but he gives three days' notice of his intention to cut. The manufacture is done by the raiyat at his own option as to time and place. The supervisors move about and supervise the manufacture as far as they can. Practically the bulk of the manufacture is not completed under the supervisor's eye. When the manufacture is complete, the raiyat carries his produce to his own store under the latter part of Rule II of Section XX of the Excise Manual, page 155, there being no public godown large enough to receive the whole crop. A license is given to the raiyat describing the quantity and kind of ganja he is allowed to store, and authorizing him to keep it until he disposes of it to a licensed purchaser. The amount is arrived at by the supervisors by inspection of the crop after manufacture and the number of bundles into which it is manufactured. The crop is made up by the raiyat into 2-seer bundles, and by long practice the measure- ment is wonderfully exact, though it is done by guess. The raiyat's store is generally situated close to his manufacturing ground. The wholesale dealer comes to the mahal armed with a license from the Collector of his own district, giving the amount he is authorized to export. He makes his own arrangements with the raiyats, visiting any store be likes, and, as far as I know, unaccompanied by a supervisor or any excise officer. Having made his bargain, the dealer brings the ganja to the Government gola, where it is weighed, and the sale recorded on the back of the raiyat's license as well as in the Government books. No pass is required for the removal of the ganja from the raiyats' store to the Government gola. The dealer's consignment is sealed at the Govern- ment gola, and then carried by the wholesale dealer under pass to his gola at the head-quarters or sub-division of the place of import. There it is placed under double lock, one being in the possession of the dealer, and the other in the possession of the Excise Deputy Collector. The wholesale dealer sells to the retail vendor at his own price, and the retail vendor sells to the public at his own price, except in one district where a maximum limit is imposed under the terms of the arrangement with the monopolist. This district is Cuttack. The right of retail vend is sold by auction.'" The rules require that ganja shall ordinarily be stored in a public store- house, and that it shall only be stored in private storehouses as an excep- tional case, where the cultivator can satisfy the supervisor that he has a secure private storehouse of his own. As there is, at present, no public storehouse, the exception has become the rule. 50. Ganja is not ordinarily imported from any other British province into Bengal, but ganja grown in the Orissa Tributary Mahals (Garhjat) is imported under passes in small quantities into the districts of the Orissa division. The rules as to storage and levy of duty on Rajshahi ganja apply, mutatis mutandis, to Garhjat ganja. Any vendor licensed to retail Rajshahi ganja may sell Garhjat ganja under the same license. The Excise Commissioner states that Garhjat ganja is largely smuggled into Orissa, but with this exception, the growth and trade in ganja in Bengal are fairly under control. The cases of illicit cultivation are few; they are all of a petty description, such as the growing of a few plants (very often only a single plant) in the courtyards of houses, more for the purpose of using the leaves as bhang than for manufactur- ing ganja. Cases of unlicensed sale of ganja, though comparatively numerous, generally represent sales of the excised drug by petty dealers who have obtained their supplies from licensed vendors, and often arise from the licensed shops being too few to supply the local demand. 51. Charas is not made in Bengal, but a small amount is imported from Upper India under passes and is sold by licensed vendors after paying duty. 52. There is also no licensed cultivation of the hemp plant for the cultiva- tion of bhang in Bengal. Bhang is either imported from the North-Western Provinces or collected for the market from the spontaneous growth which abounds in Bhagalpur and in districts north of the Ganges, and especially Monghyr and Purnea. Legal possession, except by licensed persons, is limited to one-fourth of a sér, but there is no restriction on the use of the hemp plant in its green state. It is only when prepared to be used, stored, or sold as a narcotic or stimulant, that it comes under excise rules. Passes are required for the import or sale of bhang,
17 and the rules for its storage are the same as for ganja. Practically bhang is under little control, as is natural in the case of a plant which grows spontaneously over wide areas. It is observed that certain rules made by the Board of Revenue, with the object of extirpating the spontaneous growth, were cancelled by the Bengal Government as impracticable and tending to have no result, except petty oppression. The Governor General in Council is doubtful if the Commission are right in advocating this extirpation; considering the generally innocuous character of bhang, it hardly seems worth while, except where it interferes with the control of ganja production; but the Government of Bengal will be asked to re-examine the subject. The revenue from bhang has increased, but this is because the duty is low and not worth evading. 53. Wholesale licenses are issued free and the revenue is all realised in the form of direct duty and license fees for the right of retail vend at fixed shops only. The direct duties per sér levied are calculated on the actual weight of the drug issued, except in the case of charas, half the duty on which is levied at the time of taking out a pass for importation of the drug. 54. The weak points in the Bengal system of administration are said by the Commission to be18 with the drug at R3 per sér. It was contemplated in the agreement that the price might be raised by increments of 4 annas to R4 per sér, and the duty by increments of 3 annas to R2-12 per sér within the year 1880-81. At the same time the system of auctioning the monopoly of retail vend by circles was done away with, and monthly licenses were issued at fixed rates, varying according to the size of the town or village, and without limit as to the number of licenses existing in one place. This system, how- ever, was abandoned in the following year, and the auction system was again for the most part introduced. This was the origin of the system of monopoly of wholesale which exists to the present time in the Central Provinces. Since 1882-83, by which time Act XXI I of 1881 had become law, the wholesale monopolist has been called upon to pay a certain amount per sér in addition to the direct duty of R2 per sér, the rate varying in different districts and being generally determined by tender. Such tender is limited by the necessity of supplying retail vendors at R3 per sér to an amount per sér less than R1. The object of this measure was to fix the difference between the duty on the drug, R2 per sér, and the price at which it was to be sold to retail vendors, R3, at a figure considerably in excess of the cost price of the drug, and to put up the gross profits thereby secured to the wholesale vendor to auction in the form of tender. It was thought that this would practically raise the direct duty in the districts where the cost price of the drug was least, and so equalize prices throughout the prov- ince. Cultivation in British territories has been concentrated, and since 1891 it has only been allowed in the Khandwa tahsil of the Nimar district." 56. The defects in the Central Provinces system are, the Governor General in Council observes,19 some measures are urgently required for reducing the taxation of the different kinds of ganja which are brought into the province to some kind of uniformity. The need of remodelling the system has been fully recognised by the officers in charge of the excise; and the proposals of the Excise Commissioner, which have the support of the Member of the Board of Revenue in charge of excise, include the following measures:20 Defects in the system of administration in Madras and Bombay pointed out. 61. The Governor General in Council considers that both in Madras and Bombay the excise administration of hemp drugs might be greatly improved, and that the taxation in these two presidencies is capable of considerable development. The area under cultivation should be restricted in both presidencies, no cultivation should be permitted without license, and arrangements should be made in them for the supervision of the manufacture and storage of the crop in order to the imposition of a fixed duty on ganja in addition to the fees for licensed vend which are already levied. In Madras too the import and ex- port of the drugs must be placed under control. System of administration in force in some of the minor provinces and the Punjab. 62. In Berar, Ajmere, Coorg, and Quetta-Peshin the system should be assimilated to that in force in other prov- inces. In the Punjab an import duty ought to be levied on charas, it being provided that all charas shall be taken to bonded warehouses, and a duty, which the Commission propose to fix at R80 per maund, must be levied on all charas issued from the warehouses. The duty may, the Governor General in Council considers, be all levied when the charas is issued from the bonded warehouse; it does not seem expedient to make the duty in part payable on issue from the Punjab bonded ware- house and in part in the provinces to which the charas is removed, as this proposal of the Commission would tend to complicate the levy of the duty. The credit of the duty to the province of consumption is a matter of account that can be separately arranged. General recommendations of the Commission extending to all India, and orders of the Gov- ernor General in Coucil thereon. 63. The recommendations of the Com- mission, which are general to all India, are21 that no shop for the sale of hemp drugs should be opened without consulting the Municipal Committee, and in rural centres notice of the intention to open a shop should be given, and any objection to the establishment of a shop which may be brought forward should be considered, no shop being opened unless there is a real demand for the drug. (f) With regard to the maximum of possession, the Commission recom- mend that it should be fixed at 5 tolas for ganja and charas and 20 tolas, or ¼ of a sér, for bhang. This limit is reasonable, and the Governor General in Council accepts it. In Bengal, the adoption of this limit requires legislation. (g) A proposal to tax hemp drugs according to their strength has been made, but the Commission find that there are practical difficulties in the way of adopting this suggestion, as " the physiological value of the resin extraction present in all samples is not the same; and though two specimens may contain precisely the same percentage of resin extraction, it does not follow that the narcotic power of the drug would be equal, and also that the percentage of extraction in the drugs may vary from year to year;" and the proposal is not, in the opinion of the Governor General in Council, a feasible one. Incidence of taxation in different provinces should not vary much. 64. That the incidence of taxation in different provinces ought not, c22 same district is said to reach a maximum price of 2 annas per tola. With these exceptions, no district shows a higher maximum price than that given in the statement. It is evident that if the systematic treatment advocated by the Commission is to be applied, some means must be taken, especially in regard to ganja, of removing the extra- ordinary inequalities disclosed by this comparison. Up to year 1892-93, notwithstanding the high price of Rajshahi ganja, the cost of the daily average allowance of liquor to the habitual consumer in Bengal is, according to the memorandum, much higher than in the case of ganja. Judged by this test, there is room even in Bengal for increased taxation. A fortiori is this the case in other provinces except Assam. No doubt the quality of the drug varies in different provinces, but there is nothing in the analysis of the different kinds of ganja which points to such marked discrepancies in the price. And the general conclusion which must be drawn from these figures is that in all the provinces, except Bengal and Assam, taxation is totally inadequate to the due restriction of consumption. The same may be said of charas. As regards bhang, many witnesses are of opinion that there is no need to impose the same restrictions upon its consumption as in the case of ganja and charas, and the difficulty of doing so in the Himalayan region is considerable. But the Commission concur with the majority of the witnesses in thinking that the same general principles apply, and that, so far as may be possible, this product of the hemp plant should be brought under more efficient control and taxation. 66. The Governor General in Council recommends the study of this table to all Local Governments. Except in Bengal and Assam the incidence of taxation is very much too low in all provinces, and very notably so in both Madras and Bombay. The standard of taxation in Bengal should, in the absence of any special reasons to the contrary, be worked up to everywhere with due regard to the remarks made in paragraph 49 onwards, and in Bengal also the ques- tion of whether any increase in taxation is feasible should be carefully considered. Question of licensing the sale of ganja to natives of India in Burma. 67. The Commission recommend that the sale of ganja to natives of India should be licensed in Burma under pro- per control and taxation where there is a demand for it among such persons. The prohibition of cultivation in Burma, as well as the use by Burmans, should, the Commission recommend, be maintained. The Governor General in Council is assured that the prohibition of the sale of ganja in Burma is ineffectual so far as natives of India are concerned, and that there is a large illicit traffic in the drug which is demoralising to those who engage in it, and which the Government of Burma is powerless to stop. Under these circumstances, and having regard to the fact that Burmans have never taken to the drug, it seems to His Excellency in Council that it would be better that the existing demand should be met licitly rather than illicitly. The amount of illicit ganja seized in Burma is given in paragraph 693 of the Report, and shows that there must be a con- siderable traffic in the drug, and that in spite of every effort to keep ganja out of the country it will still come in, so long as ganja is wanted in Burma; those who want it will get it, though they have to pay highly for it and to incur some risk in obtaining it. Before, however, deciding to license the sale of ganja to natives of India in Burma, the Governor General in Council will refer the question to the Chief Commissioner with a view of ascertaining the opinion of the local officers on the subject. IX.23 of the use of hemp drugs upon their consumers, and the information which has been brought together on the subject in the Report of the Commission is of great interest and value, not only to Government and its officers, but also to the general public. 69. The acknowledgments of the Government are especially due to the three unofficial gentlemen, Raja Soshi Sikareshwar Ray, Kunwar Harnam Singh, and Lala Nihal Chand, who at great expenditure of time and comfort, and, in one case at least, at some risk to health, took part in the investigations of the Com- mission. The inability of the Governor General in Council to agree with two of these gentlemen, in the points on which they dissent from the views of their colleagues, does not diminish his appreciation of the care and labour they have bestowed on the task entrusted to them. ORDER.APPENDIX TO THE RESOLUTION. (See paragraph 43.) EXAMINATION OF THE EVIDENCE QUOTED IN LALA NIHAL CHAND'S MINUTE OF DISSENT. STATEMENT I. Social and religious customs. Extract from the Minute of Dissent: 36. I therefore hold that, as the public opinion (social or religious) is quite against the use of ganja and charas, as has already been shown, and as they have no connection with the social and religious customs of the people, none but a few of the habitual consumers will feel any hardship by their prohibition, and that class, too, for a time only. On the contrary, even the family members of the consumers will consider the prohibition of the drugs as a blessing to them. There will be no public discontent nor any interference with the religious and social customs of the people, if ganja and charas are prohibited. [ Here is inserted a quotation. ] 37. A few of the many witnesses are quoted in statement I, appended to this note, in justification of the above views. This statement I contains extracts from the evidence of forty witnesses, Among these witnesses are the following:2 of the god Shiva. The use is generally temperate, but is likely to lead to the formation of the habit." When cross-examined he qualified his reply to question 33, for he said: "Spiritual guides forbid the use of intoxicating things among their disciples, not among the people generally." 7. North-Western Provinces.3 18. Madras.4 4. Surgeon-Colonel Bovill, witness No. 109, in answer to question 45 says: "The habitual moderate use of bhang appears to produce no ill-effects, and in many cases that of ganja is equally harmless. 5. Behari Lal Pal, witness No 127, did not answer question 42. 6. Mir Kumar Ali, witness No. 130. Question 45: "Habitual moderate use of ganja or bhang does not produce any noxious effect, physical, mental, or moral, but such use of the former (ganja) impairs the constitution in some way or other." In answer to question 46, refers to excessive use only. 7. Bijoy Rutna Sen, witness No. 151, says: "The moderate use of ganja and charas is only noxious under certain circumstances." 8. Ganga Prosad Sen, witness No. 152. Evidence same as that of witness No. 151. 9. Trailokya Nath Majumdar, witness No. 140, does not answer question 42. 10. Prasad Das Mullick, witness No. 141, says in answer to question 42: "The moderate occasional use is harmless, except to those who are predisposed to insanity." 11.Nimai Charan Dass, witness No. 142 in answer to question No. 42 says: "I think moderate use is not injurious if taken internally for medical purposes." 12. Assam.5 ganja and charas do impair the constitution in the long run, specially of the persons taking low diet. Again, no attempt is here made to estimate the value of this evidence; but it is obvious that these witnesses cannot be quoted in support of the proposition that the moderate use of ganja and charas is deleterious. STATEMENT III. Opinions of some medical witnesses on effects. STATEMENT IV. Opinions of some witnesses on crime. The first of these two statements contains extracts from the evidence of 43 witnesses; the second from that of 102 witnesses. The evidence in question is analysed at length by the Commission in paragraphs 500 to 509 in one case; and in paragraphs 540 to 55 in the other. It does not appear what objections are raised to the correctness of the Com- mission's analysis. STATEMENT V. Political danger of prohibition. Extract from the Minute of Dissent. 86. I have given a list in statement V of some witnesses of position and experience, who state that there would be no political danger of the use of these drugs if prohibited. Of the 130 witnesses enumerated in this statement, 89 say that to prohibit the use of ganja and charas would cause discontent, which might be more or less serious, and 97 are opposed to total prohibition, either because they think it would be ineffectual, or because they think it would be an unjustifiable interference with the liberty of the subject. The reason why they think it would cause no political danger is because of the small number of consumers as compared to the total population. The Commission analyse in para- graphs 569 to 584 the evidence relating to prohibition; and their general conclusion is given in paragraph 585 of their report.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. Finance and Commerce Department. SEPARATE REVENUE. Excise. RESOLUTION. No. 1369 Ex. Dated Calcutta, the 21st March 1895. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. G. I. C. P. O.