BULLETIN OF THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF SOUTHERN INDIA. No. 1. 1908. PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE ASSOCIATION. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1909
TABLE OF CONTENTS. Section PAGE 1. The influence of cyllin on the virus of rabies 1 2. The diagnosis of rabies in inoculated animals 1 3. The measure of immunity against rabies in human beings 5 4. The measure of immunity against rabies in animals 7 5. The degree of infectivity of various parts of the central nervous system in rabies in relation to the treatment of patients 10 6. Negri bodies 13 7. On toxins in rabies 24 8. Histology of the blood in rabies 26 9. The susceptibility of Guinea pigs to rabies and the result of attempts at immunising them 28 10. The action of chloroform on fixed virus 29 11. The infectivity of the peripheral nerves in rabies 30 12. A method of estimating the percentage of chlorides in serum 30 13. The formation of a hæmolytic amboceptor in the blood of patients as a result of antirabic inoculations 32 References 33
STAFF. Director J. W. CORNWALL, M.A.,M.D., D.P.H., Major, I.M.S. Assistant Director A. G. McKENDRICK, M.B., Captain, I.M.S. Assistant Surgeon M. KESAVA PAI, M.B., C.M. Hospital Assistant S. RAMASAMY AIYAR.
BULLETIN OF THE PASTEUR INSTITTUTE OF SOUTHERN INDIA. 1. THE INFLUENCE OF CYLLIN ON THE VIRUS OF RABIES. BY J. W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAL. To determine for the purposes of the laboratory whether cyllin is a disinfectant to be relied. On to destroy the virus of rabies, which is at present inseparable from animal tissues and, therefore, from organic matter, a 1 in 50 fixed virus emulsion was passed through a sterile filter paper to remove the coarse particles and mixed in equal quantities with 1 in 200 and 1 in 400 emulsions of cyllin. After contact of 3 minutes at room temperature the mixtures, were centrifugalised and the sediment washed twice with .85 per cent. salt solution to remove the cyllin which had been found to have an injurious action when brought into contact with the cerebrum. Subdural inoculations of rabbits with these washed sediments were without effect, showing that cyllin in a dilution of 1 in 800 is capable of destroying the virus of rabies in from 3 to 5 minutes at the ordinary temperature. 2. THE DIAGNOSIS OF RABIES IN INOCULATED ANIMALS. BY J. W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAI. TEMPERATURE AND WEIGHT. There is no difficulty whatsoever in deciding whether a rabbit or any other animal has acquired rabies in the vast majority of instances when the typical symptoms appear, but there is a by-no-means negligible minority in which the diagnosis is far from certain, judged by the symptoms alone. An animal may present some slight signs of muscular weakness on the 6th or 7th day and die within a few hours. Another may remain apparently in excellent health for 20 days or more and then be found dead one morning. These are often the cases in which it is particularly important to know whether rabies was the cause of death or not. If street virus be in question then a microscopical examination of the brain and the discovery of Negri bodies settles the matter at once positively, but if a fixed virus animal is the subject sections of the brain cannot always be relied on to afford the required information, nor will a gross post mortem give positive, assistance. A subinoculation of the suspected brain can doubtless be performed with no uncertain result, but time is required and the test is not always practicable. Hence any additional indications of organic change peculiar to or commonly observed in rabies would possess a high value. With the object of accumulating some such points of evidence we began by ascertaining the daily variations in temperature of normal rabbits, and then tested rabbits subdurally inoculated with fixed virus.
2 The rectal temperature of normal rabbits varies between 101° F and 102° F. It may rise to 103° F or sink to 99.5° F without anything being wrong with the animals as far as one is able to judge. Chart 1 shows the mean daily rectal temperature taken morning and evening * of 24 rabbits inoculated subdurally with fixed virus. It will be noticed that the first sign of a rise in the temperature occurs at the end of the 4th day, that the rise is more pronounced on the fifth day and that the highest point is reached on the 6th day. Thereafter the fall is rapid till death occurs. Among these 24 rabbits the highest temperature recorded was one of 105° F on the evening of the sixth day. Some of the animals had a temperature of 103.6° F as late as the evening of the ninth day, while others fell to between 94° F and 97° F as early as the evening of the seventh day. In one the temperature remained betwen 90° F and 91° F for 48 hours before death, but it did not often keep below 94° F for inure than 12 hours. The temperature of the air was observed to have a considerable influence on that of the rabbits, since it was only when it fell to an average of 60° F that the very low subnormal figures were recorded. Chart 2 shows the mean daily variations in weight of 12 rabbits inoculated subdurally with fixed virus. Little change is seen until the seventh day, when a sharp fall occurs which is continued daily until the end. The interpretation of the temperature curve (chart 1) is not quite simple as regards its ascent. The fever may be due to one of two causes:[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74917825.tif] Curve showing the mean daily temperature morning and evening of 24 rabbits inoculated with fixed virus subdurally Chart I. S. O. 1909 Reg: No. 1633. Copies:BULLETIN OF THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF SOUTHERN INDIA. NO. 1. 1908. PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE ASSOCIATION. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74917828.tif] Chart 2. S.O. 1909 Reg: No. 1634. Copies:3 invariably, present; that its quantity was seldom great, never more than one-fifth of the volume; that the urine was almost invariably acid, occasionally neutral, but never alkaline; and that sugar was present in large amount in the majority. The urine of stock rabbits dying from other causes was seldom procurable in such large quantities, it was usually lighter in colour and more turbid it was generally alkaline or neutral, and rarely acid, it sometimes contained albumen but never sugar. As the stock animals often died of coccidiosis of the liver or ulcerative colitis or some other acute infection the frequency of albumen in their urine is not surprising, but death from such causes could not be confused with rabies. The urine of healthy herbivora is generally somewhat turbid, owing to earthy carbonates which dissolve on the addition of an acid, and alkaline or neutral, never acid, hence the acid urine of fixed virus rabbits is usually clear. It does not contain albumen or sugar. Further analysis of the urine of several of the passage rabbits showed that the coagulable proteid consisted almost entirely of serum globulins precipitable by saturation with magnesium sulphate. In a few there was also a trace of serum albumen precipitable by boiling after the removal of the globulins. The amount of globulin precipitable by different degrees of saturation with ammonium sulphate varied considerably. In one instance 21 per cent. saturation gave a considerable precipitate, and after filtration 30 per cent. saturation gave only a faint cloud, and 50 per cent. saturation gave another considerable precipitate. In three other instances 21 per cent. saturation gave only a faint cloud, 30 per cent. saturation gave another faint cloud and 50 per cent. satura- tion gave a heavy precipitate. In no instance was any one form of globulin present without at least some trace of each of the others. It may be concluded that the presence of albumen or globulins in the urine of a rabbit is not necessarily an indication of rabies as these substances may be found in many other conditions of diseases. If, however, albumen or globulin are found in a clear, acid urine which also contains a large quantity of sugar, the presumption is that the animal has died of rabies. The absence of sugar, though this is seemingly very unusual, does net on the other hand exclude rabies. The kidneys of all these passage rabbits were deeply congested, so that the pyramidal and cortical areas frequently appeared of a uniform tint. Sections showed that there was great destruction of the cells of the convoluted tubules; the glomeruli and collecting tubules were little changed. No opportunity has yet occurred to us of examining the urine of animals naturally infected by street virus, but albumen, sugar and even blood have been reported (1) in the urine of human beings suffering from hydrophobia. The importance of glycosuria in the diagnosis of rabies in herbivora has also been drawn attention to by Rabieux and Nicholas (7), but not having been able to refer to their paper we do not know to what length they carried their researches. Distention of the bladder is almost invariably met with in rabbits dying from rabies, but the phenomenon does not seem to be nearly as common in guinea-pigs, rats or dogs. Nor is the presence of sugar so usual in the three latter animals even when sufficient urine can be collected for examination. The presence of albumen in the urine of rabid animals is consequent on the condition of the kidneys, but whether the congestion is simply due to vaso-motor paralysis or to the attempted elimination of some toxin is still unknown. As for the sugar, it may be due to the direct irritation of the glycosuric centre in the floor of the fourth ventricle or to interference with the function of the pancreas, which has been shown to be infective in a certain percentage; or it is possible that the powers of assimilation are reduced by the inability of the animal to eat after the onset of motor paralysis, and that the blood becomes overloaded with sugar which then finds its way into the urine. The stomach and upper gut of rabbits dying from rabies are often laden with carbohydrate material, even when they have not eaten for 48 hours or more. The blood of such animals contains a quantity of sugar which we found easy to demonstrate by the following simple method. Collect about 2 cc of blood from the heart of the dead animal, which is always engorged, shake it up in a test tube with 3 or 4 cc of water or salt solution, boil, filter off the coagulated albumen and test the clear filtrate in the ordinary way with Fehling's solution. There may not always be enough sugar to produce a thick precipitate, but if the tube be allowed to stand for 5 minutes and cool a small quantity of the characteristic, yellowish, cuprous oxide will be found at its bottom. As a diagnostic test the presence of sugar in the urine seems to fail most frequently in the case of rabbits which show definite symptoms of rabies after the usual period of incubation and then die from some cause within 18 hours or so. Of two rabbits inoculated on the same day, which both showed definite symptoms of rabies on the 6th day and died about 18 hours later, the urine of one was loaded with sugar while that of the other contained none.
4 THE RETINA. We have found a further aid to the diagnosis of artificial rabies in the microscopical examination of the retina. Negri bodies are demonstrated with difficulty in the nerve cells of the brains of animals dying from fixed virus infection. It is not a little curious, therefore, that they should be so frequently present in the cells of the ganglionic layer of the retina in fixed virus infections as our investigations show. The histological method adopted will be described later in the section devoted to Negri bodies in general, in this place the point is that Negri bodies of variable size, mostly very small but sufficiently conspicuous to be recognised with a magnification of 500 diameters, have been seen in the great majority of the retinæ that we have examined of animals dying from fixed virus rabies, and that similar bodies have not been observed by us in the retinæ of animals dying from other causes. As this work was done purely for the purpose of ascertaining its value as a means of rapid diagnosis a prolonged search for the bodies in numerous sections was never made; they were found in looking the length of not more than three adjacent sections well and good; if not, the preparation was thrown away and the result entered as negative. TABLE No. 1 showing the results of the examination of the retina for Negri bodies in rabid animals. Animal. Number examined. Point of entry of virus. Negri bodies found. No bodies found. Numerous. Scanty. Fixed virus. Rabbits 24 Subdural 14 6 4 Guinea-pigs 32 Do. 23 7 2 Cats 1 Do. 1 Goats 2 Do. 2 Hents 3 Do. 2 1 Guinea-pigs 4 Subcutaneous 1 3 Street virus. Rabbits 2 Subdural 2 Guinea pigs 5 Do. 4 1 Cats 1 Do. 1 Dogs 2 Do. 1 1 Mus Rattus 4 Subcutaneous 4 Nesokia Indica 1 Do. 1 Rabbits 1 Sciatic 1 Dogs 1 Natural 1 The most striking things about Table 1 are, firstly, the number of negative findings in animals infected by the subcutaneous route and, secondly, the smaller proportion of positive findings with street virus as compared with fixed virus, although simultaneous preparations of the hippo- campus major showed abundant Negri bodies in all of these street virus infections. The numbers are evidently too small to allow any definite conclusions to be drawn; but the notion that a scrutiny of the eyes of dogs which have bitten human beings might come to replace that of their brains, which presented itself to us at an early stage, looks as if it will have to be abandoned, since no bodies could be found in the retinæ of the only two naturally infected dogs we have so far obtained. It is stated by Frösch (8) that the retina is not infective, but we have not made any experi- ments to confirm this. Frösch, however, omits to mention which kind of virus he is referring to. THE STOMACH. Another exceedingly common but not entirely specific macroscopic lesion in guinea-pigs, rats and rabbits dying from rabies is the occurrence of haemorrhages in the stomach. These may be only two or three in number and about 1 or 2 mm. in diameter, when they are usually found on the posterior surface of the cardiac end of the stomach At other times 20 or more similarly small discrete haemorrhages are seen. chiefly at the cardiac end. More rarely large irregular hæmorrha- gic patches are seen Microscopic sections show that there is necrosis of the whole thickness of the mucous membrane as well as exudation of blood at these points.
5 3. THE MEASURE OF IMMUNITY AGAINST RABIES IN HUMAN BEINGS. BY J. W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAI. It seemed a matter of considerable importance to endeavour to ascertain whether persons who have undergone the Pasteurian treatment or its modifications after having been bitten by a rabid animal are sufficiently immunised or not. It is probable that individuals differ considerably in the degree in which they react to the stimulus of the injections, just as has been found to be the case with animals which have been inoculated for the purpose of obtaining antitoxic or bactericidal serums. At the present moment we are quite in the dark in this matter as regards rabies, and the dosage of patients is accordingly regulated solely by the apparent severity of their bites, and there is no means of telling whether any particular man has had a sufficient quantity of the vaccine or whether greater security might be attained by larger doses or a prolongation of the treatment. It is possible that the deaths that occasionally occur in spite of the treatment might be pre- vented by a higher dosage; it is also possible that there is a certain number of persons who would never react properly whatever quantity of vaccine they might receive. Unfortunately with rabic virus no exact experiments can be made as with easily isolated bacteria; so the only possible method seems to be to measure the antagonistic action of the serum of treated persons on an emulsion of virulent brain in vitro by inoculating animals subdurally with the mixture. The method adopted was as follows. An emulsion of fresh fixed virus of a strength of 1 in 50, made with salt solution in the usual way, was filtered through sterile filter paper to remove the coarse particles. Preliminary gravimetric experiments had shown that filtration reduced the strength of the emulsion by a variable amount, so that it was impossible to state with exactitude the weight of brain substance actually suspended in the emulsion that was finally used. Starting with 1 in 50, the emulsion after filtration might be anything between I in 80 and 1 in 100. The filtered emulsion was then mixed in sterile test tubes with measured quantities of the serum on trial, incubated at 37° C for 1 hour, and thereafter injected subdurally. The time of contact and the temperature desirable had previously been determined by sundry experiments. Working with an antirabic serum, which always destroyed the virulence of fixed virus when mingled in the above described manner in the proportion of 20 volumes of serum to 1 part by weight of fixed virus brain in 1 hour at 37° C, it was found that:6 TABLE No. 3 showing the action of the serum of patients undergoing antirabic treatment on fixed virus emulsion. Number of patient. Day of treatment. Proportion of serum to virus. Virus destroyed or not. 66/07 10th. 15th (last). 200 to 1 150 to 1 No. No. 70/07 10th. 14th (last). 100 to 1 200 to 1 100 to 1 200 to 1 No. Yes. No. Yes. 74/07 15th (last). 200 to 1 No: 82/07 15th (last). 200 to 1 No. 108/07 11th 11th (last). 200 to 1 200 to 1 No. No. 121/07 10th. 14th (last). 200 to 1 200 to 1 No. No. As far as it goes the above table indicates that it is unusual to find evidence of any antirabic property in the serum of patients undergoing the ordinary course of antirabic treatment at this Institute, which then consisted in the inoculation of 1.35 grammes of cord substance, which had been preserved in glycerine, in a period of 14 days. The antirabic power of the serum of patient 70 in the proportion of 200 serum to 1 virus on both the 10th and 14th days of treatment may have been an idiosyncrasy on his part or may have been only apparent and due to experimental error. The evidence of an antirabic power in a serum, a negative experiment, is naturally less reliable than the proof of its absence by a positive experiment. In several of the tests of which Table 3 is a summary the serum of these patients actually seemed to be in some way adjuvant to the virus, inasmuch as it rendered the incubation period shorter than was the ease with the controls, though this may have been purely coincidence. It was scarcely expected that any antirabie power would be shown by the serum of patients while still under treatment, bearing in mind the relatively small doses of virus which are injected, though in the case of Goat C, to be referred to later, which received far larger doses some antirabic power was developed during the period of treatment. The next step, namely, to ascertain whether antirabic substances are developed in the blood of patients some time after the completion of their course of treatment is one somewhat difficult to accomplish, since the patients immediately depart to their homes generally hundreds of miles away. The only chance is to wait for patients who happen to live in the neighbourhood of the institute. TABLE No. 4 showing the effect of the serum of patients on fixed virus emulsion after the end of their course of treatment. Number of patient. Days after end of treatment. Proportion of serum to virus. Virus destroyed or not. 125/07. 10 20 200 to 1 200 to 1 No. No. 146/07. 10 25 200 to 1 200 to 1 No. No. 150/07. 12 25 200 to 1 200 to 1 No. No. 30/08. 60 200 to 1 No. It would appear from these results that the antirabie power of the serum of patients is not appreciably raised by means of the treatment either during or after the course. Working with street virus we found that normal human serum did not destroy it in the proportion of 200 to 1, that the serum of patient 33/08 on the last day of his treatment did not destroy it in the proportion of 200 to 1 and that the serum of patient 50/07 drawn 265 days after the end of his course was similarly ineffective in the proportion of 200 to 1.
7 4. THE MEASURE OF IMMUNITY AGAINST RABIES IN ANIMALS. BY J. W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAI. Employing the method described in section 3 we found that the blood of normal rabbits failed to destroy fixed virus emulsions in the proportion of 200 serum to 1 virus. Similarly normal Goat serum was ineffective in a proportion of 350 to 1 virus. It may be remarked by the way that all the experiments alluded to were rigidly controlled by simultaneous inoculations with fixed virus diluted to an equivalent degree with salt solution and kept under exactly the same conditions. Preliminary experiments, moreover, had shown that uniformly positive results are obtained with a filtered through paper fixed virus emulsion in dilutions up to at least 1 in 700, whereas in practice one seldom has occasion to use a dilution higher than 1 in 250. Few workers since Pasteur's time seem to have been as successful as he was in immunising animals against rabies by subcutaneous inoculations, but exact information is rarely available in the published records concerning the quantities of inoculum used, the weights of the animals, the virulence of the inoculum, the time occupied in the process and, lastly, whether the immunity was finally tested by fixed or street virus. In a detailed paper just published Prof. Claudio Fermi (33) of Sassari has been at some pains to tabulate most of the attempts at immunisation of which accounts have been written since Pasteur's day, and concludes therefrom, as well as from his own experience, that the possibility of immunisation against subdural inoculation with either street or fixed virus is not yet proved. As we have elsewhere remarked this is comparatively unimportant, as such conditions cannot occur in nature. We are concerned with the degree of immunity necessary to protect from the small quantity of virus which can be introduced by the bite of a rabid animal, and this unques- tionably is very much less, though possibly of a different quality, than the quantities frequently artificially injected to test immunity. Fermi's own experiments show that rats, weight not given, which have received from 10 to 64 cc, strength not given, of attenuated fixed virus, i.e., cords dried from 12 to 3 days, are not saved from a subcutaneous inoculation of fresh fixed virus weighing .16 gramme administered at some later period, whereas from 80 to 90 cc of the same material saved 100 per cent. Using the same attenuated fixed virus Fermi found that from 60 to 80 cc were required to save 100 per cent. of rats from subsequent subcutaneous inoculation with street virus. His rats must therefore have received from one-thirtieth to one-hundredth of their body weight of cord substance. To give an idea of the quantity of virus used to attain a state of serum immunity in rabbits and goats the following records, may be not without interest and value. The material used was always fresh rabbit or guinea-pig fixed virus cord or brain, generally the latter, emulsified in salt solution. Goat A8 Goat C9 Goat 410 Goat 3.11 of both cervical and lumbar cord, one batch of patients might get nothing but lumbar cord throughout their whole course and another nothing but cervical cord. The latter batch would therefore have received doses ten times as powerful as the former. In practice, so far as we know, no institute makes any difference between cervical and lumbar cord, all the fragments are classed alike. Some workers state that subcutaneous injections of normal brain substance produce as high a state of immunity as injections of fixed virus. Others state that no immunity follows injections of fixed virus the virulence of which has been destroyed by any agency. The same agency presumably also nullifies the immunising power of fresh nervous matter. If the former are correct, then in institutes which use fresh cords it does not matter to a patient whether he gets highly virulent cervical cord or lumbar cord of low virulence, i.e., approaching normal nervous tissue; if the latter, in institutes which use attenuated material, a patient who by chance got nothing but emulsion of lumbar cord would at the end of his course be in a far worse position as regards immunity than one who had received cervical cord throughout. It is just possible that some of the failures have been due to this cause. It has become a tradition to use only the spinal cord in the treatment of patients, but if the relative infectivities of the cord and brain are established there seems to be no reason why the brain should not be used as well, and many reasons why it should, notably the lessened number of rabbits that would be required. The brain of a rabbit weighs about 1½ times as much as the whole spinal cord, and, assuming that the brain as a whole is ten times as infective as the spinal cord as a whole, it is evident that 12 There is unquestionably good evidence for the conclusion that the cord in the lumbar region is somewhat inferior in potency to the cord in the cervical region, and that, if it is wished to secure uniformity of dosage to patients, either emulsions of the cord as a whole should be made or the pieces should be strictly labelled and care taken to administer to each patient as much cervical cord as lumbar. It is equally evident that parts of the brain are of greater infectivity than the spinal cord. One peculiar feature of the series in which dilutions of the whole cord up to I in 10,000 were compared with dilutions of the whole brain up to 1 in 50,000 was that, although the incubation periods were the same for both brain rabbits and cord rabbits, yet the disease was more rapid in its course by 36 hours on the average in the brain rabbits. The limit of infectivity was not reached by either dilution. Taking the three regions of the spinal cord separately in no case did a dilution of above, 1 in 5,000 prove to be infective and, whereas the regions of the cord gave 15 infections out of 33, i.e., 45.4 per cent., the regions of the brain gave 31 out of 43, i.e., 71.8 per cent. TABLE No. 6. Region. Dilution. Percentage of infections in subdural inoculation. Lumbar cord 100 to 50,000 6 out of 15 40.0 per cent. Dorsal cord " 4 " 9 44.4. " Cervical cord " 5 " 9 55.5 " Cerebellum " 7 " 15 46.6 " Motor cortex " 7 " 10 70.0 " Frontal lobe " 8 " 9 88.8 " Hippocampus" 9 " 9 100.0 " The cerebellum seems to be less infective than the cortical parts of the brain. Taking dilutions of an emulsion of the whole spinal cord of a fixed virus rabbit and of an emulsion of the whole brain of the same animal we found that dilutions between 1/5,000 and 1/30,000 of the cord gave 25 infections out of 42, i.e., 59.5 per cent., and that dilutions between 5,000 and 30,000 of the brain gave 12 out of 14 infections, i.e., 85.6 per cent. Putting together all the experiments performed we found that the spinal cord in dilutions up to 1 in 30,000 had an infection rate of 41. out of 77, i.e., 53.2 per cent., and that the brain in the same dilutions infected 40 out of 53, i.e., 75.4 per cent. Above 1 in 20,000 the infectivity of the cord is greatly reduced, but the brain between 1/35,000 and 1/100,000 still infected 17 out of 21 or 80.9 per cent. of the subdurally inoculated animals. From brain dilutions between 1/200,000 and 1/1,000,000 only one infection out of 18 resulted. When we examined the duration of the incubation periods in these experiments we found that the mean period for the cord inoculations in dilutions up to 1 in 30,000 was 9.1 days and that for the brain inoculations in dilutions up to 1 in 30,000 was 7.1 days. Further, between 1/30,000 and 1/1,000,000 the brain incubation period was 8.6 days. The percentage of infections after subdural inoculation with dilutions and the shorter mean incubation period both prove the higher infectivity of the brain substance, but it does not seem to us to be possible to arrive at a definite ratio between the infectivity of the brain and that of the spinal cord. It certainly cannot be reached by dilution experiments, for the mechanical difficulty of making a homogeneous emulsion of either brain or cord which will bear indefinite dilution without ceasing to be homogeneous appears to be insuperable. When high dilutions are made it becomes a matter of chance whether a particle of virus happens to be in the minute volume of fluid introduced beneath the dura mater or not. Hence the higher the dilution the more survivals there are, not so much on account of the small quantity of virus inoculated but more probably owing to its entire absence in a considerable proportion. This is borne out by the fact that when infection does occur after inoculation with a high dilution the incubation period is generally much the same as with a powerful dose, indicating that a particle of virus of some magnitude has been injected. There seems to be no sign of a regular lengthening of the incubation period corresponding to the dilution of the virus. Failing a method of correlating the infectivities of the various parts of the central nervous system with any reasonable degree of accuracy, it seems that the sole remaining way of utilising all the available material provided by each rabbit and at the same time making sure that the dose given to one patient is, if desired, of the same potency as that given to another is to emulsify together the whole brain and whole cord of each rabbit. The best practical method of preserving the emulsion thus procured is now engaging our attention.
13 6. NEGRI BODIES. BY J. W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAI. The presence of the bodies first described by Negri in 1903 in the cells of the nervous system of all animals, including man, which have died of naturally acquired rabies seems now to have been established beyond dispute, and so invariable is their occurrence that in some Institutes, e.g., Turin and Algiers, the microscope is exclusively relied upon to determine whether a suspected animal has died of rabies or not. No similar appearances have ever been noticed in the nerve cells of animals dying from other causes, or in healthy brains with the single exception of that of the cat to which we shall recur. Negri bodies are generally so numerous that an examination of a single section of the cortex, cerebellum or hippocampus major brings dozens or even hundreds into view. It has been affirmed that they are occasionally absent from the hippocampus while present in the cerebellum or vice versâ, but our experience has been that if they appear in the one they also appear in other parts. It has also been reported that they are occasionally so few and far between that a long search of many sections only reveals one or two. This has not yet occurred to us. That they tend to occur in clumps there is no doubt; for, in sections of cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum some parts may be found practically free while others will be crowded with the bodies. The hippocampus major is usually regarded as the seat of election of these bodies, and it is the part of the brain one naturally turns to in making sections for the microscopic diagnosis, but this is more on account of the number of large ganglion cells found in that situation, which renders the recognition of the bodies easy, than because it is the seat of a specific lesion. Nearly as many and nearly as large Negri bodies can be found in both the cortex and the cerebellum, but the size of the bodies depends on the size of the cell that contains them, and, though they are easy to see in the large hippocampal ganglion cells, the oval cells of the cortex and Purkinjé's cells in the cerebellum, they may be quite difficult to find in the small cell layer of the hippocampus and the small pyramidal cells of the cortex, and cannot be seen at all in the small cells of the cerebellum. When we leave the brain and examine sections of the spinal cord Negri bodies are not found with such ease, but a greater degree of degeneration of the nerve cells is met with than is common in the brain. The ganglia on the posterior nerve roots, however, with their large cells afford excellent pictures, and the degenerative changes induced by the Negri bodies can be studied here perhaps more easily than elsewhere. It is by no means the case, as some authors would have it, that the presence of Negri bodies has no effect on the including cell or that the bodies are seen only in cells that are apparently quite uninjured. Two or three bodies, it is true, may frequently be seen in apparently uninjured cells in which the cytoplasm, nucleus and nucleolus are all as clearly defined as in a healthy brain and it is in such cells that the clearest view of the inner structure of the bodies is obtained. One may find on the other hand numerous cells the nuclear structure of which has been entirely disintegrated, and the bodies, perhaps a dozen in number, which occupy the badly staining cytoplasm may be themselves in consequence ill defined. Other disorganised cells may be seen in which no bodies can be distinguished. A peculiar and most important difference between natural rabies and the rabies which has been passed through hundreds of rabbits subdurally and is known as the fixed virus of antirabic institutes is the fact that whereas Negri bodies are abundant and easily recognised in the former, in the latter they are either absent or so small as to be seen with difficulty. This finding is not upheld by other workers, although Negri himself started by announcing that he could not see his bodies in fixed virus brains. Bongiovanni (20) was unable to find Negri bodies in any of the fixed virus brains he examined even when the incubation had been prolonged far beyond the normal by the radium treatment initiated by him and Tizzoni. He considered that this disposes of the idea that the absence of the bodies can be accounted for by the lack of time for their proper development in the ordinarily rapid course of the fixed virus disease. Lentz (21) found them in fixed virus in 7 out of 20. Fursenko (22) found them is all of 10 fixed virus rabbits in hippocampus, cerebellum, medulla or cord, but he had a look over as many as 12 preparations from each situation. A few large forms were seen but most were small, from 114 Baschieri (25) found Negri bodies, small but characteristic, in fixed virus dogs. Mareschi (26) remarks on the rarity or complete absence of the bodies in fixed virus. Poor (27) found the bodies in 5 fixed virus dogs and 1 fixed virus guinea-pig. It may be concluded from these diverse findings that the demonstration of tiny Negri bodies in fixed virus animals depends chiefly on the methods employed and on the industry of the searcher. We have not seriously tried to determine whether merely an industrious search through numerous sections is necessary in order to prove without fail that certain animal died from fixed virus infection or not. This much however is evident, that a careful glance through one or two sections of a hippocampus, which is all that time usually allows when many other matters are in hand, does not as a rule suffice to make a certain diagnosis. Of the microscopic examinations of the brains of fixed virus animals which were made for various purposes we found small but distinct Negri bodies in the hippocampi of two rabbits, one goat and two guinea-pigs. The cerebellum of one of these guinea-pigs showed some of the Purkinjé's cells full of quite large Negri bodies such as might have been found in street virus.* None of the above quoted authors state distinctly whether the animals they examined had been infected subdurally or subcutaneously. Thinking that there might be a difference in the appearance of Negri bodies depending on the point of introduction of the infecting organism we examined the brains of a considerable number of animals which had succumbed tosubcutaneous infection with both street and fixed virus with the following results:15 Schiffmann (19) made a series of subdural passages through rabbits, starting with street virus, and states that Negri bodies gradually disappeared until at the 45th passage they were no longer recognisable. He states that a notable change was visible from the second passage, that the complex forms-first ceased to appear, that the hippocampus was clear sooner than the cerebellum and that the small round forms were the last to go. In order to trace the changes in the appearance of Negri bodies, we have also passed street virus through a series of guinea-pigs with the results shown in the following table. Except where mentioned all the passages were made from a piece of the cortex either fresh or kept in the ice box for 24 hours:16 Passage number. Incubation in days. Maximum size of Negri bodies found. 33 ... ... ... ... 5 5µ 34 ... ... ... ... 5 12µ 35 ... ... ... ... 6 7µ 36 (10 days in glycerine in ice box). 5 8µ 37 ... ... ... ... Died 6th night. 5µ 38 ... ... ... ... 5 3µ 39 ... ... ... ... 5 4µ 40 ... ... ... ... 6 5µ 41(5 days in glycerine in ice box). ... ... ... ... 5 8µ 42 ... ... ... ... 5 3µ A similar series of passages was made in dogs for the double purpose of ascertaining the progressive changes in the Negri bodies and whether the virus tends to die out in these animals, as Pasteur originally stated, or whether it tends to become fixed as recently maintained by Marie (10). The strain of virus used was obtained from a naturally infected dog but not the one employed in the guinea-pig series (Table 8). A delay between the passages sometimes occurred owing to difficulty in obtaining stray dogs. Where not otherwise mentioned the cortex, either fresh or kept for 24 hours in the ice box, was used for each inoculation. TABLE No. .9 showing the effect of successive passages of street virus in dogs on the incubation period and on the appearance of Negri bodies. Passage number. Incubation period in days. Negri bodies. 1 (11 days in glycerine in ice box). ... ... ... ... 15 Numerous and large. 2 (3 days in ice box) ... ... ... ... 10 Numerous and large. 3 (6 days in glycerine in ice box). ... ... ... ... 17 Smaller. Trypanosomes in subarachnoid fluid.* 4 (4 days in glycerine in ice box). ... ... ... ... 9 very small. 5 (2 days in ice box) ... 10 Tiny 1µ 6 (3 days in ice box) ... ... ... ... 11 None in H.M. Small in cerebellum. 7 ... ... ... ... 14 Cortex 1µ-2µ numerous. Cerebellum, none. 8 ... ... ... ... 8 H.M. and cortex 1µ 9 ... ... ... ... 9 H.M. Cerebellum. None. 10 (2 days in ice box) ... ... ... ... 9 Hippocampus Major Cerebellum. None. Cortex 1µ-2µ. 11 (2 days in ice box) ... ... ... ... 9 Hippocampus Major Spinal ganglia. Cervical cord. 1µ 12 ... ... ... ... 12 Hippocampus Major Cortex. Cerebellum, Spinal ganglia 1µ * Vide text below.
17 Passage number. Incubation period in days. Negri bodies. 13 ... ... ... ... 12 Hippocampus Major Cortex. Cerebellum. None. Spinal ganglia 2µ 18 always be recognised with certainty after the tissue has been soaked in glycerine two or more days. We failed after this procedure to recognise the bodies on some occasions though the inocu- lation was positive, but succeeded on others. Tissue fixed in alcohol 90 per cent. or formalin 5 per cent. will enable the bodies to be recognised provided that a volume of fluid, at least 20 times the bulk of the piece, be used, but one cannot rely on good preparations with either of these fixatives. A rapid diagnosis can generally be made by teasing out a fragment of a fixed hippocampus in water, when Negri bodies can be clearly made out in the isolated and unstained nerve cells. We have not relied on this performance for a positive diagnosis, much less for a negative one, but it has so far been supported by the finds in the stained sections. To demonstrate Negri bodies for certain the best all round stain seems to be Mann's watery eosin and methyl blue mixture. The bodies show up fairly well after staining with any acid dye and differentiating, but for routine use Mann's stain has certain advantages over them all. It is not necessary to adhere rigidly to the instructions given by Mann, two hours' immersion in the stain with subsequent differentiation is ample, though a stay of 24 hours if convenient does no harm. A more rapid stain is that of Unna which gives beautiful pictures and more structural detail than Mann's, but it is not so reliable for mere diagnosis. Rosanilin violet is at times a useful stain when no contrast colour is required. Half an hour in a saturated aqueous solution and differentiation in 90 per cent. alcohol depicts Negri bodies very clearly but without much detail. Some experience of it is desirable, otherwise errors may be fallen into. The internal structure of the bodies is best brought out by various manipulations with alcoholic eosin and alkaline methylene blue followed by differentiation in acid and alkaline alcohols, which cannot be repeated with invariable success, far less described. Instead of paraffin sections the smear and dab methods described by several writers should be of value when dealing with fresh, unfixed brains. Teasing out fresh hippocampus in dilute acetic acid does not often display very much. The large nerve cells are so delicate and their processes are so interlaced that they can seldom be freed from their connections in the fresh state. Such a preparation shows little but cell nuclei, which are tougher than the cytoplasm, and myelin globules. Dabs and smears19 One would naturally anticipate that, if the symptoms of the disease are due to the immediate influence of the bodies on the brain cells, they would be demonstrable concurrently with its outbreak, and one as naturally regards the bodies as organisms spreading from a centre and gaining in size until they have multiplied sufficiently to interfere with the vital activity of a large proportion of the cells of the central nervous system, when paralysis begins. The possibility of finding Negri bodies two days before the appearance of any symptoms, which we have just described, only holds good for subdural infections. It is by no means easy to prove what happens in natural, cutaneous infection, even when it occurs under supervision, on account of the variability of the incubation period; but analogy would lead one to suppose that microscopic changes would be evident in the brain before the cell destruction had reached a sufficient pitch for such a gross symptom as motor weakness to be detected. That the first symptoms are due to an invasion of the cells of certain parts of the central nervous system, depending entirely on the locality of the point of infection, and not to a toxin manufactured by the organism which has a specific action on nerve cells in general is, we think, made quite clear by the microscopic findings in the following case. A rabbit which had been inoculated with street virus from guinea pig No. 5 (see Table 7) in its left sciatic nerve displayed weakness of the hind legs on the 11th day and was killed on the 12th day and the parts sectioned. The medullated sheaths of the fibres of both sciatic nerves were broken up and the axis cylinders of many fibres were entirely disorganised. In the lumbar spinal cord there was considerable cell exudation round some of the blood vessels. Few unchanged nerve cells could be seen, but no Negri bodies. In some of the cells of the posterior root ganglia in the lumbar region small Negri bodies were plentiful, other of the cells were in process of being replaced by invading leucocytes. The bladder was enormously distended but the urine was not tested for sugar. No Negri bodies were to be found in the cervical spinal cord, but there were degenerative changes in the cells of the anterior horn and small hæmorrhages. No Negri bodies were visible in the hippocampus major. Here we have a distribution of the injuring agent corresponding to its position of entry into the body. The pathological changes were most intense in the region nearest the original focus of infection and became less marked the further off one looked. Unfortunately in the series set forth in table 10 the lumbar spinal ganglia were not sectioned, so we cannot say at what period Negri bodies reached the lower end of the cord, but on the day the bodies were first seen in the hippocampus the cervical ganglia were still free, so it is fair to assume that the lumbar ganglia were not involved until later. This case might afford ground for a modification of the view we expressed in commenting on table 10, that in natural rabies one would expect to be able to detect Negri bodies in the brain before they have developed sufficiently to cause gross symptoms, were it not that even here natural conditions are not by any means exactly reproduced, since not only was the infective dose larger than would be probable in nature, but also brain substance conveyed the organism and not saliva, possibly in another stage of its life history. It does not necessarily follow, therefore, that Negri bodies will be found in the brain of a dog two or three days before the outbreak of natural rabies, though it is to be confidently ex- pected that they Will. Nor does it follow because Negri bodies cannot be found in the early stages of artificial rabies at the end of the spinal column furthest from the point of their introduction that that portion of the nervous system is still free from disease and non-infective. Indeed the fact that the saliva has by several workers been proved to be capable of conveying rabies in nature several days before the appearance of symptoms would go to show that the infective agent has already spread itself widely in some guise or other. * * * * * Negri bodies have so far been found only in the cells of the central nervous system. They cannot be recognised in the peripheral nerves nor in any organ in spite of the fact that the peri- pheral nerves and the salivary glands are frequently capable of conveying the infection, and the pancreas, adrenals and possibly other parts more seldom. Stephanescu (28), however, has recently recorded the discovery of Negri bodies in the secreting cells of the parotid of a rabid dog and von Babes, who examined her preparations, confirmed the observation, noticing also similar bodies of various sizes in the lumen of a duct. Without denying the merit of this discovery it is as well to mention that we have carefully scrutinised the salivary glands in the few cases of natural rabies we have been able to secure and also in a good many artificial infections with both street and fixed virus without coming across any undoubted Negri bodies even when the glands were proved to be infective. We did find that Negri bodies were closely simulated in several instances by droplets of secretion in the cells which take the eosin stain. The similarity was sometimes rendered even more marked by the occasional appearance of structure within the droplets, even to the formation of a
20 perfect morula. Though at first glance deceptive there was never any real doubt that the forms we saw were not Negri bodies. * * * * * Returning to the presence of Negri bodies in the retina, which we brought forward in section 2 as a useful aid to diagnosis in doubtful cases, it may be worth while to describe the methods followed. In the first place the eye should be extracted as soon after death as possible, for the retinal elements quickly undergo destructive changes, though these are less noticeable in the cells of the ganglionic layer with which we are particularly concerned than in the more delicaté rods and cones. The eye may be fixed as a whole in acetic bichromate mixture or the retina may first be dissected out and fixed alone. We found the latter a tiresome procedure and usually fixed the whole eye. After fixation the retina must be dissected out and may either be made into a ball with collodion or lifted about as it is and embedded in paraffin in the usual way. The section should not be more than 4µ21 What may be the nature of these cell inclusions in the cat is an open question. There is no reason to suspect that they are parasitic if they are commonly found in normal cats both in Europe and Asia, but not in anyother animal. More probably they are some vestige of another structure such as the bodies known in cytological nomenclature as "plastids". It would, however, be interesting to learn if they can be found in other felidae, say tigers or panthers.* * * * * * In what does the difference between street virus and fixed virus lie ? If the former can be changed into the latter with certainty by subdural passages in suitable animals, should it not be possible to effect the reverse change and to cause the reappearance of the large and numerous Negri bodies ? The transformation of the large, easily seen Negri bodies, which are an accompaniment of the disease when its incubation period is long and irregular, into the tiny and difficult to recognise bodies, which are alone as a rule to be found when the disease has its incubation period reduced to a minimum and quite regular, is secured by subdural passages through susceptible animals. Pasteur found that 50 passages or so were required in the case of rabbits. Other workers have obtained a virus, fixed as regards its incubation period, by fewer passages, e.g., six, when smaller animals such as guinea pigs or rats were used, but, with the exception of Schiffmann (19) wh.o treats of rabbits, no one has recorded simultaneous observations of the alterations in the form of the Negri bodies which occur daring the progress of such series. (vide p. 15). Acting on the supposition that the large Negri bodies may only be developed when there is some resistance to infection, as is unquestionably the case when the subcutaneous route is chosen or when naturally resistant animals are subdurally injected, we made an attempt with rats, but failed. We next tried with guinea pigs, but in them subcutaneous inoculations failed after three or four passages, and in the brains of the ones that died none of the larger Negri forms were seen. Birds, as is well known, are remarkably resistant to rabies and it appearst hat even when successful subdural inoculations are made the virus dies out after a very few passages. TABLE No. 11 showing the result of fixed virus subdural inoculations in hens. 22 the retina they were plentiful and large, but could not be detected in the cerebellum though Purkinjé's cells were almost completely disorganised. Hen 2 was inoculated subdurally with fixed virus from another rabbit. Incubation 14 days, death five days later. In its brain Negri bodies were numerous but mostly small. In the Pons Varolii some cells were normal others quite disorganised. Some cells were crowded with bodies, the largest 3µ to 4µ in diameter, reminding one of spinal ganglion cells. There was much leucocytic exudation round the vessels. The retina contained bodies of fair size but not numerous. A guinea pig inoculated subdurally from hen 2 had an incubation of 11 days. In its cortex tiny Negri bodies were numerous and some cells contained the dark blue dots already mentioned as occurring in the ganglion cells of the retina of a street virus guinea pig. The hippocampus was unfortunately lost and no bodies were to be seen in the cerebellum, though Purkinjé's cells were much degenerated and there was a large amount of exudation round the vessels. No Negri bodies were seen in the retina. Hen 3, inoculated subdurally from Hen 1, had an incubation of 28 days. In its brain Negri bodies were numerous in parts, varying in size from 2µ in the cortex to 10µ in some of Purkinjé's cells. These large forms were not plentiful but they were indistinguishable from the large forms commonly found in street virus infections. The most striking feature visible in the brains of all three hens was the enormous amount of round cell infiltration in the neighbourhood of many of the blood vessels corresponding to the "Wutknötchen" of Babes, which are usually found in street virus but not in fixed virus infections. The retina also showed small bodies. It would appear that hens are sufficiently resistant to infection with a fixed virus having an incubation period of 623 The alteration from the large Negri bodies of newly transferred street virus to the minute and often invisible forms of fixed virus has also its analogy in the changes of form and staining characteristics which sometimes follow when bacilli are artificially cultivated. The probabilities are then, that fixed virus after having accustomed itself through many generations to an easy vegetative existence in the cells of the central nervous system cannot regain in a moment the properties which once enabled it to traverse the tissues from a wound until it reached the brain, and it therefore is comparatively innocuous when introduced into the system at a distance from the brain. Babes (30) in a long paper expresses his belief that Negri bodies as commonly seen in street virus brains are due to the entrance of a foreign element into the cell, leading to a hyaline, met- achromatic appearance and a kind of coagulation necrosis of the protoplasm, whereby the cell preserves its life, encapsulating the foreign element. The latter also throws out a capsule of its own. The presence of these bodies in the cells of the hippocampus major shows the latter to be highly resistant. He further remarks that no bodies are found in the medulla or anterior horn of the cord24 It is curious that the guinea pigs, though usually the more susceptible animals, had an incuba25 were emuls fied to 1 in 10 and allowed to autolyse in the ice box for seven days. The emulsion was then filtered through a Pasteur-Chamberland bougie F under a pressure varying between 2 and 3 atmospheres and the filtrate tested on guinea pigs both subdurally and subcutaneously (4.5 cc). No symptoms either immediate or delayed followed. Autolysis of fixed virus emulsion 1 in 10 under toluol for 48 hours at 37°C was also tried, and the fluid was filtered through a Berkefeld bougie without pressure. The filtrate caused no symptoms in guinea-pigs when introduced subdurally or subcutaneously (15 cc.). It may fairly be concluded that no toxin of any potency is present in the fresh brains of animals which have died from fixed virus infection, nor can a fluid be extracted from rabic brains, which have been subjected to a process of autolysis, which proves to be toxic in reasonable doses. We have made numerous experiments with the object of detecting some toxic substance in the organs of animals dead from rabies and of demonstrating the presence of some body capable of uniting with the amboceptor contained in antirabic serum, which may be summarised shortly as follows:26 serum gives rise to an "anti-rabbit-brain" amboceptor in the serum of the goats which is capable of being complemented by fresh sheep serum. This also occurs when normal rabbit brain is employed for the injections. The serum of a goat which had received 1/390 of its weight of normal rabbit brain substance subcutaneously and the serum of an untreated goat were kept for 52 days on ice to destroy the complement and to fall into line with a previous experiment. The serum of the treated goat was found to contain an anti-rabbit-brain amboceptor which was complemented by sheep serum, whereas the untreated goat serum contained none. It made no difference whether normal rabbit brain or fixed virus brain was used for preparing the emulsions for this experiment. 8. HISTOLOGY OF THE BLOOD IN RABIES. BY M. KESAVA PAI. There is no appreciable change in the number of red and white corpuscles. Enumeration with Gower's hæmocytometer shows that the average number of erythrocytes in a normal rabbit's blood is 7,548,000 per cubic millimetre, the counts ranging between 6,056,000 and 8,560,000. The high counts are very likely due to the altitude of Coonoor, about 6,000 feet above sea level. Daily enumerations commencing from the day of subdural inoculation with fixed virus up to the date of death gave counts varying between 7,016,000 and 8,320,000, the number bearing no noticeable relationship either to the period which had elapsed after the inoculation or to the stage of the disease. The average of the daily enumerations from the date of inoculation to death gave 7,741,000 per c. mm. as compared with 7,548,000, the normal count. Similarly the number of leucocytes which averaged 9,583 per c. mm. (ranging between 7,440 and 12,000) in health showed no definite increase or decrease after subdural inoculation, the mean of the daily counts after the operation being 9,485 per c. mm. (counts ranging from 7,320 to 12,480). Here too as in the case of erythrocytes no relationship could be traced between the daily leucocyte enumerations and the stage of the disease. An important change, however, occurs in the relative proportions of the different types of leucocytes. About the time that the initial signs of rabies manifest themselves the polymor- phonuclear elements begin to show an increase and the small mononuclears a diminution in their numbers, so that by the time the disease has well advanced the ratios in which these two types of leucocytes exist in the blood are, as it were, reversed. Thus the polymorphonuclears which form 27 per cent. of the total leucocytes in health average 45.8 per cent. when paralysis sets in and 68.4 per cent., 70.9 per cent. and 69.7 per cent., respectively, 24 hours, 48 hours and 72 hours after the onset of paralysis. On the other hand, the small mononuclears which form on an average 62.3 per cent. of the total white corpuscles in health decrease to 45.2 per cent. with the onset of the initial symptoms, the percentage going further down to 23.2, 19.2 and 22, respec- tively 24 hours, 48 hours and 72 hours after paralysis sets in. The following table shows the relative proportions of the different types of leucocytes of the rabbit in health and after the onset of rabies:27 TABLE No. 13. Type of leucocyte. Percentage on first day of paralysis. Percentage on second day of paralysis. Percentage on third day of paralysis. Percentage on fourth day of paralysis. Percentage in health. Small mononuclears ... ... ... ... 20 19.6 10.6 23.5 57.6 Polymorphonuclears* ... ... ... ... 71 76.9 85.6 72 34.5 Large mononuclears ... ... ... ... 5 1.5 1.8 2.3 2.4 Transitionals ... ... ... ... ... 4 1.6 1.2 1.7 1 Basophile polymorphonuclears ... ... ... 0 .0 .2 .3 0 Eosinophiles* ... ... ... ... ... 0 .4 .6 .2 4.5 Courmont and Lesieur (34) observed a similar increase of polymorphonuclears in lung smears from 45 per cent. in health to 95 per cent. in rabies. It was at first thought that this change in the proportions of the leucocytes of the blood might be explained, though partly, as an effect of starvation which invariably occurs in rabies, at first as a result of general paralysis preventing the animal from getting at its food and subse- quently when the muscles of masticationand deglutition are involved and the animal stops eating altogether. But the fact that the change is always noticed before starvation actually commences went against this hypothesis. It was however determined experimentally that starvation has no such effect on the leucocytes as is noticed in rabies. In one series of experi- ments one rabbit and one guinea-pig were each given a small morsel of moistened bran every 24 hours without any other kind of food and in the other series the starvation was carried still further by giving the same amount of food every 48 hours. That the starvation was not less severe than in rabies was indicated by the loss of weight undergone by the animals during the period of the experiment. A rabbit weighing 1,230grammes at the commencement weighed only 960 grammes at the termination of the experiment, a loss of weight which compares favourably with that occurring in rabies(vide chart 2). The subjoined tables which give the combined results of the two series of experiments give the relative proportions of leucocytes of rabbits and guinea-pigs before and after starvation and indicate that the changes noticed in the blood of rabies are not the effect of starvation (vide Tables Nos. 14 and 15). TABLE No. 14. Type of leucocyte. Percentage before starvation. Percentage after one day's starvartion. Percentage after two day's starvation. Percentage after three day's starvation. Percentage after four day's starvation. Percentage after five day's starvation. Percentage after six day's starvation. Percentage after eight day's starvation. Small mononuclears ... ... ... 74.2 55 76.5 75 75.5 75.5 80 66 Polymorphonuclears ... ... ... 21.5 35 16.2 22 13.5 16 15 21 Eosinophiles ... ... ... ... .5 1.5 1.3 0 2.8 .5 0 1.5 Large mononuclears ... ... ... 1.3 3 2.8 1.5 3.3 3 2 4 Transitionals ... ... ... ... 1.5 5 1.7 1.5 3.7 3 2.5 5.5 Basophile polymorphonuclears ... ... 1 .5 1.5 0 1.02 2 .5 2 Weight of rabbit ... ... ... ... 1,230 grammes. ... 1,130 grammes. ... 1,070 grammes. ... 1,010 grammes. 960 grammes. * The polymorphonuclears of the guinea-pig possess fine rod-like granules in the protoplasm. The eosinophiles show larger rounded granules staining a deeper pink.
28 TABLE No. 15. Type of leucocyte. Percentage before starvation. Percentage after one day's starvation. Percentage after two day's starvation. Percentage after three day's starvation. Percentage after four day's starvation. Percentage after five day's starvation. Percentage after six day's starvation. Percentage after seven day's starvation. Percentage after eight day's starvation. Small mononuclears ... ... ... 68.7 64 66.5 70 74.5 66 69 65 65 Polymorphonuclears ... ... 22.5 30 26 25 18 24 24 27 24 Eosinophiles ... ... ... 3.5 3 2.5 1 .8 2 0 1 0 Large mononuclears ... ... 2 2 2.8 2 2.5 2 4 5 4 Transitionals ... ... ... 2.8 1 2 2 3.7 6 2.5 2 7 Basophilo polymorphonuclears. .5 0 .2 0 .5 0 .5 0 0 Weight of guinea-pig ... ... 580 grammes. ... 480 grammes. ... 460 grammes. ... 400 grammes. ... 360 grammes. 9. THE SUSCEPTIBILITY OF GUINEA-PIGS TO RABIES ANDTHE RESULT OF ATTEMPTS AT IMMUNISINGTHEM. BY J. W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAI. A.29 (4) That some animals attain absolute immunity, resisting even two fixed virus and one street virus subdural inoculations during a period of nine months. (5) That other animals exhibit only partial immunity showing tremors and well marked paralysis of the hind quarters after the test inoculation, whether it be subdural or subcutaneous. This paralysis may completely disappear or become permanent. In either case the animal resists a further intraocular injection with street virus. (6) That in no case can one be certain of immunising a guinea-pig either by single or multiple doses of fixed virus against either subcutaneousor intraocular injection of first passage street virus brain. The susceptibility of the guinea-pig to both street virus and fixed virus limits in some directions its use in determining the value of modifications of treatment designed to be applied to less susceptible animals. On the other hand, a system which proved safe and certain in the case of the very susceptible animal could be fearlessly applied to the less susceptible. 10. THE ACTION OF CHLOROFORM ON FIXED VIRUS. BY J.W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAI. The object of this experiment was to ascertain whether it would be possible to preserve an emulsion of fixed virus for a few days by means of chloroform so that it might be distributed on occasions from a centre for local use. It is at present not practicable to prepare sterile emulsions of rabic cord substance. The usual methods of grinding the fragments in a mortar or pounding them in a conical glass, however quickly performed, allow a certain number of air-borne organisms to fall into the emulsion. Such emulsions cannot be bottled and sent out without a great risk of decomposition occurring, so any machine which could prepare sterile emulsions of differing strengths or any chemical which could inhibit bacterial growth without harming the vitality of the rabies organism would be of considerable value. A 1 in 50 filtered through paper emulsion of fixed virus was prepared and chloroform vapour bubbled through it for 20 minutes. Samples were then taken and sealed in glass bulbs. Sterile air was next bubbled through the emulsion until the chloroform was removed and further samples were taken. Rabbits were inoculated subdurally after the samples had been kept in the ice box for 24 hours and 7 days, respectively. TABLE NO. 16. Emulsion 1 in 50 fixed virus how treated. Result of subdural inoculation of rabbits with the emulsions. Incubation period in days. Series 1. Series 2. Series 3. 24 hours in ice box. 7 days in ice box. 24 hours in ice box. 7 days in ice box. 24 hours in ice box. 7 days in ice box. 1. Untreated emulsion as control ... 6 days ... 7 days ... 6 days ... 6 days ... 7 days ... Abandoned. 2. Do. do. ... 7 ,, ... 7 ,, ... ... ... ... 1. Emulsion treated with CHCl3 ... Survived ... Survived ... 7 days ... Survived ... Survived ... 2. Do. do. Do. ... Do. ... ... ... ... 1. Emulsion treated with CHCl3 and air bubbled through to remove it. Survived ... Survived ... 7 days ... 7 days ... Survived ... 2. Do. do. 8 days ... 8 days ... ... ... ... As shown by Table No. 16 sometimes the virus was destroyed by the chloroform and sometimes. it was not, and a greater effect was produced when the emulsion was sealed up saturated with the vapour than when the vapour had previously been removed by sterile air. In every case the samples were proved to be sterile as far as bacteria were concerned by plate cultures. Assuming the principle that in order to obtain effective immunity against rabies the material inoculated must contain the organism in the living state, and finding that it is more often destroyed by chloroform vapour than not, the experiment was abandoned. 8
30 This action of chloroform vapour on the organism of rabies indicates that it is less resistant to the drug than the organism of vaccinia, a point of some interest, if not of importance, considering that the two organisms appear to be related and are classified together in the order of Chlamydozoa by Prowazek (35). 11. THE INFECTIVITY OF THE PERIPHERAL NERVES IN RABIES. BY J. W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAI. TABLE No. 17 showing result of subdural inoculation of emulsions of various nerves derived from rabid animals in rabbits. Nerve used. Animal providing virus. Incubation period. Days. Animal providing virus. Incubation period. Days. Animal providing virus. Incubation period. Days. Animal providing virus. Incubation period. Days. Right sciatic upper half ... Fixed virus passage rabbit. 11 Rabbit which had died from a single subcutaneous inoculation with fixed virus. 9 Rabbit which had died from a single subcutaneous inoculation with first passage street virus from a naturally infected dog. ... Naturally infected street virus dog. ... Right sciatic lower half ... 10 8 15 Survived. Left sciatic upper half ... Died other- wise 5th day. 8 ... ... Left sciatic lower half ... 9 Survived. ... ... Right tibial ... ... 10 Survived. 18 ... Left tibial ... ... 11 Survived. ... 21 Right median ... ... Died other- WiSe 31stday. Survived. 19 ... Left median ... ... 10 10 ... Survived. Right vagus ... ... 7 8 ... ... Left vague ... ... Survived. 8 24 Survived. It would appear from this experiment that the infective agent is widely scattered throughout the peripheral nervous system, but that it is not present in a quantity sufficient to be uniformly fatal to rabbits in subdural inoculation of an emulsion of a portion of the nerve. Fixed virus nerves and street virus nerves tend to preserve their respective characteristics as regards the length of incubation, though this period is somewhat prolonged in the case of fixed virus. Un- fortunately no examination for Negri bodies was made. 12. A METHOD OF ESTIMATING THE PERCENTAGE OF CHLORIDES IN SERUM. BY J. W. CORNWALL AND M. KESAVA PAI. Not being entirely satisfied with the existing methods of estimating the quantity of chlorides in serum as regards either their accuracy or applicability, we devised the following procedure, which we have reason to believe meets the case, in that it combines with simplicity of manipulation as high a degree of accuracy as can be obtained when the end point of a reaction in a turbid fluid is indicated by a change of colour to be judged by the eye. All methods of estimating chlorides depend for their end points on a colour reaction and therefore give too high a figure, and this also applies when a large bulk of serum is evaporated to dryness and the salts are extracted from the residue after incineration. The figure obtained in this way after incineration approaches the actual as nearly as analytical chemistry will allow, and in the hands of different observers gives a range of 0.45 per cent.31 tubes are required for each specimen of serum and two for controls. A convenient size to use is 10 c.m. long and 12 mm. wide. The tubes are carefully washed in distilled water, dried, numbered and arranged in a rack 1, 2, 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B, 4A, 413, etc. Into each tube is put 1.5 cc. distilled water. To each of tubes 1 and 2, the controls, 50 c.mm. of .85 per cent. NaCl is then added. To each of 1A and 1B is next added 50 c.mm. of one of the serums, to each of 2A and 2B 50 c.mm. of another of the serums and so on. Then one drop of a 5 per cent. solution of pot chromate is added to every tube as indicator, and the contents are evenly mixed by shaking. A standard solution containing .2906 per cent. silver nitrate having been prepared previously, 420 c.mm. of this are dropped from a calibrated pipette fitted with a rubber teat into control tube 1. The yellow colour remains unchanged, 440 c.mm. are next dropped into control tube 2. This amount suffices to combine with the whole of the chloride present and to leave sufficient excess to give a distinct brownish tint of silver chromate in suspension. The silver nitrate solution is next dropped into each of the serum tubes in succession until, by comparison with control tube 1 in which the reaction is incomplete and control tube 2 in which it is complete, it can easily be judged when the end point has been reached. Tubes A and B of each serum serve to control each other. 280 c.mm. of silver nitrate may be added to each serum tube to begin with and then successive amounts of 10 c.mm., shaking well between each addition, until the right degree of brown colouration remains permanent. It is advisable to keep all the tubes, especially the controls, shaded from direct light until the estimations have been finished, for the precipitate of silver chloride rapidly blackens in the light and renders accurate judgment more difficult. Trials were made to ascertain what excess quantity of silver nitrate was required to give a definite brown tint in a chloride solution of known strength. Theoretically 50 c.mm. of .85 per cent. NaCl require 422 c.mm. of the standard AgNO3 solution for the completion of the reaction, and any excess quantity of silver goes to form red silver chromate with the indicator. In practice it was found that not until nearly 440 c.mm. of the silver solution had been added was the brown tint sufficiently marked to be judged by the eye. Therefore in calculating the percentage of chlorides in the serum 15 c.mm. was always deducted first from the quantity used, since this amount was required to give the visible colouration. Even then the method gives a higher scale of chlorides than is obtained by the incineration method. This, however, does not matter for comparative purposes since the results given by our method showed a remarkable degree of uniformity from day to day. For example we put up several specimens of a serum from a horse, and another from a rabbit in sealed pipettes and tested one of these from time to time along with the human serums. The percentage worked out to .63 per cent. or .635 per cent. chloride in each of the specimens of horse serum and to .68 per cent. or .685 per cent. in each of the specimens of rabbit serum, that is to say an error only appeared in the third place of decimals. In working rapidly it might be possible to make an error of one above or one below in the second place of decimals, and we believe that to be the extreme limit of the possible experimental error of the method, always assuming that the operator has practised it a few days and works with care. This work was undertaken with the object of ascertaining whether any alteration in the chloride content of the serum of patients undergoing the antirabic treatment in vogue at this Institute occurs. Harvey and McKendrick (36) working at the Kasauli Pasteur Institute showed by their method that patients treated according to Pasteur's system with dried, cords incurred a reduction in the percentage of chlorides in their serum, but that patients treated with fresh medulla diluted according to Högyes' system did not incur a reduction to a similar degree. After some trial of Harvey and McKendrick's chloride estimation method in watch glasses we abandoned it as it seemed more difficult and less accurate, and devised the test tube method described above, To obtain a standard for comparison we examined the serums of 48 healthy persons of various races with the following results:32 This table does not exhibit the difference between rice eaters and those who live on a mixed diet which McCay showed to be the case in Bengal, but it may be that the conditions of life on these hills (6,000 feet) tend to level up such differences. We thought it possible that some concentration of the salts of the serum might occur in persons arriving newly from the plains owing to loss of water from the tissues in the colder climate, so this point was tested before proceeding with the examination of the serums of our patients. Similarly the normal daily variations in the serum of residents in the hills was ascertained:33 finding corresponds with the quantities of nerve substance, containing rabbit R.B.Cs., injected into the respective goats. The cyllin preserved virus was evidently unsuitable for the purpose of causing the formation of hæmolytic amboceptors. Fresh human serum dissolves rabbit R.B.Cs. and its normal amboceptor, unlike that of goats, can be well complemented by fresh rabbit serum. The same experiment is on this account more difficult to perform with the serums of the patients, added to which the quantity of nerve substance injected into them and likewise of rabbit R.B.Cs. is very much less than the quantity injected into the goats. One would not, therefore, expect a very marked formation of rabbit hæmolysin in the serum of the patients, though there might be enough to measure34 (24) Williams and Lowden. Journ. of Infect. Dis. III., May 1906. (25) Baschieri. Quoted in Bull. de l' Inst. Past., 1906, p. 650. (26) Mareschi. Quoted in Bull. de l' Inst. Past., 1905, p. 789. (27) Poor. Proc. N.Y. Path. Soc. XXIV., 5th Oct. 1904. (28) Stephanescu. C.R. Soc. Biol. LXII. 1907, p. 877. (29) Luzzani. Zeit. für Hygiene, XLIX. 1905. (30) Babes. Zeit. für Hygiene. LVI. 3, 1907. (31) Remlinger. Annales de l' Inst. Past., 1903, p. 834. (32) Marie. C.R. Soc. Biol. LV. 1903, p. 1290. (33) Fermi. Zeit. für. Hygiene. LVIII. 2, 1907, p. 233. (34) Courmont and Lesieur. C.R. Soc. Biol. 1901, 1902. Quoted in Art. "Lyssaimmunität" in Vol. 4. of Kolle and Wassermann's Handbuch. (35)Prowazek. Archiv für Protistenkunde. X, 1907, p. 336. (36)Harvey and McKendrick. Scientific Memoirs by officers of the Medical and Sanitary departments of the Govt. of India No. 30, 1907, p. 34.
