M. 9 . b. I. P. IP/21/CZ.2 H
REPORT OF THE HYDERABAD CHLOROFORM COMMISSIN, WITH A PREFACE BY SIR ASMAN JAH, K.C.I.E., PRIME MINISTER OF HYDERABAD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE TIMES OF INDIA STEAM PRESS. 1891
PREFACE. IN presenting the Report of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission to the various Universities and Colleges, and to the Medical profession, I desire to express my regret at the delay which has unavoidably occurred in its production and publication. This delay has been partly due to the dispersion of the different mem- bers who formed the Commission, and partly, also, to the entirely unexpected character of the discussion on the results arrived at by the Commission. More- over, it was the wish of Surgeon-Major Lawire that the experimental data of the Commission should be subjected to the test of prolonged clinical experience. This test has been rigorously applied, with results which are set forth in detail in Part IX. of the Report, and which appear to be eminently satisfactory and conclusive. I agree in the view that free criticism and discussion are essential to the final acceptance of the principles confirmed or brought forward by the Commission. In accordance with this view, everything of importance, which has been advanced during the controversy to which the Commission's recom- mendations gave rise, has been incorporated in the Report. At the special request of His Highness the Nizam's Government, the Government of India deputed Surgeon-Major Bomford, of the Indian Medical Service, to serve on the Commission. I desire publicly to tender my warmest personal thanks, as also those of the Nizam's Government, to the President and Members of the Commission, as well as to the President, Surgeon Patrick Hehir, members of the first Commission, for the very efficient manner in which they performed their arduous but interesting work. To Dr. Lawrie is due the credit of originating the Commissions, and it affords me great pleasure to convey to him my own cordial acknowledgments, as well as those of His Highness' Government, for his disinterested labours. Our best thanks are also due to Dr. Lauder Brunton and Surgeon-Major Bomford for the thorough and
4 exhaustive manner in which they carried out the wishes of His Highness the Nizam, that the question of the safety of Chloroform should be brought to the proof in Hyderabad. I also desire to record my high appreciation of the work done by Dr. Rustomji on the Commission. In conclusion, it only remains for me to express the earnest hope that the results arrived at by the Commission may prove of service to the Medical profession, and may be attended with benefit to humanity. ASMAN JAH. HYDERABAD DECCAN, 11th September 1891.
REPORT OF THE SECOND HYDERABAD CHLOROFORM COMMISSION. Part I.2 6. The following letter explains the action of His Highness's Government with regard to the first Commission and the lines on which the experiments they performed were conducted: 3 without any fear of accidental death, if only the respiration, and nothing but the respiration, is carefully attended to throughout." 8. In forwarding the report to Government, Surgeon-Major Lawrie stated that " the results of the experiments harmonise with the principles necessary for the safe administration of chloroform taught by Mr. Syme, who never had a fatal case, and with my own experience, which is founded upon those principles. I have killed scores of dogs with chloroform, and in every instance death has resulted from failure of the respiratory function. I have also given chloroform in surgery, without a death, for more than twenty years4 and occurs in a late stage of the administration. The primary syncope is rarely, if ever, possible to induce in dogs, although, unfortunately, it is this form of chloroform heart failure which does occur in human beings, and which it is almost impossible to remedy. While welcoming the attention paid to the subject by the Hyderabad Commission, we cannot but feel that, should the Commission inculcate a disregard of the heart as a factor in chloroform dangers, it will do harm and provoke a slipshod carelessness in the use of that valuable anæsthetic which must in the long run do damage to the cause the Commission has espoused. [" The Lancet," May 11, 1889.] BY SURGEON-MAJOR E. LAWRIE, RESIDENCY SURGEON, HYDERABAD, AND PRINCIPAL, HYDERABAD MEDICAL SCHOOL. In "The Lancet" of March 2nd, 1889, page 438, there is an annotation criticising certain remarks of mine on the subject of chloroform in which the writer states that* " all those who are familiar with chloroform are well aware that syncope, when primary, as a rule supervenes in the initial stages of inhalation while secondary syncope due to respiratory embarrassment is the result of accumulation of chloroform in the blood leading to paralysis of the medullary centres, and occurs in a late stage of the administration," and that unfortunately it is the primary form of chloroform heart failure which occurs in human beings, and which it is almost impossible to remedy. I have no wish to say any- thing to give offence to those who hold the same views as the writer of the annotation, but I hold that those views are wrong, and that there is no such thing as chloroform syncope. It is conceivable that syncope may occur in the initial stages of inhalation of chloroform, but in the course of a very large experience I have never met with a single instance of such an accident, and if it ever does occur it cannot be due to chloroform poisoning, though it might be caused by fright or shock. Owing to the numerous accidents that have happened with chloroform, to the discussions prevalent in the profession, and to the mistaken notion that the risk of heart failure is inseparable from its use, the public dread its administration much more than they dread surgical operations, and fainting from mere fright in the early stages of inhalation is no less intelligible than it is easy to prevent, in cases where it is likely to occur, by a preliminary dose of alcohol. On the other hand, it is equally intelligible that syncope may be induced if an operation be commenced in the initial stages of chloroform administration, before the patient is rendered insensible to shock by being brought fully under its influence. With regard to secondary syncope, "The Lancet" states that it is due to respiratory embarrassment (through the respiratory centre;)5 on the principle taught by Syme and Simpson, in Edinburgh, and long before the Hyderabad Com- mission was formed, I had satisfied myself that they are entirely true.* The Hyderabad Commission was appointed by the Nizam's Government to verify or refute the opinion that if chloroform is properly given it has no injurious or dangerous effect upon the heart. The experiments of the Commission were performed publicly and with every precaution against inaccuracy, and the conclusions they arrived at are irresistible. The chloroform was given in every possible way, and in no case did the heart become dangerously affected until after the breathing had stopped. This is not, as " The Lancet" avers, a scanty statement of experiments performed upon dogs: it is a summary of the results of more than two hundred complete experiments carried out by the Commission, and it tallies exactly with my own experience. If direct heart failure were one of the risks of chloroform, it must have occurred in some of the administrations which I have superintended; but I have never seen the heart directly affected by chloroform, nor have I ever seen the inhalation carried so far in human beings as to affect it indirectly. Neither I nor the Hyderabad Commission have any desire to "inculcate a disregard of the heart as a factor in chloroform dangers, and so to provoke a slipshod carelessness in the use of that valuable anesthetic ". Our object is the very reverse of this, as a consideration of the difference between the position we take upon this point and that of those who hold the same views as " The Lancet" will show. " The Lancet" would trust to the heart and circulation for signals of danger in chloroform administration. Our contention is that, if the ad- ministration is ever pushed far enough to cause the heart to show signs of danger, the limits of safety have already been exceeded, and a fatal result must almost inevitably ensue. So far from disregard- ing the heart as a factor in chloroform dangers, we say that any affection of the heart, either direct or indirect, is the one danger to avoid. But we say further that the respiration invariably gives warnings when a dangerous point is approached, and consequently that it is possible to avert all risk to the heart by devoting the entire attention to the respiration during chloroform administration. I am well aware that these opinions appear to go in the very teeth of the conclusions at which the Commission appointed by the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society and by the British Medical Association arrived and " are opposed to the careful and painstaking experiments of such scientific observers as Snow, Claude Bernard, and McKendrick,"6 be guided as to its effects. Up to the time of his death Syme taught,* " we are guided as to the effect of chloroform not by the circulation, but entirely by the respiration." At the same time Erichsen was teaching, and still teaches, that7 attainments will ensure the acceptance of his opinions by the profession, the subject might be threshed out thoroughly, and the question whether chloroform does or does not affect the heart directly, and other questions connected with it, might be settled once for all. 5. His Highness's Government therefore desires to offer £1,000, a cheque for which is forwarded herewith, to the Editors of " The Lancet," to send a representative to Hyderabad to repeat and continue the experiments of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission and make with them any others that " The Lancet" chooses to suggest. 6. If His Highness's offer is accepted, the gentleman selected should take a return ticket by P. and O. via Brindisi for three months, to be extended if necessary, and he will be the guest of the Nizam's Government during his stay in Hyderabad. 7. The Hyderabad Commission undertake to place themselves entirely at his disposal, and will act under his direction. The Commission will provide all instruments and appliances and everything which may be required for the experiments, and will, without bias, do all in their power to assist the representative of " The Lancet" in arriving at the truth. I have, &c., ED. LAWRIE, SURGEON-MAJOR, Residency Surgeon [" The Lancet," September 21, 1889.] On another page we print Surgeon-Major Lawrie's letter containing details of His Highness the Nizam of Hyderabad's offer to place at the disposal of "The Lancet," as the leading medical journal, the sum of £1,000 to send out a representative to repeat the experiments of the Hyderabad Chloro- form Commission, and to make any others that we may suggest. This offer we have cheerfully accepted. There are many young men of great ability and thorough scientific training who could have done this work exceedingly well; but in accordance with the Nizam's desire that we should select a man who is not only a trained scientist, but one whose position and attainments will ensure the acceptance of his opinions by the profession, we have requested Dr. Lauder Brunton, F.R.S., to act as our representative, and he has consented to set out for Hyderabad on October 4th, which is the earliest possible opportunity. Dr. Lauder Brunton has not only devoted much time to phar- macological work for more than twenty years, his first contribution on the action of nitrite of amyl having appeared in our columns in 1867; but the fact that his large work on " Pharmacology and Therapeutics," which appears also in an American edition, has been translated into French, and is now being translated into German, Italian, and Spanish, shows that he is regarded as an authority in other countries as well as our own. It may perhaps be considered as a farther advantage that in this work Dr. Lauder Brunton has very decidedly stated that one of the dangers resulting from chloroform is death by stoppage of the heart. " Audi alteram partem" is the motto of an important section of " The Lancet," and we think that by getting both opinions regarding the effect of chloro- form on the heart represented on the Commission, as they will be by Dr. Lauder Brunton and Surgeon- Major Lawrie, we are more likely to obtain a correct conclusion, The question whether chloroform paralyses the heart or not is one of the greatest possible practical importance, for upon its correct
8 solution the lives of thousands of people and the happiness of thousands of families may depend. Both in Europe and America clinical experience and physiological experiments have led to the con- clusion that it has a paralysing action on the heart, while ether exerts such an action in a very minor degree, if at all. In consequence of this ether is now largely used in this country as well as in America for producing anæsthesia in surgical operations, in spite of the greater pleasantness and convenience of chloroform. It is almost impossible to believe that the conclusion at which European and Ameri- can surgeons and scientists have arrived is, after all, destitute of foundation, and little better than all idle dream. When we find, then, that Dr. Lawrie and the Nizam's Commission have arrived at an entirely opposite conclusion, it is natural that we should hesitate to accept it. A consideration of the report of the Commission appears to show that the number of experiments performed was not only large, but the results were so uniform that the conclusion arrived at,viz., that chloroform does not paralyse the heart, but kills by stopping the respiration, may fairly be taken as correct for the animals experimented on and for the conditions under which the experiments were performed. But if we grant this, we are at once confronted by the next problem: Why do the results of the Nizam's Commission differ from those of European and American investigators? Is it because the experi- ments in India were carried on in a warmer climate? Or is it because the animals experimented on were peculiarly resistant to the action of chloroform? These questions can only be answered by further experiments, which can hardly fail to be of practical utility, even if they afford only a partial solution of the problem. For Surgeon-Major Lawrie states in his letter, which appeared in our issue of May 11th, that the results of the experiments carried out by the Commission tallied exactly with his own experience. In the correspondence which occurred on the subject in "The Lancet" some writers agreed with Dr. Lawrie, while others supported the opposite view. We may perhaps fairly call these two views those of the Edinburgh and London schools. In the Scotch capital failure of respiration is regarded as the chief or only danger, while in the metropolis failure of the heart is more feared. It is quite possible that the surgeons in both cities are right, and that the habits or mode of living of the people may lead to differences in the resisting power of the cardiac or respiratory appa- ratus respectively. The proportion of gouty patients is much larger in London than in Edinburgh, and when we consider that the natives of India appear to resemble the Scotch in their comparative immunity from cardiac paralysis by chloroform, it will be advisable for the Commission to ascertain, if possible, what the conditions are which enable the heart either in dogs or men to resist the power of chloroform or which lead to its stoppage dulling the administration of the drug. It may not be possible to work out completely all the questions which may arise, but if the Hyderabad Commission, with the aid of Dr. Lauder Brunton, can settle definitely the question whether chloroform does or does not affect the heart directly, a most important practical object will have been attained by means of the Nizam's generous offer. 10. The opinions held by the medical profession in Great Britain may be fairly judged from the above quotations from " The Lancet." There is no doubt they were and are largely influenced by the experimental results obtained by various observers, and more especially by the Committee of the Royal Medico- Chirurgical Society and of the British Medical Association or Glasgow Com- mittee. Both these Committees arrived at the conclusion, from a very limited number of experiments, that chloroform lowers the blood-pressure, while ether does not, The Glasgow Committee went further, and not only stated that
9 chloroform lowers the blood-pressure and paralyses the heart, which ether never does, but drew the important conclusion from experiments on one dog only that this action is sometimes exerted in an unexpected and capricious manner. 11. The state of opinion regarding chloroform in America may be inferred from the statements made regarding it in the last edition of H. C. Wood's "Therapeutics," one of the best American works on the subject. He says "As an anæsthetic chloroform possesses the advantages of quickness and pleasantness of operation, smallness of dose, and cheapness. These advantages are, however, so out-balanced by the dangers which attend its use that its employment under ordinary circumstances is unjustifiable, It kills without warning so suddenly that no forethought or skill can guard against the fatal result. It kills alike the robust and the weak, the well and the diseased; even the previous safe passage through one or more inhalations is no guarantee against its lethal action. Statistics seem to indicate a mortality of about one in three thousand inhalations, and hundreds of utterly unnecessary deaths have been produced by the extra- ordinary persistence in its use of a portion of the profession. It ought never to be employed except under special circumstances, as when a speedy action is desired in puerperal eclampsia or when the more bulky anæsthetics cannot be transported as in the field in war time.10 ether as well as of chloroform, and it is not the deaths during operations, but the observations on blood-pressure and on the action of chloroform on the exposed or excised heart which have led to the unfounded dread in the profession that it may paralyse this organ when given as an anæsthetic. 13. But there is still another difficulty;11 14. Dr. Lauder Brunton and Surgeon-Major Bomford arrived in Hyderabad on the 21st of October 1889, and the second Commission was constituted at once as follows:12 work of the first Commission. From No. 29 the Committee were employed principally with blood-pressure experiments. The ordinary experiments, per- formed without recording apparatus, were then made over to the Sub-Committee, which continued to work in the same room under the supervision of the Commission. 19. The experiments of the Sub-Committee are numbered continuously with those of the Committee, so as to form a consecutive series and facilitate reference. Part II.-GENERAL EXPERIMENTS WITHOUT RECORDING APPARATUS. 20. The experiments of the Sub-Committee, together with the first 28 performed. by the Committee, form a total number of 430, and are divided into seven sections. These experiments are recorded in a tabular form at Appen- dix B. 268 dogs and 31 monkeys were killed outright, and 86 dogs and 39 monkeys were subjected to artificial respiration at varying intervals after the natural. respiration had been arrested with chloroform. The animals which were killed had chloroform administered to them in every possible way and under every conceivable condition. A large number of dogs were killed just as they were caught in the bazaars; others at various intervals after having heavy meals of meat or farinaceous food or fat; others fasting; others after the administra- tion of Liebig's extract of meat, coffee, rectified spirits of wine or ammonia. Most of these animals were healthy, but some of them had cardiac disease and in many the heart and other organs were rendered fatty by the previous adminis- tration of phosphorus. In a large number of cases morphine, strychnine and atropine, singly and in combination, were given by subcutaneous injection at in- tervals before the inhalation was begun. Chloroform was given with and without inhalers in the vertical and recumbent positions; in glass and wooden boxes; in large and small doses; by being pumped into the trachea with bellows; and in fact in every way that could suggest itself to the Commission. 21. The results in one respect are uniform. In every case where chloro- form was pushed the respiration stopped before the heart. The following table shows the interval of time between the cessation of respiration and of the heart's action in dogs and monkeys in uncomplicated cases, and in cases com-
13 plicated by asphyxia and by the administration of certain drugs subcutaneously before the chloroform inhalation was commenced:14 22. The movement of the heart was in the first 66 cases of the Sub-Com- mittee tested by auscultation, but afterwards by a needle inserted through the chest-wall into the organ and the thoracic cavity was laid open when doubt existed. 23. In the majority of the uncomplicated cases, which include those fed in different ways before inhalation, the heart ceased to act in from two to six minutes after stoppage of the respiration. In one uncomplicated case the heart's action ceased within one minute after the breathing stopped. The heart ceased within one minute after the respiration stopped in two cases where the inhala- tion was very slow and prolonged, in four cases complicated by asphyxia, and in one where the subcutaneous injection of morphine gr. ½ and strychnine gr. 3/100 was administered beforehand. The maximum time the heart continued to beat after the respiration ceased, in the experiments of the Sub-Committee, was eleven minutes in a dog and twelve in a monkey. 24. The effects of chloroform do not appear to be interfered with or much influenced by any of the variations in the method of preparation of the animal for or of the administration of, the anæsthetic. There are four general excep- tions to this statement. In very slow and prolonged administration, and in cases complicated with partial asphyxia, as well as in one case where one-third of a grain of atropine was administered before the inhalation, the heart stopped very soon after the respiration ceased; and in all cases where the inhalation was accompanied by struggling the animals became insensible with unusual rapidity. In these cases also the interval between the cessation of respiration and the time of possible restoration by artificial respiration was shortened. (Vide tables in Appendix B.) 25. As regards the restorative effects of artificial respiration the Sub-Com- mittee found it was nearly always successful if commenced within thirty seconds after the respiration ceased, very seldom successful if commenced between thirty and sixty seconds after, and always -unsuccessful if not begun till after sixty seconds. In forty-four cases, in which artificial respiration proved successful, it was commenced on an average 28.2 seconds after natural respiration ceased. In thirty-eight unsuccessful cases the average was 31.5 seconds. 26. The Sub-Committee formed the opinion that artificial respiration was less successful in restoring the respiration after it had been stopped by chloro- form in cases where a subcutaneous injection of morphia was administered before the inhalation was commenced. There were eighteen cases in which this was tried. In the first six artificial respiration was commenced eight seconds after cessation
15 of natural respiration. Of these five died. In three cases artificial respiration was begun fifteen seconds after the natural respiration ceased, and of these two recovered and one died. In three cases in which artificial respiration was com- menced twenty seconds after the respiration stopped, two out of the three died; and, lastly, in six cases where artificial respiration was not commenced till thirty seconds afterwards five died and one was revived. The average of those cases that were revived was 17.6 seconds and of those that died in this series, 26.4 seconds. This opinion was tested by blood-pressure experiments Nos. 162 and 178, the results of which did not support their conclusion. Part III16 and the changes of every kind which occurred in their condition, are referred to the number of the experiments in which they took place. 28. The majority of the experiments were made upon dogs or monkeys, and a few upon horses, goats, cats and rabbits. 29. The experiments of the Committee were designed to show the effect upon the blood-pressure, heart, and respiration of the inhalation of chloroform, ether, and the A. C. E. mixture, administered in various ways and under vary- ing conditions. The objects of the Commission were five in number:17 V. The effect of the anæsthetics above mentioned upon different animals, more especially upon monkeys, as the nearest approach to human beings. 30. The conclusions to which the Commission has been brought by the study of these experiments are the following:18 after-fall of the blood-pressure and begin again spontaneously. As a rule, if the respiration has stopped, or even becomes slow and feeble at the time when the inhalation is discontinued and artificial respiration is not resorted to, the fall in blood-pressure will continue until death ensues. (5) There are two conditions which frequently disturb the gradual fall of the blood-pressure, viz., struggling and holding the breath, and it is only by great care that they can be avoided in animals, (6) Struggling, independently of any change in the respiratory rhythm, appears generally to raise the blood-pressure.* In one case of a dog much weakened from phosphorus19 (10) The effect of holding the breath may occasionally cause a temporary fall of blood-pressure after the chloroform inhalation has been stopped * or even when the animal is quite out of chloroform.20 tory movement rather than to irritation of the vagi. To test this point Experi- ment No. 184 was instituted. In this experiment the dog's chest was forcibly inflated with bellows connected by a tube with the trachea, and the effect of this proceeding was to cause a fall of pressure and slowing of the heart exactly the same as in involuntary holding of the breath. The dog was then poisoned with atropine, after which inflation of the chest, still caused a fall of pressure, but without slowing of the heart (vide Fick Nos. 8 and 9). The fall of pressure must be in some degree independent of vagus irritation, which however usually accompanies it. (15) It only remains to be considered whether the slow action or tem- porary stoppage of the heart with great fall of pressure produced by vagus irritation is in itself an element of danger in chloroform administration, and if it is not, wherein the danger actually lies. (16) The experiments in which deliberate irritation of the vagi was carried on during anæsthesia show unmistakably that irritation of these nerves diminishes rather than enhances the danger of anæsthetics. The effect upon the heart is never continuous, and as the vagus becomes exhausted, or when the irritation is taken off, the blood-pressure rises again, as it does when the same result is produced by asphyxia. The slowing of the heart and circulation which is produced by irritation of the vagus by any cause, such as holding the breath in chloroform administration, retards the absorption and conveyance of chloroform to the nerve centres just as holding the breath, whether voluntary or involuntary, prevents chloroform from entering the lungs; and of itself slow- ing or temporary stoppage of the heart in chloroform administration is not dangerous. (17) To answer the second part of the last question in para. 15 is easy enough, if it is kept in mind that the effect of vagus irritation upon the heart is never continuous; and in chloroform administration as the pressure rises again after the slowing of the heart and temporary fall of pressure produced by any form of asphyxia, violent, respiratory efforts with bounding heart's action lead, as in the case of struggling, to a rapid and dangerous inhalation of chloroform and consequent rapid and dangerous decline in blood-pressure. It is, in fact, the temporary exhaustion of the vagi after stimulation that is to be feared, and not the actual stimulation as long as it is continued. (18) In accordance with this fact it will be found that in chloroform ad- ministration neither holding the breath, even if involuntary, or vagus inhibition can be kept up beyond a certain time; and if the chloroform is not removed from
21 the face, one or both of two things may happen: (1) when the animal breathes again it takes deep and gasping inspirations, the lungs become filled with chloro- form, and an over-dose is taken in with extreme rapidity; or (2) when the restraining influence of the vagus is taken off the heart, through the irritation ceasing or the nerve becoming exhausted, the heart bounds on again, and the cir- culation is accelerated in proportion. The blood then becomes quickly saturated with chloroform, and an over-dose is at once conveyed to the nerve centres. The theory which has hitherto been accepted is that the danger in chloroform admin- istration consists in. the slowing or stoppage of the heart by vagus inhibition. This is now shown to be absolutely incorrect. There is no doubt whatever that the controlling influence of the vagus on the heart is a safeguard, and that it is the exhaustion of the nerve which is dangerous. (19) It can be readily understood how a condition in which the pulse is rapid and bounding with high blood-pressure leads to more rapid absorption of chloroform from the lungs, and a more rapid propulsion of the chloroformed blood to the medulla oblongata, and consequently to a more rapid paralysis of the respiratory and vaso motor centres and precipitous fall in the blood-pressure Such a condition is produced in some cases by ether or by division of both vagi* or by a full dose of atropine.22 in which alone it could occur in the practical inhalation of chloroform, would rather be a source of safety than of danger. (21) The Committee discussed the advisability of cutting the vagi some time previous to experimenting on the blood-pressure with chloroform. The effect of this procedure is to cause continuous rapid action and tendency to exhaustion of the heart, as well as to degeneration of the terminal branches of the nerves in the heart if the animal live sufficiently long. Such experiments might be of some interest theoretically, and also have had a practical bearing upon the condition of the heart in certain cases of chronic alcoholism; but the Committee decided not to perform them as it considered the end to be gained did not justify the pain they would have inflicted. (22) In Experiment No. 178, the case of a dog that had had morphine, remarkable slowing and even temporary cessation of the heart's action occurred again and again at the same moment as the respiration stopped.* but the heart invariably recovered itself, and began again to beat regularly before any steps were taken to restore the animal, and without any respiration occurring. We find in this case that it was possible to restore the animal even after un- usually long intervals had been allowed to elapse between the cessation of the natural, and the commencement of artificial, respiration. The failure of the heart, if such it can be called, instead of being a danger to the animal, proved to be a positive safeguard by preventing the absorption of the residual chloro- form and its distribution through the system. (23) The effect of artificial respiration after the natural respiration has ceased, is to cause an alternate rise and fall of small amount in the blood-pressure, the trace thus formed upon the drum being a coarse imitation, altered some- what by the shaking of the table, of the natural respiratory curve. The differ- ence consists chiefly in the fact that the artificial rise and fall is more abrupt than in natural breathing, and that the rise always coincides with expiration or compression of the chest. After artificial respiration has been continued for a certain time, the blood-pressure begins to rise again, and a little later natural respiration returns. (24) The effect of artificial respiration in restoring an animal after the respiration had stopped was always marked. In a few exceptional cases, such as No. 159, a phosphorus dog, and No. 142, a horse which had an enormous *Vide No. 178, Fick readings 2 and 3, 8, 13, 18, and 26, and compare No.49, Fick reading 2 and 8, and No 60, Fick reading 3, which are similar cases, but were not so carefully observed.
23 over-dose, although the artificial respiration was commenced as soon as possible after the breathing was noticed to have stopped, it was not successful. (25) Complete stoppage of the respiration always means that an over-dose has been administered, and the over-dose may have been so great as to render restoration impossible. It is impossible to say whether, after chloroform has been pushed and then discontinued, the respiration will be restored spon- taneously or not, and it is never in any case certain that artificial respiration will restore the natural respiration and blood-pressure, no matter how soon it is com- menced after the respiration stops. A great deal depends upon the amount of the after-fall: in some cases, even after the respiration has been restored, the pressure continues to fall and respiration again ceases, and artificial respiration then fails. We thus find respiration restored by artificial respiration while chloroform is still being absorbed, and this tends to show that artificial respiration does not merely pump the chloroform out of the blood, but exerts considerable influence in exciting the natural respiration. (26) The time which elapses before artificial succeeds in restoring natural respiration varies very greatly. In one case, No. 116, it was continued for eleven minutes before the first natural gasps commenced. This period is undoubtedly prolonged in some cases by a condition of physiological apn24 to stimulation of the vagus through asphyxia. The animal was therefore easily restored as he was suffering more from asphyxia than from chloroform poisoning.* (28) It corresponds to those cases, which are so often reported, in which dangerous failure of the heart is said to have occurred some minutes after the administration of chloroform had been discontinued, and which are sometimes restored, and sometimes not, by artificial respiration. There is nothing at all sudden about, the failure of the heart in these cases, but the attention of the chloroformist, which has been wandering, is suddenly called to the fact that the patient is apparently dead. When the animal was really dead, it was found in some cases that artificial respiration still maintained a small amount of mean pressure in the manometer. In others the pressure seemed to fall to the zero line between each compression of the chest. (29) The dangers of too vigorous artificial respiration were illustrated in some of the accidental deaths. In one case the liver was badly ruptured, and in another the pleural cavity was full of blood. In three cases, Nos. 80, 92 and 103, rhythmical movements of the diaphragm were noticed after the heart had ceased beating, and after the chest had been opened. It is remarkable that in two of these cases the splanchnic nerve had been divided. The third was a case in which chloroform had been injected into the jugular, and in this case there was a synchronous movement of the jaw as well. In all, death and stoppage of the heart had occurred gradually, and in No. 103 the heart was still irritable. These movements cannot be called respiration, though the last gasp of' a dying animal, that ineffective jerk of the diaphragm, which is such a fatal symptom, is very likely in many cases a movement of the same character. Similar movements, which were continued much longer, occurred in. Experiment No. 104 after the thorax was opened, while the heart was still beating. Still more remarkable con- vulsions of the muscles of the jaws, ears, and fore-feet occurred in Experiment No. 167 in the case of a dog that had been poisoned with nicotine. These move- ments continued at regular intervals for more than ten minutes alter death, and were sufficiently forcible to jerk the handles of a pressure forceps fixed on the end of the tongue off the table at each spasm. In a rabbit in Experiment No. 153 the auricles of the heart continued to beat rhythmically for three hours after it was supposed to be dead from chloroform and its thorax had been laid open. Irri- tability of the heart after death was noticed in many cases, but seemed to be most marked in cases where ether had been used. * There was a mistake in para. 27 as it originally stood. In the observation at Fick 12 chloroform was admin- istered for two minutes and not fur a few seconds only. The error was caused by confusion in the tracing on account of its having been carried twice round the drum at the end of the experiment.
25 (30) Chloroform injected in the heart through the jugular vein did not cause clotting of the blood as was the case when ether was injected. (31) In the course of the experiments of the Committee various drugs were administered in order to ascertain if they had any effect in modifying the action of chloroform. The result showed that none of them had any effect in prevent- ing the typical descent of the blood-pressure that occurs when chloroform is inhaled. Atropine, when given in a dose sufficient to paralyse the vagi, of course prevents the action of those nerves in asphyxia, and by increasing the action of the heart it appears to cause a more rapid descent in the blood-pres- sure when chloroform is inhaled as has been already explained. Morphine appeared in No. 162 to render the rise in blood-pressure that occurred when the chloroform was discontinued slower and less complete, and to bring about a more or less permanent condition of anæsthesia. It may be noted that the animal used in this experiment was a monkey, and in other experiments with monkeys, when no morphine had been given, it was remarked that the animal., after a few inhalations of chloroform, would often lie quite quiet in a state of semi-insensi- bility for a long time without further inhalations; still this condition was much more marked in Experiment No. 162 than in any of the others. No action of this kind was noticed in the dog No. 178, but other experiments (Nos. 90 and 94) showed that pariah dogs are very indifferent to the action of morphine, and it is probable that the dose of morphine in this case was insufficient to bring about the condition noted in the monkey. The peculiar behaviour of the heart in No. 178 was not the result of the previous administration of morphine, for a similar phe- nomenon had occurred in other cases (49 and 60) in which no morphine had been given. Experiments Nos. 162 and 178 prove conclusively that morphine has no effect in shortening the period that may be allowed to elapse between the cessation of natural respiration and the commencement of artificial respiration. (32) The other drugs used had no effect upon the action of chloroform except when their own special action became the leading feature in the case, as for instance, during the vomiting from apomorphine (104, Fick 9) or the convul- sions produced by nicotine (167). (33) In order to test the alleged danger from shock during chloroform administration, the Committee performed a very large number of those operations which are reputed to be particularly dangerous in this connection, such as extrac- tions of teeth, evulsion of nails, section of the muscles of the eye, snipping of the skin of the anus, & c. In many cases the operation was performed when the 4
26 animal was merely stupefied by the chloroform and not fully insensible. In such cases a slight variation in the blood-pressure would sometimes occur, such as one would expect from the irritation of a sensory nerve or from the struggling that ensued, but in no case in any stage of anæsthesia was there anything even sug- gestive of syncope or failure of the heart's action. In thrusting a needle into the heart, there was often a momentary, but well-marked, fall of blood-pressure; but even this was absent in all other injuries. If chloroform really had any power to increase the tendency to shock in operations, it is impossible to believe that it would not have been manifested to some degree at least in one or other of these numerous experiments. The Commission was, however, not content with this negative result, and determined to ascertain the effect of direct irrita- tion of the vagi during continued chloroform administration. The result of such experiments (Nos. 65, 117, and others)proved that inhibition of the heart's action prevented, rather than assisted, the fatal effects of prolonged chloroform inhal- ation. An animal that was put into a condition of extreme danger (from which it could only be restored by means of artificial respiration) by inhalation of chloroform for one minute, recovered spontaneously and readily after five minutes of chloroform inhalation together with inhibition of the heart by electrical irri- tation of the vagus carried on simultaneously. In one of these experiments, No. 117, chloroform was pushed for seven minutes; and during continued irritation of the vagus the animals repeatedly came round without artificial respiration. The danger really begins when the irritation is discontinued or fails to inhibit the heart, and thus enables the chloroform in the lungs to be rapidly absorbed and thrown into the system. This danger is certainly increased by deliberately pump- ing the chloroform into the lungs, by means of artificial respiration, for animals in which this was done, although they showed a tendency to recover when the chloroform and imitation of the vagus were discontinued, afterwards died rapidly. (34) On another occasion, during Experiment No. 117, the animal was very nearly killed by a comparatively short inhalation of chloroform, owing to the electrodes becoming accidentally short-circuited and tailing to keep up the irritation of the vagus. Something similar occurred in No. 177, the effect of the irritation of the vagus passing off, while the chloroform was still being pushed, and thus putting the animal into a condition of extreme and unexpected jeopardy. Nothing could be more striking than these near approaches to accidental death from failure to irritate the vagus efficiently. (35) Other experiments were made to test the truth of the statement that chloroform increases the action of electrical stimuli applied to the vagus, and
27 showed conclusively that it has no such effect. In one instance only* the inhibition seemed to be intensified as the chloroform was commenced and diminished when it was discontinued; but apart from the fact that the supposed effect ceased much too suddenly, a repetition of the experiment on the same and other animals showed that there was in reality no such effect. The increased inhibition in this instance was due to the chloroformist compelling the attend- ant who was holding the electrodes to change his position and thus making him unconsciously apply them more efficiently. When the chloroformist with- drew they were restored to their former position. This affords an instance of the care that has to be taken in making experiments if one is not to be deceived. (36) To test the effect of shock due to vaso motor change rather than affection of the heart Goltz's experiment, on the frog was repeated on three dogs. In one there was slight lowering of pressure which was not extensive, and in the others no effect was produced at all. Other operations which seemed likely to produce shock, such as violent blows upon the testicle, were singu- larly devoid of effect. Failing to lower the blood-pressure by any of these methods recourse was had to section of the splanchnics, but the low condition of blood-pressure this produced appeared, like stoppage of the heart from vagus irritation, to be a source of safety rather than of danger during chloroform administration. In this connection Experiment No. 111 may be studied. There was not much external hæmorrhage, but the Splanchnics were divided,28 state of blood-pressure in No. 163). Numerous attempts were made in these animals to produce shock by operations in the recumbent and vertical posi- tions, but without any more result than in those that were healthy. (38) The truth about the fatty heart appears to be that chloroform per se in no way endangers such a heart, but., on the contrary, by lowering the blood- pressure, lessens the work that the heart has to perform, which is a positive advantage. But the mere inhalation of chloroform is only a part of the process of the administration in practice. A patient with an extremely fatty heart may die from the mere exertion of getting upon the operating table, just as he may die in mounting the steps in front of his own hall door, or from fright at the mere idea of having chloroform or of undergoing an operation, or during his involuntary struggles. Such patients must inevitably die occasionally during chloroform administration, and would do so even were attar-of-roses or any other harmless vapour substituted for chloroform. (39) The effect of hæmorrhage was tested by opening the femoral artery and allowing a considerable quantity of blood (8 to 12 oz.) to escape. An immediate lowering of the blood-pressure result, and this is very slowly re- covered from. Such an accident., however dangerous it may be in itself, in no way affects the action of chloroform, except in so far that a patient who has been nearly bled to death would require less chloroform in his system to put him into a state of anæsthesia. The low condition of his blood-pressure produc- ed by the hæmorrhage would tend to prevent the too rapid intake of chloro- form, exactly as in the case of cutting the splanchnics. (Vide supra sub. para. 36.) (40) When the hind feet are lowered on to the floor, so as to place the animal in the vertical position, a considerable fall of blood-pressure in the carotid artery occurs; but when the animal is replaced on the table in the recumbent position the pressure is fully restored. Various operations were per- formed on animals in the vertical position, but in no case was anything re- sembling dangerous shock produced. Inversion of the body, so that the animal stands on its head, has exactly the opposite effect,29 the blood of the carotid, which occurs when the position of the body is changed appears therefore to be due simply to the effect of gravity. (41) As regards the effect of chloroform upon different animals, it may be said to be the same as far as its anæsthetic action is concerned. There are cer- tain peculiarities in its effect on the respiration and circulation connected with its local irritant action on the nostrils and fauces which are interesting to notice. Thus, when concentrated chloroform vapour is applied to the nostrils of rabbits they hold their breath and the heart30 sensitive, and the pressure rises and falls alternately to a slight amount and forms a wavy trace, which may be continued right round the drum * without any parti- cular change. As soon as air is rigidly excluded the pressure commences to fall gradually exactly in the same way as with chloroform, and with the same succes- sion of phenomena, viz., first anæsthesia, then cessation of the respiration, then of the heart movements, and, finally, death.* How far this is due to ether and how far to the results of asphyxia it is impossible to say, but an exactly similar succession of events can be brought about by making the animal inhale carbonic acid gas alone (vide 160). (45) If surgeons choose to content with a condition of semi- anæsthesia. it can no doubt be produced with perfect safety, though with discomfort to the patient, by ether held rather closely over the mouth. Such a condition of imper- feet anæsthesia would never be accepted by any surgeon accustomed to operate under chloroform. If more perfect anæsthesia is required, it can be procured by excluding the air more rigidly; but then there is exactly the same danger as in giving chloroform. How very suddenly and rapidly tile pressure may fall and death ensue is well shown by Experiment No. 33. Ether injected into the jugular vein produces a fall of blood-pressure and anæsthesia in the same way as chloroform does (vide 93);but in all cases in which it was so injected, large clots were found in the heart immediately after death. It is interesting to note that Claude Bernard seems to have formed a very similar opinion with regard to ether as the following quotations from his work entitled " Leçons sur les Anes- thésiques et sur L'Asphyxie,31 quotation, to be found on page 101 of the same work, runs:32 to paralysis or sudden stoppage of the heart, as Snow assumes to have been the case. 32. It must be remembered, in studying the tracings, that, except when it is expressly stated to the contrary, chloroform was throughout administered very freely.* The degree and rapidity of the fall of blood-pressure is in almost all cases much greater than should be the case in administering chloroform to human beings. To avoid complicating the notes the inhaler was kept on much more persistently, with none of those little interruptions while the cornea is being examined, &c., which always occur in practice. The whole series, with few exceptions, may be characterized as examples of reckless administration of chloro- form, and accidental. deaths would. have been much more numerous had it not been that, when once the animal was connected with the manometer. it was kept under the most careful observation. Experiment, No. 79 affords a most inter- esting exception. The chloroformist, though present in body was absent in mind, and failed to observe and report the cessation of the respiration. The chloroform was in. consequence pushed much further than it should have been, and the animal died sooner than was intended, 33. These cases are of themselves quite sufficient to show that animals are Just. as liable to death from the careless administration of chloroform as human. beings; and the accidental deaths which occurred during the experiments of the Commission afford the best possible proof that the effects of chloroform are identical in the lower animals and in the human subject. The statement so frequently made that dogs are more resistant to chloroform than human beings is entirely incorrect.
Part V.34 Respiration ceased at 4h. 30m. 50s., after which the pulse continued feebly, but owing to clotting has not been recorded on the tracing. Death after a few minutes, but not exactly recorded. October 26th.35 and canula inserted at 7h. 55m. 30s. Connection with manometers made at 8h. 1m., at which time the cornea was still sensitive, and the animal breathing quietly, but very slowly, about 8 times per minute. Two tracings Ludwig, one Fick. Trace I. Ludwig shows effect of (a) evulsion of the nails, (b)snipping of the anus, (c) extraction of teeth, and includes four Fick readings. Trace II. Ludwig (commencing at 8h. 32m. 34s.) shows effect of (d) change to the vertical position, and while in that position (e) extraction of teeth, and (f) administration of chloroform until death. Post-mortem36 Trace II, Ludwig shows effect of (e) continued administration of chloroform with at the same time (f) hæmorrhage from the femoral artery, and includes Fick readings Nos. 7 to 9. Observations. H M. S. A. 11 12 20. 37 usual way. Artery tied at 4h. 8m. 45s. Canula inserted at. 4h. 9m. 45s. Con- nection made with the manometers at 4h. 11m. 30s, Trace I. Ludwig shows effects of ether and chloroform alternately, and finally death from chloroform, and includes 12 Fick readings. Trace I. Fick gives the whole of the 12 Fick readings in four revolutions of the drum. October 29th.38 October 29th.39 tation of the left vagus with the coils 10 cent. apart; (b) injection of physos- tigmine into the jugular vein; (c) lifting the vagus from its bed; and includes 6 Fick readings, which show the effect of (d) irritation of the entire left vagus; (e) application of saturated solution of carbonate of soda to the vagus. Trace Ludwig shows effect of (f) ligature of left vagus; and (g) inhalation of chloroform with rapid but temporary falls of pressure that frequently occur when animals hold their breath at the commencement of the administration. it includes Fick readings 7 to 10, which show the effect of (h) pinching the vagus with forceps; (i) irritation of the peripheral end of the vagus; (j) evulsion of the toe-nails; (k) gradual death from ether. October 30th.40 H M. S. G. 4 11 0. 41 Trace I. Ludwig shows effect of42 A clot having been found, the experiment was closed by squeezing the Junker apparatus rapidly 80 times a minute. The heart-beat (indicated by a flag thrust into the heart) continued six minutes after the respiration had entirely ceased and 3m. 15s. after the pulse was imperceptible. The one Fick tracing includes 7 readings taken at periods indicated on the third Ludwig tracing. November 1st.43 H.M.S. C.10350.44 (7) Same as 5; but a little later the effect of the hæmorrhage still marked. (8) The same; only more under the influence of ether. (9) Just after ether was stopped. (10) Effect of chloroform pushed. (11) Do. do. (12) Do. respiration stopped. (13) The animal dying. (14) Dead. In this experiment (44) the figures (1), (2), (3), &c., refer to the Fick readings. November 2nd.45 just coming out of chloroform. Two Ludwig and three Fick tracings. Trace I. Ludwig was taken during the administration of A. C. E. mixture with Junker's inhaler, at first at the rate of 10 squeezes a minute, afterwards rapidly. Dur- ing trace II. Ludwig the A. C. E. administration was continued, but as the effect was not sufficient, the bottle was filled up to 2 oz. with fresh A. C. E., after which the dog died rapidly, The three Fick tracings include 8 readings taken at times noted on the Ludwig tracings. Total A. C. E. mixture used, 13½ drachms. November 2nd.46 of the above (administration of chloroform, ether, and A. C. E.) and finally death from chloroform. The four Fick tracings include 25 readings at times noted on the Ludwig tracings. Observations. H. M. S. A. 10 20 30. 47 November 4th.48 3h. 49m. 50s. Canula inserted 3h. 58m. 40s, Connection made with manometers at 4h. One Ludwig and two Fick tracings during49 Three drachms of blood in the pericardium. Mitral valves a little thickened. Apex of right ventricle attenuated. Observations. H. M. S. A. 8 27 30. 50 November 5th.51 November 5th.52 Observations. A. 10h. 28m. 0s.53 melt of the ether inhalation, is noticeable. It was the accompaniment probably of struggles and holding breath, though this was not noted on the tracing. As ether did not appear to be going to kill the animal in a reasonable time, chloro- form was pumped into the inhaler and death ensued rapidly. The second Ludwig tracing is imperfect, on account of the float not working freely in the tube of the manometer. The needle was found in the apex of the left ventricle. November 6th.54 Placed on the table at 7h. 53m. and given a little chloroform from time to time to keep him quiet. Artery ligatured at 8h. 5m. 10s. Temperature in the rectum 98.2 F. A loose ligature placed under both vagi. Connection made with the manometer at 8h. 20m. 15s. Three Ludwig and three Fick tracings. Ludwig I. is during (a) a short administration of chloroform (b) ligature of the right vagus after the chloroform was stopped, causing very marked and continued depression; (c) artificial respiration; (d) division of the right vagus (e) peripheral irritation of the right vagus, electrically (coils distant 10 cent.), with at the same time the pushing of chloroform on an ordinary cap for a little over two minutes; (f) artificial respiration and gradual recovery, Ludwig tracing II. is during (g) peripheral irritation of the right vagus (Fick reading 9); (h) irritation of right vagus, peripheral as before, and pushing of chloroform at the same time (Fick reading II.) for about one minute (i) grad- ual recovery without artificial respiration; (j) the same experiment again, irritation of right vagus and pushing chloroform, for over two minutes; (k) recovery again without; artificial respiration, but in the course of recovery, irritation of the right central vagus; and (l) ligature and section of the left vagus. Ludwig tracing III. is during (m) irritation a the periphery of both vagi with pushing of chloroform at the same time for about two minutes; (n) opening and placing a tube into the trachea; (o) chloroform accidentally squirted into the trachea and gradual death of the animal. The time of the 22 Fick readings is noted on the Ludwig tracings. Temperature in the rectum after death 98.4 F. Obserrations. A. 8h. 20m. 30s.55 commenced during more or less complete inhibition of the heart (vide Fick 5 and 6) from 8h. 30m. 10s. to 8h. 32m. 0s. The respiration ceased at 8h. 32m. 0s. and the chloroform cap was removed. Artificial respiration was not begun until 8h. 33m. 55s. and natural breathing was restored at 8h. 39m. 0s. C. 8h. 53m. 30s.56 the respiration was no longer a factor in the process, except to eliminate it from the lungs. The effect of the uncontrollable absorption of chloroform into the blood was, not to give rise to any paralysis or weakening of the heart, but simply to produce the ordinary regular and gradual fall of the blood-pressure, which is associated with narcosis of the nerve centres in the medulla, in normal chloroform inhalation. The trachea was opened at 9h. 19m, 0s. and a tube inserted at 9h. 19m, 50s. E. 9h. 25m, 0s.57 artificial respiration was employed whenever the respiration stopped so as to ensure the chloroform entering the lungs. Afterwards the dog took a few shallow respirations and then died in spite of artificial respiration. Temperature in the rectum just after death 98 F. Observations. A. 11h.22m. 50s.-Pushed chloroform; breathing stopped at 11h. 23m. 34s.; chloroform cap removed 11h. 23m. 50s; breathing restored spontaneously without artificial respiration. B. 11h. 30m, 0s.58 ensued. Experiment No. 65 proves that inhibition of the heart's action, due to stimulation of the vagi during continued chloroform administration, pre- vents rather than assists the fatal effects of prolonged chloroform inhalation, and that lowering of the blood-pressure either suddenly or gradually with- out weakening of the heart is in no sense a danger. November 8th59 Temperature in rectum 100.6 F. Carotid artery ligatured at 2h. 38m. Canula inserted at 3h. 40m. 30s. Ligature placed under both vagi. Junker's lead tube inserted into an opening in the trachea and the chloroform administered through it. Connection made with manometers at 3h. 5m. 30s., but stopped. again almost immediately on account of bleeding from the artery below the canula. Connection again made at 3h. 19m. 15s. One Ludwig and one Fick tracing. During the tracings numerous attempts were made to irritate the right vagus, but it is not probable that the nerve had really been exposed. The canula slipping at 3h. 38m., an attempt was made to place it in the right carotid, but failed, and the experiment was closed by killing the monkey with chloroform. November 8th.60 H. M. S. M. 5 5 0. 61 H. M. S. J. 10 48 40. 62 H. M. S. I. 11 52 0. 63 by vagus stimulation after cessation of the respiration from chloroform poisoning. At 3h. 2m. 20s. artificial respiration was commenced and natural respiration was restored at 3h. 4m. 30s. B. 3h. 8m. 30s.64 H. M. S. C. 4 5 55. 65 November 11th.66 H. M. S. D. 3 40 0. 67 place and the pulse tracing disappeared (vide Fick 4). During recovery at 8h. 32m. 0s. and 8h. 35m. 0s. the blood-pressure twice rose and fell again in a remarkable manner without any apparent cause. (Compare with Experiment 117, Observation G at 9h. 23m. 50s. to 9h. 25m. 15s). The condition of respiration was not recorded at these times. F. 8h. 40m. 0s.68 November 12th.69 November 12th.70 Two Ludwig and two Fick tracings. H. M. S.Observations. A.4 7 40.71 100.4 F. in the rectum. Connection made with manometers at 8h, 25m. 10s. Loops under both vagi. Two Ludwig and one Fick tracing. H. M. S.Observations. A.8 28 30.72 November 13th.73 Experiment interrupted by hopeless clotting at 4h. 12m. Stopped breath- ing at 4h. 17m. 40s. The heart-needle stopped moving a few seconds before the thorax was opened and the heart was found to be quite still. Temperature after death 97.8 F. November 14th.74 box at 9h. 42m. Fallen down at 9h. 45m. 10s. Placed on the table at 9h. 46m. 45s., after which its breathing was noticed to have stopped. Artificial respira- tion was commenced at once, but failed to bring him round, although there was a pulse some time after it commenced. This is a case where a weak sick animal was left in the chloroform box too long and its respiration neglected while it was being transferred to the table. November 14th.75 by hopeless clotting at 12h. 31m. Heart stopped very gradually, but not finally until 12h. 37m. Temperature after death 95.4 F. November 14th.76 H. M. S. B.3 52 50.77 H. M. S. G.8 51 0.78 2h. 33m. and afterwards went to sleep. At 4h. 15m. he was still irritable and unfit for experiment. November 14th.79 Observations. H. M. S. A. 8 0 15.80 H.M.S. B.104020.81 given now and again during above proceedings. Connection made with mano- meter at 3h. 26m. 50s. Two Ludwig and three Fick tracings. H.M.S.Observations. A.32650.82 November 19th.83 quick revolving drum (the same as is used for the Fick manometer). The experiment was imperfect, but a few readings are preserved showing effect of placing ammonia before the nose. November 20th.84 H.M.S. F. 102440.85 7s. Connection with manometer at 2h. 40m. 45s. Three Ludwig and three Fick tracings. Observations. H.M.S. A. 2410.86 H.M.S. P.35910.87 9h. 25m. 30s. Temperature in rectum 100.2 F. Canula inserted at 9h. 29m. 30s. Connection made with manometer at 9h. 41m. One Ludwig and one Fick tracing. H.M.S.Observations. A.94220.88 One Ludwig and one Fick tracing. H.M.S.Observations. A.10360.89 Tracing stopped at 12h. 21m. Heart still moving when the thorax was opened at 12h. 25m. Temperature 97.4 F. Heart flickering at 12h. 27m. November 22nd.90 H. M. S. C. 10 51 0. 91 is often said, bleeds the animal into his own vessels. The pressure was after this extremely low, but chloroform was repeatedly given, and various other actions taken, and then chloroform had to be pushed on a saturated sponge enclosed in a cap for eleven minutes before respiration ceased. November 22nd.92 H. M. S. I. 4 20 30. 93 (After the manometer experiment was closed the convolutions of the brain were exposed, but stimulation failed to give any result.) November 23rd.94 table at 7h. 36m. 20s., and kept quiet with chloroform. Left carotid ligatured at 7h. 46m. 10s. Canula inserted at 7h. 49m. 15s. Temperature in rectum 101·4 F. Connection made with the manometers at 7h. 56m. 15s. Four Ludwig and six Fick tracings showing the effect of pushing chloroform during irritation of the entire right vagus on several occasions. In one of these the irritation of the vagus was kept up continuously for more than eight minutes, and the chloroform administration for seven minutes and the animal recovered without artificial respiration. At another time when the irritation accidentally failed on account of defect in the electrodes, the animal was with difficulty re- stored after chloroform had been pushed for one minute. Death eventually ensued after prolonged irritation of the vagus together with pushing chloroform and artificial respiration to ensure the chloroform entering the lungs freely. Observations. H. M. S. A. 7 56 0. 95 H. M. S. stopped. The residual chloroform in the lungs was then rapidly taken up and produced its ordinary effect. (Compare with Observation D in Experi- ment 64) E. 8 52 30. 96 H. M. S. H. 9 31 25. 97 H. M. S. C. 11 33 40. 98 H. M. S. G. 3 55 0. 99 November 26th.100 November 26th101 No. 127102 No. 129No. 129104 No. 134. Another medium-sized monkey. Weight 4 lbs. No. 131105 No. 134106 30s. Artery ligatured at 2h. 45m. 25s. Canula inserted at 2h. 48m. 10s. Loop under both vagi. Connection made with manometer at 2h. 59m. 50s. Three Ludwig and three Fick tracings. Observations. A. Ordinary chloroform administration and struggling. B. Double ligature and division of the right vagus. C. Irritation of the central, and D. Peripheral. end of the vagus. E. Injection. of 10 grains of chloral into the peritoneum, and after- wards irritation of the central and peripheral. end of the right, vagus. F. Exposure and ligature of the femoral artery. G. Opening the trachea and tying a small glass tube into it. H. Closure of the tracheal tube so as to produce almost complete asphyxia. I. Pumping chloroform vapour into the closed tube by means of Junker's inhaler while the respirations are still embarrassed and consequent speedy death. While the chest was being opened, air suddenly rushed in, and it was thought that spontaneous respiration was going to recommence, but there was no real spontaneous movement. After death chloroform was injected with much force into the femoral artery and produced complete rigidity of the limb. November 25th,107 H. M. S. D. 11 30 30. 108 from time to time to keep it under. Temperature in the rectum 100.6 F. at 8h. 9m. 45s. and artery ligatured. Connection with manometer at 8h. 1m. 25s. Two Ludwig and one Fick tracing. Observations. H.M.S. A.8430.109 One Ludwig and one Fick tracing. Observation. H. M. S. A. 11 12 40. 110 November 20th.111 November 29th.112 pericardium at 5h. 47m. 50s. Needle into heart at 5h. 48m. 30s. Irritation left vagus, coil 5, at 5h. 50m. 35s. Stopped irritation at 5h. 50m. 47s. Irritation left vagus at 5h. 51m. 10s. Stopped irritation at 5h. 51m. 27s. Chloroform at 5h. 52m. 3s. Irritation of left vagus at 5h. 52m. 37s. Stopped irritation at 5h. 52m. 47s. Stopped artificial respiration and chloroform 5h. 53m. 22s. Diaphragm contracting rhythmically. Heart slow and feeble at 5h. 53m. 30s. Heart almost stopped. Began artificial respiration again at 5h. 54m. 35s. Heart more vigorous at 5h. 55m. 27s. Irritation of left vagus not acting made him cough, coil 6, at 5h. 56m. Irritation left vagus, coil 6, at 5h. 56m. 35s acting fully. Irritation of left vagus continued at 5h. 56m. 57s. Chloroform at 5h. 57m. 15s. Stopped irritation at 5h. 57m. 40s. Irritation of left vagus again at 5h. 58m. 23s. Coils run up to zero at 5h. 59m. 20s. The heart stopped at first, but is now going again. Stopped irritation at 5h. 59m. 46s. Irritation of vagus again at 6h. 0m. 20s. Run up to zero at 6h. 0m. 30s. Stop up outlet for air at 6h. 2m. 23s. Stop chloroform and artificial respiration at 6h. 2m. 55s. Stop irritation at 6h. 3m. 10s. Air let out of the chest at 6h. 3m. 35s. Artificial respiration again at 6h. 3m. 55s. Heart hardly beating at 6h. Sm. 15s. Heart stopped at 6h. 6m. 30s. November 30.113 November 30th.114 H. M. S. C. 3 1 30. 115 H. M. S. O. 4 20 0. 116 H. M. S. Observations. A. 8 55 30 117 H. M. S. C. 11 48 30 118 December 2nd.119 was first given gradually and then pushed by pressing the cap closely upon the animal's nose and mouth. The effect of this latter proceeding is not shown in the tracing, owing to the artery becoming hopelessly drawn out of its sheath and twisted. Respiration ceased at about 8h. 52m. 30s. and the heart was still beating when the observation ceased at 9h. December 3rd.120 H. M. S. E. 11 33 0 121 H. M. S. D. 4 7 0.122 H. M. S. D. 8 38 40.123 H. M. S. C. 11 8 10.124 December 4th.125 H. M. S. B. 10 45 0. 126 H. M. S. B. 3 14 30. 127 side as the effect of the chloroform wears off. Instead of this, Experiment 162 shows that there were ample pulsations on both sides of the temporary pauses, If Fick 9, with the Ludwig tracing on either side, is carefully studied, it will be seen that up to the time the heart beats ceased, the pulsations recorded in the Ludwig were ample and strong. There was then a temporary arrest of pulsation for 6 seconds (vide Fick 9). Immediately after Fick 9 the pulsation returned for 5 seconds (vide the Ludwig between 3h. 28m. 0s. and 3h. 29m, 0s.) Afterwards there was a long pause of 20 seconds without any pulsations at all. This pause was so marked that Dr. Bomford thought a clot had formed in the tube, and at 3h. 29m. 10s, he wrote on the Ludwig tracing"? clot." Artificial respiration was just about to be commenced when the animal gave two spontaneous gasps, vigorous pulsations followed and the pressure was raised in five seconds to the height it was at before chloroform was administered in Observation C. December 7th. 128 H. M. S. Observations. A. 11 39 0. 129 December 7th.130 with chloroform. Artery ligatured at 10h. 36m. 47s. Canula inserted at 10h. 38m. 55s. Connection with the manometer at 10h. 42m. 45s. One Ludwig tracing and part of one Fick (incorporated with 169 and 170). Observations. H. M. S. A. 10 44 5 131 ensued. Post-mortem132 H. M. S. D. 3 48 10. 133 H. M. S. holding of the breath, but was restored to its former height by four deep slow inspirations, the cornea being still sensitive. B. 12 5 30.134 tracing during:135 Chloroform was given four times gently until respiration ceased and longer intervals were allowed to elapse each time before artificial respiration was commenced. On the first occasion a remarkable slowing of the heart was noticed just before and at the time the respiration stopped (vide Fick readings 2 and 3). Artificial respiration was commenced after about half a minute and natural respiration was soon restored. On the next occasion the heart completely stopped at the same time as the respiration (vide Fick reading 8), but soon com- menced to beat again. Artificial respiration was begun nearly two minutes after the cessation of natural respiration, but this was again speedily restored. On the third occasion the heart again stopped at the same time as the respiration (vide Fick 13) and did not resume its beating for more than half a minute. After more than two minutes the animal made two feeble gasps, but artificial respira- tion was not begun until four minutes after the original stoppage. The pres- sure rose almost at once and natural respiration soon returned. On the fourth occasion there was again marked slowing of the heart's action shortly after respiration had stopped. (Fick 18). Artificial respiration was begun after two minutes and a half and was successful in restoring the natural respiration. After recovery the chloroform was again pushed rapidly and continued until death resulted without any attempt to restore the animal by artificial respiration. There was again some slowing and intermittence of the heart's action(vide Fick 26), but the heart continued to beat for eight minutes after the cessation of the respiration. observations. H. M. S. A. 2 19 45. 136 H. M. S. B. 2 29 25. 137 reading there was no pulsation at all. There was no fall of pressure during the arrest, and the Ludwig tracing shows how strong the beats on each side of it were. No better proof could be afforded than is to be found in these two experiments that direct weakening of the heart is not the cause of the fall of the blood-pressure which is inseparable from chloroform narcosis. Experiments 64, 65, 162, 178 and 186 prove three important points:138 December 13th.139 December 14th.140 H. M. S. I. 3 3 25. 141 2h. 42m. 30s. Canula inserted at 2h. 43m. 25s. Connection with manometer at 2h. 49m. 20s. Two Ludwig and five Fick tracings. Observations. H. M. S. A. 2 51 0. 142 H.M.S. B.21840.143 fall of pressure were in itself a danger under chlo- roform, the further fall ought to have increased the danger; but it proved to be a safeguard and saved the animal's life. H. M. S. F. 3 6 0. INDEX TO MANOMETER AND OTHER TRACINGS, ON THE RECORDING DRUMS. Abdomen146 Asphyxia Nos. 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 66, 70, 87, 89, 96, 97, 104, 105, 111, 113, 115, 135, 136, 138, 140, 148, 150, 151, 156, 157, 158, 161, 183, 184, 185. Atropine " 74, 76, 77, 80, 81, 86, (120), (121), 158, 183, 184. Breath147 Chloroform148 Gasping ineffective after respiration had practically ceased No. 31, 34, 35, 64, 70, 74, 75, 76, 80, 82, 86, 92,103, 104, 108,111, 138, 139, 143, 159, 160. Goats149 Saline150 Vagus, LeftPART VI.
152 Experiments conducted by Committee. 1 Date. 2 No. 3 Description of dog. 4 Time at which in- halation com- menced. 5 Cornea became insensi- ble after 6 Respira- tion ceased after 7 Pulse stopped after 8 Heart ceased beating after 9 Artificial respira- tion com- menced at 10 Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for 11 Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. Oct. 23 1 Full-grown well-nouri-hed pariah. 2 51 0 0 2 0 0 3 20 0 3 55 0 3 55 2 54 55 0 3 0 The chloroform administered freely on a cloth cap with a sponge inside. The respiration was in mere gasps for some time before its final cessation. The dog continued to yelp for some time after the cornea became insensible. Artificial respira- tion for three minutes failed to restore the pulse or respiration. P.-M.153 20 ... until 3m. 30s. after the commencement of inhalation. No yelping or groaning. Both ventricles moderately firmly con- tracted. Right auricle distended. Do. 9 Do. do. 10 17 35 0 1 53 0 3 30 0 4 10 0 5 40 Do. ... Chloroformed fully. No muzzle used. Respiration stopped after 2m. 40s., after which there were only three gasps, and it finally ceased at 3m. 30s. as noted in the table. Pulse stopped after 3m. 20s., but returned and continued for 4m. 10s. as noted Groaning continued for 2m. 35s. Do. 10 Full-grown pariah (light meal only at 7-30). 10 9 40 0 5 25 0 9 50 0 11 25 0 13 53 Do. ... Dog enclosed in a box 42 ½ in. by 19 in. by 17 ¼ in. (8 cubic feet contents), which was opened occasionally in order to examine the dog and chloroform given fully on a piece of blotting paper placed under the lid. No struggling or excitement. Removed from the box after 6m. and chloroform administered on a cap as before. Respiration ceased after 6m. 15s., but feeble occa- sional movements continued without probably any entrance of air into the chest for 9m. 50s. Heart as in previous cases. Blood in left ventricle rather venous in character. Do. 11 Full-grown pariah just caught 10 48 50 0 7 0 0 9 42 0 16 30 0 18 0 11 7 15 0 2 0 Dog enclosed in the same box and chloroform administered as in No. 10. No excitement, the dog lying down quietly after about 4m. Removed from the box after 8m. 30s. and chloro- form administered on cap as before, but the sponge was not pushed up close to nose so that the vapour was not so con- centrated as in the previous cases; and the last air which entered the lungs therefore contained a less proportion of chloroform. Both ventricles full but not distended. The blood in the right ventricle dark; that in the left ventricle arterial, but not bright red. Do. 12 Full-grown pariah, rather thin... 11 17 50 0 4 10 0 5 53 0 12 35 0 16 0 11 33 40 0 2 0 Dog in box as before, but with a small opening covered with a glass lid in order to observe movements. No excitement. Re- moved from box at 4m. 30s. and chloroform administered on a cap as in No. 11. Chest opened after 14 minutes, so that heart's movements could be seen. Only flickering contraction for last two minutes, after which the trachea opened and lungs inflated by means of bellows, but no restoration of heart's movements occurred, although it was stimulated by pressure. Do. 13 Full-grown pariah brought in 3 hours before, no food since arrival. 11 40 50 0 4 28 0 5 50 0 7 7 0 8 30 11 48 40 0 1 50 In box as before. No excitement. Dog fell down in box at 11h. 44m. 8s. Removed after 4m. 30s. and chloroform adminis- tered as before. Chest opened at 11h. 48m. 40s. The heart only feebly flickering for half a minute. Do. 14 Full-grown but rather small-sized pariah dog, rather thin, no food. 2 45 50 0 4 55 0 10 47 0 12 27 0 12 54 ... ... The dog in the same box but excited by putting crackers inside the box and hammering it outside. Chloroform as before freely on blotting paper inside the box. Dog fell down after 3m.45s. Removed from the box after 5m.45s. and chloroform administered on a cap as before. Respiration very slow after 8 minutes. A few flickering movements of chest wall after respiration had practically ceased. Heart as in No.11. Blood rather venous on left side. Do. 15 Large-sized full-grown pariah, not fed recently. 3 2 25 0 4 15 0 8 10 0 9 32 0 10 19 ... ... The dog in box and excited by crackers as in No. 14. Dog fell down after 1m. 50s., but continued to struggle. Dog removed from box after 4m. 50s. and chloroform continued as before. Breathing very shallow after 7m. hardly more than flickering movement of the chest wall. P.-M.154 1 Date. 2 No. 3 Description of dog. 4 Time at which in- halation com- menced. 5 Cornea became insensi- ble after 6 Respira- tion ceased after 7 Pulse stopped after 8 Heart ceased beating after 9 Artificial respira- tion com- menced at 10 Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for 11 Remarks. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m s. h. m. s. h. m. s. Oct. 24 16 Small-sized but fully-gown pariah just brought in. 3 17 50 0 6 55 0 15 50 0 17 40 0 18 11 Dog in the same box, only without agitation. Chloroformed as in previous cases. Removed from the box after 7m. 5s. and chloroform continued as before. Evulsion of the nails per- formed after 9m. 17s. and while respiration continued. No apparent effect on the pulse in femoral artery. Internal rectus muscle cut through after 13m. 40s. Pulse did not intermit during operation but was felt to be hard and cordy. This condition had not been previously observed. Chloroform temporarily interrupted during operation. Pulse became feeble and intermittent after 15m. 5s. A very little, almost venous, blood in the left ventricle. Right side full. Liver very much congested, the large veins of the splanchnic area engorged, but venous radicles almost empty. Oct. 25 17 Full-grown well-nourished dog fed with beef tea about a quarter of an hour previously. 9 30 15 0 4 15 0 6 5 0 7 12 0 7 50 9 34 5 In the same box, but this had been made more air-tight. Chloro- form fully on blotting paper. No excitement, the dog lying down after 3m. 50s. and rolling about from side to side. Con- vulsed violently at 4m. Taken out of the box at 4m. 45s. and chloroformed with the ordinary cap. Respiratory move- ments and heart sounds both feeble at that time. Post-mortem 155 Do. 22 Full-sized fairly-nourished pariah. 10 50 33 0 12 25 0 19 21 0 21 30 0 22 15 ... ... Chloroformed with Junker's inhaler. No muzzle. The ball being compressed 20 times in a minute. Struggled a little at first. cornea becoming insensible very gradually. Breathing ceased at 12m. 38s., but returned at 14m. 30s., the pulse dur- ing this interval being very rapid. Respiration then very shallow, but continued until 19m. 24s. after the commencement of inhalation. Four drachms of chloroform used. Heart, liver and venous radicles as in No. 20. Do. 23 Half-breed Spaniel-pariah badly nourished. 11 27 33 0 2 32 0 5 18 Not noted exactly. 0 8 5 ... ... Chloroformed with Junker at the rate of 40 squeezes per minute. The pulse stopped about ½m. after the respiration; exact time not noted. Two drachms of chloroform used. Left ventricle empty. Liver and venous radicles as in No. 20. Do. 24 Half-breed black and tan pariah well nourished. 11 47 20 0 1 27 0 7 32 0 7 49 0 9 0 ... ... Chloroformed with Junker squeezing rapidly so as to keep the second ball distended. Respiration stopped at 4m. 26s., but the chloroform being discontinued to listen to heart, the res- piration returned and finally ceased after 7m. 32s. Left side of heart almost empty and otherwise as in No. 23. 2 ½ drachms of chloroform used. Do. 25 Full-sized strong pariah 2 25 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... Manometer experiment. Oct. 26 26 Full-sized pariah (brown) fairly nourished. 7 44 0 8 32 1 8 34 0 No ces- sation. Employed but not timed. Box 8 feet cubic contents, prepared as in No. 21, with eight drachms of chloroform fully evaporated before the dog was put in. Transferred at 8h. 19m. 30s. into another box of 9 ½ cubic feet contents prepared in the same way, before the dog was put into it. with 9 ½ drachms of chloroform, so that the proportion of the vapour was equal in the two boxes. Removed from the box at 8h. 32m. Heart beating very fast, but no pulse could be felt. Breathing returned after a few minutes but stopped again, and was only fully restored after artificial respiration had been employed. Dog fell down at 7h. 53m. Box changed at 8h. 19m. 30s. Do. 27 Same dog 8 52 0 9 29 0 9 31 30 9 31 50 Not employed. Repetition of the last experiment with the same dog, which was still drunk from the previous experiment. Recovered. Respiration returning about 1 minute after the heart was supposed to have ceased beating. Respiration again stopped 9h. 35m. 30s. Breathing again 9h. 37m. 30s. During this time pulse had not stopped. Cornea sensible at 9h. 38m. 30s. Respiration 34 per minute, and the dog fully recovered even- tually. Was lying down at the commencement, Box changed at 9h. 22m. Do. 28 Same dog 10 44 0 11 35 0 11 35 0 ... Same boxes as in the last with 8 drachms and 9 ½ drachms of chloroform, respectively. Respiration gasping at 10m. 48s. and afterwards continuously very feeble, but regularly. On respiration ceasing at 11h. 35m., he was taken out of the box and the pulse could not be felt and the heart, which was beating very slowly, was thought to have stopped. He recovered, however, without artificial respiration and commenc- ed to breathe spontaneously at 11h. 41m. Dog fell down in box at 10h. 47m. 30s. Box opened at 11h. 23m. 30s. * * Nos. 29 to 185 were manometer experiments.
156 Experiments conducted by Sub-Committee. 1 Date. 2 No. 3 Description of dog. 4 Time at which in- halation com- menced. 5 Cornea became insensi- ble after 6 Respira- tion ceased after 7 Pulse stopped after 8 Heart ceased beating after 9 Artificial respira- tion com- menced at 10 Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for 11 Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. I(a).157 as quickly as possible, but immediately afterwards, two or three seconds at most, the heart and pulse stopped simulta- neously. It was impossible to perform ordinary artificial respi- ration, as no air could be forced in or out of the lungs. Post-mortem158 1 Date. 2 No. 3 Description of dog. 4 Time at. which in- halation com- menced. 5 Cornea became insensi- ble after 6 Respira- tion ceased after 7 pulse stopped after 8 Heart ceased beating after 9 Artificial respira- tion com- menced at 10 Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for 11 Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. I (f).159 I (h).160 1 Date. 2 No. 3 Description of dog. 4 Time at which in- halation com- menced. 5 Cornea became insensi- ble after 6 Respira- tion ceased after 7 Pulse stopped after 8 Heart ceased beating after 9 Artificial respira- tion com- menced at 10 Artificial respira- tion con- tinned for 11 Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. Oct. 31 270 Full-grown ill nourished pariah 9 48 0 Not noted. 0 2 30 0 6 30 0 7 42 ... ... Chloroform in tin box as in the last case. Did not struggle at all during inhalation. Do. 271 Full-grown well-nourished pariah. 10 0 0 Do. 0 3 0 0 6 40 0 10 15 ... ... Struggled as usual. Breathed again 50s. after the respiration ceased and continued breathing for 50s. Chloroform given as in the last case. II (c).161 II (b).162 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog. Time at which in- halation com- menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tion com- menced at Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for Remarks. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. 1889. Nov. 4 308 Ill-nourished mangy pariah puppy between 4 and 5 months old. 10 7 0 0 0 45 0 1 40 0 4 50 0 5 25 10 9 0 0 4 0 Morphine injected at 9h. 47m. Struggled slightly. Artificial respiration continued for 4m.; no effect. Pulse stopped during artificial respiration. Artificial respiration commenced after 20s. Unsuccessful. Do. 309 Full-grown pariah puppy ema- ciated. 0 28 50 0 0 46 0 1 4 Not noted. Not noted. 10 30 15 0 6 0 Morphine injected at 10h. 17m. Dog died. Artifical respiration commenced after 21s. Unsuccessful. Do. 310 Full-grown powerful pariah... 10 38 0 0 0 48 0 1 52 ... ... 10 40 0 0 8 0 Morphine injected at 10h. 23m. Natural respiration re-establish- ed at 10h. 48s. Artificial respiration commenced 8s. after breathing stopped. Successful. Do. 311 Emaciated full-sized pariah... 11 6 0 0 1 0 0 3 4 Not noted. Not noted. 11 9 20 0 12 0 Half grain morphine injected at 10h. 52m. Artificial respiration commenced 16s. after breathing stopped. Unsuccessful. III (c.)163 III (d).1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog. Time at which in- halation Com menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tin com- menced at Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s h. m. s. IV (a).Do. 359 Full-sized well-nourished pariah... 10 18 6 0 1 30 2 7 30 2 8 40 2 9 2 ... ... 2 drs. chloroform given as above. Dog was recovering at 11h. 9m. 1 dr. of chloroform added at 11h. 10m. Dog was seen to be recovering again at 12, when another drachm of chlo- roform was added. Dog 27 pounds in weight. I (f).1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog. Time at which in- halation com- menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tion com- menced at Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. Nov. 11 378 Small monkey 3 13 0 0 7 36 0 14 20 0 15 55 0 17 23 In glass box at 3h. 13m. and chloroformed. Fell down at 3h. 20m. Taken out of box at 3h. 20m. 30s. Weight 5 lbs. Do. 379 Do 3 35 0 0 0 32 0 0 50 0 1 20 0 3 21 This monkey was asphyxiated when brought on the table owing to the noose around his neck having been drawn too tightly, and he was, after much difficulty, recovered. He was imme- diately after chloroformed on the table and not placed in the box. Weight of monkey 6 lbs. Do. 380 Do 3 43 13 0 3 4 0 7 32 0 8 12 0 9 3 Put into the glass box at 3h. 42m. 13s. Fell down at 3h. 45s. Taken out of box at 3h. 45m. 30s. Chloroformed pushed as in the other cases. Nov. 12 381 Young monkey 10 23 0 0 8 30 0 11 30 0 12 50 0 14 15 Put into the glass box at 10h. 23m., fell down at 10h. 30m. Taken out of box 10h. 32m. Temperature after taking him out of box 101.4 F., temperature after death 100.4 F. Weight 5 lbs. Do. 382 Do 10 54 0 0 16 12 0 17 3 0 18 7 0 23 5 Put into the glass box 10h. 54m. Fell down at 11h. 7m. 30s. Taken out of box 11h. 9m. 4s., and cloth inhaler placed over head. Temperature 103.2 F. when taken out of the glass box; after death 102.3 F. Weight 4 lbs. I (j).Do. 393 Old small and emaciated pariah 11 31 0 0 1 10 0 2 25 11 34 0 0 4 0 Artificial respiration was commenced 35s. after breathing had ceased and proved unsuccessful. Do. 394 Under-sized fairly-nourished pariah 2 40 0 0 0 45 0 1 30 2 42 0 0 6 0 Artificial respiration commenced 30s. after respiration stopped. Gasped twice after 2m. and ceased. Artificial respiration started again and continued for 4m. and proved unsuccessful. Do. 395 Full-sized well-nourished pariah 2 50 0 0 0 55 0 2 5 2 52 20 0 9 0 Artificial respiration commenced 15s. after respiration ration ceased and continued for 9 minutes. Proved unsuccessful. Do. 396 Do 3 3 0 0 0 30 0 1 30 3 4 35 0 3 0 Artificial respiration was commenced 5s. after the respiration had ceased. Dog revived. Do. 397 Full-sized healthy pariah 3 12 45 0 1 12 0 2 35 3 15 50 0 4 0 Artificial respiration was commenced 30s. after the respiration had ceased and proved unsuccessful. Do. 398 Do 3 27 30 0 1 17 0 2 45 3 30 50 0 1 0 Artificial respiration was commenced 35s. after the respiration had ceased. Dog revived. Do. 399 Small but full-grown pariah 3 44 30 0 2 0 0 1 30 3 46 30 0 6 0 Artificial respiration was commenced 30s. after the respiration had ceased. Unsuccessful. Nov. 14 400 Full-grown small ill-nourished pariah. 10 26 0 0 0 7 0 8 8 Not noted. 10 35 8 0 6 0 Chloroformed in a deal wood box 8 cubic feet capacity. Dog fell down at 10h.32m. 32s.; taken out at 3h. 33m. and placed on the table and some chloroform given. Artificial respira- tion was commenced 1m. after breathing had ceased. A needle was put into the heart at 10h.41m. and the heart was found to be contracting. Artificial respiration continued for 6m., but proved unsuccessful. Do. 401 Large-sized ill-nourished pariah 10 53 0 Not noted. 0 12 0 Not noted. 11 6 0 0 6 0 Chloroformed in the same manner at 10h. 53m. Dog fell down at 10h. 57m. 30s. Taken out at 10h. 58m. and placed on the table and more chloroform given. Artificial respiration was commenced 1m. after the respiration ceased. It was con- tinued for 6m., but proved unsuccessful. Do. 402 Large-sized well-nourished pariah. 11 15 0 0 16 10 11 31 35 0 2 0 Chloroformed in the same manner at 11h. 15m. Dog fell down at 11h. 23m. 45s. Taken out at 11h. 26m. 30s., placed on table more and chloroform given. Artificial respiration was commenced 25s. after the breathing had ceased and proved successful. Do. 403 Do. do. 11 36 0 0 9 2 11 45 32 0 8 0 Chloroformed in the same way. Fell down at 11h. 39m. 36s. Taken out and chloroformed on table at 11h. 40m. Artificial respiration was commenced 30s. after the breathing had ceased and proved to be unsuccessful. Do. 404 Full-sized ill-nourished pariah 11 53 10 0 3 30 0 6 8 11 59 43 0 4 0 Chloroformed in the same way. Dog fell down at 11h. 55m. 28s. Taken out at 11h. 56s. placed on the table and chlor- oformed again. Artificial respiration was commenced 25s. after the respiration had ceased and proved unsuccessful. Do. 405 Full-sized well-nourished pariah and one that had revived in a former experiment. 12 7 0 0 6 30 12 13 37 0 5 0 Chloroformed in the same way. Fell down at 12h. 11m. Taken out of box 12h. 11m. Artificial respiration commenced 7s. after respiration had ceased, and proved unsuccessful. Do. 406 Full-sized well-nourished pariah 2 40 0 0 0 5 2 15 20 0 9 0 Chloroformed in the same box. Fell down at 2h. 43m. Taken out at 2h. 44m. 0s. and chloroformed on the table. Artificial respiration was commenced 20s. after respiration had ceased. Dog revived. Nov. 15 407 Under-sized fairly-fed pariah 9 31 38 0 0 43 0 1 16 9 33 6 0 5 0 Struggled a great deal. Artificial respiration was commenced 12s. after the breathing had ceased and proved successful. Chloroformed in large doses with cloth inhaler. Do. 408 Full-grown well-nourished pariah 9 40 30 0 1 2 0 2 0 9 42 40 0 4 0 Struggled a great deal. Artificial respiration was commenced 10s. after breathing had ceased and proved successful. Chloroformed in large doses with cloth inhaler. Do. 409 Full-grown small and well-nourished pariah. 9 53 0 0 0 54 0 1 25 9 54 40 0 3 0 Struggled as usual. Artificial respiration was commenced 15s. after the breathing had ceased and proved successful. Chloroformed in large doses with cloth inhaler. 167
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog. Time at which in- halation com- menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tion com- menced at .Artificial respira-tion con- tinued for Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. Nov. 15 410 Under-sized lean pariah... 10 13 0 0 1 0 0 2 4 10 15 19 0 4 0 Struggled a great deal. Artificial respiration was commenced 15s. after the breathing had ceased and proved successful. Chloroformed in large doses with cloth inhaler. Do. 411 Small full-grown well-nourished pariah. 10 33 30 0 0 45 0 2 40 10 36 30 0 2 0 Struggled as usual. Artificial respiration was commenced 20s. after the breathing had ceased and proved successful. Chloroformed as in the above case. Do. 412 Large-sized well-nourished pariah... 10 41 0 0 1 35 0 8 12 10 49 37 0 8 0 Struggled as usual. Artificial respiration was tried 25s. after the breathing had ceased and found to be successful. Nov. 18 413 Full-sized healthy pariah... 9 41 0 0 2 20 0 3 50 9 45 15 0 3 0 Gradual administration of chloroform on cap. Dog struggled very much. Artificial respiration 25s. after the breathing ceased and found successful. Do. 414 Under-sized badly-nourished pariah 9 50 0 0 1 20 0 2 30 9 53 0 0 10 0 Chloroform administered gradually as above. Artificial respira- tion by bellows began 30s. after breathing stopped and con- tinued for exactly 10m. After this, needle inserted into heart; no movement. Dog struggled during inhalation. Dog died. Do. 415 Full-sized well-nourished pariah... 10 7 0 0 2 3 0 2 30 0 5 0 10 9 45 0 6 0 Chloroformed gradually as above. Artificial respiration by bellows began 15s. after breathing stopped and continued for 6m. No effect. Needle inserted into heart and movements of flag noted. Dog died. Dog struggled as usual during inha- lation Do. 416 Full-sized healthy pariah... 10 20 0 0 1 15 0 3 10 10 23 30 0 5 20 Chloroformed gradually as above. Artificial respiration in the ordinary way began 20s. after respiration ceased and continued for 5m. 20s. Dog died. Struggled a great deal during inhalation. Do. 417 Full-grown large-sized pariah... 10 32 0 0 7 0 0 11 18 10 43 33 0 4 0 Chloroform given in very small quantities and very gradually with a large admixture of air. Dog revived. Artificial res- piration was commenced 15s. after the respiration had ceased. Struggled during administration. Do. 418 Do. do.... 10 32 30 0 4 30 0 9 2 11 1 57 0 3 0 Chloroformed gradually as in the last case. Artificial respira- tion was commenced 25s. after the respiration had ceased and proved successful. Struggled during administration. Do. 419 Do. do.... 11 8 0 0 4 12 0 7 33 11 15 38 0 5 0 Chloroform gradually given as in the last case. Artificial res- piration was commenced 25s. after the respiration had ceased. Dog died. Struggled during administration. Do. 420 Do. do.... 11 21 0 0 2 40 0 16 2 11 37 22 0 6 0 Chloroform gradually given as in the last case. Artificial res- piration was commenced 20s. after respiration had stopped and proved successful. Do. 421 Full-grown large-sized healthy pariah. 2 32 0 0 5 30 0 7 0 2 39 20 0 8 0 Chloroform gradually given as in the last case. Artificial res- piration commenced 20s. after respiration had stopped. Dog died. Did not struggle much. Do. 422 Full-grown under-sized fairly-nour- ished pariah. 2 51 30 0 1 45 0 4 15 2 56 0 0 1 30 Chloroformed as in the last case. Artificial respiration com- menced 15s. after respiration had ceased. Dog revived. Did not struggle very much. Do. 423 Full-grown well-nourished pariah... 3 0 0 0 2 30 0 9 14 3 9 34 0 3 0 Chloroform administered in small doses gradually as in the last case. Artificial respiration was commenced 20s. after breath- ing had ceased and proved successful. Struggled as usual.
22 Do. 424 Do. do. 3 14 0 0 2 8 0 18 6 3 32 16 0 2 0 Struggled a great deal. Chloroform was administered as in the last case and artificial respiration tried 10s. after breathing had ceased. Dog revived. Do. 425 Do do. 3 36 45 0 2 55 0 11 50 3 49 5 0 3 0 Struggled as usual. Chloroformed as in the previous case. Artificial respiration was commenced 30s. after the breath- ing had ceased and proved successful. Artificial respiration continued for 3m. Do. 426 Do. do. 4 1 0 0 2 3 0 4 8 4 5 38 0 3 0 Struggled. Artificial respiration was commenced 30s. after the breathing had ceased, but did not prove successful. Chloroformed with a large dose and with little air. Nov. 19 427 Full-grown fairly-nourished pariah 9 48 0 0 1 20 0 2 5 9 50 20 0 9 0 Dog struggled very much; large dose of chloroform given with very little air. Artificial respiration commenced 15s. after breathing had ceased. Gave several gasps after 4m. Artifi- cial respiration unsuccessful. Do. 428 Do. do. 10 6 0 0 6 15 0 13 45 10 20 0 0 3 30 Chloroform given in measured doses of 1 drachm at a time. Total given 4 drachms. Artificial respiration commenced 15s. after breathing had ceased and proved successful. The doses of chloroform administered at an interval of 4m. between each dose. Dog struggled slightly. Do. 429 Large-sized full-grown well-nour- ished pariah. 10 26 0 0 3 45 0 12 2 10 38 7 0 2 0 Chloroform given as in above case. Artificial respiration com- menced 5s. after the breathing had ceased. Successful. Do. 430 The same dog chloroformed a second time as soon as the cornea became sensitive. 10 43 4 0 2 18 0 5 23 10 48 32 0 2 0 Chloroformed as in the above case, and artificial respiration com- menced 5s. after the breathing had ceased. Successful. Do. 431 The same dog chloroformed for the third time as soon as the cornea became sensitive. 10 55 0 0 1 43 0 10 3 11 5 8 0 4 0 Chloroformed as in the last case. Artificial respiration was commenced 5s. after the breathing had ceased, but proved unsuccessful. Do. 432 Young monkey 11 13 0 0 0 58 0 2 0 11 15 5 0 6 0 Chloroformed as in the last case. Artificial respiration was commenced 5s. after the breathing had ceased, but proved unsuccessful. The bellows were used in this case for artifi- cial respiration and found unsuitable. Do. 433 Do. 11 33 0 0 1 25 0 5 0 11 38 5 0 4 0 Chloroformed as in the last case. Artificial respiration was commenced 5s. after the breathing had ceased and proved successful. Artificial respiration was carried on in the ordi- nary manner with the hands. Do. 434 Do. 12 0 0 0 1 15 0 4 56 12 5 6 0 3 0 Artificial respiration was commenced 10s. after the respiration had ceased and was unsuccessful. Nov. 20 435 Do. 9 26 0 0 8 0 0 17 20 9 43 50 0 3 0 Chloroform administered in 1 dr. doses at intervals of 5 minutes with plenty of air. Artificial respiration commenced 30s. after the breathing had ceased. Animal revived. Total chloroform administered 3 drs. Do. 436 Do. 10 23 0 0 1 15 0 1 58 10 25 28 0 2 0 Chloroform administered as in the last case. Artificial res- piration commenced 30s. after the respiration had ceased. Proved successful. VI (a).1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog. Time at which in- halation com- menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tion com- menced at Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. Nov. 20 439 Full-grown pariah dog 10 0 0 Chloroformed for an hour and allowed to revive for a further observation the next day. November 21st 9 57 0 0 1 0 0 2 5 0 2 45 0 5 55 21stVI (b.)1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog. Time at which in- halation com- menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tion com- menced at Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for Remarks. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. Nov. 22 464 Full-grown monkey 11 20 0 0 1 40 0 9 27 11 30 22 0 7 0 Chloroformed as in the above case, and artificial respiration com- menced 55s. after the breathing had ceased. Unsuccessful. Do. 465 Do. 11 38 0 0 0 53 0 3 0 11 41 55 0 1 0 Chloroformed as in the above case, and artificial respiration com- menced 55s. after the breathing had ceased. Monkey revived. Do. 466 Subject of a former experiment 11 51 0 0 1 3 0 3 16 11 55 11 0 2 0 Chloroformed as in the above case, and artificial respiration tried 55s. after the respiration had ceased. Proved successful. VII.Do. 473 Young Monkey 11 46 0 0 1 35 0 3 23 11 50 23 0 2 0 Chloroformed as in the above experiment. Artificial respira- tion was commenced one minute after the breathing had ceased, and proved successful. Struggled. V (b).1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog Time at which in- halation com- menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tion com- menced at Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for Remarks. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. V (c).V (a).1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog. Time at which in- halation com- menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tion com- menced at Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. V (e).23 Do. 538 Full-grown small pariah 11 12 0 0 0 30 0 2 0 0 2 8 0 4 10 Strychnine 3-20th gr. injected at 11th. 5m. Became convulsed at 11h. 9m. from strychnine poisoning and was chloroformed in this condition. Do. 539 Full-grown large-sized pariah 11 16 0 0 0 32 0 2 58 0 3 6 0 5 23 Strychnine 1-5th gr. injected at 11th. 15m. Tetanic convulsions set in in a minute's time, and the dog was at once chloro- formed. Do. 540 Full-grown pariah 11 20 0 0 0 45 0 0 53 0 1 56 0 5 0 Strychnine 1-5th injected at 11th. 18m. Tetanic convulsions set in in 1½ minute first time, and the dog was chloroformed in this condition. Gasped 13 times before the heart ceased to beat. Do. 541 Full-grown small-sized pariah 11 33 0 0 0 42 0 2 12 0 3 7 0 6 53 Strychnine 1-5th gr. injected at 11h. 23m. Chloroformed during convulsions. III (i).1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Date. No. Description of dog. Time at which in- halation com- menced. Cornea became insensi- ble after Respira- tion ceased after Pulse stopped after Heart ceased beating after Artificial respira- tion com- menced at Artificial respira- tion con- tinued for Remarks. 1889. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. h. m. s. Dec. 5 560 Full-grown fair-sized pariah 4 32 0 0 0 57 0 3 14 4 35 29 0 4 0 Morphine ½ gr. injected at 4h. 20m. Struggled. Artificial res- piration was commenced 15s. after the breathing had ceased. Successful. Do. 561 Full-grown emaciated pariah 4 41 0 0 1 5 0 5 52 4 47 17 0 3 0 Morphine ½ gr. injected at 4h. 30m. Struggled. Artificial res- piration was commenced 15s. after the breathing had ceased. Successful. Do. 562 Full-grown large pariah well nour- ished. 4 52 0 0 1 3 0 1 23 4 53 38 0 6 0 Morphine ½ gr. injected at 4th. 40m. Artificial respiration was commenced 15s. after the breathing had ceased. Dog strug- gled. Unsuccessful. Dec. 6 563 Full-grown well-nourished pariah 10 40 0 0 0 57 0 3 6 10 43 36 0 10 0 Morphine ½ gr. injected at 10h. 25m. Struggled. Artificial res- piration was commenced 30s. after the breathing had ceased. Unsuccessful. Do. 564 Full-grown fair-sized pariah. 11 57 0 0 1 9 0 2 2 11 59 32 0 6 0 Morphine ½ gr. injected at 10h. 38m. Struggled. Artificial res- piration was commenced 30s. after the breathing had ceased. Successful. This dog died 2m. after it was taken outside and left alone. Do. 565 Full-grown Well-nourished pariah. 11 7 0 0 1 10 0 2 26 11 9 56 0 4 0 Morphine ½ gr. injected at 10h. 50m. Struggled. Artificial res- piration was commenced 30s. after the respiration had ceased. Needle in heart at 14h. 16m. ceased to vibrate. unsuccessful. V (b).Do. 572 Full-grown small-sized pariah 11 40 0 0 2 29 0 4 32 0 5 4 0 7 52 Chloroform given as in the above case. Struggled feebly. Thorax opened and the heart's action watched to the end. Weight 20 lbs. Do. 573 Do. do. 11 51 0 0 1 33 0 8 13 0 9 0 0 13 28 Chloroformed as in the previous case. Struggled. Thorax opened after the needle ceased to vibrate and the heart found to have stopped acting. Weight 17 lbs. Do. 574 Small and emaciated pariah 12 17 0 0 1 11 0 4 40 0 5 3 0 8 6 Chloroformed as in the previous case. Struggled. Thorax opened after the needle ceased vibrating and the heart's ac- tion found to have stopped. Weight 18 1bs. Do. 575 Small but full-grown pariah 3 13 0 0 1 13 0 11 3 0 11 55 0 18 22 Chloroformed in a similar manner. Struggled. Thorax opened after the needle ceased to vibrate. Weight 17½ lbs. Do. 576 Full-growth large-sized pariah 3 36 0 0 1 28 0 3 47 0 3 59 0 7 4 Chloroformed in a similar manner. Struggled very much, Thorax opened after the needle ceased to vibrate. Weight 28 lbs. Do. 577 Full-grown well-nourished pariah 3 45 0 0 2 16 0 3 0 0 3 15 0 7 11 Chloroform administered as in the previous case. Struggled. Gasped before the heart ceased to beat. Thorax opened after the needle ceased to vibrate. Weight 21¾ lbs. Do. 578 Full-grown large-sized pariah 3 56 0 0 1 2 0 10 8 0 10 24 0 14 3 Chloroformed in the same way. Struggled. Weight 30 lbs. Do. 579 Full-grown, small and emaciated pariah. 11 6 0 0 3 42 0 8 13 0 8 32 0 12 9 Chloroformed as in No.578. Struggled. Thorax opened after the needle ceased to vibrate. Weight 20 lbs. Do. 580 Full-grown well-nourished pariah. 11 20 0 0 1 10 0 3 54 0 6 2 0 6 53 Chloroformed as in the above case. Struggled severely and had to be held down with great force. Weight 29 lbs. Do. 581 Full-grown well-nourished pariah. 3 3 0 0 1 52 0 8 4 0 9 0 0 12 8 Chloroform given as in the above case. Struggled severely and had to be held down with force. Dec. 11 582 Full-grown well-nourished pariah 10 37 0 0 0 58 0 2 15 0 3 3 0 7 14 Chloroformed in small doses on cloth cap inhaler. Struggled very much, and had to be held down forcibly. Weight 30 lbs. Do. 583 Do. do. 10 47 0 0 1 38 0 4 18 0 4 56 0 10 21 Chloroformed similarly. Struggled. Weight 26 lbs. Do. 584 Full-grown small pariah 11 1 0 0 1 0 0 4 6 0 4 23 0 13 42 Chloroformed similarly. Struggled. Weight 19 lbs. Do. 585 Full-grown large pariah 11 16 0 0 1 7 0 2 5 0 2 47 0 8 50 Chloroformed similarly. Struggled. Weight 35 lbs. Do. 586 Full-grown well-nourished pariah 11 27 0 0 1 47 0 4 31 0 4 52 0 8 16 Chloroformed similarly. Struggled very much. Gasped before heart ceased beating. Weight 32 lbs. Do. 587 Do. do. 11 37 0 0 2 51 0 8 41 0 8 59 0 12 4 Chloroformed similarly. Struggled. Weight 31 lbs. Do. 588 Do. do. 11 53 0 0 2 2 0 5 53 0 6 0 0 15 31 Chloroformed similarly. Struggled. The respiration returned in this case at 12h. 2m. and continued for 3 m. when the chloroform was renewed in the cap. Weight 28 lbs. 179
181 PART VII.182 animal could thus be watched. When it fell down insensible it was taken out at once, and if prolonged anæsthesia was required, as for blood-pressure experi- ments, an additional quantity of the anæsthetic was administered on a cap. Administration of Definite Proportions of Chloroform Vapour. In order to make animals respire air charged with definite proportions of chloroform vapour, the following methods were used: 183 was employed with the addition of a bellows, which drew the air from the box. In the valve-hole of the bellows a ¾ in. tube was fixed by means of a large cork bung. This tube was connected by a ¾ in. India-rubber tubing with one of the tubes in the end of the box already described, and by the Y tube with the tracheal canula. A valve over the nozzle of the bellows and another on one arm of the Y tube regulated the direction of the current of air. These valves consisted simply of a piece of dentists' sheet rubber tied loosely over the end of the nozzle or tube and then cut across. When the air passed in one direc- tion, eg.,from the bellows, it blew open the edges of the cut rubber, but when it tried to pass in the opposite direction the edges of the rubber fell together and presented a considerable obstacle. Administration of Definite Quantities of Chloroform. For the purpose of giving a definite quantity of chloroform with un- limited quantity of air another apparatus was used. It consisted of a wide- necked jar 7 in. deep by 5½ in. internal diameter. The top was closed by a tightly-fitting bung, in which there were three apertures. In two of these were fixed ¾ in. glass tubes, and the third was closed by a small stopper, which could be withdrawn at will for the purpose of introducing chloroform into the bottle. To one of these tubes a valve was attached which only allowed the air to enter the bottle, but prevented its exit. The other tube was connected by wide rubber tubing with a tin inhaler. This inhaler was in the form of a truncated cone, and had two ¾ in. tubes opening into it. One of these was at the apical end, and the other at the side of the inhaler. The apical tube was con- nected with the bottle just described. The side tube was closed by a simple valve consisting of a perforated cork, over which a strip of thin sheet rubber was loosely fastened. At each expiration the rubber allowed the air to escape freely, but at each inspiration it closed completely. The muzzle of the animal was inserted in the inhaler, and a piece of Mackintosh was tied round the inhaler and the head of the animal by means of an elastic bandage, so that the inhaler was nearly air-tight. On inspiration the air passed through the glass cylinder, becoming partially charged with chloroform on its way, and during expiration it passed out through the side tube of the inhaler. For the purpose of keeping up artificial respiration an ordinary bellows was employed, but to the nozzle of it was fixed a valve which closed when the bellows was pressed, and thus directed the air into the lungs, but opened as the bellows expanded, and thus allowed the air to escape from the lungs.
184 This valve consisted of a T tin tube ¾ in. in diameter. One end of its trans- verse limb was connected with the nozzle of the bellows, the other with the tracheal canula. The opening of the perpendicular limb was covered by a piece of tin plate mounted on a hinge in such a way that when the bellows was pressed a cord tied to the upper handle of the bellows pulled it down and closed the opening, but during the expansion of the bellows it was raised and the opening uncovered by the elastic force of a piece of India-rubber. The cord and India-rubber were both attached to a short rod fixed at right angles to that which carried the cover. When it was desired to give chloroform vapour along with the insufflated air, a piece of blotting-paper soaked with chloroform was held over the valve-opening of the bellows, or the opening was closed by a bung and wide rubber tube, and the blotting-paper was placed inside the tube. In the first comparative experiments on the effects of chloroform and ether on the heart in monkeys, when given by insufflation, the bellows and valve just described was employed. Instead of one limb of the T tube being directly connected with the tracheal canula, however, it was connected to a small glass T tube. Each of the other limbs of this tube passed to a long- necked glass flask furnished with a tubulature through which the anæsthetic could be introduced. The neck of the flask was closed by a stopper through which two glass tubes passed, one reaching only a little way below the stop- per, but the other extending nearly to the bottom of the flask. One of these tubes was connected with the glass T tube just mentioned, and the other with a glass canula tightly tied into the trachea. At each blast of the bellows the air passed onward through these glass flasks to the trachea of the animals, and returned through the flasks and out through the valve during the expansion of the bellows. It is evident that by this arrangement a certain admixture of ether and chloroform vapour will occur in the tubes between the animals and the valve, so that after a few blasts both animals will receive mixed vapour, although that of chloroform will predominate in the one case and that of ether in the other. In order to avoid this admixture the bellows was used without, the valve, and provision was made for allowing the air to escape from the lungs by using a different form of tracheal canula. Instead of a plain glass tube a small glass T tube was used. The perpendicular limb was inserted into the trachea, and one end of the horizontal limb was connected with the bellows the other was partially closed by a piece of glass tubing, one end of which was drawn out and cut off so as to leave only a small orifice. This was attached by a short piece of India-rubber tubing to the limb of the T tracheal canula. The orifice was of such a size that while it presented
185 sufficient resistance to the passage of air to allow the lungs to become com- pletely inflated when the bellows was pressed, yet during the expansion of the bellows it allowed the air to escape from the lungs and thus prevented over- distension. When it was desired to give vapour by insufflation to one small animal, such as a monkey or rabbit, only the India-rubber ball of Junker's apparatus was used instead of the bellows. Junker's apparatus consists of the India- rubber balls ordinarily used for spray producers, but these arc attached to a bottle in which the anæsthetic is put in such a way that, instead of producing spray, the air simply passes through the anæsthetic and becomes charged with the vapour. It then passes to a mouth-piece and is inhaled. The mouth-piece which we employed for dogs was made of stout leather in the form of a truncated cone. A metal rube ¼ in. in diameter, opening into the inhaler at its apical end, conveyed the vapour into it. This tube fitted the opening in the inhaler, through which, it passed closely, but the junction was not air-tight. The inhaler at its other end did not fit the dog's muzzle at all closely, so that there was a free circulation of air. When we wished to prevent this and to give concentrated vapour, a piece of Mackintosh was tied over the inhaler and muzzle so as to close up the space between them. Blood-pressure Experiments. In all these experiments the pressure within the arteries was registered by one of Ludwig's kymographs consisting of a mercurial manometer and a revolving cylinder on which the oscillations of the mercury were recorded. Thu paper on the cylinder was smoked by means burning camphor. The float on the mercury of the manometer consisted of it cylindrical piece of ivory tapering below and bearing above a steel wire, near the top of which it writing. point of glass was fixed by a bit of cork. This point was kept in contact with the smoked paper by a silk thread loaded with a shot. To the top of the mano- meter was fastened a second writing point made of glass or of copper foil. When the mercury was at zero this point was at the same level as the point on the float, and as the cylinder revolved it traced tile zero line round it and thus afforded a means of estimating the height of the blood-pressure at any moment. The cylinder revolved once in nearly thirty minutes. Near the top of the cylinder was placed a magnetic time-marker worked by a DuBois Reymond's key. An observer sat constantly beside the cylinder with a watch in front of him, and recorded on the cylinder by means of the time-marker, as well as the 24
186 instant when anything worthy of note occurred, the time, minute by minute. When the revolution of the cylinder or drum was complete it was removed, and a second drum, which was kept ready smoked, was substituted. The tracing on the first drum was at once cut off and varnished, and another paper put on and smoked, so as to be in readiness when required. The movement of the cylinder in these experiments is much slower than that usually employed, but it has the double advantage of allowing the whole record of the experiment to be reproduced and of rendering distinct even small variations of pressure which are apt to escape observation in the long tracing taken on a rapidly revolving drum. But the tracing taken on such a slow drum as we employed has the disadvantage of being so compressed that the individual pluse-beats are invisible. To obviate this defect a method of double registration was adopted, which had been devised by one of us for a previous research. In the connection be- tween Ludwig's kymograph and the artery a Y tube was inserted, by means of which a second kymograph, the cylinder which revolved once in 3m. 9s., or about ten times as rapidly as the first could also be brought into communication with the artery. Both provided with stop-cocks, so that they might either be allowed to work simultaneously, or the communication of either or both with the artery cut off at will. If a mercurial manometer had been used in the second kymograph it would have given the number of pulse-beats, but the oscillation of the mercury itself would have modified their size and form. One of Fick's spring manometers was therefore used, and in order to prevent the oscillations of the mercury in the other manometer affecting Fick's the stop- cock connecting the former with the artery was almost always turned off when the latter was turned on. This plan had the further advantage that the straight line traced by the float of Ludwig's kymograph attracts the eve so that a glance at the tracing at once shows when a tracing has been taken by Fick's manometer, and by attaching corresponding numbers to these blanks in the trac- ing from Ludwig's kymograph and the tracings Fick's kymograph, the relation of the tracings to each other can be at once ascertained. The clock-work of Fick's kymograph was usually started at the moment when the stop-cock connecting it with the artery was opened. A short time is required for the clock- work to attain its fall speed, and therefore at the beginning of a tracing the oscilla- tions may be closer together, and the pulse may appear to be quicker at the begin- ning than the end of a reading of Fick's kymograph, although the pulse rate might be really the same throughout. The cylinder was usually, though not
187 always, allowed to revolve a little space after the connection of the manometer with the artery had been cut off in order that the readings might be more dis- tinctly separated from one another. The mercurial manometer was connected with the artery partly by metal and partly by India-rubber tubing. The Fick's manometer was connected entirely by India-rubber tubing in the experiments up to November 5th, but after that the connection was made partly by India- rubber and partly by metal, exactly as in the Ludwig's. The whole of the connecting tubes, except those between the Y tube and the manometers where water was used, were filled with a solution of sodium bicarbonate in order to prevent coagulation occurring in them. This solution was made by saturating boiling water with sodium bi- carbonate and then boiling it for some minutes, so as partly to convert it into carbonate. It was then allowed to cool, and was poured into a large glass vessel furnished with a tubulature near the bottom, and suspended on the wall of the room at a height or 7 ft. from the floor and 4½ ft. above the level of the table From the tubulature of this vessel the solution was conveyed by India-rubber tubing to a glass T-piece inserted in the connection between the manometers and the artery. By means of clamps the soda solution could be passed at will through the tubes leading to the artery. Before beginning an experiment the pressure within the manometer was raised by means of the soda solution to a height approximating to the estimated blood-pressure in the animal so as to prevent the blood from passing too far up the tubes and forming clots. This was also done whenever the artery and mano- meter had to be disconnected on account of clots having formed. In order further to lessen the tendency to form clots an elongated glass bulb was introduced into the tubing, and was connected by a short piece of India-rubber tube with the glass canula in the artery. The canulas used for insertion into the artery were blown with a short neck to hold the ligature and prevent the canula from slipping out or the artery. They were of various sizes so as to fit the artery of the animal experimented on. In all the experiments, with one exception, the animal was first rendered insensible by being placed in a box with chloroform, as ether given in this way would have been useless. As soon as it became insensible it was taken down and the legs fastened with cords to a simple piece of board 4 ft. 6 in. long by 2 ft. 2 in. broad. To one end of this one of Bernard's dog-holders was attached and in this the animal's head was put so as to hold it still. Chloroform or ether was then administered on a nose-cap as required to keep the animal
188 anæsthetised and one carotid exposed, the left being selected in every case as it was nearest to the manometer. Occasionally one or both vagi were also exposed and a loop of thread placed under them, but not tightened round them. The artery was firmly ligatured on its distal side, and the proximal side was compressed by spring forceps covered with India-rubber tubing to prevent their injuring the coats of the artery. The artery was then opened, the canula inserted, and firmly tied in. The canula was then filled with soda solution by means of a pipette, and connected with the glass bulb already mentioned, care being taken that no air bubbles were present. The spring forceps were then removed from the artery, the stop-cock of the manometer turned so as to open the connection with the artery, and the tracing commenced. All this time the animal was kept unconscious by the administration of an anæsthetic from time to time as required. Registration of the Movements of the Heart. These were sometimes registered by inserting a needle into the heart, and connecting a thread to the end which projected outside the thorax when this was unopened, or outside the cardiac walls When the thorax was opened and the heart exposed. This thread was in the first instance tied to the lever of a Marey's tambour (A), and the movement transmitted by it to a second one (B), which recorded it. The resistance of the two tambours, however, was too great, and the tracings obtained were unsatisfactory. Better results were obtained by connecting the needle in the heart with a time-marker by means of two very light wooden pulleys. The lever of the lime-markers being kept up by a very fine spring, a very slight pull sufficed to depress it, and thus it marked even when the cardiac action was weak, and had the further advantage of opposing very little resistance to the action of the heart. Registration of the Respiration. For this purpose the two Marey's tambours A and B were used. A was usually connected to a needle pushed through the chest walls into the diaphragm. On one or two occasions an incision was made just under the margin of the ribs, and a piece or thick copper-wire flattened at one end, was introduced, so that the flat pieces lay between the diaphragm and liver. The other end projected outside, and the thread from Marey's tambour was fastened to it. In some of the later experiments a fish-hook was used instead of a needle.
189 PART VIII.190 LECTURE ON CLINICAL SURGERY DELIVERED DURING THE WINTER SESSION OF 1854-55 BY JAMES SYME, Esq., PROFESSOR OF CLINICAL SURGERY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH. From 191 nothing to do with us; so far as my department is concerned, it might as well have been at Guy's Hospital or in Kamschatka, or anywhere else; indeed, it so happened that at the very time when that unfortunate event was taking place in another part of the establishment, I was myself performing an operation on a patient under chloroform in this theatre. In inquiring into the reason of this difference between the experience of chloroform in London and here, we have not far to search for the explanation; it must lie in one of three things, riz., difference in the chloroform, difference in the patients, or difference in the mode of administration: with regard to the chloroform, I believe, that most of that which is used in London is made in Edinburgh, and I know that some of the fatal eases might be shown to have occurred with Edinburgh chloroform. With respect to the patients, it appears that great care is taken in London to use chloroform only in persons free from chest affections, especially cardiac derangements: here we never ask any questions as to the state of the heart or constitution of the patients. In all cases where chloroform is required for an operation, it is freely given. Now, considering the frequency of cardiac disease. and particularly of fatly heart,192 As another example, I may mention the case of an old gentleman, aged seventy-four, affected with disease of the heart, from whose bladder I removed a large stone, some years ago. Chloroform was administered as he lay in bed; and he was put so fully under its influence, that he was taken from the bed, was operated on, and put back to bed, before he woke from his sleep. He recovered perfectly; but some time afterwards died and Dr. Begbie, on examin- ing the body, found the disease of the heart, which had been diagnosed during life. We cannot therefore attribute the absence of deaths here to our being more discriminating than others in the patients to whom we administer chloro- form; the very reverse, in fact, being the case. I think then, gentlemen, that we are necessarily led to the conclusion that the difference of results depends on difference in the mode of administra- tion. We know that in other cases differences in the method of procedure had led to differences of results, e.g., it was said in London that amputation at the ankle invariably caused sloughing; but it turned out that the surgeon who made this statement performed the operation in a manner that deviated much from the principles on which it is here performed successfully, and which led inevitably to sloughing so of dividing stricture by external incision, it was said that the extravasation of urine must necessarily take place in a dangerous manner, and that other serious complications may occur; but it turned out that the incision had been made without guide on a silver catheter; in short, with such deviations from principles as fully to account for the results. So far as I can ascertain, from what I have heard and read upon the sub- ject, there are important differences between the mode of administration of chloroform here and in London. It appears that here it is given according to principle, there according to rule. There great attention is paid to the number of drachms or minims employed; here we are entirely regardless of the amount used, and are guided only by the symptoms of the patient. The points that we consider of the greatest importance in the administration of chloroform are, first, a free admixture of air with the vapour of the chloroform, to ensure which a soft porous material, such as a folded towel or handkerchief, is employed, pre- senting a pretty large surface, instead of a small piece of lint or any other apparatus held to the nose; secondly, if this is attended to the more rapidly the chloroform is given, the better, till the effect is produced; and hence, we do not stint the quantity of chloroform. Then193 the respiration; you never see anybody here with his finger on the pulse while chloroform is given. So soon as the breathing becomes stertorous, we cease the administration; from what I have learned it is sometimes pushed further elsewhere, but this we consider in the highest degree dangerous. Attention to the tongue is another point which we find of great consequence. When respira- tion becomes difficult, or ceases, we open the mouth, seize the tip of the tongue with artery-forceps, and pull it well forward; and there can be little doubt that death would have occurred in some cases if it had not been for the use of this expedient. We also always give the chloroform in the horizontal position, and take care that there is no article of clothing constricting the neck. There are thus considerable differences between our practice and that which prevails more or less elsewhere. We use no apparatus whatever, take the respiration for our guide, attend to the condition of the tongue and never continue beyond the point when the patient is fully under the influence of the anæsthetic. You observe that in this matter I am very far from taking any credit to myself; all that I have done has been to follow the example of Dr. Simpson, and all that I would say respecting our brethren in London, is, that they have not been so fortunate as to get into the right way in the first instance, and I would urge upon them to banish all previous notions, and to keep in view the essential points to which I have alluded; then, if unfortunately there should still be fatal cases, I shall not presume to speak further upon the subject. As the matter at present stands, the discussions prevalent in the profession tend to give the public a dread of chloroform, and to limit the advantages which it confers; and so long as the difference of opinion seemed due to important difference of practice, I felt called upon to address to you the observations I have made. 25
194 THE CHLOROFORM COMMISSION IN INDIA. [Reprint of an article from the "pioneer" of November 6th1889.] The arrival of Dr. Lauder Brunton and Surgeon-Major Bomford in Hyderabad, to re- peat and extend the chloroform experiments which were carried out last year in the Nizam's capital, is of interest not only to the medical profession, but to the public generally: and some account of the scope of their investigations and their bearing on the practice of surgery may not be out of place. Chloroform was introduced to the medical profession by the late Sir J.Y. Simpson of Edinburgh, who first employed it in midwifery in the year 1847. It was very soon afterwards used in surgery in Edinburgh by the late Mr.Syme, and its position as an anæthetic quickly became established. It was some little time before Syme could lay down precisely the principles on which the safe administration of chloroform depends, and meanwhile deaths occurred elsewhere discussion arose in the profession as to their cause, and the public became alarmed and acquired a dread of chloroform which thenceforth limited its advantages. In the year 1855 Mr. Syme published a lecture in the Lancet in which he showed that there was an important difference in practice in the administration of chloroform in Edinburgh and in London. In Edinburgh, surgeons were guided as to the effect of chloroform entirely by the respiration; in London, partly by the respiration and partly by the circulation, so that it was, and still is, the rule in London to watch the pulse carefully throughout the adminis- tration. The teaching by the two schools amounted to this: in Edinburgh it is held that chloroform never affects the heart directly, and that signs are always given by the respiration whereby danger can invariably be averted; in London it was taught that one, if not the greatest, danger of chloroform lies in the fact that it sometimes affects the heart directly, and that its administration is never free from risk. Syme's lecture was couched in polemic terms and increased the divergence of opinion between the Edinburgh and the London surgeons, and from time to time deaths from chloroform continued to occur. In 1864 a Commission was appointed by the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society to enquire into the action of chloroform with special reference to its effect upon the heart. This Commission performed few reliable experiments, but nevertheless arrived at the conclusion that chloroform does directly affect the heart. In 1870 Syme and Simpson died still adhering to their original opinion and never having had a fatal accident with chloroform. Between 1870 and 1880 Syme's principles were gradually lost sight of, and the Opinion that chloroform affects the heart gained ground, and was fortified by another Commission which was appointed in Glasgow in 1879, and, like the previous one, did not hesitate to condemn chloroform upon altogether insufficient data. As the belief in the safety of chloroform has decreased, two remarkable phenomena have come about: (1) deaths from chloroform have increased in exact proportion to the amount of attention bestowed upon the heart and circulation; and (2) an effort has been made to substitute there or some other anæsthetic for chloroform.
195 So far no anæsthetic has been discovered which can he favourably compared in any way with chloroform administered on Syme's principles. Ether can be used only in certain climates and under certain conditions. Nitrous oxide is said to induce epilepsy and insanity, and none of the other so-called anæsthetics deserves any consideration at all. A further evil result of the morbid and unfounded dread of chloroform fostered by the English and Scotch Commissions has shown itself' in many of the large medical schools and hospitals in Great Britain, where anæsthesia has been relegated to specialists, and students have ceased to enjoy the advantages of practical teaching in anæsthetics, so that they now begin practice almost ignorant of a subject in which they ought to have become experts before they left college. Syme196 that chloroform might be with perfect safety administered, provided the administrator watched the respiration with sufficient care. Surgeon-Major Lawrie197 causing the death of the animal, however, it appeared rather to he a safeguard, preventing the anæsthetic from being conveyed in too great quantities to the nerve centres. In our note to one of Dr. Brunton198 mulgation of this report, what would be the result to the administrator ? Would a coroner's jury find death from misadventure or would the verdict be one of manslaughter ? I know that I should be very sorry to administer chloroform if I knew I was liable to be found guilty of manslaughter should the patient die under it, and I fancy that many other doctors would say the same. For the last fourteen years I have administered chloroform precisely as the Com- mission recommends, and although I never lost a patient under it, still I went so near doing so twice that my experience may be interesting. About twelve years ago, when civil surgeon of a very large district in India, I had a great deal of surgery, and so great was the crush of people coming daily that at Last it became almost impossible to get through the work. To enable me to cope with it I used to make my assistant surgeon give chloroform to one patient while I went on examining others in order to pick out those cases that were suit- able for operation. I worked in a verandah only a few yards from the door of the operating- room, and one day my assistant surgeon rushed out to tell me that the patient on the table to whom he was administering chloroform was dead. In a moment I reached the room, and at once commenced trying to resuscitate the patient, and I succeeded after about twenty minutes of the hardest work I ever had. My assistant surgeon assured me that he had given very little chloroform, when suddenly the man stopped breathing and at once passed into the alarm- ing condition in which I found him. He (my assistant) was a very capable man, of great ex- perience in giving chloroform, so that I had no reason to doubt his word. Moreover, he had helped me to give chloroform hundreds of times, and knew how to give it just as well as I did. Some two years afterwards I was giving chloroform to an old woman, and she had only taken a few whiffs, not enough to harm an infant of a week old, when suddenly, without the least previous warning, she ceased breathing and became to all appearances dead, and it took me all 1 knew to get her round again. There was nothing whatever in her previous condition to lead one to suppose that she could not tolerate chloroform, and I know that no one could have given it more carefully than I did. I say, therefore, that one certainly cannot give chloroform with absolute safety in every case. I do not write this to find fault with the general findings of the Commission. On the contrary, I know from my own experience that they are absolutely true, and I rejoice that at last the truth is known about chloroform, and that it is to a man of my own service the credit is due for this crowning victory in its favour. I only say that I am not satisfied as to its absolute safety in every case, and I shall be glad to hear whether my experience of it can be borne out by others. I am, Sirs, yours faithfully, A. DEANE, M.D., CROYDON, Jan. 20th, 1890. Surgeon-Major, Bengal Med. Service.
199 LETTER FROM DR. E. F. NEVE. TO THE EDITORS OF 200 ANNOTATION FROM THE LANCET, JANUARY 25TH, 1890. In our annotation on the report of the first Hyderabad Chloroform Commission in our issue of March 2nd, 1889, we strongly deprecated anything like slipshod carelessness in the administration of chloroform, or anything likely to lead to such carelessness. Nothing, we are certain, could have been farther from the minds of either of the Commissions than to inculcate carelessness, and a careful perusal of the practical conclusions which we printed last week will show how necessary the Commissions consider care to be, and how stringently they inculcate it. Yet one of our contemporaries, in referring to the report of the Commission, says: 201 I greatly fear that, as a result of the Hyderabad Commission, the opinion that death from chloroform is always prefaced by some change or sign of danger in the patient's breathing will gain ground. But does the Commission prove this ? I think not. What it does prove is that in dogs and monkeys and some other animals, in India, respiration always gives warning of an overdose and ceases from one to ten minutes before the heart stops for ever. This is no new statement, for in Snow's work on Anæsthetics, published in 1857, we find the following passage; 202 time, and they will continue so to do as long as chloroform is administered. I have the less hesitation in quoting these particular cases, for in each of them the anæsthetic was given without any inhaler, all forms of which the Commission condemns. Referring to the three fatal cases above mentioned from Snow203 patient usually swallows all the saliva which is secreted, often in large quantity, and this pro- duces after vomiting; whereas when the patient is on his side the saliva will run out of the corner of his mouth, and consequently cannot irritate the mucous membrane of the stomach. Also, when the patient is lying on his side, the tongue is not liable to fail back and thus impede respiration; in natural sleep and in cases of apoplexy how constantly do we notice that a patient on his back snores heavily and breathes uneasily, but when turned on his side all noise ceases and he breathes quietly. The next conclusion I agree with, provided the patient is placed on his side for the reasons above stated. The principles of the next five paragraphs have been taught in the London schools for years. I can answer for Charing-cross Hospital, where the pupils are systematically instructed in the theoretical and practical details of anæs- thetics. In paragraph 33 of the report the Committee state that they performed a large number of operations which are reputed to be particularly dangerous from shock, such as extraction of teeth, evulsion of nails, section of muscles of the eye, &e. These operations were performed in all stages of anæsthesia, and even when the animal was merely stupefied with chloroform; in no case was there anything suggestive of syncope or failure of the heart204 half a century205 these it appears that deaths from chloroform in the London hospitals amount to about 1 in 1,236, and from ether to 1. in 4,860 administrations. The late Mr. Syme's cases and my own form a continuous series of daily administrations* of chloroform in Europe and in India, from 1847 to 1890, without any deaths, and if Mr. Roger Williams's reasoning from statistics is correct, it is logical to infer that the administration neither of chloroform nor of ether, as conducted in London, is as safe as the administration of chloroform on the principles advocated by Mr. Syme. There can be no doubt that there is a flaw somewhere in the London teaching with reference to anæsthetics, and evidence on this point is supplied by the letter of Mr. Woodhouse Braine, who maintains that it is far more important to watch for 'pallor of the face than for partial interference with the breathing in chloroform administration, having previously stated that pallor of the face is one of the signs that the patient is dead, Mr. Braille -writes as if the acceptance of the truth about chloroform would be disastrous to anæsthesia specialists. The reverse of this would be the case, as it is well known that immense numbers of people are deterred from having operations performed on account of the dread of anæsthesia caused by the present position of anæsthetics. It is for anesthetists themselves, however, or for the surgeons who employ them, to decide which policy is likely to be more conducive to their own interests; to persevere in an- nouncing publicly that anæsthetics cannot be given safely in London, or to a fair trial to syme's principles, which have stood the test of experience,;and have been proved by the Hyderabad Commission to rest on a secure physiological foundation. The question of chloro- form administration is no longer one of doubt or of opinion, and moreover it is one of common sense. If Hyderabad students can be taught to give chloroform as they do day after day, with guaranteed safety, a fortiori it must be a much more easy task to teach Loudon students to do the same. I am, Sirs, your obedient servant, EDWARD LAWRIE, Surgeon-Major. Hyderabad, Deccan, March 12th, 1890. MEDICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. AN ordinary meeting of this Society was held on February 10th, the President, Dr. Theodore Williams, in the chair. The President sail that so much hung upon the valuable work of the Commission at Hyderabad that the council of the Society- had decided to give up an evening to listening to Dr. Lauder Brunton's account of experiments, and to the discussion following thereon. [* By daily administrations must be understood several administrations every day.206 Dr. Brunton commenced by stating that the conclusions arrived at by the Commission had already been published by "The Lancet", but he thought that the main value of their work lay in the number of experiments that had been done, which had been recorded graphically, and which would be printed and circulated so that they might be available to all, and the conclusions of the Commission concerning them might be criticised, and, where necessary, corrected. Syme attributed the absence of fatalities in the use of chloroform at Edinburgh to two facts207 used, a sudden fall of pressure was observed. It then behoved them to inquire how deaths during the administration of chloroform were likely to occur, and how they were to be pre- vented. They investigated the direct action of chloroform upon the heart. It was well known that if chloroform were injected into ordinary striated muscle it became hard like a board, but they found that injection of chloroform into the veins did not produce a distinct action on the cardiac muscle fibre,208 ing teeth produced no shock. The effects of dress were tried on female monkeys; a plaster- of-Paris jacket was put on to imitate stays, and a tight bandage round the abdomen to resemble the band of a petticoat. Under both these disadvantages the animals seemed to die very quickly indeed. Phosphorus was administered to induce fatty degeneration, and in some the heart seemed to stop more quickly than in healthy animals, but the effects were not marked. Their main conclusions were that chloroform and ether acted in the same way, both paralysing the respiratory centre before the heart; if pushed after the respiration had ceased, the heart would be paralysed. Chloroform was more potent than ether, which latter could not be used in very hot countries, and the chloroform should be given with plenty of air, for suffocation and chloroform formed a deadly combination. The deaths from chloroform were due to asphyxia and resulted from imperfect observation of the respiration. During the prosecution of the research they had a large number of accidental deaths, but all these were due to inattention to the respira- tory condition. The pulse did not begin to fail till after the respiration, and if the respiration were not attended to till after the pulse had failed it was probably too late. If attempts were made to pay attention to both the respiration and the pulse, neither perhaps would be observed well, and hence it was advisable to keep the attention fixed on the respiration alone. Dr. Brunton concluded by saying that we owed a great deal to the Nizam, who not only caused the research to be undertaken, but had generously consented to publish it, so that a complete set of the photographic tracings would be presented to all the principal medical libraries in the world. In the discussion which followed, Mr. Bailey dealt with the clinical side only. In the early days of chloroform he thought it was administered as well in London as in the north, but many deaths occurred which were considered to be due to failure of cardiac action. The plan of administering nitrous oxide before ether did away with its disadvantages, and as perfect an anæsthesia could be obtained with ether as with chloroform, and the death-rate from the former was smaller. He found it quite easy to watch not only the respiration, but also the pulse and the pupil, and the latter, he thought, gave most valuable indications as to the patient's condition. Mr. Braine said that in fatal cases under chloroform the patient would be going on well, then a little more chloroform would be given, when a pallor of the cheeks would be noticed and no pulse would be felt, though the patient breathed on. He thought that one case so observed in the human being was more valuable than thousands of experiments on animals. Dr.Sansom agreed that it was most valuable to have these experiments on blood- pressure reduced to manometric certainty. The question was what were the teachings of experiments on animals, and how did they bear on the practice of the present day ? Years ago careful experiments were performed both in England and abroad, which led to the same conclusions that the Hyderabad Commission had shown more elaborately, namely, that the heart in animals was an ultimum moriens. But animals varied very much in their reactions to anæsthetics even in the same species, and he thought that we could not argue direct from animals to man, whom the influence of emotion placed in an entirely different category. While there was a fair amount of uniformity in the necropsy records from animals, in man this was not so, for in some cases all chambers of the heart were found full of blood, which pointed strongly to the idea that death took place from paralysis of the heart rather than of the
209 respiration. His general conclusion was that, though experiments were valuable, they ought not to be accepted as solving the question, and while practical anæsthetists valued these experiments at their proper worth, they could not prevent the possibility of syncope occurring. Mr. Carter referred to a case which occurred years ago when he was giving an anæsthetic, and the patient died. He could not remember the state of her respiration, but saw nothing to arouse suspicion till he noticed the pallor of the countenance. His own opinion was strongly in favor of chloroform as opposed to ether for ophthalmic operations. Ether was attended by more struggling and consequent venous congestion, and the liability to hæmorrhage from the choroid was therefore greater. Dr. Routh advocated the use of methylene as an anæsthetic. He had seen apparent death follow the administration of an anæsthetic in six cases; in all the respiration seemed to fail as much as the pulse, and they were all restored by turning them topsy-turvy. He had likewise seen a fatal case from ether administration. He thought that all apparatus for the registration of chest movements would be valuable. Dr. Day had administered methylene 1300 times without an accident. He had given it in cases of weak and dilated heart and in mitral stenosis without bad effect. He quoted from Sir Spencer Wells's work to illustrate its value. Dr. Hewitt had never known respiration to fail while the pulse was good or fair at the wrist, and he had seen two or three cases in which the pulse had given the first sign of danger. Dr. Brunton, in reply, said that then were certain differences of opinion as to the relative advantages of chloroform and ether. He had found the respiration stop in animals when the pulse was quite good at what corresponded to the wrist. Their experiments with ether were done under difficulties owing to the temperature in Hyderabad; they had almost to cut off the air before they got anæsthesia with ether. After poisoning from much diluted chloroform there was a great difficulty in bringing the animal round, but there was not this difficulty with a stronger dose; the reason was that in the former case it was difficult to say when the animal had stopped breathing. He felt sure that the truth about the question would come out later when the whole investigation was published, and when others would have an equal opportunity with themselves of studying the work that had been done. ANNOTATION FROM THE LANCET, FEBRUARY 15TH, 1890. Dr. Lauder Brunton delivered a very interesting address on his work at Hyderabad at the Medical Society on Monday evening. Describing the methods he employed, now pretty familiar to those who have pursued physiological research, he passed round a number of tracings illustrative of the fall of blood-pressure under chloroform, &c. Dr. Brunton reiterated in the main the conclusions which have already appeared in our columns, but supplemented them by details of work which could hardly find a place in the formal report. The discussion to which Dr. Brunton's singularly lucid descriptions gave rise tended to indicate conclusions not altogether in harmony with the Hyderabad Commission's results, While admitting the force 27
210 of Dr. Brunton's arguments as applied to the lower animals, the practical anæsthetists present deprecated the extension of conclusions from the lower animals to man, unless positive evidence of uniformity of behaviour of chloroform towards men and beasts were adducible. It was further pointed out that the evidence produced was, so far as the action of the drug upon the heart went, wholly negative, and that the clinical observations of Snow, Clover, and living anæsthetists were opposed to the Commission's contention that chloroform kills through the failure of respiration, and not by primary heart failure. While conceding the obvious and great value of experiments made upon the lower animals to elucidate conditions prevailing in man, one of the speakers pointed out that considerable divergence in reaction towards chloroform existed in them, and this was an additional reason for not relying too much in the present discussion upon the negative evidence Dr. Brunton advanced. None will seek to diminish the great value, both scientifically and practically, of Dr. Brunton's painstaking researches, and it must be accepted as a sign of respect to him that so eager and lively a discussion was elicited by his description of his part in the work of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission. LETTER FROM DR. DUDLEY BUXTON. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." SIRS.211 reputation was at stake. Again, we have long acknowledged the danger of death from asphyxia occurring during chloroformisation, and Snow pointed out long ago how over-dosage would, by paralysing the medullary centres, bring about death; but our experience212 LETTER FROM DR. SHAND. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." SIRS,213 LETTER FROM MR. EWEN J. MACLEAN. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." SIRS,214 LETTER FROM THE GLASGOW CHLOROFORM COMMITTEE. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." SIRS,215 quence of failure of the pulse having been taken to mean that the heart has "suddenly ceased." I am here only referring to those cases in which chloroform itself would seem to have been the cause of death; and in such cases, which are usually rapid in their course, I do not think the clinical evidence we possess is sufficient to disprove the contentions of the Commission. But this, I submit, is the least important part of the subject. Even though we admit the fact that, when chloroform itself is the direct cause of death respiration ceases before the action of the heart, we are confronted by question which seems to me far more important than that upon which the Commission has laid so much stress. When fatalities occur during the administra- tion of chloroform, are those fatalities invariably caused by the direct toxic effects of the drug? In other words, have we not conclusive evidence to show that, in man, deaths under chloro- form sometimes arise by reflex cardiac failure which is only indirectly due to the anæsthetic ? I cannot regard the experiments of the Commission in this direction as rendering such a posi- tion untenable; for cases have come under my own observation in which symptoms of cardiac depression obviously of reflex origin have arisen. Whether it be the low vascular tension of chloroform narcosis or other conditions I know not: but I feel sure that there is something that renders the human heart under chloroform susceptible to impulses which are utterly inopera- tive under ether. I am inclined to the belief that that the performance of many operations under chloroform is attended by considerable risk from this quarter: and I am by no means satisfied that cardiac inhibition is less likely to be produced during profound than during imperfect anæsthesia under chloroform. Not long ago I administered chloroforms, by means of Junker's apparatus, to a patient of about thirty-five years of age, whose general health was good. Anæs- thesia was produced in from eight to ten minutes, and was characterised by muscular flaccidity abolition of lid-reflex, and slight stertor. There were two stages in the operation about to be performed, the first of which consisted in placing a temporary ligature round the carotid artery in the neck. Whilst the artery was being exposed for this purpose the pulse became extremely feeble, the face pale, and respiration shallow, and the operator had some difficulty in recognis- ing the carotid artery by reason of its extraordinary diminution in size. The head was lowered. After three or four compressions of the chest the pulse improved, and, as rigidity and lid-reflex soon reappeared, I was obliged to continue the administration, having recourse to ether for the remainder of the operation, which was successfully performed. The day after the operation, whilst the wound over the carotid was being examined, the patient's face suddenly became pale, the artery contracted as on the previous occasion, the eyes were observed to turn upwards and the muscles of the jaw to twitch, and for a few seconds unconsciousness was present. Now in this case, when the first attack of syncope occurred, the patient was thoroughly anæsthetised by chloroform; whilst the quick return of muscular rigidity and of lid-reflex proves that the anæsthetic was in no way to blame as a direct cause of the symptoms. Cases of this kind are, I believe, by no means uncommon, and they would seem to point to the conclusion that reflex syn- cope may undoubtedly arise under chloroform even when the anæsthesia is profound. Apart from anæsthetics, some persons are, as is well known, more prone to syncope than others, and this would seem to be so with regard to patients under chloroform. How can we compare the patient above referred to, to the pariah dog ? Would the latter be likely to be attacked with syncope by manipulating its carotid ? I gather from the report of the Commission that syncope, should it arise, is a safeguard against chloroform poisoning rather than a condition
216 involving much danger to life; but we cannot look upon it in this light when we meet with it upon the operating table. In conclusion, I would say a few words concerning the indications afforded by the pulse during chloroform administration. There is much evidence to show that, in whatever way death occurs during chloroform narcosis, the pulse, if carefully watched, usually gives warning of the approach of danger before respiration has become seriously affected. In those cases in which cardiac depression is only indirectly due to the chloroform217 LETTER FROM DR. CHARLES E. SHEPPARD. To THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." SIRS,218 On making a general survey of the experiments as reported we cannot help being struck by one very important fact, viz., the uniformity with which the various phenomena presented themselves in each series, even in those purposely complicated for special objects. In other words, the percentage of typical cases is very large, and contrasts markedly with what is observed in the human subject, where typical form is comparatively uncommon, but is nevertheless, when it occurs, recognised as the normal and made the point of departure for the consideration of all others. It is chiefly on this account that I feel I must disagree with the state- ment of the Commission that, if the rules laid down be followed, "chloroform may be given in any case requiring an operation with perfect ease and absolute safety." The public, who are our judges, if anything goes amiss, will219 ANNOTATION FROM THE LANCET, MARCH 22ND, 1890. It is rather extraordinary to observe what an outcry has lately been raised by a number of our lay contemporaries against the experiments upon the effect of tight-lacing as a cause of death during the administration of anæsthetics which were made by the Chloroform Commis- sion in Hyderabad, and mentioned in an address given at the Medical Society by Dr. Lauder Brunton. In some papers these experiments have been quoted as examples of the infliction of pain upon sensitive animals to an extent that is "horrifying," and have been stigmatised as "wanton cruelty." Some of the papers appear to have thought also that Dr. Lauder Brunton's observation that the experiments were made on female monkeys as being more like women than dogs referred to their mental and not to their physical characters, whereas it is obvious that the observation had reference only to the shape of the body as influencing the respiration, and in shape the body of the monkey more nearly resembles the human being than does that of the dog. Female monkeys were chosen in preference to males on account of the possibility that a difference might exist between the amount of thoracic and abdominal breathing in male and female monkeys similar to that which exists in women as compared with men. It is hard to see how these experiments can be looked upon as cruel, inasmuch as there was absolutely no pain inflicted, the experiments simply consisting in applying to monkeys under chloroform an amount of compression of the chest and abdomen which is self-inflicted daily by many thousands of women in Great Britain without anæsthetics. The objection has also been raised that the experiments were needless, as the effects of tight-lacing had been demonstrated over and over again; but it seems to have been forgotten that the experiments of the Commission were not made in regard to the effect of tight-lacing in general, but to the effect of tight-lacing as a factor in producing death during the administration of chloroform. Theoretically, no doubt, it ought to be easy to predict that tight-lacing would aid in the production of death during the administration of chloroform; but it is very easy to say, after the experiments of the Commission have shown this to be the case, that the results they obtained were well known before, and that no good has been gained by their experiments upon the subject. But practically the dangers of tight-lacing have not been properly appreciated, inasmuch as an unfortunate death occurred in Edinburgh from nitrous oxide administered for the extraction of a tooth, at the beginning of October last, shortly before the Commission began its labours. In this case there seemed to be reason to believe that tight-lacing had contributed in no small measure to the unfortunate result, and it was, indeed, this lamentable accident which led the Hyderabad Commission to make their experiments. These experiments will have served their purpose if they lead to the general observance of the rule which the Commission lays down in the third section of its conclusions, viz.: "To ensure absolute freedom of respiration, tight clothing of every kind, either on the neck, chest, or abdomen, is to be strictly avoided; and no assistants or by-standers should be allowed to exert pressure on any part of the patient's thorax or abdomen, even though the patient should be struggling violently. If struggling does occur it is always possible to hold the patient down by pressure on the shoulders, pelvis, or legs without doing anything which can by any possibility interfere with the free movements
220 of respiration." The outcry, foolish though it may have been, against the experiments just mentioned may not be altogether without its use if it leads to a general recognition of the dangers of tight-lacing or tight clothing generally in anyone who is about to take an anæsthetic. LEADING ARTICLE. "The Lancet," 29th March 1890. Professor H. C. Wood, conjointly with Dr. Hare, has communicated a paper upon the physiological action of chloroform to the American Medical News of Feb. 22nd. The authors criticise the work of the Hyderabad Commission, and are led to adopt very different views concerning the action exerted by chloroform upon the heart. Moreover, they take exception to an observation made by us in The Lancet of Jan. 18th, p. 139. We said, in speaking of the Hyderabad Commission: "The practical outcome of the research would appear to be that deaths are not inevitable. They are therefore preventable, and by due care in its administration they may be with certainty avoided." Professor Wood and his colla- borator do not appear to recognise that in using the above words we were expressing the conclusions of the Commission rather than our own. We were careful to add: "The conclu- sions of the Commission are sweeping, and without abundant evidence cannot be accepted." We have spoken with no uncertain sound from time to time concerning the dangers attending the use of chloroform221 noticed that death has been produced by primary cardiac arrest." Although possessed of these facts as the result of several years' work in the laboratory, it was determined, upon the publi- cation of the Hyderabad Commission's report, to re-investigate the matter. This was done with the result that Professor Wood became more than ever impressed by the fact that chloro- form can and does kill directly through primary arrest of the heart. One series of experiments went to show that the heart is directly affected and not reflexly, the view now commonly held by experts. A second series proved that although when large doses are given, respiration and the heart's action may cease synchronously, yet frequently the cardiac action ceases a perceptible period before the respiration comes to a standstill. The conclusions founded upon these experiments are well worthy of very careful consideration. The authors say chloroform acts as a powerful depressant poison upon both respiration and circulation; sometimes the influence is most felt at the heart, and death results from cardiac arrest; in other cases the drug paralyses primarily the respiratory centres, while in other instances it seems to act with equal force upon both medulla and heart." And, further, they are led to formulate "that cardiac arrest is specially prone to occur when chloroform is administered rapidly and in a con- centrated form." It is also stated by the writers of the paper that they have each witnessed deaths from chloroform in the human subject, in which the heart ceased some while before arrest of respiration took place. They suggest that if the report of the Hyderabad Commission is not materially modified in its main contention, viz., that chloroform does not cause primary cardiac arrest, the explanation may be found in some peculiarity of Indian pariah dogs, since European and American dogs unquestionably succumb to primary heart failure when allowed to inhale an unduly strong chloroform vapour. In The Lancet of September 21st, 1889, we made the same suggestion as Professor Wood does now, and pointed out the possibility of the animals experimented on in Hyderabad being peculiarly resistant to the action of chloroform, and also indicated that differences in resisting power might also exist between the inhabitants of different cities. We further indicated varia- tions in temperature as another possible cause of difference in the results of chloroform admin- istration. There may be other factors still unknown, and which may be ascertained by further experiment. We have no doubt that the experiments of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commis- sion and those of Drs. Wood and Hare were made with equal care, and the apparent discrep- ancies between the results will in the end only lead to a fuller and more perfect knowledge of the truth. But we have foreseen that it is quite impossible to come to a final conclusion re- garding the action of chloroform on man from experiments, however numerous and however careful, on the lower animals. Such experiments are of great value, but the question must also he worked out from the clinical side, and it is for this reason that we have sent out a re- quest for information regarding the results of the administration of anæsthetics. We trust that the difficulty of arriving at exact conclusions without a very large basis of facts will induce all those who can give us information to do so as fully as possible, and also to remember the proverb, "Bis dat, qui cito dat." When we have received these returns we purpose to have them collated, and to devote careful consideration to the whole question of the action of anæs- thetics, from its clinical as well as its experimental side.
222 LETTER FROM DR. A. MITRA. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." SIRS,223 REMARKS on the REPORT of the SECOND HYDERABAD CHLOROFORM COMMISSION, by JOHN G. McKENDRICK, M.D., (Professor of Physiology in the University of Glasgow); JOSEPH COATS, M.D., (Pathologist to the Western Infirmary, Glasgow); and DAVID NEWMAN, M.D., (Surgeon to the Western Infirmary, Out-door Depart- ment, Glasgow); Members of the British Medical Association Committee on Anæsthetics. (REPRINTED FROM THE BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL OF JUNE 14TH, 1890.) The work of the Commission224 dogs either by primarily paralysing the heart or the respiration." "In most cases respira- tion stops before the heart's action." "The danger of death from stoppage of the respiratory functions must be borne in mind in every case in which anæsthetics are given," &c. These sentences show that we recognised the danger to respiration. At the very beginning of our report we state: "Without going into detail, we may say that it soon became apparent to us that chloroform administered to dogs and rabbits has a disastrous effect on the respiratory centres; it is easy to kill one of these animals by pushing the chloroform till respiration is paralysed. In observing the rate of the heart during these experiments, it could often be determined by auscultation that its contractions were maintained after respiration had ceased. It was apparent, however, that even when failure of respiration was more directly the cause of death, the heart was, to some extent, simultaneously affected; there were even cases in which the heart appeared to fail at least as soon, if not before, the breathing." It is evident from this that we regarded the danger to respiration as a proved and indeed a well-recognised fact; and our special object was to investigate the question of how far chloroform was dangerous to the heart. The result of our inquiries was to convince us that danger to the heart is at least an occasional occurrence, and one to be kept in mind in watching a patient under the influence of chloroform. In summing up, we put the matter thus: "The chief dangers are (1) sudden stoppage of the heart; (2) reduction of the blood- pressure; (3) alteration of the pulse respiration ratio; and (4) sudden cessation of the respira- tion." In this enumeration we did nut intend to place the phenomena in the order of their relative frequency or importance, although we admit the sentence might bear this inter- pretation were it not taken in connection with the statements quoted above from the beginning of the report. The question, then, narrows itself down to this: Does chloroform ever kill by paralysing the heart? We assert that it may do so; the Hyderabad Commission hold that it never does so, and that it always kills by paralysing the respiratory centres or, in their own words, referring to experiments without recording apparatus: "In every case in which chloroform was pushed the respiration stopped before the heart." 5. Before entering on an examination of the Hyderabad observations, we may reiterate some of the points which our experiments seemed to bring out:225 middle line, which was carried by a pair of blunt scissors or boneforceps through the ensiform cartilage and lower part of the sternum. This was effected generally with no serious bleeding. It soon became apparent that, when chloroform is given in this way, there is at once a most serious effect on the heart; the right ventricle almost immediately begins to distend, the heart presently stops, with the right ventricle engorged with blood. The heart has often, in the case of rabbits, virtually come to a stand-still within a minute of the introduction of chlo- roform by the method described. The contrast was most striking when ether was used instead of chloroform, the other steps in the experiment being the same. Ether may be given for an indefinite period without interfering with the heart. We kept up artificial respiration with ether in the circuit for an hour, not including twenty minutes occupied in producing anæsthesia, and at the end of that time the exposed heart was beating as vigorously as at first." It might be objected to those experiments that the dilatation of the heart, especially of its right cavities, may be due to asphyxia, but the fact that the heart is not affected in the same way by ether as by chloroform, although the other conditions of the experiment are precisely similar, meets that objection. (b) During the operation of registering the blood-pressure either by the mercurial or by the spring kymograph, we observed in several instances, both in rabbits and in dogs, and especially in dogs, even when the blood-pressure was not very low, a sudden failure of the heart's action. This effect was a common occurrence during the administration of chloroform especially in the earlier stages or when the animal was recovering; it rarely happened with ethidene, and we never observed it with ether. This effect is well seen in the blood-pressure tracings from the rabbit, G and H.* During deep narcosis, these sudden variations do not occur. We were quite aware of the fact that these effects might be held to be due to a reflex mechanism, irritation of sensory nerves of the outer openings of the respiratory passages stimulating the inhibitory centre of the vagi in the medulla, and thus retarding or even arresting the action of the heart. Whatever may be the explanation, the fact remains that at certain stages in chloroform narcosis there may be sudden falls in blood-pressure due to interference with the heart's action, and no one will deny that this is a serious state of matters. (c) We have seen in more than one instance the blood-pressure of the dog become enor- mously reduced, and the pulsations become so infrequent as to be virtually ineffectual while respiration continued. A record of this experiment produced the "Glasgow trace," as it is termed by the Hyderabad Commission. 226 (ii) the explanation of the sudden effect on the heart sometimes occurring under the influence of chloroform, and observed equally by the Hyderabad Commission and by us, but ascribed by the Commission to asphyxia and by us to a peculiar, and apparently capricious, influence of chloroform. (i) In the report of the Hyderabad Commission it is stated that chloroform "causes a gradual fall in the mean blood-pressure..... As this fall continues the animal first becomes insensible, then the respiration gradually ceases, and, lastly, the heart stops." This is regarded as the normal course of events, and in confirmation of it reference is made to Ex- periments 168, 169, and 170. We have carefully examined these tracings, and others of a similar character. Like our own tracings, they show that, under the administration of chloro- form, the blood-pressure is continually lowered, and that when chloroform is pushed the depres- sion is apt to assume what the Hyderabad Commission admit to be a "dangerous" degree. These tracings seem to us in themselves to show that chloroform when pushed has a disastrous effect on the heart as well as on the respiration. In most of the experiments two different kinds of tracings were taken, 227 due to asphyxia." A number of tracings are adduced by the Hyderabad Commission in confirmation of these statements, and these we have carefully examined, with results different from those arrived at by them. In the first place, in Experiments 103, 119, and 157, quoted in Note 10 of Lancet Report, we have sudden falls of pressure, and opposite some of these, not all, there is the note "holding breath". Thus, in 103 (Ludwig), between Fick 20 and 21, there is a very sudden fall, at the bottom of which is noted "holding breath". Again, Trace 119, Fick 2, shows a sudden fall, and in the Ludwig trace we have a similar note. It is the same with 157, Fick 2, (not Fick 4, as in Report of Commission). But these sudden falls of pressure are not confined to occasions when the animal holds its breath. An examination of trace 157 is very instructive in this respect. Soon after the com- mencement of this tracing there is, as shown in the Ludwig trace, a sudden fall of blood- pressure, with the note,"taking off gag he suddenly held his breath, and pressure fell". There was then a slight recovery of pressure, and trace Fick 2 was taken which starts from a low pressure, and shows a tracing somewhat like our A. Further on in the tracing comes Fick 4, which is very like that of Fick 2, so like that the Commission in their Report have misplaced the numbers, but the animal is distinctly noted as "struggling, but not holding breath". It is noted, however, that chloroform is being given "with the cap closely applied". If we add to this that in the cases noted the fall of blood-pressure seems to have been almost simultaneous with holding the breath, the effect on the heart can hardly be regarded as the result of asphyxia, as asphyxia is well known to induce reduction of blood-pressure only after a consider- able time. (See further on.) Turning to the experiments referred to in Section 12, where the breathing was arti- ficially interrupted, we have been astonished to find that the traces do not bear out the state- ment of that paragraph. For example, take Experiment No. 150. The following facts are noted in regard to it. (a) Near the beginning of that race we find that "holding nose and mouth" produces a distinct fall, not nearly so abrupt or great as in our A, or as in observations under "holding the breath". (b) Again, at 11.55, pressure has greatly fallen under the in- fluence of chloroform, which has rendered the animal insensitive, before the nose and mouth are stopped; the fall continues, but not with any approach to the rapidity of those previously mentioned under "holding the breath". (c) Further on, at 12.5-30, after the animal had partly recovered, and when chloroform is being given with "lots of air", and with the animal "just insensitive, stopping the nose and mouth produces a much more gradual fall than in the previous two occasions apparently because the animal is less affected by the chloroform. (d) Again, at 12.9-30, the chloroform is pushed with the cap crammed over the nose, but the res- piration is not obstructed, and there is a fall similar to that in b. (e) Still further on, at Fick 7, we have "mouth and nose closed", but there is scarcely any effect on the blood-pressure and very little on the pulsation. (f) At Fick 10, chloroform having been stopped a while, holding mouth and nose produced little effect on the pressure, but distinct slowing of the pulse. After this the vagi are cut, and the experiment need not be followed further.
228 No. 151 brings out similar facts, namely, that when chloroform is pushed, whether the nose and mouth be held or not, the blood-pressure falls, and there is the additional fact that this seems to depend very little on the action of the vagi. Thus, soon after the beginning of the trace there is the note "stop nose and mouth ", which is followed by a slight fall. One minute after this the Fick tracing 3 shows great slowing of the pulse. Then the vagi are cut. Chloro- form is given at 3.55, and there is the usual fall, to be followed by a rise when the chloroform is stopped. The pressure rises till 3.58, when Fick 4 is taken. After this the nose and mouth are again held, but there is little effect on the pressure for more than two minutes, after which the fall is somewhat rapid (from Fick 4 to Fick 6) till the nose and mouth are again set free. This shows the true asphyxia curve, the fall in pressure not occurring for two minutes after the respiration was obstructed. No. 148 is mentioned as an example of asphyxia by obstructing the nose and mouth, and the tracing is described as "identical" with our A. We recognise a resemblance to our trace in the Fick tracings 2 and 6, but in these the chloroform is being pushed, and there is no obstruction to the respiration. The place where there is such obstruction is before Fick 17. At 3.54.15 we have "asphyxia by holding mouth", and there is a gradual fall for three-quarters of a minute, when Fick 17 is taken. The Fick tracing does not show the fall, and has no particular resemblance to our A, while the Ludwig trace shows that the fall here is, as in other cases of asphyxia, greatly slower than ours, taking three-quarters of a minute to accomplish a less fall than was attained in ours in about seven seconds. (Note that the drum in our obser- vations revolved very much faster than in theirs. The time is given by a chronograph showing half-seconds in our Trace C.) We turn now to our own tracings, from the examination of which the Hyderabad Commis- sion infers that the sudden fall in blood-pressure is due to asphyxia. It has been indicated above that the fall in blood-pressure due to asphyxia is not sudden, but follows some time after the interruption to the respiration. This applies to our tracings; but besides that, they show in their very form that there was here no asphyxia. In order that our statements may be followed we reproduce the Tracings A and C. In Trace A it will be observed that the beginning of the fall is associated with what we take to be a respiratory curve, that is to say, after the fall has begun, as shown by the sudden dip, there is a gradual rise with five pulsations of the heart which is clearly identical with the respiratory curves further on in the trace, when the pressure is beginning to rise (see A, con- tinued). It is to be noted that this tracing was taken at a time when the administration of chloroform had been stopped for two minutes. If any doubt exists as to Trace A, none can exist as to Trace C. This records an observation on the same dog as Trace A, made on the same day after a partial recovery of the animal, and it forms a continuation of the same tracing. Two things will be observed in this tracing. In the first place, it is definitely noted on the sheet "Respiration continues", although the heart is at a standstill. But, in the second place, the curve itself shows that there
229 was no asphyxia. In the second block of C, there are the most obvious respiratory variations in the curve, and these continue right on till the rapid fall sets in. This tracing is so important that we may repeat here our original remarks on this observation: "It is to be remembered that this animal got chloroform in the usual way, by a cloth saturated with the agent being held over his mouth and nose. He received no overdose, and the administration only lasted seventy seconds. As bearing on at least one mode of death under chloroform, the relation of the heart's action to respiration is of particular significance. The blood-pressure is enormously reduced, and the pulsations have become so infrequent as to be virtually ineffectual, yet respiration continues. But respiration stops forty seconds after the heart has resumed, the pulsations being still, however, so ineffectual that the pressure is even minus. We believe that the legitimate inference to be drawn is that the stoppage of respiration was not due directly to the chloroform, the inhalation of which had ceased for about forty-eight seconds. It seems likely that the failure of the heart in the first instance, and the insufficiency of its subsequent pulsations, were the cause of the failure of respiration. In such a state of the circulation, the respiratory centres would probably be insufficiently supplied with blood, and be consequently liable to cease acting. In this case, if death had occurred, it would only apparently have been due to the failure of the respiration, the primary failure being that of the heart. To what extent this may apply to human cases we do not venture to speculate." 7. We now come to a very interesting point, namely, that of determining the relative effects of a diminished activity of the heart or a diminished activity of respiration in bringing about a fatal result. In this connection, the report of the Hyderabad Commission contains many valuable suggestions. We both observed that there is still a fall of pressure after the animal had ceased to inhale chloroform. Thus, in the first recorded experiment of the British Medical Association Committee, it is noted: "Chloroform was given, and during deep anæs- thesia a canula was introduced into the carotid artery, and connected with the kymograph. By the time connection with the kymograph was established, no chloroform had been given for about two minutes. On first making the connection, the pressure registered 104 milli- mêtres, which may be regarded as nearly normal; but now, without any fresh dose, the pressure rapidly fell to zero, with a remarkable retardation of the heart."* We quite agree with the Hyderabad Commission in the view that "this after-fall is probably due to absorption of a portion of the residue of chloroform in the air-passages after the stoppage of the inhala- tion." The Hyderabad Commission, however, hold that "slowing or temporary stoppage of the heart in chloroform administration is not dangerous", and that the "controlling influence of the vagus on the heart is a safeguard, and that it is the exhaustion of the nerve which is dangerous". Their theory is that when the inhibitory action of the vagus (which is known to be intermittent and not continuous) is called into play, the heart does not beat so quickly nor so strongly, that less chloroformed blood is transmitted to the respiratory centres, and that consequently, these centres are not then in danger of sudden arrest. Further, that if the vagus irritation ceases, or if the vagus becomes exhausted, the heart "bounds on again", and "the blood then becomes quickly saturated with chloroform, and an over- * JOURNAL, vol. II., 1880, p. 962.
230 dose is at once conveyed to the nerve centres". This ingenious view has much to support it, and we think that much credit is due to the Hyderabad Commission for its sugges- tion, as it undoubtedly explains the beneficial action of atropine as an adjunct to chloroform administration. We would remark, however, that in our opinion the Hyderabad Commis- sion attach too much importance to it, and that it does not account for the facts in each case. For example, we observed in one case, after stoppage of respiration, while the heart continued beating, that respiration was spontaneously resumed; and we suppose that by the cessation of respiration, less chloroform was taken into the blood, so that in a short time the respiratory centre recovered. In this case the heart was pulsating vigorously after stoppage of respiration, but as the chloroform in the air-passages was taken up and quickly eliminated and decomposed in the blood, the respiratory centres recovered. When, however, they recovered, breathing recommenced, more chloroform was introduced, and again there was danger to the respiratory centres and to the heart. Chloroform, no doubt, is taken from the pulmonary air-cells by diffusion, and this will be facilitated by inspiration. possibly by expiration; at all events, the rapidity of absorption will not be the same when the pulmonary aircells are quiescent as when they are expanding and contracting in inspiration and expiration. Thus the movements of respiration will affect the amount of chloroform absorbed, and if, respiration becomes feeble, or even ceases, less chloroform will be taken up and time may be allowed for both the respiratory centres and the heart to recover. Thus the number and volume of the respiratory movements affect the quantity of chloroform absorbed and the number and volume of the heart beats affect the quantity of chloroform sent to the nerve centres. It is clear, therefore, that the problem is more complicated than as stated by the Hyderabad Commission, and that the physiological action will depend on so many factors as to make it extremely unlikely that the course of events will be the same in each case. Thus we have (1) the condition of greater or less asphyxia, as effected by the quantity of air mixed with the chloroform vapour; (2) the occurrence of any inhibition of the vagus, as affecting the number and volume of the heart beats, and thus the amount of chloroform reaching the nervous centres; the number and amplitude of the respiratory movements, as affecting the amount of chloroform absorbed into the blood; (4) as we hold, the specific action of chloroform on the muscular structure and intrinsic nervous mechanism in the heart; and (5) the influence on the vaso-motor centre, as a factor in producing the great fall in blood-pressure. We think the Hyderabad Commission attach too much importance to one common mode of death, failure of the respiratory centres; and while we agree generally with their conclusions, which in many respects are similar to our own, we consider it unwise and unsafe in practice to pay no attention to the state of the circulation, and to observe respiration alone. We also consider it unwise to convey to the public, even through the profession, the notion that the administration of chloroform is a pro- ceeding in which there is practically no danger. At the same time, we thankfully admit that the number of deaths following the use of so potent an agent has been remarkably small, even in the hands of those who pay little or no attention to the condition of circulation. As a matter of common prudence, and especially seeing that when respiration fails we can employ artificial means for its restoration, while if the heart fails, little or nothing can be done to avert a fatal issue, it is incumbent on every one giving chloroform to watch both the pulse and the breathing.
231 It may here be noted that our observations are in complete accord with those recorded by Drs. Wood and Hare, of the University of Pennsylvania, published in the Medical News of February 22nd, 1890, and reprinted in the Provincial Medical Journal, April 1st, 1890. The results of numerous experimental observations are embodied in the following paragraph:232 LEADING ARTICLE. The Lancet, June 21, 1890. IN presenting to our readers this week a selection of tracings from those obtained by the Second Hyderabad Commission, we think it may be well to bring shortly again to their notice the facts about this Commission. Its object was an essentially practical one, and could not be better defined than in the words of His Highness the Nizam himself, "to save people's lives ". This object Surgeon-Major Lawrie hoped to attain by showing experimentally what he, in common with his teacher Syme and many others, had found clinically, that attention to the respiration was the safeguard against death during chloroform anæsthesia. At his sug- gestion, the first Hyderabad Commission was appointed by the Nizam's Government, but the results were so different from those obtained by many other experimenters that we hesitated to accept them when they were forwarded to us. At Dr. Lawrie's instance a Second Commission was appointed, and the Nizam generously forwarded to us £1,000, with the request that THE LANCET would nominate an expert to assist in the investigation, and Dr. Lauder Brunton kindly acceded to our request to act as our representative. To take up the whole general action of anæsthetics, although interesting, would have occupied more time than the Commis- sion had at its disposal, and consequently it restricted its experiments to those having a direct practical bearing. In a subject of such vital interest as the mode of action of anæsthetics it is important that no conclusion should be accepted without the most thorough criticism, and it is with the view of enabling our readers to draw their own conclusions from the experiments of the Second Hyderabad Commission that we present them with a selection from the tracings obtained. Nearly 600 experiments in all were performed by this Commission, about 150 of them being blood-pressure, and each blood-pressure, as a rule, involving three or four tracings or more. Out of the total number of tracings, amounting to 400 or 500, we now select 32 in order to illustrate some of the most important points. The facts on which the Commission lay most stress are that when chloroform is given to animals by inhalation, in the same way as it is given to patients during operations, the respi- ration invariably stops before the heart, and if the administration of the anæsthetic be stopped and artificial respiration be begun as soon as natural breathing ceases, life can invariably be restored. The great slowing of the heart's action which has been observed, more especially by the Committee of the British Medical Association, and which has been regarded as due to the action of chloroform, the Hyderabad Commission regard as due to asphyxia, inasmuch as they entirely failed to obtain this tracing by giving chloroform with free admixture of air, but were able to obtain it at will by simple obstruction of the animal's respiration. Moreover, instead of looking at this slowing of the heart's action as a cause of danger, the Commission regard it rather as a means of safety, preventing the anæsthetic from being carried too rapidly from the lungs to the nerve centres. From the observations made by the Commission there seems to be little doubt that while chloroform given with a free supply of air by inhalation
233 does not paralyse the heart directly, yet that asphyxia with chloroform is very dangerous, and generally causes the heart to stop much more quickly than asphyxia alone would do, although to this rule there may be exceptions. The influence of shock was very fully tested by the Commission, as will be seen from Experiments 79 and 185. It was found to be very much less than what might have been expected. These experiments are no doubt open to the objection that the operations intended to produce shock were not performed at the time when sudden death from shock is said to be most likely to occur, viz., at the very beginning of the operation before any anæsthetic had been given at all, but were done after the animal had first of all been thoroughly anæsthetised and had only partially recovered from the anæsthesia. Of this objection the Commission took full cognizance, but decided not to perform operations before anæsthetics had been given, because animals are less liable to shock than man on account of their lower mental develop- ment, and the chance of obtaining evidence of shock seemed too small to justify the infliction of the pain which would necessarily have been entailed by operating without chloroform. In THE LANCET of September 21st, 1889, we indicated that difference of temperature might have something to do with the varying results obtained at Hyderabad and elsewhere, and the Commission consequently noted the temperature of the room as well as of the animal in most of their experiments. The effect of chloroform upon animals with a fatty heart was ascertained by administering phosphorus to the animals previously, so that their Organs became fatty; but as will be seen from Experiment 79, the effect was less marked than might have been anticipated. The lamentable case of death from the combined influence of nitrous oxide and tight- lacing which occurred in Edinburgh last autumn shortly before the Second Hyderabad Com- mission began their work induced them to test the effect of tight-lacing in monkeys subjected to the action of chloroform. It will be seen that death occurred rapidly. No doubt this might readily have been anticipated, and the Commission no doubt would not have tried the experi- ment had not the death of the unfortunate lady shortly before shown that the danger of tight- lacing when taking an anæsthetic was not sufficiently appreciated. These experiments of the Commission have caused much remark by many of our lay contemporaries, who did not seem to understand that their object had nothing to do with tight-lacing in general, but simply with tight-lacing as affecting the action of anæsthetics. As we have already pointed out, a question of such importance is not likely to be finally settled either by clinical observation alone or experiment upon animals alone; the two must be combined. The Experiments of the Second Hyderabad Commission have supplied us with a mass of experimental data such as has never been obtained before, and is not likely to be obtained again, at least for many years; but in order to have this supplemented from the clinical side, we issued with THE LANCET of March 15th a form of inquiry regarding deaths from anæsthetics which we trust that our readers will fill up and return as soon as possible, and 30
234 that they will also aid us in our work by obtaining answers from as many trustworthy persons as they can. By combining the experimental and clinical data we trust that we shall be able to set finally at rest the vexed question of how death occurs during anæsthesia, and thus "to save people's lives", as the object of the Commission was expressed by the enlightened ruler to whose generosity, backed by the public spirit of his ministers, we owe the establishment of the Hyderabad Commission. The tracings which we have reproduced were taken by connecting the carotid artery of the animal with a mercurial manometer, the float of which ascended and descended with every rise or fall in the arterial pressure, and traced upon the slowly-revolving cylinder blackened with soot the variations of the pressure upon the arterial system. As the revo- lutions of the cylinder were too slow to allow of the individual pulse beats being seen, a second cylinder was employed which revolved at a speed nearly ten times as great as the first; by using a wide tube, either limb of which could be shut off or opened at leisure, both mano- meters could either be put into communication at once with the artery, or a single one could be connected at a time. Usually only one was thus connected; the general variations of the arterial pressure are shown in the tracing taken by the Ludwig's or mercurial kymograph, termed shortly "Ludwig" in the tracings, and the pulse beats were taken by a Fick's kymo- graph on the quickly revolving cylinder. These tracings are indicated by the word "Fick" in the corner. In the tracings taken by Ludwig's manometer a straight line will be found here and there in place of the usual curve. These lines indicate the points where the Fick's kymograph was connected with the artery in place of Ludwig's. Each is numbered, and by reference to the corresponding tracings by Fick's kymograph the character and rate of the pulse at any of these periods can be readily ascertained. ARTICLE BY SURGEON-MAJOR LAWRIE. [From "The Lancet," June 21st, 1890.] WHATEVER may be the result of the labours of the Second Hyderabad Chloroform Commission, the gratitude of our profession is due to His Highness the Nizam of Hyderabad for the opportunity of scientific progress which his unbounded liberality has afforded. At the time the Commission was appointed, the Pioneer, the leading journal of India, wrote: "No- thing could show better the beneficent nature of the solid and friendly tie which binds together the British and the Nizam's Governments than the remarkable and cosmopolitan interest which His Highness the Nizam and his officials, one and all, have taken in bringing the question of the safety of chloroform to the proof. It redounds to the honour of the Government of India no less than to that of the administration of Sir Asman Jah, that the leading Indian State should take a principal share in the settlement of a question which concerns the welfare and happiness of the whole of mankind." Since we are in a position to show that the researches of the Commission have finally proved the safety of chloroform, it is
235 right to ask that the Nizam and his Minister, Sir Asman Jah, together with the Minister's responsible adviser, the Nawab Mushtak Hussain, should receive public recognition as benefactors not only of the human race, but also of the animal kingdom, which, no less than mankind will derive benefit from the advantages chloroform confers in the abolition of pain and in the relief of suffering. In considering the work of the Second Hyderabad Chloroform Commission, a very brief recapitulation is necessary. Four hundred and thirty animals were killed with chloro- form by the Commission's Sub-Committee, or were subjected to experiments as to the effects of artificial respiration, with the object of confirming, elaborating, or disproving the work of the First Commission. In addition to this, 168 animals were killed by the Commission with chloroform and ether, and the effects were recorded by Drs. Lauder Brunton and Bomford with Ludwig's and Fick's manometers. The Sub-Committee's experiments confirmed the results obtained by the First Commission presided over by Dr. Hehir; and in their turn the results of the Sub-Committee were confirmed by the experiments undertaken with the self-recording apparatus. In every case of death from chloroform the respiration stopped before the heart. The three series of experiments showed that simple chloroform poisoning causes paralysis of the respiratory centre and then gradual death, the heart being the last organ in the body to die. The exceptions to the rule that the heart retains its vitality longer than any other part of the body were found in four cases, in which more or less energetic contractions of the diaphragm occurred after the cessation of the heart's action. In one case the contractions took place after the thorax had been laid open, and when the lungs were collapsed. The Commission called these movements gasps, but solely for convenience and the want of a better term. They were no more respiratory movements than the wagging of the tail and the snap- ping of the jaws, which went on for ten minutes after death in two other cases, were move- ments of joy or of mastication. The respiratory is a coördinating centre, but there is no reason why any of the muscles should not contract spasmodically from stimuli applied to their own proper centres after the respiratory centre is paralysed. The diaphragmatic contractions in vomiting and hiccough are not generally considered respiratory movements. With reference to the manometer experiments of the Commission, it must be borne in mind that the inhalation of chloroform necessarily causes a fall of the blood-pressure. When this was first imperfectly demonstrated by the English Commission in 1864 it was erroneously thought to be a source of danger; and the idea was confirmed by the Glasgow Committee in 1879, which went further and attempted to prove, by means of more accurate apparatus, that not only does chloroform cause a fall of the blood-pressure, but that the fall is sometimes capricious, and that this constitutes the grave danger in chloroform administration. The Commission have shown that the capricious effects which the Glasgow Committee attributed to chloroform were produced by accidental asphyxia; and the fact that the fall of the blood- pressure, as indicated in the Glasgow Committee's tracings, was irregular is now known to prove that there must have been irregularity of, or interference with, the respiration, in their experiments. How the fall of the blood-pressure is produced by chloroform may be left for physiologists to determine, but it must be clearly understood that it is in no sense a danger, in
236 any case which is fit for an operation, unless it is excessive, that is to say, unless an over-dose of chloroform is inhaled. The facts brought out by the manometer experiments of the Commission, which can be proved from the tracings, are: 1. "Chloroform, when given continuously by any means which ensures its free dilution with air, causes a gradual fall in the mean blood-pressure, provided the animal's respiration is not impeded in any way, and it continues to breathe quietly without struggling or involuntary holding of the breath. As this fall continues, the animal first becomes insensible, then the respiration gradually ceases, and, lastly, the heart stops heating (vide Experiment 169: Ludwig and Fick tracings). If the chloroform is less diluted the fall is more rapid, but it is always gradual so long as the other conditions are maintained; and, however concentrated the chloroform may be, it never causes sudden death from stoppage of the heart." 2. Chloroform has no power of increasing the tendency to either shock or syncope during operations. Every operation that ingenuity could suggest, or that has ever been sup- posed to be dangerous under chloroform, was performed by the Commission in every stage of chloroformisation, without any effect upon the heart, the pulse, or the blood-pressure. 3. The Commission found, however, that struggling during chloroform inhalation, or anything which interfered with the breathing in any way, such as holding the breath or asphy- xia, produced irregularities in the circulation and in the action of the heart (vide tracings of Experiment 148). Even such slight interference as is brought about by forcibly pulling the tongue forward had this effect (vide Tracing 185). In fact, pulling the tongue, which is constantly done when patients are supposed to be in danger from chloroform, was the only proceeding short a direct irritation of the vagus that appeared to produce shock. This would have been thought very paradoxical had it not been that previously. when Experiment 65 was reached, Dr. Bomford had proposed that the heart should be inhibited by electrical irritation of the vagus during chloroform poisoning, as he believed it would prove beneficial by postpon- ing or preventing the fatal effects. If Tracings 65 and 117 are examined, it will be seen that inhibition of the heart's action and slowing of the circulation, with rapid fall of pressure, caused by irritation of the vagus, proved to be a safeguard, exactly as Dr. Bomford had anticipated, rather than a danger. 4. Following up the discovery regarding the vagus, the Commission found that an effect precisely similar to that caused by electrical stimulation of the vagus is produced through the same nerve: (a) in the holding of the breath, which occurs in the early stages of chloro- form administration (vide Experiment 148: Fick I. and II., readings 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, and 11): (b) in asphyxia (vide Experiment 161: Fick 1, readings 14, 15, 16, and 17: and Experiment 156: Fick I., reading 5); and (c) sometimes after the respiratory centre is paralysed in the later stages of chloroform poisoning (vide Experiment 148: Ludwig III., from 4.5 to 4.7: and Experiment 178, all tracings). The same effect is produced in man by identically the same causes, and is what THE LANCET of March 2nd. 1889, wrote as of "primary and
237 secondary syncope". It is evidenced by pallor of the face and other symptoms, to which Mr. Battle and Mr. Hewett referred in their letters to THE LANCET of Feb. 22nd and March 1st, 1890. 5. The Commission discovered gradually (vide Experiment 148) that it is possible to give chloroform in such a way that full anæsthesia is produced, with a gradual fall of blood- pressure, unaccompanied by any irregularity of the heart or circulation. The Commission found that the way to do this was to ensure natural and regular respiration, without struggling, holding the breath, or asphyxia, or any interference with the breathing. It became evident in the course of the experiments that it was difficult, if not impossible, to make any animal inhale unduly strong chloroform vapour without previously making it hold its breath, asphyx- iating it, or making it insensible. When an inhaler saturated with chloroform is held too close to the mouth and nose an animal holds its breath: and in many animals, especially the rabbit or the goat, holding the breath stimulates the vagus and at once slows the heart and retards the circulation. 6. The experiments of the Commission proved that death from chloroform is invari- ably due to an over-dose; and the question which next arose was, are there any circum- stances which make chloroform inhalation dangerous, and, as it were, open the door to an overdose, or make the action of the drug appear capricious? 7. It is fully demonstrated by the experiments of the Commission that struggling, holding the breath, any form of asphyxia, or any kind of interference with the breathing are dangerous in chloroform administration. Obviously either complete asphyxia or continuous holding of the breath, if this were possible, would be sure preventives of poisoning by chloro- form; but the danger in such conditions is due to the fact that they must alternate with extra vigorous and deep respiration. Struggling makes the inhalation of chloroform dangerous, because it either partially asphyxiates the patient, or alternately does this and accelerates the respiration and circulation, so increasing the amount of chloroform inhaled and hastening the rapidity with which the chloroform is conveyed to the brain and nerve-centres. Holding the breath causes asphyxia, and asphyxia produced in this or in any other manner poisons and stimulates the respiratory centre, and, on the one hand, makes it extremely obnoxious to paralysis by chloroform; while, on the other, it leads to gasping and deep inspirations, by which an over-dose is very soon taken in. The rapidity of chloroform poisoning when asphyxia is produced is much the same as it would be if you threw a man into a pond, and held a chloro- form inhaler over his head every time he came to the surface to take a breath. This is exactly what a timid or badly taught operator often does. He measures his chloroform and pours it into a patent inhaler, which he then applies to the patient's face. The patient, holds his breath and becomes deadly pale, while his vagus slows the heart and circulation. Presently the patient takes a deep gasp, and as soon as the chest begins to move, the chloroformist thinks there is no danger and replaces the inhaler on his face, too probably adding another dose of chloroform as he does so. The patient's natural protective means being exhausted, he very quickly absorbs a fatal dose of chloroform, and we are subsequently told that his heart failed, that he afterwards gasped two or three times and then died. No care in measuring
238 the chloroform or diluting it in a mechanical inhaler is any guide whatever to the amount of the anæsthetic a patient inhales or absorbs. Moreover, breathing through an inhaler is not natural breathing. 8. The Commission has shown that the key to the safe administration of chloroform is that the breathing be natural, so as to avoid struggling and any form of respiratory embarrass- ment; and that it may be so the anæthetic must be administered in an open cone or cap, which is held far enough from the patient's face to avoid causing him to hold his breath or struggle, and into which he is at first made to blow after each inspiration, the cap being brought nearer to the face, and eventually quite close to it, as the chloroform begins to take effect and he breathes regularly. The two tracings dated March 6th, 1890, Nos. 3 and 4, Ludwig, show very conveniently all the points claimed by the Commission. They demonstrate: (a) The gradual fall of blood-pressure caused by chloroform inhalation, when the chloroform is properly given, so as to entirely avoid struggling or holding the breath, &c. (b) The value of reflex winking when the eye is touched, as a guide to the state of anæsthesia. When this point is reached, the subject may, as a rule, be said to be ready for operation, and this, it will be seen from the tracings, occurs long before the fall of pressure, if this be regular, reaches a dangerous stage. (c) The effects of pushing chloroform till the stoppage of the respiration, the heart being un- affected till long after this stage is passed. (d) The slowing of the circulation and fall of blood-pressure caused by irritation of the vagus. No one doubts that the vagus has the same action in man as it has in animals. (e) The effect of electrical irritation of the vagus when the respiration has ceased; and the slowing of the circulation, which retards the conveyance of chloroform, to the nerve centres. It is not difficult to understand how slowing of the circula- tion necessarily retards the conveyance of chloroform to the medulla. For example, if the pulse is sixty, and sixty atoms of chloroform are conveyed to the brain in a minute, only thirty atoms a minute will reach the brain (other things being equal) if the pulse is reduced to thirty by stimulation of the vagus. Tracings 3 and 4 of the effects of ordinary chloroform inhalation are identical up to the point where the respiration ceased. Tracing 3 then shows that the breathing having entirely ceased, stimulation of the vagus slowed the circulation from eighty- six to forty-two a minute and saved the dog's life. Tracing 4 shows how, after the stoppage of the respiration, when artificial respiration was not employed and the vagus was not irritated, the heart's action gradually ceased. Both tracings show how useless it would have been to have taken the action of the pulse as a guide. When the pulse failed, as it did at the end of Tracing 4, it was a sign of impending death. The two tracings demonstrate that by taking the respiration alone as a guide, danger could have been averted, as it always can be in the human subject under chloroform, if the breathing is carefully kept free. It is remarkable that in these two experiments the chloroform was given undesignedly or precisely the same length of time, viz., 4.42 minutes. Considered by the light of the work of the Commission, these tracings prove incontestably that the slowing of the heart and circulation through the stimula- tion of the vagus is a safeguard in chloroform poisoning. The symptoms239 as they signify that the patient has not been breathing properly, or that he has been asphyxiat- ed, or that the respiratory centre has been paralysed. They do not indicate, as has hitherto been supposed, that chloroform has any direct effect upon the heart; but whenever they occur, at whatever stage of chloroform administration, they show most unmistakably that it has been given in such a way as to interfere with the breathing. The most important point of all in the tracings is to be found in the invariably gradual and regular fall of blood-pressure when chloroform is properly administered. This is shown in many of the Commission's experiments, especially from No. 164 to the end (vide 169), and in the tracings of March 6th, 1890. In tracings 3 and 4 of March 6th the fall of blood- pressure is gradual and perfectly regular, and they demonstrate the only method of chloro- form administration compatible with absolute safety. Though fall of pressure is inseparable from chloroform administration, there is never the least danger if it falls regularly, and if the inhalation is stopped directly the state of the cornea shows that the patient is "under". Regularity of the blood-pressure depends entirely upon regularity of the respiration. Any irregularity, therefore, in the fall of blood-pressure during chloroform inhalation indicate irregularity of or interference with the respiration: and, per contra, any irregularity of or interference with the respiration at once causes irregularity in the fall of blood-pressure; but as long as the respiration is regular and not interfered with, the fall of the blood-pressure will exactly correspond with it, and will cease long before a dangerous point is reached if the inhalation is stopped when the cornea become insensitive, or other signs show that the patient is "under". If the respiration is kept up without struggling, holding the breath, or asphyxia, chloroform may be given slowly or quickly, freely and with perfect confidence, without the slightest risk to the patient. From the standpoint of medical education it is a serious misfortune that ether has been allowed to displace chloroform in any of our large hospitals. The public has a right to de- mand that every medical man shall be able to administer an anæsthetic with safety in any part of the world; and there is no anæsthetic which can be thus universally employed except chlo- roform. If ether is used as the sole recognised anæsthetic in the hospitals attached to our medical schools, students cannot learn how to give chloroform; or if anæsthetics are only to be administered by specialists, students cannot learn anæsthesia practically; and it is notori- ous that the advance of ether has been accompanied by a decrease in the employment of anæsthetics by the general practitioner, and has limited their usefulness. In conclusion, I desire to do justice to the wisdom of my old masters by comparing the principles Syme laid down for the safe administration of chloroform,240 form in the horizontal position, taking care that there is no article of clothing constricting the neck, and we never continue beyond the point when the patient is fully under the influence of the, anæsthetic." The Commission has demonstrated that the aim of the surgeon must be to give chloro- form so that the blood-pressure should fall regularly throughout the whole administration, and that the blood-pressure can only be kept free from irregularities by absolute regularity of the breathing. The chloroform must therefore be inhaled in such a way that the breathing is natural and regular throughout. Feeling the pulse during chloroform inhalation is no guide whatever either to the blood-pressure or to the one thing necessary for safety, which is to keep it regular; and it has been shown above that the pulse is of no value as a sign of approaching danger, since it is only affected dangerously (a) when the respiration has been inter- fered with or (b) by an overdose. Lastly, in order to keep the breathing regular, the whole of the administrator's attention must be concentrated upon this point alone; and it is therefore clear that if, as is now recommended in most of the text-books, part of the chloroformist's atten- tion is to be given to the pulse, an important element of danger comes into the administration. We can no longer contend, with regard to chloroform, that the results of clinical ex- perience and of experimental research do not agree. The investigations of the Hyderabad Commission have brought to light a strikingly precise and complete agreement between both. I have stated in THE LANCET of April 5th, 1890, that the late Mr. Syme's and my own form a continuous series amounting to more than 45,000 cases of almost daily (and often several times a day) chloroform administration, extending from 1847 to 1890, in which the respiration alone was taken as a guide, without one death resulting. Mr. Roger Williams has proved in THE LANCET of February 8th, 1890, from the statistics of one of the largest hospitals in London, (which, he says, may be accepted as reliable averages of all the London hospitals), in which the pulse is taken as a guide, and is carefully watched as well as the respiration that the deaths amount to one in every 1,236 administrations. We thus see that in a long series of 45,000 cases, extending over 40 years, in which the chloroformist's attention was concentrated on the respiration alone, and in which the chloroformists were students, there were no deaths at all; while in another series of 12,368 cases, in which a part of the chloroformist's attention was devoted to the pulse, and in which the chloroformists were specialists (anæsthetists), there were no less than 10 deaths,241 thorough comprehension of the significance of this fact. As soon as this was demonstrated, it became clear that chloroform and shock were not associates but incompatibles, and that the supposed capricious action of chloroform upon the heart was due either to the stimulating effect of concentrated vapour upon the nervous system, or to the effect of asphyxial blood upon the nerve centres, resulting in the exclusion of the poison from the system, and not the direct effect of the absorbed poison upon the heart or its nerves. APPENDIX TO ARTICLE IN THE LANCET OF JUNE 21ST, 1890, BY SURGEON-MAJOR LAWRIE. THE above paper was written before the Glasgow Committee's criticism appeared in the British Medical Journal of the 14th instant. I lose no time in exposing the Committee's fallacies, as I am obliged shortly to return to India. The first point to notice in the Glasgow Committee's remarks is their reference to the paralysing effect of chloroform vapour on the muscular tissue of the heart. "Chloroform vapour has a paralysing effect upon the muscular tissue of the heart, and indeed upon all kinds of protoplasm when directly applied. When the heart of a frog is exposed to the direct action of chloroform vapour 'it became rapidly weaker till it ceased beating.'" The accuracy of this point may be conceded as far as it goes. It is only necessary to supplement it by stating that this paralysing effect is never sudden, but always gradual. "As regards the action on the mammalian heart," the Glasgow Committee performed artificial respiration by pumping air saturated with chloroform into the lungs of rabbits and dogs through an opening in the trachea. "It soon became apparent that when chloroform is given in this way there is at once a most serious effect upon the heart; the right ventricle almost immediately begins to distend; the heart presently stops, with the right ventricle engorged with blood." It is evident from this descrip- tion that the serious effect upon the heart is not caused in the heart itself. The distension of the right ventricle must mean damage to the circulation through the lungs. It is the first effect of stasis in the lungs. Sir Joseph Lister has shown (vide Professor Roy's paper in the Journal of physiology, 1879, vol. ii., p. 323) that when chloroform is applied directly to the web of a frog's foot stasis immediately takes place; and the same effect is undoubtedly produced in the same manner in the lungs and is sufficient to account for the ventricular engorgement which the Committee observed when they pumped air saturated with chloroform into the lungs of the rabbit. It is incorrect to imply that driving chloroform into the lungs brings it into direct contact with the heart, or that the process of pumping in the chloroformed air elimi- nates respiration from the inquiry. * If respiration is not to be taken into consideration in this way of giving chloroform, we should first require to have it proved that the air driven into the lungs is sufficient, or sufficiently free from poison, to keep up the respiratory function independently of the action of the chloroform. Air saturated with chloroform cannot do this. In any case, the fact stated by the Committee242 The Glasgow Committee ask us to believe that, when air saturated with ether was pumped into a rabbit's lungs, "twenty minutes were occupied in producing anæsthesia", and that it "may be given for an indefinite period without interfering with the heart". At the end of an hour's pumping "the heart was beating as vigorously as at first". It is contrary to all experience that twenty minutes should be occupied in anæsthetising a rabbit by means of air saturated with ether pumped into the lungs. The Hyderabad Commission made many experi- ments with ether, from among which I have selected two as examples of its effect. In the first manometer No. 106, a pariah dog weighing 25 lb., the tracing of which will be published as soon as possible, the administration of ether on a saturated sponge in a fairly close-fitting cap was commenced at 9h. 46m. 10s. on Nov. 21st, 1889. The blood-pressure rose immediately. It began to fall again at 9h. 46m. 30s., and continued to do so till death. At 9h. 47m. the cornea was insensitive. At 9h. 48m. 40s. there was rattling in the trachea. At 9h. 50m. 30s. the respiration was slow and shallow, and it stopped at 9h. 51m. At 9h. 52m. 30s. the pulse became imperceptible; artificial respiration was kept up, and the dog's body was invert- ed until 9h. 57m. The thorax was then opened, and the dog was found to be dead. The artery was cut and the pressure fell to zero. The whole experiment lasted ten minutes and fifty seconds, and any one who chooses to examine the tracing can verify this description of what occurred. The second experiment took place on Nov. 26th, 1889, on two monkeys weigh- ing 4 lbs. each, Nos. 129 and 130. In the first monkey, a measured quantity of chloroform was pumped into the lungs through an opening in the trachea by artificial respiration, much in the manner described by the Glasgow Committee. The inhalation was begun at 4h. 2m. 37s. 10cc. of chloroform were used in divided doses, and the heart stopped at 4h. 10m. 55s. The other monkey had ether in the same way. The inhalation was commenced at 4h. 2m. 24s. 15cc. of ether in divided doses were employed, and the heart stopped at 4h. 12m. 20s. In the chloroform experiment 10cc. of chloroform freely diluted with air killed a monkey in eight minutes and eighteen seconds. In the ether experiment 15cc. of ether freely diluted with air killed a similar monkey in nine minutes and fifty-six seconds. The difference corre- sponds with the recognised difference in the strength of the two anæsthetics in the ordinary practice of surgery. With reference to the Committee's statement that the heart was beating as vigorously at the end of an hour as at fist, we are not told whether there was any natural respiration when the ether administration was stopped, or even whether the animal was alive; and in the absence of reliable information on theses points we cannot consider this experiment trustworthy. Either the ether which the Committee employed had lost its strength, or else the Committee fell into the error of supposing that because the heart was still beating the ether had not interfered with its action. The same vigorous action of the heart after prolonged anæsthesia, brought forward by the Committee in favour of ether, recently came under my notice with chloroform. On May 28th, 1890, air saturated with chloroform was administered to a rabbit in my presence, in precisely the same way as that described by the Glasgow Committee. The administration was begun at 12h. 59m. 40s. At 1h. 0m. 20s. the inhalation was stopped. There was no return of natural breathing, and the blood-pressure had fallen nearly to zero. Artificial respiration was commenced at 1h. 0m. 30s., and continued till 1h. 5m. 5s., when the artery
243 was cut and the rabbit was thrown aside dead. The thorax was opened at 1h. 5m. 50s., and the heart was seen by several competent observers "beating vigorously and rhythmically". At 1h. 15m., it is noted, "heart still beating rhythmically; auricles and ventricles both contracting strongly, but the action of the ventricle is intermittent". At 2h. 5m., one hour after death, the auricles were rhythmically beating; the ventricles were still. This continued till 3 o'clock, two hours after death, after which no more notes were taken. In the face of these facts we cannot accept the vague statements of experiments which the Glasgow Com- mittee first brought forward in 1879, and have repeated without confirmation in 1890. The next part of the Glasgow Committee's paper deals with the manometer experiments of the Commission. I may observe that in all the manometer experiments of the Commission every event which is marked in the Ludwig tracings was written on the tracings, as the drum revolved, at the time it actually occurred. The Committee says:244 The mouth and nose were not closed till 12h. 17m. 35s.245 chloroform administration. The action of atropine is to paralyse the vagus and produce the same dangerous condition as when the nerve is exhausted. If the Committee regard the effect of atropine as beneficial they must intend to convey that the inhibitory action of the vagus is a danger in chloroform administration when atropine is not used, i.e., that the normal action of a healthy nerve is dangerous to life. The greatest living physio- logists are agreed that the inhibitory action of a nerve like the vagus is not a danger to the organ inhibited, and the Hyderabad Commission goes a step further and shows that it may be a safeguard to the organism in poisoning by an anæsthetic. If the views of the Glasgow Committee are right, then a patient is in much less danger with the pulse at 105, carrying 105 atoms of chloroform to the medulla in a minute, than he is when the pulse is 31 and only 31 atoms of chloroform are being conveyed to the medulla in a minute. This is manifestly an absurdity. In actual practice the amount of atropine employed as an adjunct to chloroform administration would probably be so small as to be immaterial; but, if it produces any effects at all, it must be to do more harm than good. The Glasgow Committee's tracings have been reproduced in the British Medical Journal. They are given above for the sake of comparison with tracings 148 and others of the Hyderabad Commission. The Committee state that in the experiment which furnished Tracing C the chloroform was administered "by a cloth saturated with the agent being held over the mouth and nose." This exactly bears out the conclusion of the Commission. The animal got chloroform with insufficient air, and the 'Glasgow trace', which the Hyderabad Commission produced over and over again in their experiments, was due to the stimulation of the nerve centres with asphyxial blood. It only remains to add that the Glasgow Committee's remarks on the condition of an animal whose pressure is "minus" require explanation. As they stand, it looks as if the Committee were describing the existence of pulse and respiration curves, as, indeed, they are represented in Trace C, below the basement or true zero line, the line of no pressure, which is, of course, an impossibility. The animal in Trace C was never in any danger except from the improper manner in which the chloroforms was administered to it. It did not die; and the Committee's argument about the danger of chloroform to the heart, which is based upon the faulty tracing, has its foundation, not in physiology, but solely in imagination. In their practical conclusions the Glasgow Committee say: "We think the Hyderabad Commission attach too much importance to one common mode of death246 death beforehand, not by the operation itself, but by terror of the effect of the anæthetic. The Committee state finally: "As a matter of common prudence, and especially seeing that when respiration fails we can employ artificial means for its restoration, while if the heart fails, little or nothing can be done to avert a fatal issue, it is incumbent on every one giving chloroform to watch both the pulse and the breathing." If this statement is to be acted upon, it is incumbent on every one giving chloroform to watch the pulse for heart failure, in spite of the fact recorded by the Committee themselves, that "if the heart fails, little or nothing can be done to avert a fatal issue." No teaching could possibly be more dangerous. Without deny- ing that there may be conditions of the heart in which failure and death may occur in some of the processes connected with chloroform administration, just as a man with a certain condition of heart may die of heart failure from running to catch a railway train, the Hyder- abad Commission has shown that sudden death from stoppage of the heart is not a risk of chloroform itself. If the surgeon is to have constantly before his mind the fear of the sudden death of his patient by stoppage of the heart from the mere action of chloroform, and is to carefully watch the pulse for signs which can only have a fatal issue, it is a physical impossi- bility for him to concentrate his attention on the warnings given by the respiration, by which alone danger can invariably be averted. The teaching of the Glasgow Committee is wrong, and if it is followed deaths with chloroform will be as inevitable in the future as they have been under the same circumstances in the past. LETTER FROM DR. R. M. WHITTINGTON LOWE, M.D. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET". SIRS,247 necessarily the result of the anæsthetic248 because ether is far more difficult to administer than chloroform. If ether is to be given with satisfaction it requires an inhaler, and special instruction in the use of it. But ether always gives warning of danger, whereas under chloroform there may be sudden death. One point I would strongly urge is always to have a sufficient variety of anæsthetics on a table at hand, viz., chloroform, ether, A.C.E. cocaine. Latterly I have added Messrs. Bartts' improved Clover's gas and ether inhaler. No one can predict with certainty which anæsthetic the patient will take best. I have had cases (generally alcoholic patients), where ether caused struggling and great excitement, but after Clover's inhaler had been changed for Ormsby's, with A.C.E., the patient quietly and quickly went under; in such cases chloroform should never be given. It is a pity that A.C.E. is not more generally used; for when ether fails to stimulate it is most valuable, as in ovariotomies and such like protracted cases. In reference to* inhalers. I am sure none can compare with Clover's for ether; with it the exact percentage required can be given. Ormsby's is the best for A.C.E., mixture, Messrs. Bartts have lately made a hinged cap for me, whereby the mixture can be poured on to the sponge without removing the cap, for small quantities constantly put in are preferable to a large amount. Caution is needed in using the inhaler, for the alcohol and ether volatilise more rapidly than the denser vapour of chloroform. For chloroform admin- istration nothing is better than a double piece of lint, whereby plenty of atmospheric air can be given. I have noticed five deaths where metal inhalers have been used. I have witnessed several deaths from chloroform, though I am thankful to say that none have occur- red in my own practice, and I am convinced that they were due to an overdose and not due to shock from too little being given; and I would here draw attention to Dr. Hewett's admirable letter in your issue of March 1st, wherein he mentions a case of syncope arising from deep chloroform narcosis, where he went on with ether for the remainder of the operation. Surgeons now-a-days expect too much from anæsthetics. Profound anæsthesia cannot be maintained for 1½ or 2 hours without great danger occasionally, and there are many cases where it suffices to keep the patient on the verge of returning consciousness, e.g., sequestrotomies and similar tedious but not delicate operations. I would conclude by saying that ether should be always given between the ages of sixteen and sixty, except there is some good reason to the contrary, such as pulmonary. renal or arterial disease. Never, upon consideration whatever, should chloroform be given for dental cases. It is always dangerous in the sitting posture for anything. I must apologise for taking up so much of your valuable space, but my excuse must be the immense importance of the subject and the alarming mortality of chloroform. I am, Sirs, your obedient servant. H. CHESTER NANCE, House Surgeon. Norwich and Norfolk Hospital, Norwich, June 9th, 1890. * Vide The Lancet, vol. ii. p. 1220. 1888. Dr, Squire's communication on his giving ether for Liston in 1846, and his first inhaler.
249 LETTER FROM DR. WM. HORROCKS, F.R.C.S. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." Sirs,250 experimenting with ether and chloroform are the following:251 LETTER FROM JOHN HOPE POTTER, ESQ. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." SIRS,252 supposing that asphyxia stimulates the vase-motor centre. It is more probable that it paralyses that centre and stimulates the respiratory centre. Chloroform, on the other hand, paralyses both centres. Fortunately, it effects the respiratory centre most deeply first, so that when danger of overdosing arises warnings are given by the respiration, whereby that danger can invariably be averted. The most important result of the labours of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission has undoubtedly been to establish the proof that chloroform has never, under any circumstances whatever, a direct action upon the human heart; and not the least important of the results of the Commission's work consists in the exposure of some of the sham physiology which has passed current as genuine for the last ten ten years. Not to speak of the condition of animals with the blood-pressure "minus," it is a well nigh irreparable misfortune that a whole generation of our profession should have been taught such physiological untruths as that the normal action of the vagus nerve is to imperil and occasionally to destroy life; and it is degrading to reflect that one of the main uses to which this false knowledge has been applied in England since 1879 has been to throw dust in the eyes of the public, when coroners' inquests are held on the victims of chloroform administered in accordance with the erroneous principle advocated by the Glasgow Committee. I am, Sirs, your obedient servant. EDWARD LAWRIE, Surgeon-Major, President, Hyderabad Chloroform Commission, Hyderabad, Aug. 1890. LETTER FROM DR. ARTHUR H. W. HUNT, M.R.C.S., &C. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET" SIRS,253 Robbins, Oxford-Street, London. Deceased was not deeply under ether when I commenced and finished the operation, which only lasted two or three minutes. At no time was the ether on beyond the mark 3 on the inhaler. On telling the house physician I had finished the inhaler was put aside, and I commenced to dress the wound. After breathing normally several times deceased moaned, and then turned pale and ceased breathing. At the same time his pupils dilated. The tongue was at once drawn out with forceps, and artificial respiration begun. The chest was slapped with a wet towel, and hypodermic injections of ether and brandy administered. In addition a battery which was at hand was applied. Artificial respiration was kept up for forty minutes, but was of no avail. The post-mortem examination was made by Mr. Vincent Jackson, at the request of the coroner. There was a considerable layer of fat over the chest, and the muscles were paler than natural. Both lungs were healthy, but there were some old adhesions in the right pleural cavity. The heart was unduly covered with fat especially at its apex. The right side was dilated and full of blood, the left empty and contract- ed. The walls of the right ventricle were thin. The valves were healthy. The heart muscle was very pale and soft. A small piece examined under the microscope showed marked fatty changes. The jury returned a verdict accordingly. This case is interesting, first because it is opposed to the view that death from ether takes place from asphyxia; and, secondly, from its sudden fatal termination, without any previous warning. I am, Sirs, yours faithfully, ARTHUR H. W. HUNT, M.R.C.S., &c., Wolverhampton, Sept. 2nd, 1890. House Surgeon to the Hospital. OBSERVATIONS on the ADMINISTRATION and DANGERS of ANÆS- THETICS. by JAMES DUNLOP, M.D., Surgeon to the Royal Infirmary, Professor of Surgery at Anderson's College, and Medical Examiner in Criminal cases, Glasgow. In view of the recent development of this subject, circulars asking for information upon it have been issued by The Lancet to scientific medical men throughout the world. This cir- cular has simulated Dr. Dunlop to record the result of his observations on the subject made in wards 15, 23 and 24 of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary during the last ten years, and to state his opinions thereupon. Allowing of unrecorded cases in these Wards, the following opinions are based on observa- tions of 3,500 cases within the specified period. To produce anæesthesia in this number of patients, chloroform has been principally used. In the administration, the drop method was adopted. Ether was sometimes employed; its use by Clover's apparatus was began on March 8th, 1882. Its use was greatly dependent on the skill and ability of the assistant, some assistants administering the drug with greater skill than others. In a general way ether was administered in the proportion of one case of ether to thirty cases of chloroform. Ether
254 was employed preferably in cases of debility from long-standing disease of joints or from loss of blood in severe railway smashes or machinery injuries. This drug, however, was found unsuitable in operations for hernia, lithotomy, reduction of dislocations, rectal operations, and in persons suffering from pulmonary or bronchitic ailments, or addicted to habits of ntemperance. Referring to the relative dangers of various anæsthetics at the operation or after the operation, Dr. Dunlop remarks that "chloroform is never absolutely safe, no matter how care- fully or how skilfully it might be administered. Chloroform is much more dangerous than ether during operations; but after operations ether is more dangerous to life than chloroform from bronchitis or pneumonia setting in. It may be said that when pneumonia or bronchitis follows, the ether was badly administered. That may have been so. It is much more difficult to administer ether accurately than to administer chloroform accurately." On two occasions recently he encountered great difficulty with ether. In one case the breathing had almost ceased, and the pulse failed. The young woman's face had become blanched. She was dying not from asphyxia, but from weak heart action. The remainder of Dr. Dunlop's remarks are as follows:255 on Indian dogs and monkeys. To help The Lancet in its consideration of the question, how to save people's lives? I desire to contribute some evidence on the other question, why and how do some people die under the influence of chloroform? During the last twenty years in conjunction with my colleague, Dr. Moore, as one of the medico-legal examiners for the city of Glasgow, I have had exceptionally favour- able opportunities of acquiring experience of the fatal results following chloroform administra- tion. In these years there has been a considerable number of deaths of individuals while under the influence of chloroform. The deaths which were made the subject of post-mortem examin- ation, took place in the Royal and Western Infirmaries, in the hospital of the Barnhill Poor- house, in the operating rooms of dentists and consulting-rooms and elsewhere of private practi- tioners in the city and suburbs of Glasgow, within the county of Lanark. A careful study of such details as are before me leads me to the conclusion considering the population, its numbers and character under medical treatment, and subjected to chloroform, the proportion of fatal cases is very small, probably not more than from two and a-half to three per annum. Within the last ten years the deaths under chloroform have been more numerous than they had been in the previous decade. There have been. however. at least eight or nine deaths since January 1st, and of these seven were the subject of post-mortem examination, and in all, so far as I can learn, it was the respiration that was watched and not the pulse. The respiration gave no signs or warning of approaching danger. It was noted that the fatal results occurred in the young and middle-aged, not in children or very old men, and in females as well as males. It was further noted that some forms of surgical procedure had some pecu- liar influence in predisposing to a fatal result, as operations upon joints, not, however. involving the use of the knife. Two individuals died who were having dislocations at the shoulders reduced, one a dislocation at the elbow, and three breaking down adhesions within and about the knee-joint. In no single case was death attributable to nervous shock from the operation having been begun or completed while the patient was not fully under the influence of the anæsthetic. Some of the deaths which took place while the patients were under chloroform were not directly due to the poisonous effects of the drug itself, but to some other cause. One death was due to asphyxia from vomited matter (tripe) obstructing the air passages. The help present was neither adequate nor skilled, and the men lost their heads. Another was caused by the bursting of a small pouch (aneurysmal) in the brain, a third of an aneurysmal pouch in the first part of the aorta, both deaths taking place in the early period of the administration and while the patient was struggling. The deaths which are to be distinctly charged against chloroform are, according to the post-mortem appearances, divisible into two distinct classes. In the one and larger class the appearances are those of death by asphyxia256 tinge, which seems to be characteristic of death from asphyxia by chloroform. The left side was firmly contracted and empty, the veins leading to the right side full of blood, the lungs behind engorged with liquid blood of a dark pinkish tint. A general engorgement of the veins of the liver and kidneys, and in some cases petechial spots formed by extravasated blood in the serous covering of the heart and pleural lining of the ribs, and the covering of the lungs. We find often similar petechial spots in new-born infants, who make a struggle to breathe fully and freely, and fail from obstruction by pressure, &C. In the deaths from syncope, or failure of heart's action, there was found a flaccid heart with all the cavities empty. No blood on the right side; no contraction of the left ventricle. There was blood in the veins; the cavæ were distended with blood. In some instances the heart was large, soft, and fatty, and its tissue friable. Along with this condition of heart was noted a more or less yellow, soft, fatty liver. in other instances there was no evidence of any disease of the heart or other organs: all that was noticed was a flaccid empty heart, with venous engorgement in the lungs, In one fatal case examined by Dr. Moore there was in addition to the empty flaccid heart, complete adhesion all round to the pericardium. Death was due to syncope from failure of the heart's action. Deaths from asphyxia, or preventable deaths, took place under two dis- tinct sets of circumstances. In one set the administration of the chloroform was too long continued. The patient was too deeply under its influence from the beginning. There was an overdose, the breathing became shallower and shallower, the chest ceased to move, the diaphragm and abdominal walls only moving. The face and lips became livid, and death ensued in spite of artificial respiration. In the second or other set the patient was placed fairy- under the influence of chloroform, administered with a due admixture of air, but during the operation, owing to the patient appearing to come out from under its influence, a further dose was administered, and this dose was excessive, and the patient died. The cause of death was asphyxia through the lungs, This is not an uncommon blunder, even in the hands or skilled men, and is due to want of care in the administration and the neglect of watching the respiration. There are some conditions of lungs and other organs which render the administration of chloroform specially hazardous, and which increase the risk of death from asphyxia. One is a lung or lungs bound down to the walls of the chest and diaphragm by old adhesive bands, the patient having had extensive pleurisy. The breathing capacity or volume of the weakened lung being greatly diminished, a small or ordinary quantity becomes an overdose. With lungs in this condition a very little chloroform seems to embarrass the respiratory organs and bring about a fatal result. In two dental cases in which chloroform was administered by experienced men, who had not, however, examined the chests, and did not know how imperfect and unsatisfactory the respiratory machinery was, death ensued early in the administration and rapidly. There was no help at hand of a proper kind to save life by artificial respiration. I have known humpbacked patients giving great trouble from imperfect breathing apparatus. Another con- dition which is embarrassing, but in a different way, is albumen in the urine257 elimination of urea, epileptiform convulsions may occur and death result. There are always danger and trouble during the administration of chloroform when albumen is present. To prevent death from asphyxia chloroform requires skill, experience, undivided attention, prompt action in time of danger, and a suitable method of administration. Anæsthetics should never be administered in a close, crowded, small, ill-ventilated apartment, or side room of a ward, or in the lobby of an operating theatre. Neither should there be a crowd around the patient witnessing the operation. several deaths had the fatal result induced or hastened by one or other of these conditions. Of the apparatus used in the administration of chloroform, based upon the evidence afforded by the deaths, Allis's inhaler is the most dangerous. Next in order is the folded towel arrangement, and the safest of all is the drop method on flannel stretched on wire. Deaths from syncope or failure of heart are not common. They do, however, occur, and, as a rule, early in the administration. A small quantity of concentrated vapour without any air administered to a nervous, timid patient has proved fatal. A. healthy, florid-faced young man had chloroform administered to him in private by a surgeon who had gained much experience of chloroforming in the wards of the Royal Infirmary. The chloroform was administered on a folded towel, three or four drachms having been poured on. While the patient was counting, and when he had reached the number twenty-five, his face became at once pale and blanched, the pupils suddenly widely dilated, no pulse was felt at the wrist. The young man was dead. On post-mortem examination I found his heart an empty flaccid bag. There was no disease of any organ, and no evidence of death from asphyxia. I have known a robust-looking ship captain die under precisely similar circumstances, and on post-mortem examination I found only an empty flaccid heart. Both men had hearts and nervous systems specially sensitive to chloroform, and the fatal result could not have been provided against. There is no possibility of discovering beforehand the existence of such a sensitive heart. Weakly, flabby, thin-walled, yellow hearts, and hearts bound to the pericardium by old adhe- sive bands of probably rheumatic origin, are prone to become paralysed very early in the administration of chloroform. Indian dogs and monkeys, the subjects of experiments by the Hyderabad Commission, do not afford the cardiac and pulmonary complications which are often present in man, and con- clusions based upon such experiments, however interesting and important they may be when viewed from a purely scientific standpoint, are of very little practical importance or value as guides to us in the safe administration of chloroform to our patients. Strange as it may seem, disease of valves, hypertrophy of walls, cardiac murmurs of all kinds, give no trouble during the administration chloroform. I know that from experience in the operating theatre, and I have never found any valvular disease in any case of death under chloroform. I have no post-mortem data of deaths from syncope in the last period of the administration of chloroform. On that point I have nothing to say. In conclusion, I have to state that after thirty years' experience as a surgeon in hospital and in private practice, experience both of the living and the dead, I have formed the opinion 33
258 that at all times and under all circumstances chloroform cannot be administered without some risk to the patient's life. That risk, however, may be greatly diminished259 to us the inquiry form sent out. If this has been mislaid, we will gladly furnish fresh forms. The constant tale of deaths which are so lamentable surely claims of the profession some personal effort towards establishing a satisfactory clinical record of the behaviour of human beings under anæsthetics, and, it may be, throwing light upon the best way to avoid fatalities. AN ADDRESS ON ANÆSTHESIA. delivered before the International. Medical Congress, Berlin, August, 1890, by H. C. WOOD, LL.D., Philadelphia. [Reprinted from the "British Medical Journal," August 16th, 1890.] THE most brilliant modern achievements of the science and art of medicine in the direct saving of life are connected with surgery. These great achievements have been render- ed possible by two epoch-making discoveries-antisepsis and anæsthesia. The long array of fatal cases of poisoning by carbolic acid, by iodoform, by corrosive sublimate, and by other antiseptic agents; the hundreds of deaths from chloroform, ether, and other anæsthetics, all bear witness to the verity of that strange law, in obedience to which the progress of the human race is so often at the sacrifice of the individual. Antisepsis has outgrown the dangers of its youth, and to-day the measures that are meant to save very rarely kill. On the other hand, the death roll of anæsthesia is daily added to260 clinical and experimental facts alike, and should lead to careful re-examination. No amount of failure to purge a dog by elaterium proves that elaterium does not purge man; whilst, on the other hand, the discovery that digitalis increased the blood-pressure in the lower animal very properly led to doubt as to the correctness of the, at that time general, belief that digi- talis acts upon man as a cardiac sedative, and finally to the recognition of the falsity of the clinical observation upon which such belief rested. Whatever difficulties may beset the path of the experimental therapeutist, it is certain that law is throughout the universe supreme; that man, at least in his physical nature, is only an especially developed animal; and if drugs act differently upon different animals, such action must be in obedience to certain laws, to us known or unknown. Any attempt to fairly discuss these laws would lead us too far afield for the present. One law, however, treads so closely upon the matter at hand this morning, that it requires statement. This law is, that, when an apparatus or system is of similar function, and of similar functional activity in different animals, the difference in the action of remedies is very rarely, if ever, in kind, though it may be in degree. Throughout mammalia the heart has one general structure and one general function; the heart of the dog responds to the touch of digitalis precisely as does the heart of the man. The human brain is so much more highly developed than the brain of the lower mammal that it is. in fact, a new organ or apparatus. and its relation to drugs changes with the change of structure and of function. The scope of this law in regard to anæsthesia is not far to seek. The functions especially com- promised in lethal anæsthesia are respiration and circulation. Surely these functions are similar throughout mammalia, and surely we ought to he able to safely reason concerning them from the dog to the man. Recently, however, alleged clinical facts have been challenged by authority, upon the strength of experimental results. Under these circumstances, nothing must be at once abandoned, everything must be re-examined. These re-examinations I have made, and I may be pardoned perhaps, if I affirm that a complete study of the clinical and experimental evi- dence brings out, not a discord, but a most beautiful concord,-that concord between experi- mental and practical medicine which so often fails to appear simply because we cannot fit together the fragments of truth in our possession. Although numerous substances have been tried. there are to-day in use practically only three anæsthetics,261 therefore, a priori, to be expected that the phenomena of mechanical and of nitrous oxide asphyxia should differ to a certain extent. To determine the way in which nitrous oxide inhalation affects the circulation, I have, during the past winter, in connection with my assist- ant and friend, Dr. David Gerna, made a long series of experiments. The result has been to show that usually the inhalation is followed by a rise of the arterial pressure, accompanied by a great disturbance of the pulse; the pulse at first becoming irregular and tumultuous, but by-and-by settling, so that when anæsthesia is complete the pulse wave is remarkably large and full, and the rate very slow. The rise and fall of the arterial pressure in nitrous oxide anæsthesia was found to vary remarkably, not only in different inhalations, but in different periods of the same inhalation. Sometime the rise was sudden, sometimes it was slow and gradual; sometimes it was maintained until near death, sometimes it was interrupted very early; sometimes it was not very well marked, sometimes it was enormous. In all our experiments respiration ceased while the heart was still in full activity. Indeed, instead of the gas acting as a cardiac depressant, it appeared to act as a cardiac stimu- lant, although it paralysed the vaso-motor apparatus. Thus, during complete anæsthesia, fara- disation of the sciatic nerve always failed to register in an increase of the blood-pressure, although the heart was beating very powerfully, and although the pneumogastrics had been previously severed: whilst late in the poisoning262 A suggestive and very practical fact which came out in our experiments is that some- times during an inhalation of nitrous oxide the rise of the arterial pressure is extraordinary and abrupt. Not long since, in the city of Philadelphia, a gentleman arose from the dentist's chair after an inhalation of nitrous oxide, staggered, and fell in an apoplexy. Is it not easy to perceive that when the arterial system is diseased the great strain of a sudden rise of blood- pressure may produce rupture? Some years since years Dr. Kendernine, a Philadelphia surgeon of local note, died of diabetes, which he insisted was produced in him by the inhalation of nitrous oxide. This is in accord with the researches of the French physician. Dr. Lafont, who reported a case in which sugar appeared in the urine twice in a patient after the inhalation of the gas, and who also caused in himself, and in dogs, temporary glycosuria by such inhalations. Further, Dr. Lafont noticed in a case of mitral insufficiency temporary albuminuria. I am not aware that these very statements of the French physician have given rise to any research. except five experiments made recently upon healthy men, with negative results, by two medical students of the University of Pennsylvania, Messrs. George S. Woodward and Alfred Hand. junr. I do not, believe that ordinarily the inhalation of nitrous oxide is followed by sufficient disturbance of the circulation to register itself in the urine, but the negative evidence of Messrs. Woodward and Hand is not sufficient to render it improbable that in exceptional cases the inhalation of nitrous oxide may produce albuminuria or glycosuria. Such phenomena, if they occur, are in all probability not directly produced by the nitrous oxide, but are due to the disturbances of capillary circulation caused by it. However these facts may be, it seems to me that great caution should be used in the administration of nitrous oxide to persons, the coating of whose arteries is diseased, and it is probable that when widespread atheroma exists, ether is a safer anæsthetic than nitrous oxide. When respiration has been suspended in nitrous oxide anæsthesia, the overwhelming indication is certainly for the employment of artificial respiration. Notwithstanding the great safety and the many advantages which attend the anæsthetic employment of nitrous oxide, the gas can never he used for the general purposes of the surgeon, on account of the excessive fugaciousness of its influence. The perfect anæsthetic will be a substance which has the power of paralysing the sensory- nerve trunks without affecting other functions of the body. If such drug exists it yet awaits the coming of its discoverer. Probably until such a sensory-nerve paralysant is found chloroform and ether will maintain the complete supremacy which they now have; and in the further discussion of my subject I shall confine my remarks to them. Lack of time limits this discussion to: (1) The method in which these two drugs kill, both in man and in the lower animal, that is, whether they destroy life through the circulation or the respiration. (2) The comparative fatality attending the use of these two agents, and the reasons for the difference.
263 (3) The comparative disadvantages between the two agents, and the best method of securing the desired results. (4) The treatment of accidents occurring during ether or chloroform anæsthesia. In regard to the method in which anæstheties kill, my own teaching hitherto has been: first, that although ether in moderate doses acts as a stimulant to the circulation, yet in over- whelming amount, it is capable of depressing the heart, but that such depression of the heart is always less than the depression of the respiration, and therefore ether kills always through the respiration; secondly, that chloroform may produce death by paralysis of the respiratory centre, or by a simultaneous arrest of respiration and circulation, but that primary paralysis of the heart may occur, and is especially prone to do so when the chloroform vapour has been given in concentrated form. I think that these views are in accord with general professional belief, but it has recent- ly been alleged that they are at variance with experimental evidences, so that a re-examina- tion is necessary. What then are the clinical facts? If any credence is to be attached to the statements of competent witnesses, who have recorded human deaths during anæsthesia it is certain that in some cases, under the influence of chloroform, the pulse and respiration have ceased simultaneously: whilst in other instances the respiration has failed before the pulse: and in still other cases the pulse has ceased its beat before the respiratory movements were arrested. Usually ether arrests respiration in men before it paralyses the heart, but the collec- tion of records made by Dr. J. Reeves certainly show that the fatal result may be produced by syncope. Thus Dr. Ernest H. Jacobs, in a report of a fatal positively "the pulse ceased, the breathing continued". It would seem that we must allow that ether in the human subject may cause death in the same methods as does chloroform. Such then are the clinical facts; or, in other words, such are the results of observations made upon the human subject. What are the results of observations made upon animals? The general teaching in regard to chloroform has been recently challenged by Dr. Lauder Brunton, who, as the result of 450 experiments made by himself upon the pariah dogs of India, has reached the conclusion, as published in the London Lancet, that, however concentrated the chloroform may be, it never causes that death from sudden stoppage of the heart. In the physiological laboratories of the University of Pennsylvania, for some years, several hundred dogs have been used annually, and a very large proportion of these dogs have been, at the end of an experiment, killed by chloroform. The observations of Dr. Reichert, professor of Physiology in the University. Dr. Hobart Hare, Demonstrator of Therapeutics, and myself, have been concordant in showing that chloroform is a cardiac para- lysant, and often does kill dogs by a direct action upon the heart or its contained ganglia. The statements made concerning the Hyderabad Commission, however, led Dr. Hare and myself
264 to a careful and thorough re-study of the subject. Some of our experiments were made by injecting chloroform into the jugular vein; others by administering it by inhalation in the usual way. The action of the chloroform seems to be not seriously modified by the method of administration. We definitely proved that in the dog chloroform has a distinct, direct, para- lysing influence on both respiration and circulation; that the respiration may cease before the heart beat, or the two functions be simultaneously abolished; but that in some cases the heart is arrested before respiration. We have several times seen the respiration continues as long as one, and even two minutes after the blood-pressure has fallen to zero, and the pulse has completely disappeared from the carotid artery. The correctness of our experiments, we claim, must be acknowledged. The experiments have not only been witnessed by a number of persons, but I have with me to-day tracings which I will gladly show any one especially interested in the subject. I do not desire to express any doubt whatever as to the correctness of the experimental data of Dr. Brunton; I simply claim that both sets of experiments, although they have yielded different results, have been correctly and properly performed. It may be that the high heat or other climatic conditions surrounding the pariah dog make his heart less sensitive to the action of chloroform than is the heart of the dog bred in northern climates. That the thought of the different constitutions of animals in different climates is not absurd, is shown by the fact that some years ago265 very rare for the blood-pressure to remain near the normal, and I have seen the blood-pressure begin to fall in the very first stages of ether anæsthesia; moreover, in at least two experiments, death occurred from syncope, the respiration continuing for one or two minutes after the com- plete cessation of the circulation. In experiment in which the fall of blood-pressure was most pronounced, and the arrest of the heart most complete, the dog was sick from the mange, and it is possible that the weakened heart was more susceptible than is the normal heart to the depressing influence of ether. So far, then, as concerns the method in which ether and chloroform kill, I claim most urgently that there is no contradiction between the results as obtained by the bedside and in the physiological laboratories, and that a complete broad study of the clinical and experimental evidence leads to one conclusion, namely, that chloroform and ether are capable of paralysing the respiration and the circulation; that in some cases one function, in other cases the other function, is primarily arrested, but that ether is less prone to produce a primary arrest of the heart than is chloroform. In the discussion of the second point which I have raised, namely, as to the comparative fatality attending the use of ether and chloroform, I shall not occupy time with any elaborate setting forth of the clinical evidence. In regard to the number of recorded deaths, I shall content myself with accepting the latest statistics at hand, namely, those collected by Dr. Lawrence Turnbull, who has found 375 deaths reported from chloroform, and 52 from ether. I do not believe that these figures nearly represent the total mortality; I doubt very much whether one-third of the deaths from anæsthesia are reported: certainly not one-third of the cases I have had personal knowledge of having been publicly recorded. Moreover, the pressure to conceal deaths from chloroform is greater than when the lethal result is due to ether. The surgeon who uses ether feels that he has employed the safest anæsthetic, and that he will receive no blame if a death occurs from it, and feels also that he has a rare case to put on record, which will give his own name permanent place in anæsthetic literature; where- as the surgeon who uses chloroform knows that if death occur from the anæsthetic, a very large proportion of the profession, at least in the united States, will condemn him either in public or in secret for the use of this drug, and that he will be fortunate if he escape being publicly condemned by a coroner's jury. Moreover deaths from chloroform are only too common, so that the surgeon has nothing to gain much to lose by publication of a chloroform death, and, if possessed of the average human nature holds his peace. It seems to me impossible to get at the exact number of anæsthetic deaths or the propor- tionate fatality of ether and chloroform. Lyman considers that in regard to chloroform, the ratio of deaths to inhalations is 1 in 5,860; Richardson affirms that it is 1 in 2,500 to 3,000; Andrews puts it for ether at 1 in 23,204; and Lyman at 1 in 16,542. Without claiming strict accuracy for any of these figures, I think that it can be assert- ed that the probable ratio of deaths from chloroform is three to five times that of deaths from ether. 34
266 When we come to study the effects of chloroform upon the lower animals, we find that it varies very distinctly in its action on the different species. The cat seems to withstand the fatal influences of chloroform with a power worthy of its reputed "nine lives". Many years ago, Professor Schiff called attention to the fact that the use of chloroform as an anæsthetic in the dog is usually attended with the loss of many animals. Professor Martin, of the John Hop- kin's University, writes me that the margin between complete chloroform anæsthesia in the dog, and chloroform death, is a very narrow one, This certainly is our experience in the University of Pennsylvania; we have never been able to use chloroform as an anæsthetic without losing a very large proportion of our dogs. Clinical and experimental results, namely, the results of experiments made in the phy- siological laboratory upon the lower animal, and the results of experiments made in the am- phitheatre upon the higher animal (man) are again concordant. Chloroform is much more inimical than ether to animal life. The cause of this singular fatality is not, however, chiefly the cardiac action of chloroform. Chloroform is more apt to cause cardiac arrest than is ether, but it is also much more prone than is ether to cause deaths by failure of the respiration. Almost invariably, when ether is withdrawn before the dog is absolutely in the grasp of death, recovery occurs; but over and over again I have noticed that although the chloroform was taken away whilst the respirations were still being maintained with regularity, the arterial pressure much above zero, and the pulse very apparent, yet the symptoms of cardiac and respiratory failure continued to increase until the fatal issue was reached. It seems to me that certain general facts or principles in regard to anæsthesia must be considered as established:267 this "holding on" is because it is less volatile than ether, and can we not here get a hint why chloroform is less deadly in the South than in the North? The diffusibility of vapours or gases is in inverse proportion to the square of their densities, and the vapour of chloroform would certainly diffuse itself with far greater rapidity at 90° F. than at 70° F. The comparative advantages and disadvantages of the two anæsthetics in practical medi- cine are so well known that only one or two points seem to force themselves upon our present attention. I cannot see that the surgeon is justified in putting the life of the patient to un- necessary risk of chloroformisation, except under special circumstances. I believe, moreover, that much of the unpopularity of ether is due to its improper administration. It is so easy to embarrass the respiration seriously by the folded towel, as commonly used, that not only are the struggles of mechanical asphyxia almost invariably produced, but probably death itself sometimes caused, Especially is there danger of death being thus caused mechanically in the advanced stage of etherisation, when the patient is too thoroughly etherised to struggle and when the attention of the etheriser is, it may be, attracted by some novel and difficult operation. I confess myself to once having nearly killed a patient in this way. A proper apparatus is certainly preferable to the folded towel. Various have been in- vented, but, as the time is short, I shall only mention one which seems to me a practically perfect mechanism, although it is probably little known this side of the Atlantic. The inhaler invented by Dr. O. H. Allis is based upon the theory that the patient to be etherised should be supplied with a full abundance of air, saturated with the vapour of ether. It consists essentially of a series of foldings of muslin on a wire framework, arranged almost like the gills of a fish, so as to allow the air to pass freely through, but everywhere come in contact with ether. It should be placed upon the face of the patient dry, and the ether gradually poured on from a bottle with a tight cork, pierced by two small glass tubes, one short for the entrance of the air, the other long. and reaching nearly to the bottom of the bottle for exit of ether. When properly used the Allis inhaler practically does away with the sense of suffocation, and the consequent struggles which have made etherisation alike so repulsive to patient and surgeon. In order to determine the rapidity with which etherisation can be produced by this inhaler, Dr. M. H. Wilson kept for me notes of thirteen consecutive cases in the clinic of the Jefferson Medical College Hospital in Philadelphia. The average time required for the production of complete unconsciousness was 8 minutes, The average time during which anæsthesia was fully maintained was 32 minutes; and the average amount of ether used during this time was 7½ ounces. In twenty-one surgical cases occurring this spring in the clinical service of Professor J. William White, of the University of Pennsylvania, the average time for the production of complete anæsthesia with ether, used through Allis's inhaler was 79/10 minutes. The results arrived at in these two clinics are so close that 8 minutes must be considered as the average time required for full etherisation by this apparatus. In discussing the treatment of the accidents of anæsthesia, the results obtained at the bedside naturally press forward for careful consideration; but in going over the subject from
268 this point of view, I have found so little that was novel, and so little that was satisfactory to myself, that I shall not occupy the time of this Congress with any conclusions drawn from reported cases, or personal experience in chloroform accidents. I do not think myself that the problem can be solved by any such study of cases. Death is so near and so terrible, time is so absolute, moments so important, that no surgeon would be willing or justified in waiting for the effect of any one remedy; and when a man is dosed with alcohol, nitrite of amyl, hypodermic injections of ether, digitalis, atropine, and other powerful agents; faradised, slapped, douched, stood on his heal, subjected to chest movements for artificial respiration and various other measures too numerous to mention; who can tell, if by chance he recover, why he has done so? or who can point out, if by chance he die, what is the remedy whose omission or commission has led to the fatal result? The problem is a very complex one not to be worked out amidst the excitement and responsibilities of the amphitheatre. Only in the physiological laboratory can its various elements he separated and studied each by itself. without regard to the individual life which is at stake. In the physiological laboratory two distinct paths open, each promising to lead to some positive knowledge. We may, on one hand, enter upon the study of the minimum fatal dose of the anæsthetic, and of the results by the consentaneous subsequent administration of its supposed physiological antagonist: or we may investigate the effect of remedies upon functions that are failing under the influences of the anæsthetic. The objections to the first of these methods have been, in the present instance, over- whelming. The accidents seem to be independent of the amount of anæsthetic inhaled; and such a method of investigation would have required far more time than was available after I had had the honour of being asked to address this body. Death is produced by chloroform and ether through paralysis of the respiration and the heart, and the method of experimental study which I have employed consisted in a study of the action or powerful agents upon these functions when oppressed by chloroform, I have selected chloroform chiefly because it is the more powerful agent of the two anæsthetics. and the more certain in its results. The experiments have all been made upon dogs, by one plan. The carotid artery and also the trachea. having been connected with a recording drum. so that the movements of the circulation and the respiration could be consecutively recorded. the animal was anæs- thetised, and when the blood-pressure had fallen almost to zero. and the respiration had ceased, or nearly ceased. as the case might be the remedy to be tried was injected into the jugular vein, through a canula which had been previously inserted. The more important remedies which have been used by clinicians for the averting of threatened death during anæsthesia are ether alcohol, ammonia, nitrite of amyl, digitalis, atropine, and caffeine, alterations of position, and artificial respiration. Although, at least in America. hypodermic injections of ether have been frequently employed even in ether accidents, such use is so absolutely absurd that it does not seem to me
269 to require any experimental evidence of its futility. Ether in the blood acts as ether, whether it finds entrance through the lungs, through the rectum, or through the cellular tissue; and the man who would inject ether hypodermically into a patient who is dying from ether, should, to he logical, also saturate a sponge with the ether and crowd it upon his unfortunate victim. Instead of simply stating the results obtained in my experiments, I have thought it would be more interesting to show reproductions from some of my tracings. The first drug that I shall report upon is caffeine. I have injected it during the cardiac failure produced by chloroform, in doses varying from 3 to 7 ½grains, and have never been able to perceive any distinct alteration in the arterial pressure, and no consistent distinct change of the pulse either in number or force. So far as the experiments go, they certainly indicate that the drug has no influence upon the heart that is being overpowered by chloroform. I may also state here that it is not possible in any of my tracings to make out any influence exerted by caffeine upon the respiration. With atropine I have made a few experiments, the results being almost as negative as with caffeine. Ten cubic centimiêtres of a 2 per cent. solution of the atropine injected into the jugular vein of a chloroformed animal, altered the rate of the pulse beaft, but had no apparent effect or influence upon the arterial pressure, or upon the respiration, and in no wise prevented final cardiac arrest. Of all drugs, that which I think is usually most relied upon by clinicians as a cardiac stimulant in anæsthesia as in other cases of heart failure, is alcohol. The chemical and phy- siological relations of alcohol to ether and are, however, so close, that many years ago I became very doubtful of the value of this drug as a stimulant to a heart depressed by an anæsthesia. These doubts continually grew stronger from what I saw and read as to the effects of the administration of alcohol anæsthesia and were finally changed into conviction by the experiment of R, Dubois,* who found that in the animal to which had been freely given, much less chloroform is required than in the normal animal, to anæsthetise or to kill; or, in other words, that alcohol intensifies the influence of Chloroform and lessens the fatal dose. In my own experiments with alcohol an 80 per cent. fluid was used, diluted with water. The amount injected into the jugular vein varied in the different experiments from 5 to 20 cubic centimêtres, and in no case have I been able to detect any increase in the size of the pulse, or in the arterial pressure produced by alcohol when the heart was failing during advanced chloroform. anæsthesia, On the other hand, on several occasions the larger amounts of alcohol apparently greatly increased the rapidity of the fall of the arterial pressure, and aided materially in extinguishing the pulse rate. The effects of ammonia upon the failing heart of chloroform anæsthesia have been in my experiments uncertain; sometimes distinct, although very fugacious, and sometimes im- perceptible. Twenty cubic centimêtres of a 10 per cent. solution of aqua ammoniæ fortior * Progras Mid., 1883 xi. 951.
270 (United States' Pharmacopaia), in some cases produced an immediate rise in the arterial pressure, and even fugaciously registered itself in the respiratory rate, but perhaps more frequently it failed in its influence. The influence of injections of digitalis has been in a number of experiments very pronounced in producing a persistent gradual rise of the arterial pressure with an increase in the size of the individual pulse rate. In several instances death was apparently averted by its injection, and I saw in one or two cases, where large amounts of the digitalis had been em- ployed, sudden systolic cardiac arrest, indicating that digitalis, if in sufficient amount, is able to victoriously assert itself in opposition to chloroform. Moreover, when I have given chloro- form to dogs whose hearts were already under the influence of digitalis, there has seemed to be a peculiar steadying or sustaining power combating the circulatory depression naturally produced by the anæsthetic, and I believe that in all cases of weak heart in man a full dose of digitalis before the administration of chloroform would greatly lessen the danger of cardiac collapse. With the nitrite of amyl four experiments were made; in some of these from four to ten drops of the nitrite of amyl were injected in the jugular vein; in others the nitrite was used by inhalation. No distinct effect upon the arterial pressure was in any instance produced, and usually no alteration in the size of the pulse waves, although sometimes the pulse did appear to be a little fuller. Of all my experimental results, those which have been reached with strychnine have been the most surprising. The injection of strychnine into the jugular vein usually produced a gradual rise of the arterial pressure, and always caused an extraordinary and rapid increase in the rate and extent of the respiration. Thus I have seen the respiration, which had practi- cally ceased for ten seconds, suddenly, under the influence of an injection of two-tenths of a grain of strychnine, become at once very large and full, and reach a rate of 130 a minute. A series of elaborate experiments made upon the effect of the position of the animal on the blood-pressure in the carotid and other arteries, has very clearly proved that the body of the animal whose circulation has been paralysed by chloroform acts in a measure like a tube filled with fluid. Thus, if the feet of the dog were raised vertically above the head, whilst the latter remained upon the table, an immediate rise of pressure occurred, even though the heart had ceased beating entirely; provided that the head of the animal was kept upon a level with the table. If, however, the head of the animal was depressed below the level of the table for a distance equal to, or greater than, the length of the body of the animal, a decrease of the arterial pressure occurred at once, although the animal was in a vertical position. The phenomena observed were precisely such as would have been produced if the canula had been inserted into a tube filled with fluid, instead of the carotid artery, and the elevation and depression of this tube had registered itself on the recording drum, in obedience to the ordinary laws of hydrostatics. The phenomena, were entirely in- dependent of any beat of the heart, and were readily produced when the animal was dead, provided the death had not occurred too long previously. Sometimes, even a very few minutes after the cessation of the heart beat, it was impossible to produce the changes of pressure upon the drum. This I believe to have been due to coagulation of the blood occurring very early
271 after death to a sufficient extent to interfere with the liquid properties of the fluid. In no case was any effect upon the respiration produced by change of position in the animal. In a number of cases, however, when the feet were elevated, the heart, which had entirely ceased beating, recommenced its work, and I have several times seen a pulse entirely disappear when the animal was taken from the vertical to the horizontal position. On the other hand, very frequently it was impossible to affect the cardiac action by changing the position of the animal. Nevertheless, the phenomena spoken of occurred too frequently to be a mere outcome of chance, though I several times noted that the heart was usually more affected by alternately elevating and depressing the feet of the animal than by keeping it in a steadily elevated or horizontal position. When the circulation has practically ceased, under the depressing influence of an anæsthetic, inverting the body must cause the blood which has naturally collected on the enor- mously relaxed vessels of the abdomen, to flow into the right side of the heart and distend it, and this distension272 The one measure which in practical value far surpassed all others for the restoration of the dying animal was artificial respiration, and I have no doubt that a great majority of the deaths which have occurred in man from anæsthesia might have been avoided by the use of an active artificial respiration. The difficulty with artificial respiration as it has been hitherto practised upon man, after the Sylvester or other methods, is ifs inefficiency; whereas the artificial respiration which I used on animals was very active, indeed, much more efficient than natural breathing in causing circulation of air through the lungs, and therefore in removing excess of the anæsthetic from the residual air of the lungs and from the blood. The use of what may be called "forced" artificial respiration by the physiologists, so naturally suggested a similar practice in man, that the celebrated John Hunter invented for the purpose an apparatus which consisted of a bellows so constructed that when it was ex- tended one compartment drew in air from the lungs, while the other drew air from the atmos- phere; and when it was closed the process was reversed, the fresh air being thrown into the lungs, the foul air into the atmosphere. In 1867 Richardson, of London, invented an ap- paratus more elegant and portable, although identical in principle with that of John Hun- ter's; but I have not found that either Hunter or Richardson treated by forced artificial res- piration an actual case of disease or poisoning, In 1875.* Dr. John Ellis Blake reported a successful case of aconite poisoning, in which life was apparently saved, although there was no pulse for over three hours, by artificial respiration, with the use of oxygen. In this case Mar- shall Hall's method was at first used, but later, a small rubber tube was connected directly with a copper reservoir of condensed oxygen, the other end of the tube terminating in as mall nozzle, which was inserted in one nostril. Four hundred gallons of oxygen were thus used, but how far the force of the compressed gas was employed to dilate the lungs is not very clear; and it is doubtful whether this case should be considered as one of forced respiration. The first physician to use forced respiration in actual human poisoning, with a clear idea, of its value and power, so far as my reading goes, was Dr. George E. Fell.273 living, but have made a series of experiments upon dead bodies, which have demonstrated that usually a face mask is all that is necessary for the performance of artificial respiration. Before using the mask, the tongue should be well drawn forward, and, if necessary, fixed in this position by an ordinary piece of silk suture run through it, which can be held in the hand of the operator. If in any individual case the mask fails, an intubation tube may be introduced into the larynx. I do not believe it will ever be found necessary to perform a tracheotomy. Dr. Fell's apparatus consists of a pair of foot-bellows by which air is forced into a receiving chamber, which is connected with an apparatus for warming the air, and a valve which can be opened and shut by a movement of the finger. This valve in turn leads to the tracheal tube. When the valve is opened the air rushes through the chamber into the lungs and expands them; the finger is lifted, the valve shuts, the lungs contract; and so the respira- tion goes on. I have no doubt that this apparatus is efficient in practice, but it is open to the serious objection of being unnecessarily complex and costly. A much simpler, cheaper, and probably equally efficient apparatus may consist simply of a pair of bellows of proper size, a few feet of India rubber tubing, a face mask, and two sizes of intubation tubes. There should also be set in the tubing a double tube, with opening similar to that commonly found in the tracheal canula of the physiological labora- tory, so that it is in the power of the operator to allow for the escape of any excess of air thrown by the bellows. This whole apparatus can be prepared at a very trifling expense, and it seems hardly necessary to point out its probable value in various narcotic poisonings, and other accidents, in which death is produced by a paralysis of the respiratory centres of temporary nature. The proper use of it,274 CLINICAL LECTURE BY SURGEON-MAJOR E. LAWRIE. GENTLEMEN,275 Sir Joseph Fayrer's letter therefore merely confirms my opinion that the report of the Glasgow Committee, which was published in 1879, and was founded upon insufficient experiments, has done infinite harm, and is chiefly responsible for the fatality from chloroform during the last ten years. Dr. James Dunlop also states:* "Within the last ten years the deaths under chloroform in Glasgow have been more numerous than they had been in the previous decade." Professor Wood next proceeds to re-examine the clinical facts. "If any credence is to be attached to the statements of competent witnesses who have recorded human deaths during anæsthesia, it is certain that in some cases under the influence of chloroform the pulse and the respiration have ceased simultaneously, whilst in other instances the respiration has failed before the pulse, and in still other cases the pulse has ceased its beat before the respira- tory movements were arrested." Nothing is more certain, however, than that it is unsafe to attach credence to those whom Professor Wood styles the competent witnesses who have recorded human deaths during anæsthesia. The reports of chloroform deaths are utterly worthless and unreliable, because there is no independent person present who can take notes, and who will not interfere, although he sees the inevitable death approaching. Professor Wood then compares his clinical facts, which you now see are of no value, with the results of observations made on animals. He states that he and his colleagues definitely proved that in "the dog chloroform has a distinct, direct paralysing influence on both respiration and circulation: that the respiration may cease before the heart beat, or the two functions be simultaneously abolished; but that in some cases the heart is arrested before respiration. We have several times seen the respiration continue as long as one and even two minutes after the blood-pressure has fallen to zero, and the pulse has completely disappeared from the carotid artery." Professor Wood here, makes the same mistake as was made by Dr. Lauder Brunton on the very last day of the Hyderabad Commission's experiments. No one who was present will forget the exciting scene when Dr. Brunton, who was watching the Fick manometer, called out that the heart had stopped, though the dog was still breathing. The excitement reached a climax when a needle thrust into the heart showed that it was beating vigorously; and we restored the animal easily. On another occasion everybody in the room thought a dog was dead when it was not. The fact that there is no carotid pulse is no proof that the heart has stopped. Professor Wood continues: "The correctness of our experiments we claim must be acknowledged. I do not desire to express any doubt whatever as to the correct- ness of the experimental data of Dr. Brunton. [Why not of the Hyderabad Commission?] I simply claim that both sets of experiments, although they have yielded different results, have been correctly and properly performed." The results being irreconcilable, either the experimental data of Professors Wood and Hare or those of the Hyderabad Commission must be incorrect. The question we have to decide is which of the two are wrong. Professor Wood asserts that his experimental data correspond with his clinical facts. But his clinical facts prove nothing whatever, except that, if part of the chloroformist's attention is devoted to the pulse in chloroform administration, deaths occur. Professor Wood's experi- mental data, like his clinical facts, do not prove that chloroform directly affects the heart. * Vide THE LANCET of Sept. 27th, 1890.
276 The cases he brings forward as instances of death from stoppage of the heart in animals are not supported by any evidence that the heart had stopped beating when he assumed that it had because the blood-pressure was low and the carotid pulse could not be felt. We must have more information regarding Professor Wood's methods before we can accept his con- clusions. He probably used a mercurial manometer. In our experiments the pulse was often visible on the Fick, or glycerine, manometer long after it had disappeared on the mercurial manometer; and the needle in the heart would beat long after the Fick tracing was reduced to a straight line. The clinical facts which led to the formation of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission are very different from those of Professor Wood. They consist of an almost unbroken series of 45,000 cases of chloroform administration, extending over forty years. In this long series of cases the chloroformists were guided as to the effect of the chloroform entirely by the respir- ation, and there was not a single death. In strict accordance with these clinical facts the experimental data of the Hyderabad Commission prove (1) that the administration of chloro- form is free from risk if the breathing is perfectly regular throughout and the inhalation is stopped as soon as the animal is fully under its influence; (2) that chloroform never causes death by sudden stoppage of the heart; (3) that death from chloroform is always the result of an overdose; (4) that the danger of overdosing is enormously increased by holding the breath, struggling, asphyxia, or anything which causes the patient or animal to take gasping inspirations; and (5) that the inhibitory action of the vagus nerve, which is called into play in threatened and actual poisoning with chloroform, is a safeguard. The safeguard action of the vagus was discovered by Dr. Bomford, and its true meaning was subsequently worked out by Drs. Bomford and Brunton, and no physiological discovery that has been made of late years can compare with it in practical importance. It was never mentioned or alluded to at the Berlin Congress. We are now able to institute a comparison between the value of Professor Wood's clinical and experimental data and that of the clinical and experimental data of the Hyder- abad Commission. Professor Wood's data lead to nothing more than an admittedly unsafe method of chloroform administration. The Hyderabad Commission demonstrates that by proper attention to the breathing chloroform can be administered with safety in any part of the world. No one is in a better position than I am to appreciate the worth and significance of the Hyderabad Commission's researches. For twenty years before the Com- mission was appointed I had given chloroform and taught hundreds of students to give it with unvarying safety. I took no part in Drs. Brunton's and Bomford's experiments, but I had the supreme satisfaction of looking on and watching the gradual development of the proof of the truth of Syme's principles. I now know scientifically, what I knew before empirically and it is difficult to over-estimate the difference. Formerly I taught my students to be on the alert for the warnings which are given by the respiration in chloroform admin- istration, by which danger can be averted. We frequently gave patients overdoses, and were obliged to draw forward their tongues, or occasionally even to employ artificial respiration to restore them. I now teach you that the true art of giving chloroform, 277 the inhalation whenever the breathing is irregular, and directly the patient is fully under the influence of the anæsthetic. We never have trouble now from overdosing; you rarely see respiratory embarrassment in my operations, and during the last year, since the Commission completed its work., we have not had a case in which stoppage of the respiration has occurred. Professor Wood finds ether is as bad as chloroform in the laboratory. Clinically it does not kill so many people, because it is not pushed so far. In many cases, partial anæsthesia is con- sidered sufficient when ether is used. Professor Wood has found out also that atropine, caf- feine, and alcohol are not beneficial in chloroform administration, and that digitalis is. He has only to study our report and the vagus experiments to understand why. Anything which in- creases the rapidity of the pulse increases the rapidity with which chloroform is conveyed to the nerve centres, and if alcohol, or atropine, or caffeine does this they are bad. But alcohol does not always increase the rapidity of the pulse. Very often if a patient is frightened a small dose steadies and slows the pulse, and gives him confidence; and in so far as it does this, a preliminary close of alcohol does good in operations under chloroform. Before bringing this lecture to a close, I desire to call your attention to a paper by Dr. James Dunlop in The Lancet of September 27th, 1890, as it has an important bearing on Professor Wood's address. Dr. Dunlop's paper consists of observations on the administration and dangers of anæsthetics, in reply to The Lancet's circular calling upon scientific medical men throughout the world for information on the subject. Dr. Dunlop states that "the skilful administration of the anæsthetic includes attention to the pulse, as well as watching the respira- tion", and he gives numerous instances of death under chloroform from what he calls asphyxia and syncope. Dr. Dunlop's paper emphasises the truth of what I have already stated with regard to the worthlessness of Professor Wood's clinical facts, and it affords additional evidence that if part of the chloroformist's attention is devoted to the pulse in chloroform administration, deaths occur. It must be clearly understood what is meant by attention to the pulse in chloro- form administration. Any surgeon who can give chloroform safely can keep his eye on the pulse. Towards the end of long operations I often ask my students, just as Mr. Syme used to ask me, "How's the pulse?" This is quite a different matter from watching the pulse for signs of danger from the anæsthetic278 three or four drachms having been poured on. While the patient was counting, and when he had reached the number twenty-five, his face became at once pale and blanched, the pupils suddenly widely dilated, and no pulse was felt at the wrist. The young man was dead." In order to understand the cause of the young man's death, you must consider Dr. Dunlop's account of it carefully, and remember that it is impossible to make any patient (or animal) inhale concentrated chloroform vapour without any air, unless you either cause him to gasp, by making him hold his breath or by asphyxiating him, or first render him insensible. From Dr. Dunlop's statement it is clear that the young man was made to count while the chloroform was held over his face on a towel. No surer method of making him gasp could possibly have been devised. Try it yourselves without chloroform, and tell me if counting and regular natural breathing are compatible. But with chloroform close to the face, it is certain that if you try to count you must gasp after every number, or after every few numbers. In fact, counting must lead to gasping much more quickly than holding the breath, because the lungs are emptied by the process. You remember a case which occurred here the other day. When a patient was nearly under chloroform he suddenly began to try to speak, and went on muttering "er279 every 1,236 cases of chloroform administration at St. Bartholomew's and the other large London hospitals where the pulse is taken as a guide. Then we have Professor Wood's state- ment that "carnage" still goes on when chloroform is given in accordance with his own principles; and now we have Dr. James Dunlop asserting that the pulse must be attended to as well as the heart, and boasting that only three cases are killed by chloroform in Glasgow alone every year.* Why are we to continue to study only the experience of those surgeons who cannot give chloroform safely? Why does not The Lancet ask the men who do not have deaths to give us their experience for a change? It is imperative that, in addition to clinical experience of the latter variety. The Lancet should call for the opinion of the whole profession on the anæsthesia controversy. The report of the Hyderabad Commission was published in the leading medical journal last January, and many letters and criticisms on it have appeared since. A careful study of The Lancet for 1890 will enable every general practitioner in Great Britain to form an impartial opinion as to the merits of the case. The votes of the majority will then decide whether the teaching of the Hyderabad Commission or that of Pro- fessor Wood is thought to be more likely to conduce to the interests of the profession and the public; and I have no fear what, the verdict will be. Finally, Dr. Dunlop states that "every intelligent assistant I have had during the last ten years has felt happier during an operation when ether was used than when chloroform was administered." This is not at all surprising. No assistant can give chloroform happily or safely if he is always in dread that his patient may die suddenly. As long as the belief prevails that one of the dangers of chloroform is sudden death by stoppage of the heart, and the chloroformist watches the pulse for signs of heart failure, deaths will occur. It is high time this reproach to our profession and opprobrium of modern surgery should be put an end to: and if surgeons will not put an end to it themselves, the administration of chloroform should be prohibited by law until the teaching with regard to chloroform syncope is altered and brought into conformity with the conclusions of the Hyderabad Commission. LETTER FROM SURGEON-MAJOR P. R. GABBETT. TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET". SIRS,280 the principle taught by Surgeon-Major Lawrie, namely, to concentrate the whole of their attention on the breathing of the patient, and not to pay the slightest regard to the heart or pulse. I understood that it had been clearly and satisfactorily proved by Dr. Lauder Brunton and the Hyderabad Commission that chloroform did not prove fatal by sudden stoppage of the heart; yet very little attention seems to have been paid to the addresses of Dr. Lauder Brun- ton or Professor Wood at the Berlin Medical Congress last August, when the views expressed by these gentlemen were distinctly opposed to each other. The profession in general are there- fore left as far as ever from a sound and definite basis for the administration of chloroform. I am, Sirs, yours truly, P. R. GABBETT, Secunderabad, Deccan. Surgeon-Major, Medical Staff. ARTICLE BY DR. DUDLEY W. BUXTON, [Reprinted from "The Lancet" of December 13th, 1890.] ONE of the dangers of controversy is the almost inevitable crystallisation of the thought of those who advocate, or press, the negative of any question. There is certainly some fear in the present juncture, lest the common-sense side of the chloroform question should be left out in the cold, while we hotly discuss the modus operandi of its death-dealing properties. On the present occasion I hope to draw attention as concisely as possible to the various practical issues involved in my title. Chloroform, I take it, cannot, even if we would, be laid aside; it possesses properties so valuable and so useful that it will, perhaps for ever, remain a favourite anæsthetic with many operating surgeons and obstetricians. The main considerations, then, for practical men are: How far is it a dangerous agent, in what does its danger consist, and can this danger be abrogated or minimised so as appreciably to render the peril beyond ordinary computation either by methods of administration or other means; and, lastly, how does it compare, as far as absolute safety goes, when placed side by side with other anæsthetics? It may be said that the present time is hardly ripe for opening such an inquiry, since the subject is still to be further elucidated by the clinical report promised us by the Editors of THE LANCET. But we should remember that from its very nature such a report must be devoid of personal colour, being statistical, so that the experiences of practical anæsthetists can neither forestall nor be devoid of value whatever may be the finding of THE LANCET Chloroform In- quiry. Death under chloroform is, unhappily, a frequent occurrence. We hear of a few deaths, probably not all, and if we accept 1 in 3,000 as a working estimate of their frequency we are probably within the mark, although Surgeon-Major Lawrie says he has given chloro-
281 form five or ten times daily for fifteen years without a casualty, i.e., a mean of 40,000 anæs- thetics; and other exceptional estimates have been given by Baudens, 1 in 10,000 during the Crimean War, and Hunter McGuire, 1 in 15,000 during the Secession War. These deaths may be due to282 from heart syncope secondary to respiratory failure, and both will submit that such deaths should not occur; that they mean in many cases carelessness and deviation of the anæsthetist's attention from the patient, and both will assert that most of such patients can be brought out of their peril by prompt and skilful employment of artificial respiration, &c. It then becomes necessary to consider the evidence upon which these rival schools of thought and teaching base their opinion and practice. In this connection I would point out a most valuable source of information which has up to the present been but lightly laid under contribution, and which is capable of furnishing the most valuable testimony. I refer to the frequent cases which are met with by those who have a large practice in chloroforming in which untoward symptoms occur, but which not ending fatally are not recorded in the medical press, and perhaps noticed only by the chloroformist himself. Upon the question of primary heart failure the Hyderabad Commission have definitely assumed the position that respiration always fails before cardiac syncope; in other words, that cardiac syncope is invariably secondary. The immense care with which the work of the Com- mission was conducted, the great help it received from the experience of Surgeon-Major Lawrie in chloroforming and that of Dr. Lauder Brunton in physiological research, render its conclu- sions of especial value, and justify us, I think, in saying that if primary heart failure from chloro- form is a delusion the Hyderabad Commission were competent to prove the same up to the hilt. The evidence adduced is now common property, so that detailed quotation is needless. In chloroforming considerably under one thousand dogs, rabbits, &c., the Commission failed to induce primary syncope, and Surgeon-Major Lawrie in, say, 40,000 inhalations in human beings the bulk of whom we may assume were Asiatics, never lost a patient. Two classes of fatalities occurred among the lower animals283 muscle relaxed, and dilatation took place, leading, of course, to gradual failure of circulation. Up to a certain point this "give" of the heart muscle was recoverable, and upon chloroform being stopped the heart regained its normal tone and contraction. Other phenomena asso- ciated with the action of chloroform upon the heart are summed up under the term "delirium cordis," or a rhythm of the heart muscle leading to futile contraction of portions of the myo- cardium without assisting the viscus to effectually contract and expel its contents. In some cases the dilatation was sudden, and all efforts at resuscitation failed. These results are important, in so far as they are positive, not negative, and because they are demonstrable; the heart is seen to undergo dilatation and to contract up to its usual capacity, or to give out altogether, as the case may be. We have, then, to a certain extent, a conflict of opinion284 judged by the eye and the plan above mentioned, shows no alteration; that not only is there evidence of general feebleness of circulation, which might be attributed to the fall of blood-pressure, regarded by the Hyderabad Commission as protective, but that distinct and unmistakable cardiac enfeeblement occurs. Further, this is progressive, and likely, it has appeared to me in more than one case, to end in cardiac syncope unless prompt and vigorous measures were used. Inversion, which undoubtedly would be highly prejudicial in chloroform, danger due to respiratory paralysis or asphyxial conditions, proves highly efficacious in such cases of cardiac and circulatory enfeeblement. In contending that a fall of blood-pressure is protective, I think a most important factor has been left out of consideration. For granted that such a fall leads to lessened intake of the narcotic vapour, it also determines a lessened output of that which still circulates in the blood. Things being equal, I believe that chloroform acts more harmfully upon poorly oxygenated blood and tissues, e.g., the anæmic, the cyanotic those whose circulation is depreciated by fatty changes in their heart and other viscera, than upon those better supplied with oxygen. On the other hand, cases present themselves when, from the nature of the operation, the chloroforming is complicated by partial asphyxia! and these offer a contrast in that their danger reveals itself in respiratory difficulty leading even to cessa- tion of breathing. I have found, however, that such cases responded readily to artificial res- piration, and danger was over. Words give a poor idea of the contrast presented between these two categories of cases, but one has only to be brought face to face with them to be con- vinced that their difference is one of kind and not one of degree. Again, having once seen the heart relax and dilate under chloroform, as in Professor MacWilliam's experiments, one recog- nises the anatomical counterpart of the procession of events which one had encountered again and again in the operating theatre. It would subserve no useful purpose to attempt to explain the discrepancies which appear between the experiments undertaken by the Hyderabad Com- mission and those of other observers, or to reconcile these results with those arrived at by the daily observations285 instituting a rough-and-ready comparison between chloroform and ether, when both are administered by skilled persons employing good methods; and I am bound to say that ether, whatever may be urged against it, has fewer deaths to account for than chloroform. It has been said that chloroform kills at or during the operation, whereas ether kills afterwards. This is not my experience. One's kind surgical friends usually keep one well informed of un- toward results following or traceable to the anæsthetic, and yet I have not found ether after- effects more severe or dangerous than those arising from chloroform. The subject of this communication is the administration of chloroform, so that I will dismiss this ether digression, and conclude by inquiring, Where does the above reasoning concerning chloroform leave us? I submit there exists a considerable bulk of direct evidence pointing to the truth of the existence of primary heart failure under chloroform, due to a distinct anatomical result of the anæsthetic, and that disregard of the pulse must tend to induce the anæsthetist to overlook the impending danger, while a careful watch over the colour and pulse, on the other hand, would give timely warning for measures to be adopted which would stave off the peril. Respiration must, of course, also be noted, as death may arrive through that channel. Skill and a lively sense of responsibility, which is not fear of chloroform, will do much to lessen deaths from that anæsthetic, but I submit the courage or recklessness begotten of a false sense of security must only end in still further increasing the death-rate from chloroform, already unnecessarily high. While thus contending that chloroform kills through the heart as well as the respiration, I would not be understood in any way to deprecate its use and value in suitable cases. Because we recognise its dangers it does not follow that those dangers assume an exaggerated appearance indeed, the reverse effect is likely to obtain, especially if we at the same time learn how to recognise and guard against them. Mortimer-street, W. ANNOTATION. From "The Lancet," Dec. 27, 1890. IN the course of his presidential address, delivered at the annual meeting of the South- Western State Medical Society of Ohio, Dr. J. C. Reeve reviews with some care the expe- rience of American surgeons concerning deaths under chloroform. Reports of such casualties occurring in the States lead him to tabulate the following as causes of death:286 it is a well substantiated fact that drugs do not always affect human beings and the lower ani- mals the same way, e.g., elaterium kills dogs but does not purge them, pigeons bear enormous doses of morphine, and rabbits cannot be killed with belladonna. The weight of clinical evi- dence alike of England (Snow), Germany (Kappeler), and America, Dr. Reeve avers, is entirely against, the Commission's finding that primary heart failure does not occur in chloroform narcosis, and cases are cited in which it is stated the heart stopped before respiration ceased. He concludes by saying: "I protest, in the interest of patients, against the doctrine that chlo- roform can be administered with absolute safety;" and Dr. Reeve insists that such a conclu- sion can only be arrived at by "ignoring a vast amount of evidence, both experimental and clinical,287 events if sufficient air is given with the chloroform. If they do occur the cap must be removed and the patient must be allowed to take a breath of fresh air before the administration is proceeded with. (5) Full anæsthesia is estimated by insensibility of the cornea. It is also indicated by stertorous breathing, or by complete relaxation of the muscles. Directly the cornea becomes insensitive, breathing, or by complete stertorous, the inhalation should be stopped. The breath- ing may become stertorous while the cornea is still sensitive. The rule to stop the inhalation should notwithstanding be rigidly enforced, and it will be found that the cornea always be- comes insensitive within a few seconds afterwards. It is only necessary to add that the patient should be so dressed for an operation that his respiratory movements can be seen easily by the chloroformist. In the climate of India this is not difficult to manage, but it is difficult to manage in the climate of Europe; so that in this respect, and in this respect alone, the chloro- formist in England is placed at a distinct disadvantage compared with the chloroformist in India. Proceeding in the above way chloroform never produces any bad effects, and its admin- istration, in any case which is fit for an operation, is entirely free from danger. [The Hyderabad Commission unequivocally adopts the suggestion of Dr. William MacEwen in the great discussion on Anæsthetics in Glasgow that "every one of the patient's respirations should be registered on the admin- istrator's tympanum."] I have drawn attention to the danger of taking the circulation as a guide as to the effect of chloroform,* and should not further allude to it but for an article on chloroform administra- tion by Dr. Dudley Buxton in The Lancet of Dec. 13, 1890. This article is by far the cleverest that has yet appeared front our adversaries, but Dr. Dudley Buxton's teaching con- demns itself. His plan of giving chloroform is288 plainly that the plan is faulty, if not impracticable; in fact, it stands self-condemned. There is never any dangerous enfeeblement of the general circulation or of the heart in the method of giving chloroform recommended by the Hyderabad Commission. Dr. Dudley Buxton can readily satisfy himself of the truth of this statement by giving our method a thorough and impartial trial. None of our critics have done this yet, but if one fair-minded man of Dr. Buxton's calibre were to do so, he would infallibly convert himself to our views, and the conversion of the rest of London would follow in time as a matter of course. Dr. Buxton states that "having once seen the heart relax and dilate under chloroform, as in Professor MacWilliam's experiments, one recognises the anatomical counterpart of the procession of events which one has encountered again and again in the operating theatre. This statement goes far to prove that there must be some fallacy about Professor MacWilliam's experiments. As a surgeon I care very little what happens to the heart when it is subjected to such abnormal treat- ment as is involved in laying open the thorax and pumping chloroform into the lungs in order to prove that it is directly affected by chloroform. We might just as well pump in boiling water, and then tell old women they are not to inhale steam when they get bronchitis. But it is interesting to be told by such an authority as Dr. Dudley Buxton that Professor MacWilliam's results form the anatomical counterpart of a method of chloroform administration which causes general feebleness of the circulation and of the heart, and there is very little doubt that they do. Professor MacWilliam's premiss that heart failure is not necessarily accompanied by a fall of blood-pressure is manifestly unsound, and his description of rhythmic cardiac relaxation and dilatation, under chloroform, is open to the fatal objection that he has not shown that the move- ments of his base line, by which they were estimated, were not produced by relaxation of the diaphragm, pushing up the heart through his artificial opening. If his heart dilatation can really occur without fall of pressure, or when chloroform is properly given, it must be a natural condition and free from risk. The Hyderabad Commission has proved that there is no such thing as chloroform syncope, and that in death from an overdose of chloroform the respiration always fails before the circulation. What the harmless fall of blood-pressure in normal chloroform administration is due to, as well as what happens to the heart after the respiration fails from overdosing, which are the only two points left open to discussion by the Hyderabad Commission, must be entrusted to physiologists to determine. In the telling words of Dr. Bomford, "it is sufficient for us as practical men to know (1) that the heart is the very last organ to give in under the action of chloroform, and (2) that there is no more danger of permanently paralysing it in. chloroform administration, than there is of paralysing the legs and giving the patient paraplegia." LETTER FROM DR. DUDLEY W. BUXTON, TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET." SIRS,289 remain ignorant of all others. The open method, or that of Syme and Simpson, is so well and fully set forth in Sir Joseph Lister's article in "Holmes's System of Surgery," written in 1861, that it appeared to me to be superfluous to describe it in the columns of a journal like The Lancet; but since Surgeon-Major Lawrie has received numerous letters from Europe concerning it, and has gone to the pains of describing it, I suppose I am wrong in supposing that the ABC of the chloroformist's duties are pretty generally understood. With regard to the second method to which I alluded, that in which Junker's inhaler is employed, I must say that your correspondent is clearly wholly unacquainted with the method, or he would not have permitted himself to indulge in such playful criticism. His humour loses none of its point when read by a person who is familiar with Junker's apparatus. I may just say that, with average intelligence and common-sense, the inhaler can be used without necessitating Surgeon-Major Lawrie's suggestion being carried into effect, and the patient compelled "to do it himself." Further, the argument which he adduces, viz., that be- cause I had seen various degrees of heart failure and circulatory trouble, therefore my methods are erroneous, is an instance of what logicians call a petitio principii, and proves too much. In the first place, the open method, to which my remarks mainly referred, is precisely the method which the Hyderabad Commission, following Syme, advocates. I as well as many others in Europe, learnt the method before the session of the Commission. That Surgeon-Major Lawrie has never seen the heart fail and that I have is not surprising, because he has never felt the pulse or examined the action of the heart during chloroformisation, and I have. That Surgeon-Major Lawrie has had many cases I do not for a moment doubt, only he has over- looked them, and as, fortunately, in most cases respiratory rhythm is affected pari passu with cardiac enfeeblement, he has seen the danger-signal quâ the respiration, and has taken mea- sures accordingly. I am further stated to give no fixed principle of chloroform administration, and in my paper, to which reference has been made, I admit such is the case, and for the reason above stated, that my object was argumentative rather than didactic. In my lectures and practical demonstrations I believe I am dogmatic enough, but personally I regard dogmatism in dis- cussion upon scientific subjects in a scientific periodical as unseemly and valueless. In con- clusion, may I draw attention to a sentence against which I am bound to enter a protest? It runs: "The Hyderabad Commission has proved that there is no such thing as chloroform syncope, and that in death from an overdose of chloroform the respiration always fails before the circulation." I submit the Hyderabad Commission has done nothing of the kind; its conclusions were based upon purely negative evidence, and were not warranted by the facts before the profession, and I am strongly of opinion that any teaching which tells chloroformists to ignore the pulse is fraught with danger. I am greatly obliged to Surgeon-Major Lawrie for his courteous reference to myself, and can assure him that I constantly employ the open method and obey the rules he, following Syme, advocates; but I also watch the pulse. I am, Sirs, your obedient servant, DUDLEY W. BUXTON. Mortimer-street, Cavendish-square, W. 37
290 LETTER FROM SURGEON-MAJOR EDWARD LAWRIE, TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET". SIRS,291 LETTER FROM DR. DUDLEY W. BUXTON, TO THE EDITORS OF "THE LANCET". SIRS,292 ARTICLE BY ARTHUR R. CUSHNY, A.M., M.B. (Aberd.) (FROM THE PHYSIOLOGICAL LABORATORY OF BERN UNIVERSITY.) "The Lancet", March 14th, 1891. THE report of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission has been read with interest not only in England and America, but also in Germany and Switzerland, where it has aroused widespread discussion and comment. In the latter country especially, which is at present in the throes of a discussion as to the respective merits of the rival anæsthetics, the report of the second Commission was awaited with anxiety and received with much approbation by the numerous advocates of chloroform. On the decision of the Commission becoming known, Professor Kronecker of Bern, whose pupils, Ratimoff and Schemey, had already shown the poisonous action of chloroform on the heart, suggested that I should make a few experiments on the subject. The details of these will be published elsewhere, and I will here state merely the general results. By the Hyderabad Commission no experiments seem to have been made with chloro- form vapour of ascertained concentration, and, as this factor seems to be of considerable weight, I have used an apparatus* in which it could be exactly regulated. This consists of two wash-bottles, one-third filled, the one with chloroform, the other with water. Part of the air inspired by the animal passes through one, part through the other, and becomes saturated with chloroform fumes or water vapour accordingly. The proportion of the chloroform saturated to the moisture saturated air is regulated by two graduated stopcocks (Kroneckner's Schiebhahn). The two currents unite, and are led by a short tube to the tracheal canula. Expiration is provided for by a small hole in the sheath of the latter, which is covered by a flap of moist goldbeater's skin, to prevent the inspiration of air which has not first passed through the apparatus. In order to exclude all chance of asphyxial complications, and to allow a regular amount of chloroform to be absorbed in a given time, the air was driven through the apparatus by a machine for artificial respiration. The animals used were dogs and rabbits, and the experiments were carried out at ordinary room temperature (15° to 17° G.). The movements of the heart and respiration were recorded by a heart needle and diaphragm lever, and tracings were taken in almost all the experiments. In the respiratory tracing the curves formed by spontaneous respiration were combined with those caused by the artificial inflation of the lungs, but could be easily distinguished, and the moment of cessation of the former ascertained. When this occurred artificial respiration was generally stopped for a few seconds, to see if any spontaneous movements occurred. I may here state that the heart needle was not found to be an accurate index of the heart beat, as in some cases it continued to vibrate after paralysis of the ventricles, owing to the continued pulsation of the auricles communicating a motion to the ventricles through which the needle passed. In all cases, therefore, in which there was any doubt as to the condition of the heart, artificial respiration with air was resumed, and the heart observed directly by opening * Ratimoff and Schemey used the same apparatus in their experiments.
293 the thorax. As soon as chloroform was applied to a rabbit (except when the vapour was greatly diluted with air), the animal began to struggle and the respiration became irregular with expiratory gasps, or almost ceased for a few seconds. Very soon the stage of rapid respiration described by Knoll set in. In those cases in which the air was saturated with chloroform (i.e., in which all the air inspired passed through the chloroform bottle), this stage only lasted from twenty to sixty seconds. In cases in which a lower concentration was used it lasted much longer, sometimes for two hours, but in all the spontaneous respiration gra- dually got shallower without getting slower, till it ceased entirely. The condition of the heart at this moment varied with the concentration in which the vapour had been blown into the lungs. Of seventeen rabbits chloroformed with saturated air, in five the whole heart continued to beat, in nine one or both auricles were in rapid motion while the ventricles were still, in one the left auricle alone was paralysed, while in one the whole heart was in diastolic standstill. In rabbits which were anæsthetised with a mixture of chloroform vapour and air, i.e., in experiments in which the stopcock on the water-bottle was partially open, the whole heart was invariably found beating, but the more chloroform the mixture contained the weaker was the heart beat. Even when only four parts chloroform-bearing air were mixed with ninety-six parts pure air the respiration ceased, though only after from two hours to two hours and a-half294 to avoid its action on the heart, and if this dilution can be sufficiently provided for, observation of the pulse is not absolutely necessary. Although I cannot agree with the Hyderabad Com- mission that the heart always continues to beat after respiration ceases, yet the difficulty in maintaining the concentration necessary to paralyse the heart simultaneously with the respir- tion is extremely great, and I should think that in ordinary chloroform administration such a simultaneous paralysis can never occur. As, in the great majority of my experiments, death was due to the respiration alone, some experiments were made to find the condition of the medulla oblongata during chloroform narcosis. This question was approached by an examination of the reflexes connected with it. I found that these all ceased before the respiration, and returned (in cases where the animal was revived) some time after spontaneous respiration had set in. The more concentrated the mixture, the shorter the interval between their disappearance and that of respiration. The first to cease to act was the corneal reflex, then that on the respiration from the nasal branch of the trigeminus, then the swallowing reflex from irritation of the soft palate or of the superior laryngeal nerve; and, last of all, Traube's active expiratory reflex from expansion of the lungs. The reflex in dogs were not so carefully noted as in rabbits, but in general presented no marked differences. The respiratory centre, as Knoll has pointed out, is affected differently in different stages of chloroform narcosis. At first it is acted on by the reflexes first from the nose then from the trachea and lungs. Then the rapid stage of respiration sets in. This occurs after division of the vagi, and is due to stimulation of the vagus roots in the medulla, and not to stimulation of the respiratory centre itself; for, if the latter were the case, the result would be, as Marckwald has pointed out, respiratory spasms; whereas, after section of the medulla above the centre and division of both vagi, chloroform breaks up the resulting spasms into regular respirations exactly as weak tetanisation of the vagi does. Last of all, the centre is paralysed by chloroform, and fails to respond to electrical stimulation of the medulla. The blood-pressure was registered in several experiments in which the drug was administered in weak concentra- tion, and I found that there occurred a slight rise and then a very gradual uninterrupted fall. In very weak form (4 per cent.) chloroform caused no preliminary rise, but a slow fall from the very first, though so gradual was the change in pressure that it could only be seen by comparing the curves at intervals of ten minutes. No such sudden falls of pressure were seen as have been noted by some critics of the Commission, which is perhaps to be explained by the abundant and uninterrupted supply of air to the lungs. I may remark that in those experi- ments in which the movements of the heart were registered directly, they never showed any sudden change, but gradually increasing weakness, which culminated in paralysis or passed off, according as chloroform was continued or shut off. For the sake of comparison a few experiments were made with ether, and the same stages were observed as with chloroform, death occurring equally rapidly if undiluted ether vapour was used, and being due to paralysis of the respiration alone or with accompanying heart paralysis. In one case delirium cordis was observed after a minute and a quarter's in- halation. Rabbits anæsthetised with pure ether vapour could not be revived by artificial res-
295 piration. Dogs always ceased to respire while the heart continued to beat, as also did rabbits to which diluted vapour had been given, and the majority of these could be revived. The reflexes appear to behave in the same way as in chloroform narcosis. Ether was borne in higher con- centration than chloroform, and the respiration could be more certainly restored. For example, in one case 8 per cent, was given for two hours without killing the animal, while with chloroform 5 per cent. was fatal after one hour and a-half. This fact is the more striking because a very much larger quantity of ether than of chloroform is given in a concentration of 8 per cent. Theoretically, 2.7 times as much ether as chloroform should be carried to the lungs by a given quantity of air, and by actual experiment I found a proportion of 2.61: 1. In both anæsthetics the action on heart and respiration seems the same, a difference in degree only being perceptible. Ether can be given in greater quantity with safety: but so long as the proportion of drug to air is kept low enough either can be used with safety. The concentration necessary to keep rabbits and dogs "under" chloroform is respectively four and eight parts chloroform vapour (at from 15° to 17° C.) to ninety-six and ninety-two parts pure air. Since, however, the concentration necessary to maintain narcosis varied in different species of animals, no inference could be made as to that necessary for men, and my results would have been incomplete had I not been enabled through the kindness of Professor Girard and Dr. Niehans to carry out some experi- ments in their operating theatre in Bern Inselspital. In these experiments the anæsthetic was given in the same way as in my experiments on animals, with the exception that, instead of a tracheal canula, a Y-shaped glass tube was used, the two ends fitting tightly into the patient's nostrils. Expiration was allowed through the mouth, but inspiration through it was prevented by a valved respirator. The patients in general did not object to the method, and one who had to be anæsthetised again some days subsequently begged that the apparatus might be used again instead of the mask. Narcosis was attained in from five to twelve minutes by a mixture of 15 or 20 per cent. of chloroform, and could be kept up by continued inhalation of 5 to 7 per cent, in children and of 7 to 10 per cent, in adults. Almost no excitement occur- red. Throughout the narcosis the face and conjunctiva remained red, and in several cases the concentration necessary to keep up insensibility with retention of the corneal reflex was main- tained. With ether adults were narcotised with difficulty, and only after prolonged inhalation. Anæsthesia was afterwards kept up by a concentration of 10 to 15 per cent. Children pre- sented less difficulty, requiring 25 to 30 per cent. to induce insensibility, which continued uninterrupted with a concentration of 10 to 15 per cent. In all cases the usual increased secretion of tears, saliva, and mucus was manifested. The difficulty in inducing narcosis with ether seems to confirm the theory of many observers that ether alone is insufficient for this purpose, and must be aided by a partial asphyxia. The results of these narcoses may be summed up shortly by saying that, to maintain narcosis with chloroform, a concentration of five to seven and seven to ten parts of chloroform saturated to ninety and ninety-five parts pure air must be adopted for children and adults respectively; while if ether be used, a concentration of ten to fifteen parts saturated to ninety and eighty-five parts pure air is suitable for all ages. The drug may be inhaled in a slightly higher concentration to induce narcosis, but, as soon as the eyelid reflex disappears, the above
296 proportions should be given. The use of the above apparatus (which will be more fully de- scribed in the Zeitschrift für Biologie) offers an easy method of regulating the strength of the inhalation, but, if the usual method is adopted, the anæsthetic should be poured on frequently and in small quantities rather than at longer intervals and in largest doses. By the latter method of administration the narcosis is rendered unnecessarily, and often dangerously, deep for a short time, and then quickly passes off; while by the former it is kept at approximately the same depth throughout. ARTICLE BY SURGEON-MAJOR EDWARD LAWRIE. "The Lancet", July 15th 1891. THE article on chloroform and ether by Dr. Arthur R. Cushny in The Lancet of March 14th, 1891, is a valuable and opportune contribution to the literature of anæsthetics, and is especially welcome to the Hyderabad Commission. Dr. Cushny agrees with us in so many important particulars that it is impossible to regard him as anything else than an ally; and though the cause of the Commission does not require bolstering, Dr. Cushny's experiments and report are the best support we have had yet. Dr. Cushny agrees with us that the effect of ether is precisely similar to that of chloro- form only less intense, and that it is very difficult to produce narcosis at all with ether apart from asphyxia. On the practical question he says, "in ordinary chloroform administration such a simultaneous paralysis of the heart and respiration can never occur," and he further states that "no such sudden falls of pressure were seen as have been noted by some critics of the Commission, which is perhaps to he explained by the abundant and uninterrupted supply of air to the lungs." On all those points Dr. Cushny is clearly a friend to be welcomed. Where he appears to be wrong is in overlooking the effect of the residual chloroform in the lungs after he has finished pumping chloroform into the trachea. It is obvious that artificial respiration must be much more likely to fail when the air in the lungs is saturated with chloroform than when it only holds a very small proportion of the poison. The Hyderabad Commission succeeded in giving chloroform, by the ordinary method of inhalation, in such a dose that artificial respira- tion failed to get rid of it quickly enough to save the animal's life. This occurred in dogs; and in dogs, with Dr. Cushny, artificial respiration was always successful. In these cases he must allow that the inspired air was fully saturated, and in all of them every by-stander, includ- ing The Lancet's chosen representative, Dr. Lauder Brunton, was satisfied that the heart con- tinued to beat after, generally long after, the respiration had ceased. Whether or how far the Hyderabad Commission experimented with dilute chloroform is a matter of no consequence. We tried concentrated vapour, in which alone Dr. Cushny can find any danger. We are quite agreed that extreme concentration is dangerous, but this is so because it leads to the rapid
297 intake of an overdose, and not because there is any action on the heart peculiar to any particular degree of concentration. The Hyderabad Commission's experiments, where chloroform was injected into the large veins of the neck, show that even pure chloroform in the blood does not stop the heart till after it has paralysed the respiration. It is abundantly proved that diluted chloroform, provided it is not too dilute, gradually causes an accumulation of chloroform in the blood sufficient to produce first narcosis, then cessation of the respiration, and finally death. A higher concentration can only bring about the same sequence of events in a shorter time. The higher concentration cannot have any action on the heart peculiar to itself, unless it be that the more concentrated vapour gives rise to spasm of the bronchioles, or in some other way impedes the oxygenation of the blood, and so, pace Professor MacWilliam, affects the heart injuriously, it is impossible that the concen- trated vapour can act upon the heart in a mysterious way before it gets into the blood. It is clear also that the harmless dilute vapour must in time accumulate in the blood; otherwise it could not bring about narcosis and cessation of the respiration But we may well enquire why, when this point is reached, it does not then have the same effect as the concentrated vapour? The truth is that the concentrated vapour interferes with natural respiration and the natural oxygenation of the blood; and in the Hyderabad Commission's report, and in that of Dr. Cushny, it is remarkable that there is an utter want of uniformity in all experiments where normal respiration is interfered with, and complete uniformity in all experiments with chloro- form inhaled in the natural way. The concentrated vapour of chloroform cannot be voluntarily inhaled by man or by animals. When a patient or an animal is forced to inhale concentrated vapour involuntarily, or if it is pumped into the trachea, the danger lies in the fact that when it is desired to stop giving the chloroform it is entirely beyond control, and though the administration be discontinued, the discontinuance does not actually commence until the residual amount far down in the lungs has been got rid of. Long before this can be effected either by artificial respiration or in any other way, the patient may be dead. Dr. Cushy and the Hyderabad Commission are in complete accord with regard to the practical administration of chloroform, and have them same object in view. That object is the dilution of the anæsthetic to a point consistent at once with full anæsthesia and with safety Dr. Cushny attains this end by means of an apparatus. The Hyderabad Commission attains it with equal certainty by giving the chloroform in such a manner as to ensure normal regularity of the respiration. Lister has demonstrated that the strength of vapour which can be naturally inhaled on an open cone or on a towel is from two to four per cent. With regular breathing, if the number of respirations and the number of cubic feet of air inspired in a minute are known, the dose of chloroform inhaled in a given time can be estimated with almost uniform accuracy. But if the breathing is irregular, the intake of chloroform will be variable and uncertain, and there will be danger in proportion to the uncertainty of the dose. Lastly, if the vapour is concentrated so as to compel the patient to struggle and hold his breath, the risk of overdosing is enormous. Asphyxia ensues and leads to deep gasping inspirations and rapid and, may be, irremediable poisoning. It follows from these considerations that the strongest vapour of chloroform which can be inhaled with regular natural breathing constitutes the safe 38
298 dilution of the anæsthetic, and that the most trustworthy as well as the most universally manage- able guide to safe dilution must be regular respiration. The essential factors in chloroform administration are diluted chloroform and regular breathing, but whatever be the degree of dilution regular respiration alone ensures a measured dose and alone maintains regularity of the heart's action and of the circulation. The sole raison d'etre of an apparatus is to determine safe dilution. But as this is definitely determined by regular respiration, and as regularity of the breathing ought to be assured in chloroform inhalation whether an apparatus is employed or not, it is evident that an apparatus is superfluous. Theoretically the Hyderabad Commission has no objection to any forms of apparatus or inhaler, except that no apparatus call ensure regular breathing; but practically we know that their complicated nature demands some of the chloroformist's attention and may lead to neglect of the all-important respiration. An appara- tus is therefore not only superfluous, but introduces an element of danger into the administration. To keep the patient's breathing absolutely regular during the inhalation of chloroform, and to sustain the necessary watchfulness for the warnings afforded by the respiration and by the reflexes whereby overdosing can be avoided, requires the undivided and unceasing attention of the chloroformist. I trust I have made it clear that the Hyderabad Commission has no intention of criticis- ing Dr. Cushny's admirable work in anything but the most friendly spirit. We are thoroughly satisfied. Dr. Cushny may still think that there is theoretical danger to the heart, but he is constrained to admit that it could not occur in practice. Having got so far, we venture to express a confident hope that he will continue his experiments and observations, and that he will yet see his way to accepting the whole truth. THE HYDERABAD CHLOROFORM COMMISSION. LETTER FROM DR. RICKARD W. LLOYD. To THE EDITORS "THE LANCET ". SIRS,- In his article published in THE LANCET of March 14th, Surgeon-Major E. Lawrie, President of the Hyderabad Commission, emphasises the importance of the respiration and totally ignores the circulation, as a guide in the administration of chloroform. Undoubt- edly the respiration is essentially important, but my view, after ten years' practical experience of anæsthetics, is that the circulation is also sometimes an important guide to the anæsthetist during an operation, and often most valuable. No method of administering chloroform will ensure the uniform behaviour of all patients during the induction of chloroform anæsthesia. The action of chloroform upon a patient is influenced by mental and physical conditions as well as by disease. The effects of the chloroform upon the circulatory, nervous, and respiratory systems, especially when they mare diseased, as well as the loss of blood and the duration and nature of an operation (these being the conditions that have to be met by the practical anæsthetist) influence the respiration in such a way in some cases as to make it expedient to obtain all the information that can be gathered of the extent of exhaustion, the probable power of endurance
299 and the general state of the patient. This knowledge is to be obtained from the respiration, the pulse, the pupil of the eye, the sensibility of the cornea, and the complexion, all of which may be under observation at the same time without discontinuing the chloroform, when it is administered in the manner described by me in a paper read before the West London Medico- Chirurgical Society, and which is fully reported in The Lancet of March 14th. The condi- tion of the muscular system, as to relaxation, is also sometimes useful. An anæsthetist who relies on all these sources for information will sometimes be able to continue an administration of chloroform when, if he relied upon the respiration solely, he would feel bound to discontinue it. I have on several occasions had the greatest. difficulty in satisfying myself that respiration was in progress at all, especially in connection with some operations upon the skull for depressed fracture or other condition in which the functions of the brain were greatly impaired, and have found the pulse most valuable as a guide in such cases, justifying me in supplying suffi- cient chloroform to prevent reflex movements of the patient occurring. As long as respiration is unimpaired and there is no cyanosis it may not be necessary to go further for information, but early in the progress of administration the breathing may be accompanied by stertorous noises 300 before, after twenty minutes the pulse ceased again, and I asked the nurse to give an enema of half an ounce of brandy with water, called the attention of those around to the absence of pulse and the continuance of respiration, which they observed before the respiration ceased, when a little artificial respiration so far restored the patient that the operation was continued and completed in another twenty minutes. During this latter time a very little chloroform only was given when the patient had so far recovered as to call out loudly. The patient afterwards told me he felt nothing of the operation. This patient's heart was, so far as could be ascertained, practically sound. Here then was an operation taking place under chloroform, during which the pulse of the patient undoubtedly failed before the respiration on two occasions, the pulse recovering on the first without cessation of respiration, and the respiration failing on the second occasion some seconds after the pulse, and while it was still not to be felt. I have endeavoured to show in this letter the importance of the pulse as a guide to the anæsthetist, under some circumstances, during chloroform administration; and it is not my intention to express an opinion as to which of the two,301 PART I. The experiments may be divided into two classes, The first class comprises those experiments in which chloroform was given in the ordinary way by inhalation, while the respiratory movements and the blood-pressure were graphically recorded. This method, in addition to leading directly to certain conclusions, gave results which were largely used for comparative purposes. The second class of experiments comprises those in which a new method of studying the condition of the heart and vascular system was employed. By this method a simultaneous direct graphic record of the action of the auricles and the ventricles was obtained, alongside of a tracing of the arterial blood-pressure; precise information as to the state of the different parts of the heart was derived directly from the organ itself. There can be no doubt that blood-pressure tracings alone are entirely unsafe guides as to the strength and characters of the heart's action, or even of the ventricular beats. The oscillations in a blood-pressure tracing caused by the ventricular beats do not furnish any sure indications of the condition of the ventricular action. A weak ventricular beat may cause a very large oscillation in the blood-pressure trace, and vice versâ. I have shown in a former paper that when the heart recommences beating after a period of inhibition (from vagus stimulation), the abnormally extensive oscillations in the blood-pressure tracing caused by the recommencing beats are often due to systoles that are much weaker than normal, The oscillations in a blood-pressure trace depend upon the amount of blood thrown out by the heart into the aorta, and the conditions obtaining in the arterial system at the time. Hence it is evident that blood-pressure records cannot be relied upon as giving accurate information as to the state of the cardiac actions.* Mode of obtaining Direct Graphic Records of the Cardiac Action and Blood-pressure Tracings simultaneously.302 The recording apparatus employed to register the heart's action was one which I have already described in the Journal of Physiology, vol. ix. It is adapted for recording the move- ments of one auricle and one ventricle simultaneously. Either auricle can be registered; sometimes the one and sometimes the other 'was used. A thread was attached to the tip of the auricular appendix, and this thread led to a receiving tambour which communicated with a recording tambour; the latter inscribed its movements on a smoked surface. In order to prevent possible displacement of the auricle in the course of the experiment, its dorsal part was steadied by fixing in a clamp the parietal pericardium close to the auricular tissue, care being taken not to include any of the auricular substance in the clamp. The clamp was held firmly in position by means of a brass rod. With such an arrangement each contraction of the auricle causes a pull upon the thread and a movement of the lever of the recording tambour. Hence the contraction and relaxation of the auricle are expressed by up-and-down movements of the recording lever upon the smoked surface. Moreover, distension or dilatation of the auricle causes303 ment of other modes of registration, for example, by the use of light levers resting on the auricle and ventricle and inscribing their movements directly (without the intervention of tambours) upon the smoked paper. There has been a complete agreement in all important points between the results obtained by the different methods. It may here be remarked that the amount of mechanical interference involved in the application of the above method does not cause any serious injury to the state of the heart and the vascular system generally. The heart goes on beating with remarkable regularity and steadiness for many hours; a high blood-pressure is maintained, and the circulation is carried on with great activity. The rate of the movements of artificial respiration is usually indicated in the auricular tracings by a slight rhythmical oscillation in the base line of the tracing. A time record (seconds) is inscribed on the same paper alongside of the other tracings: and, in addition, electrical signal marked the points of time at Which various events (giving of chloroform, &c.) occurred. Long sheets of smoked paper were employed, and upon them there was obtained side by side, by the method described, a simultaneous record of (1) the arterial blood-pressure, (2) the action of the right or left auricle, (3) the action of the right or left ventricle, (4) the number of the artificial respiratory movements, (5) a time trace marking seconds, and (6) the inscrip- tion of an electrical signal indicating the time of occurrence of certain events. Mode of Administering the Anæsthetic.304 ration of the chloroform was somewhat more rapid in the earlier stages than in the later, when most of the chloroform had volatilised and the surface of fluid exposed to the air was diminish- ed; but, even allowing for this, it is certain that at no time was the amount of chloroform vapour in the air over 3 per cent., and even when more chloroform was added before the first minim had evaporated, the strength was always kept under 4 per cent. Different samples of chloroform (obtained from Messrs. Morson and Son, Martindale, and others) were used. Each of the samples was carefully tested, and the following results were obtained:305 The chief effects of chloroform shown by these experiments I shall now proceed to describe. Fall of Blood-pressure.306 In some cases the cardiac dilatation affected the whole organ with tolerable uniformity. In other instances the auricles and the ventricles were unequally affected, sometimes the auricles and sometimes the ventricles being more readily influenced. Occasionally the left auricle became very prominently distended. The distension of the auricles may, in some cases, be in part a secondary change. Their dilatation may be brought about or contributed to by a pre- ceding distension of the ventricles, whereby the auricles are rendered unable to discharge their contents in a normal manner, and so become distended. But in all probability the auricular dilatation is partly a primary change caused by the direct influence of chloroform, and not simply by the obstacle to their emptying themselves offered by the presence of an already existing ventricular distension. The fact that the auricles sometimes become affected much more readily and extensively than the ventricles supports this conclusion. The cardiac dilatation that occurs from the influence of chloroform is independent of any distinct change in the rate of the heart's action. There is no slowing, or indeed any characteristic alteration of rhythm. The rate of action commonly remains unimpaired, even when all the chambers of the organ have become greatly distended. When the dilatation has become extreme the heart fails in its function at the central organ of circulation. Though it continues to contract rhythmically, its action is feeble and entirely ineffective, and its cavities remain gorged with blood. In this condition evidence of rhythmic movement may still be obtained in the intact animal by passing a needle through the chest wall into the heart (as was done in many of the experiments of the Second Hyderabad Chloroform Commission). Relation between Dilatation of the Heart and the Fall of Blood-pressure.307 in relation to the genesis of cardiac dilatation. It is conceivable that a marked constriction of the pulmonary arterioles and an increased resistance in the lung might, by greatly raising the pressure in the pulmonary artery, embarrass the action of the right ventricle, and lead to its becoming distended,308 sion of this sort as a result of the administration of ether. Indeed, in more than one instance when the periodic depression was strongly marked and kept recurring again and again, a dose of ether was speedily followed by a complete disappearance of the phenomenon in ques- tion. The heart's action improved in a remarkable way; it became strong, steady and regular. It may be noted that the occurrence of this great depression of the cardiac action in cats some time after the administration of chloroform, and after partial recovery from its effects, has a curious parallel in the records of some cases in the human subject. Effect of Ether compared with those of Chloroform.309 to be simply a result of the fall of blood-pressure and not due to any special effect of ether on the heart itself. It has been already stated that a fall of arterial pressure due to a diminution in the peripheral resistance, for example, to relaxation of the small arteries, is attended by a reduction in the energy of the cardiac beat; the heart's force becomes diminished from a cause not directly affecting the heart itself. But, unless the fall of pressure is extreme in its amount and prolonged in its duration310 the vaso motor centre prior to the depression of its activity. It has already been stated that when chloroform is given in such an amount as to cause a marked fall of pressure, there com- monly occurs at the same time a more or less marked dilatation of the heart. In the healthy animal the latter change does not, in the earlier stages of a fall of blood-pressure, appear to play nearly so important, a part in lowering the pressure as does the depression of the vaso motor centre induced by the influence of the chloroform. The pressure is, as a rule, much more readily lowered by the action of chloroform on the vaso motor centre than by its action on the heart. But in the latter stages of a great fall of blood-pressure, when the anæsthetic is given so as to produce a profound effect, the cardiac dilatation becomes a factor of prime importance, and it becomes impossible to raise the pressure by any means affecting the arterial system alone; the pressure can only be raised by restoring, in some measure, the pumping power of the heart, or by the supplying of some mechanical substitute for this power, for example, by rhythmic compression of the ventricles with the hand. The relative susceptibility of the vaso motor centre and the heart to the influence of chloroform appears to vary considerably. Commonly the vaso motor centre becomes markedly depressed before cardiac dilatation is evidenced in any considerable degree. In some instances, however, the cardiac dilatation begins early, before the vaso motor centre has suffered any depression and even while it is stimulated, as sometimes occurs as a primary result of the action of chloroform upon this centre. Possibly a good deal depends on the state of the heart at the time. If the heart is strong and possesses a considerable reserve of power over and above what is necessary to expel its contents in ordinary circumstances, it can readily be conceived that a considerable amount of chloroform might be taken without causing any evidence of failure, the reserve of power making up for the depressing influence of the chloroform; meanwhile, the vaso motor centre being acted upon by the chloroform, the blood-pressure would fall. On the other hand, if the heart is, to begin with, just able to perform its function, it is intelligible that a comparatively slight depressing influence exerted on it by chloroform would soon cause it to exhibit signs of dilatation. Many nervously weak hearts possibly come into this category. Some Effects of the Falls of Blood-pressure.311 raising the pressure. But by far the most powerful means of influencing the carotid pressure under chloroform is by applying continuous firm pressure over the intact abdomen or to the abdominal aorta directly. In this way, unless the heart has been directly paralysed by chloro- form, a well-marked rise of blood-pressure can be brought about in the carotid and other arteries of the upper part of the body (head, neck and chest), and the circulation in that, part is greatly improved in rate and volume. This method of causing a rise of pressure under chloro- form has been very frequently tested in the course of my experiments, and is strikingly illus- trated in the tracings I have taken. Even when chloroform has been given in an amount sufficient to cause stoppage of the respiration and a formidable fall of blood-pressure, the immediate application of firm pressure over the abdomen or compression of the abdominal aorta has, as a rule, caused a rise of pressure. At the moment of respiratory failure, the heart, though dilated, is, as a rule, capable of acting with some effect, but it soon becomes fatally incapacitated in consequence of the influence exerted upon the already-depressed cardiac me- chanism by respiratory and vascular failure: the interference with the nutrition of the heart substance resulting from arrest of the breathing, or dependent on excessive and continued fall of the blood-pressure, even apart from stoppage of the respiration, must necessarily exert a rapidly destructive influence on the activity of an already embarrassed and depressed organ. At the time the respiration stops, the heart is usually (though not always) able to act in a way sufficient to maintain a certain amount of blood-pressure, compatible with the con- tinuance of life, provided the vaso motor system is not paralysed. The heart then being, in the majority of cases, still able to exercise its function to some purpose, it is easy to understand that a great increase in the peripheral resistance should be attended by a rise in the arterial pressure, the amount of the rise varying largely according to the power still possessed by the heart. The application of firm pressure over the intact abdomen causes, in addition to an in- crease in the peripheral resistance of the arterial system, the propulsion of a considerable amount of blood from the vessels of the abdominal cavity through the vena cava inferior into the heart. Compression of the aorta by itself causes a great rise of pressure; this shows that a large in- crease of the peripheral resistance, even apart from the forcing of more blood into the right side of the heart, is sufficient to cause all extensive rise of pressure. PART III Relation of the Results described above to what occurs during the Inhalation of Chloroform in the Incent Animal.312 within the lungs is negative. (It is not probable that this difference is of importance, for there is much evidence obtained by different workers which tends to show that the effects of chloroform depend upon the amount of its reaching certain parts in a given time, the exact mode of its introduction not making any essential difference. But direct proof on this point will be adduced presently.) Further, in the experiments above described, the pericardial sac was laid open, the heart was exposed, and recording apparatus was brought into connection with it. How far such abnormal conditions may invalidate the results obtained, as far as their application to the ordinary inhalation of chloroform is concerned, has now to be considered. I hold that they do not materially interfere with the applicability of the conclusions arrived at. It seems to me that there is conclusive evidence showing that the action of chloroform, in the respects above detailed, is essentially similar in the conditions under which my experiments have been conducted, and during ordinary inhalation in the intact animal. I shall now proceed to state briefly some proofs of this conclusion. 1. With regard to the possible influence of the presence of recording apparatus upon the cardiac action, it is important to notice that the more considerable changes in the state of the heart can be verified by direct inspection of the exposed heart without the use of apparatus, though, of course, such a mode of examination is insufficient to detect the finer changes that go on. The broad fact of the occurrence of cardiac dilatation I have often verified by simple inspection of the heart without the use of any recording apparatus. Hence it is plain that this change is not dependent on any interference with organ from the application of the recording apparatus; and, indeed, there can be no doubt that when the recording apparatus is used the action of the heart can hardly be disturbed in any serious degree, for it continues to work during long periods with very remarkable regularity and efficiency. Moreover, for compara- tive purposes (for example, the relative effects of chloroform and ether) the influence of the apparatus cannot interfere, as it is constant. 2. In regard to the opening of the pericardial sac, I shall only remark here that I have been able to observe distinct changes in the heart, of the nature already described, even through the intact pericardium. 3. With reference to the altered respiratory conditions present when the results described in Part II. were obtained, I have made a number of experiments to compare in the same animal the influence of a certain amount of chloroform (a) during the ordi- nary inhalation of chloroform in the intact animal, and (b) when air containing chloroform was artificially pumped into the lungs. The method adopted was the following:313 the anæsthetic bottle, through the same channel traversed by the air passing into the lungs when artificial respiration was used. Chloroform could readily be added (by means of the hypodermic syringe) to the air as it passed through the bottle: and thus definite doses of the anæsthetic could be administered to the animal, inhaled by its own spontaneous respiratory movements. The effects of accurately measured amounts of chloroform (given in this way) upon the blood-pressure, the conjunctival reflex, and the general condition of the animal were carefully recorded. Then, after an interval, when the effects had been recovered from, artificial respiration was substituted for the spontaneous breathing, the other conditions of the experi- ment remaining unchanged; air was pumped through the anæsthetic bottle into the lungs, instead of being inspired in the ordinary way; an equal dose of chloroform was administered and its effect watched. The influence of the anæsthetic was found to be remarkably similar to what was seen during spontaneous inhalation, provided the rate and depth of the artificial respiratory movements were made to correspond with the rate and depth of the spontaneous respirations. Two or three minims of chloroform induced similar effects, as evidenced by the blood-pressure, the conjunctival reflex, and the general condition, whether the chloroform vapour was taken in by the spontaneous breathing of the animal or was artificially pumped into the lungs. Hence it may be concluded that the intake of chloroform is substantially the same whether it is given by spontaneous inhalation (in which case the pressure within the lungs during the inspiratory movement is negative), or by artificial respiration, when the pressure within the lungs during the phase corresponding inspiration is positive. The abnormal conditions of artificial respiration do not apparently make any essential difference in regard to the effects of chloroform, provided the number and depth of the respiratory movements are the same, and the percentage of chloroform in the air taken into the lungs is identical in the two cases. 4. The nature and extent of the fall of blood-pressure caused by chloroform is, as a rule, an excellent guide to the degree in which the influence of the drug has been exerted upon the general condition of the animal. When the fall is sudden and extensive it gives ground for apprehension that an overdose has been administered; on the other hand, when the falls is gradual and moderate we many safely assume that the amount of chloroform in the circulation is not too great. Now, applying this test to the experiments described in Part II., we find that dilatation of the heart is present when the fall of pressure is no greater or more sudden than often occurs314 5. Evidence of great importance in regard to the question under consideration is afforded by the state of the conjunctival reflex.* We have seen that pronounced changes may occur in the heart before the conjunctival reflex is completely abolished. This shows plainly that the amount of chloroform in the circulation was not excessive, else the reflex would not have been present. We know that the conjunctival reflex is, as a rule, abolished long before there is any danger of respiratory paralysis. The presence of the conjunctival reflex during cardiac dilatation makes it plain that a comparatively small amount of chloroform315 least316 the heart inspected. The organ was found to be greatly dilated in all its parts, while extremely feeble rhythmic contractions were still present, utterly incapable of discharging the contents of the cardiac chambers. Rhythmic compression of the ventricles was then employ- ed, and kept up for nearly twenty-five minutes, at the end of which the regular action of the heart was restored317 the evidence afforded by my experiments goes, the slowing of the heart seems to be most commonly due to asphyxial conditions; the Second Hyderabad Commission has urged that it is always asphyxial But I have seen facts which indicate that cardiac slowing is in some cases due to causes other than aphyxia, for example, to sensory irritation when the state of the anæsthesia is not such as to render the cardio-inhibitory centre inexcitable by afferent stimuli. In any case the cardiac slowing is not due to a direct influence of chloroform on the heart; it is entirely different in its nature and causation from the enfeeblement and dilatation of the organ described in this paper. The latter, it has been seen, is a result of the direct action of chloroform on the cardiac substance. On the other hand, the temporary slowing of the heart, which occasionally occurs, is due to stimulation of the cardio-inhibitory centre in the medulla, as I found at an early stage of this investigation. It is abolished by section of both vagi, and its characters can he imitated by brief stimulation of the vagi. Slowing of the cardiac action under chloroform does not, as far as I have seen, prove dangerous in itself in healthy animals, whatever it may do in conditions of derangement and disease. The mode of failure in the healthy animal is not by a slowing or sudden cessation of the cardiac rhythm, but by an enfeeblement and dilatation of the organ while the rhythmic (but ineffectual) contractions go on. Relation of the Influence of Chloroform to the Occurrence of Fibrillar Contraction in the Ventricles ("Herz delirium" or Delirium Cordis). 318 A large amount may be given in half an hour with a continuous but slight effect upon the several functions, but a mere fraction of this quantity given in half a minute may be suffi- cient to cause death. Now, variations in the effects of chloroform in any particular animal appear, in ordi- nary circumstances, to be effected more powerfully by changes in the number and depth of the respirations than by any other factor. When chloroform is given by inhalation in the usual way (upon a cloth held near the mouth and nose), an amount of the drug which may be used with safety during ordinary easy breathing may speedily produce dangerous results when the respirations become rapid and deep. On some occasions I have tested this matter in a slightly different way319 chloroform with air and the restriction of the amount of chloroform vapour to a certain per- centage do not necessarily prove a safeguard against the speedy intake of an overdose. For air containing a sufficient percentage of chloroform vapour, for safe and effective anæsthesia dur- ing easy breathing, will, during deep and rapid respiration, supply a vastly greater amount of chloroform to the pulmonary capillaries. I am not able to state precise amounts for the volumes of air taken in during easy breathing and exaggerated breathing in the case of the cat. But we know that in man the quantity of air taken in at each respiration during easy breathing is about 20 cubic inches: whereas, during a very deep breath, about 100 cubic inches may be inspired. Thus five times as much air is taken in at a very deep breath as by an ordinary in- spiration; but, in addition to the difference between ordinary breathing and deep breathing, we have to consider the results of acceleration. In addition to a change in depth we have often a great change in rate. The rate may be doubled or trebled at the same time that the depth is increased. Hence it is evident that the amount of chloroform taken in during a period (for example, 10 seconds) of deep rapid breathing may be at least ten or fifteen times as much as during a similar period (10 seconds) of easy breathing. And, if there is a fixed percentage of chloroform vapour in the air all the time it is obvious that ten or fifteen times as much chloroform will be admitted into the lungs in the one period as in the other. Now, it will readily he understood that320 At times sudden exaggeration of the respiration and a rise of blood-pressure may result from a temporary obstruction of the breathing. And in some instances it is possible that exag- gerated respiration may be due to a directly stimulating effect of chloroform on the respiratory centre, but in this case it would probably not be so sudden in its development. Influence of certain Changes in the Action of the Heart and in the Blood-pressure upon the Effects of Chloroform Inhalation.321 amount without producing any striking effect; the chloroform may be pushed, and then when the pressure suddenly rises dangerous effects may speedily ensue if the administration of the anæsthetic is continued in the same way (in the same strength) as was employed during the state of low pressure; the amount of chloroform reaching the vital organs becomes much augmented with a high pressure. It is evident, then, that a low blood-pressure must last for some time, so as to lead to a more abundant administration of chloroform, before any danger can, with reasonable care, be caused by a change to a higher pressure. Hence the occurrence of a very brief and transient phase of low pressure (such as may be caused by a short inhibition of the heart), followed by a speedy rise to the normal height, does not introduce any special danger in the use of chloroform; for the period of low pressure does not last long enough to induce the administrator to give chloroform more abundantly, and thus there is no danger in the subsequent rise. Apart from the influence of asphyxial conditions, a change from a very low pressure to a high pressure is very rare under chloroform. Such a change can, of course, be easily brought intentionally (for example, by stimulation of the vagus, compression of the vena cava inferior, etc.), and it may possibly occur in certain peculiar circumstances of operative proce- dure, but its occurrence in such a degree as to constitute a serious danger in chloroform administration is probably rare. On the other hand, it has been already stated that during imperfect anæsthesia a sudden change from a moderate to a high pressure (caused by sensory irritation) may co-operate with exaggerated respiration in leading to the intake of a dangerous overdose. Indication of Danger during Chloroform Administration derivable from the Respiration and from the Blood-pressure.322 not more marked or notable than alterations in the respiration occurring at earlier phases of chloroform administration and attended by no serious consequences, though the giving of the anæsthetic was not suspended, or any remedial measures adopted. The sudden and precipitous fall of blood-pressure above referred to as giving warning of an overdose was, I have no doubt, attended by a marked change in the pulse323 8. When the heart becomes greatly dilated it fails to be an effective force in keeping up the circulation, while its rhythmic movement still continues324 17. The fall of blood-pressure under chloroform is in its earlier stages due mainly to the depressing effect of the anæsthetic on the vaso motor centre, preceded often by a slight stimulation; the later stages are associated with failure of the heart as well as of the vaso mo- tor centre. 18. The relative occurrence of cardiac dilatation and vaso motor depression varies. Sometimes the heart begins to dilate early325 ARTICLE, REPRINTED FROM THE MEDICAL CHRONICLE OF APRIL 1890. BY ALEXANDER WILSON, M.R.C.S., Administrator of Anæsthetics, Royal infirmary, Manchester. THE opinion that, in a certain number of cases, death from chloroform is due to cardiac paralysis, was first enunciated by Dr. Sibson (London Medical Gazette, Vol. XLII, p. 109), and it is important to note that this conclusion was originally arrived at, not from physio- logical experiment, but from a consideration of the first fatal cases in man. There appears to have always been some contradiction between the results obtained by experiment on animals and those obtained by clinical experience on human subjects. Thus, as early as 1848, Mr. Thomas Wakley proved, by a series of experiments on animals, that in deaths from chloroform the heart continued to beat after cessation of the respiration, these results being confirmed by a Commission held in Paris in 1855 (L326 These views of the action of chloroform were confirmed by the Commission of the Medico- Chirurgical Society, London, in 1864, and again in 1879 by a committee of the British Medical Association, in their report on the action of anæsthetics (British Medical Journal, 1879, Vol. I., pp. 1 and 921), stated that "chloroform has sometimes an unexpected and apparently capri- cious effect on the heart's action. Chloroform may cause death in dogs by primarily paralysing either the heart or the respiration. The variations in this respect seem to depend to some extent on individual peculiarities of the animals (?) In most cases respiration stops before the heart's action, but there was one instance in which respiration continued when the heart had stopped, and only failed a considerable number of seconds after the heart had resumed." The whole work of the committee tended to prove the conclusions arrived at by Dr. Snow, that under certain conditions chloroform did affect the heart before the respiration, though failure of the respiration was the most common cause of death. The Hyderabad Chloroform Commission have come to a conclusion similar to that arrived at by Mr. Wakley in 1818, and the Commission of the Society of Emulation of Paris, in 1852, viz., in death from chloroform the heart continues to beat after the respiration has ceased, results in contradiction to the previous London Commission of 1864, and the Glasgow Com- mission of 1874. There may he several objections taken to the unreserved application of the conclusions of these experiments to man. First, there is the difference which may exist in the action of chloroform on the heart of man and of animals. There is the possibility that the habits of life, the taking of stimulants and narcotics, especially the habitual use of drugs like tobacco327 minor operations, such as teeth extraction, especially in those in which the patient, being in the natural upright position, can give the respiratory muscles full play, and completely fill the chest. Thus it is worth considering if the holding of a struggling animal, such as a dog, might not so interfere with its breathing as to prevent the full dose being taken, especially as the animal would not be likely to be held in its natural position. There is an indication in the report that, in at least some cases, the holding of the animal did actually interfere with its respiration. If it did so in one case it probably did so in many, especially as a dog's thorax is so shaped, that to hold its fore legs together in front of it, would prevent the complete expan- sion of its chest, and so prevent it suddenly taking a fair dose of chloroform vapour. In animals, too, we have an absence of the desire to inhale freely. In at least one reported case the wish to inhale the chloroform freely contributed largely to the fatal result. In chloroform accidents in man, of the very sudden variety, considered to be due to cardiac syncope, a certain set of conditions are present which are difficult to obtain in animals. The subject is generally young or middle aged, with an expansile chest: the chloroform is willingly inhaled, quietly at first, until semi-unconsciousness is produced, when the fauces and glottis are insensitive: then, during struggling, with or without holding the breath, the patient, often in an upright or semi-upright position, and having his arms fixed by the assistants, which gives his respiratory muscles good purchase, gets one or two deep inspirations at the greatest advantage, and so obtains the maximum amount of chloroform. There is the desire to got under the influence of the drug the voluntary inhalation fol- lowed by the still steady conscious anxiety to inhale more, and then the involuntary deep in- spiration, in the natural position in which a deep inspiration can be best taken. All these are conditions difficult to obtain in experiments on animals, and it is only under such conditions that the supposed cardiac paralysis has been produced in man. The interval between the stoppage of the heart and the respiration is so short that these points, trivial though they seem, may easily be of importance in modifying the result. It has always been maintained by the advocates the syncope theory that it is only under certain circumstances, and by a certain definite combination of factors, that chloroform sufficient in quantity to paralyse the heart can be introduced into the blood, and that this particular combination of circumstances occurs very seldom328 The idea was that by certain combination of these several factors, the maximum quantity of chloroform was absorbed by the blood in the lungs and hurried to the heart, the next organ in the order of the circulation, not merely distending its cavities with chloroform-saturated blood, but also being distributed by the coronary arteries to every part of its substance, and so causing paralysis. This result is also assisted by the condition of distension of the heart and the venous condition of the blood. That the arrangement of these various factors329 The following case may be here quoted as a good example of the class of chloroform accidents, upon which is based the theory of the action of chloroform on the heart:330 have signalled any danger some seconds later. There can be little doubt but that the pulse in such a case, where the patient was quiet and breathing tranquilly, would have exhibited some decided alteration had it been observed. In the second portion of the report it is shown that the essential action of chloroform on the system is to cause a fall in the mean blood-pressure. This fall is proportionate to the amount of chloroform inhaled and absorbed into the system. [It would have been interesting to have known the relation, if any, the condition of the blood-pressure bore to the state of anæsthesia.] This fall in blood-pressure bears some relation to the respiration, but what this relation is, is not distinctly stated, and the cause of the fall in pressure is also not clearly assigned, except (Sec. 19) that it is not due to the direct action of chloroform on the heart, and must be due to paralysis of the vaso motor centre. This is important when taken in conjunction with the fol- lowing parts of the report (Sec.3): "... If the chloroform is pushed further, there comes a point not easy to define when the blood-pressure and respiration will no longer be restored spontaneously, although the heart continues to beat after the inhalation has stopped." And also (Sec. 25): "... It is never in any case certain that artificial respiration will restore the natural respiration and blood-pressure, no matter how soon it is commenced after the respiration stops." This exposes a comparatively new and insidious danger in chloroform administration, and one as difficult to treat as the old cardiac syncope. It is quite conceivable that under certain circumstances the dose necessary irretrievably to damage the vaso motor centre may be inhaled with extreme rapidity, and that while the respiration and pulse are still present, the centre may be almost paralysed before much warning has been given. From a record of fatal cases in man, it appears possible that this paralysis may, in certain conditions, be effected almost instantaneously, and before complete insensibility has been produced. In Section 20 injection of chloroform into the jugular vein caused no paralysis of the heart. It should be noted that this is not the most direct channel by which the heart can be reached; and the experiment, when compared with inhalation, is open to criticism. Chloroform in- jected into the jugular vein passes with the venous blood to the right auricle, where it is mixed with the blood of the inferior vena cava from the liver; from the right side of the heart it passes to the lungs, where the chloroform, being volatile, and the air in the alveoli of the lungs free from chloroform, a good deal may be lost; finally, what remains of it reaches the heart. Chloroform given by inhalation is much more likely to reach the heart directly in large doses passing into the air cells; about one-fifth of the whole blood of the body is at once exposed to it. This blood, saturated with chloroform and unmixed with any non-chloroformed blood, goes direct into the left auricle and ventricle, and by the coronary arteries is first distri- -buted into the very substance of the heart itself. As Dr. Snow puts it: "In inhalation the heart is always a little in advance of the rest of the body as regards the amount of chloroform
331 vapour to which it is subjected." Chloroform thus given by inhalation may have a more potent action than when injected into a vein, and the results of the two methods cannot well be compared. In Section 12 the effect described as that of asphyxia on the blood-pressure, in causing a rapid fall of blood-pressure and slowing of the heart beat, is contrary to the received ideas on the subject. ("Human Physiology." Landois and Stirling. 1888 edition, p. 198.) During asphyxia, "the blood-pressure measured in a systemic artery, e.g., the carotid, rises very rapidly, and to a great extent during the first and second stages; the pulse beats are at first quicker, but soon become slower and more vigorous. The rise in pressure is due to stimulation of the general vaso motor centre by the venous blood, and the slow beating of the heart to the action of the venous blood, on the cardio inhibitory centre in the medulla." The attempts to produce shock during the inhalation of chloroform (§ 33) uniformly failed. In experimenting on animals there are several sources of error. In the first instance, it is doubtful if animals suffer as much from shock as man, there is an absence of mental terror and the depressing effect of the anticipation of the operation, &c. It is well known that the extraction of a single tooth in a state of semi-anæsthesia may produce it considerable amount of shock and a painful mental impression that lasts for weeks,332 it was proved that the respiration alone was attended to throughout the inhalation." This is surely a mistake; there are several fatal cases where the respiration only was attended to, one of which is quoted here, and there are many more in which respiration was attended to as fully as possible. Then reference is made to the teaching of what are termed antagonistic schools: Syme taught333 Conclusions. This is the more strange, as the Commission certainly proves that the circulatory apparatus is first influenced by the chloroform, and it is by vaso motor paralysis that death is caused. Why, then, disregard it in administering the drug? As attention to the pulse is so easily managed without neglect of the respiration, and a proper knowledge of the state of the circulation has been proved to be most essential to the intelligent administration of an anæsthetic, it is advisable that the pulse should always be ob- -served; it can, at least, do no harm, and, in conjunction with the respiration, is a valuable help, quite apart from any information it gives of the general condition of the patient. The assistant in charge of the anæsthetic must endeavour to be more than a mere doler out of innocuous doses of chloroform; he should keep himself in touch with the whole condi- tion of the patient all through the operation,* To endeavour to narrow his work to mere watch- ing of the respiration is mistaken policy. In reference to the question of cardiac rersus respiratory paralysis, the following remarks appeared in the Lancet for September 21, 1889. "In the Scotch capital, failure of respiration is regarded as the chief or only danger; while, in the metropolis, failure of the heart is more feared. It is quite possible that the sur- geons in both cities are right, and that the habits or mode of living of the people may lead to differences in resisting power of the cardiac or respiratory apparatus respectively. The propor- -tion of gouty patients is much larger in London than in Edinburgh, and when we consider that the natives of India appear to resemble the Scotch in their comparative immunity from cardiac paralysis by chloroform."... As most cases of death from chloroform are put down as due to cardiac paralysis, and this is said to be rare in Scotland, the impression is con- veyed that fatal cases of chloroform narcosis are unknown or rare in that country, and there is certainly an idea abroad to this effect. It is not, necessary to resort to a comparison of the habits of the people to explain their immunity from fatal. results. In Scotland fewer people die from chloroform, simply because fewer people inhale it. A population of 3,991,499 must necessarily give fewer chances for the administration of chloro- form than one of 28,247,151 and consequently fewer possibility of fatal cases. Another point is, that such cases as do occur are not always, from the absence of coroners' inquests, brought to light a large number, if not the majority of the fatal chloroform cases in England, owing their publicity to the newspaper reports of the coroners inquests. But deaths from chloroform do occur in Scotland and even in Edinburgh. A casual search in the medical journals gives the following figures: Edinburgh Royal Infirmary (1878 to 1880), three deaths; Western (Sir George Macleod's Hospital) Infirmary, Glasgow (1883 to 1885), three deaths; Royal Infirmary, Glasgow (1883 to 1885), two deaths; other parts of Scotland (1881 to 1883), six deaths. England, 110 deaths; Scotland, 14 in same period, England, population 28,247,151; Scotland 3,991,499. [*Vide Note by the Commission at the end of Mr. Wilson's Article.]
334 In summing up the results of the latest Commission on chloroform it is to be remem- bered that, in the opinion of many persons, as regards the first part of their work, viz., the investigation of the point, does chloroform paralyse the heart? nothing new has been added to our knowledge. The result has been to confirm the work of some of the previous experimenters, but without explaining how the theory of cardiac paralysis appeared to be borne out by the experi- ments of Dr.Snow. There has always been since the discovery of chloroform sufficient evidence to prove that it is very difficult, if not impossible, to produce sudden cardiac paralysis by it in animals, and an equal amount of clinical evidence to justify the supposition that such can occur in man. To estimate the value and importance of the second part of the report, it must be noticed that the action of chloroform on the heart was (by the advocates of this anæsthetic) considered to be the only objection to its general use. It was this supposed power of causing irremediable cardiac paralysis which made people afraid of it. If this property could be shown to be non- existent the harmlessness of the drug would be established. This is easily understood, from the facts that artificial respiration is so readily carried out, and cessation of respiration remedied by artificial respiration so common, that the impres- sion is prevalent that it is easy to breathe for a person, but the remedying of the cessation of the heart-beat presents insuperable difficulties. It was not imagined that chloroform might possess other dangers335 chloroform in some 600 administrations. Death from chloroform is due apparently to paralysis of the vaso motor and respiratory centres336 before. As far as I am aware there is no text-book on surgery of the present day, except Sir Joseph Lister's article in "Holmes's Surgery," that does not recommend that the pulse as well as the respiration should be watched for signs of the effect of chloroform, and it is new to prove, as the Hyderabad Commission has proved, that to watch the pulse at all is both wrong and dangerous. The photograph of two original tracings of Experiment No.186 which accompanies this paper demonstrates the futility of attention to the pulse in chloroform administration. For example, in Tracing III., Ludwig, though the pulse of the dog experimented on was appa- rently much better at 2 hours 55 minutes than at 2 hours 54 minutes, it was not really so. Dr. Gaskell has shown that when the blood-pressure is high the pulse must necessarily be better than when the blood-pressure is low. The pressure at 2 hours 54 minutes was much higher than at 2 hours 55 minutes, and the pulse was therefore in reality better in proportion, though it was smaller in the tracing.* On the other hand, the danger of waiting for signs in the pulse of failure of the heart under chloroform is well shown in the Tracing IV., Ludwig, at the end of which the failure of the pulse at 3 hours 19 minutes 15 seconds, was a sign of impending death. The two tracings demonstrate all that it is possible to know regarding the safe adminis- tration of chloroform, and are well worth careful examination. (Everything which occurred in the experiments was marked and recorded on the tracings as the drum revolved, and nothing except what is written in red ink337 happens in every case of chloroform inhalation without exception, whether in man or in animals, where the breathing is perfectly regular. Any one who is taught to give chloroform in the right way can obtain the same sequence of events clinically, which the tracings pourtray experi- mentally; and I undertake to produce them invariably in any laboratory or operating room in the world. My students do it here every day, and if we can do it anybody can do it. The irregula- rities in the tracings of the Glasgow Committee, and Professor Macwilliam's more recent bogey of dilatation of the heart, are due to obstruction of the circulation in the lungs through interference with, or irregularity of, the respiration. The proof of this is furnished by the experimenters themselves. The Glasgow Committee state that in their experiments the anæsthetic was ad- ministered in a cloth, saturated with chloroform, held over the face, i.e., with insufficient air. In Professor Macwilliam's experiments the chloroform was pumped into the lungs with bellows. Professor Macwilliam states that only a certain percentage of chloroform, 1 to 5 per cent., was allowed to get into the air, in the experiments he performed in this manner. Before we can accept his conclusions, however, he is bound to demonstrate that air containing from 1 to 5 per cent. of chloroform, blown into the trachea with bellows, is incapable of producing obstruction of the circulation or respiration in the lungs. Obstructed circulation in the lungs and a rapidly falling blood-pressure are more than enough to account for the dilatation of the whole heart; which occurred in his experiments and which he wrongly attributed to the direct action of chloroform. It is amusing to contrast Professor Macwilliam's statements regarding the danger of dilatation from the direct action of chloroform on the heart in the laboratory with Dr. James Dunlop's clinical experience, as narrated in The Lancet of September 27th, 1890, that in typical cases of death from the direct action of chloroform the heart is empty and flaccid. Perhaps Mr. Alexander Wilson will assert that Professor Macwilliam's statements "are only a little fuller and more complete" than Dr. Dunlop's, and that they are "not incompa- tible," which is the view he takes of Erichsen's teaching that the pulse should always be taken as a guide, and Syme's teaching that it should never be taken as a guide in chloroform administration. I am satisfied to leave the question of chloroform administration to the judgment of the readers of the MEDICAL CHRONICLE. I have always understood that, next to saving life, the prevention and relief of pain are among the most important duties of our profession. According to the teaching of the Hyderabad Commission, pain may safely be prevented and relieved with chloroform by any intelligent and properly taught medical practitioner; and there can be no question that every medical man ought to be able to give a dose of chloroform with as much precision and certainty as a dose of morphine, or of any other poison. The practical outcome of the disastrous teaching of the Glasgow Committee, backed up by Professors Wood and Macwilliam, is that the relief of pain by chloroform is to be handed over to special- ists, who alone are to administer it, though their own declarations and statistics show that they cannot give it with safety. Exactly in proportion as this teaching gains ground the bulk of the profession suffers loss in credit and in pocket, and the advantages chloroform confers are most seriously restricted and curtailed. There is no more necessity for the anæsthetist, with his inhaler and other apparatus, than for a hypodermic morphia injectionist, or other poisonist. If the 43
338 anæsthetist is to be tolerated hereafter at all, it must be because he is a man of pleasant presence and cheerful countenance, who knows how to comfort and re-assure the patient until chloroform oblivion is secured. ARTICLE REPRINTED FROM THE MEDICAL CHRONICLE OF FEBRUARY 1891. By JOHN A. MACWILLLIAM, M.D., Professor of the Institutes of Medicine in the University of Aberdeen. In the Medical Chronicle of January, 1891, Surgeon-Major Lawrie, in an article on the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission, makes some comments on certain results obtained by me in a recent investigation on the action of chloroform and ether, published in the British Medical Journal, October 11th, 18th, and 25th, 1890. In my paper I described the frequent occurrence of dilatation of the whole heart under the influence of anæsthetic doses of chloroform. Such dilatation was not due to changes in the pulmonary circuit or to a fall of arterial pressure. Dr. Lawrie urges that the cardiac dilatation was due to obstruction of the circulation in the lungs, or to this along with a fall in the blood-pressure. He says: "The irregularities in the tracings of the Glasgow Committee and Professor Macwilliam's more recent bogey of dilata- tion of the heart, are due to obstruction of the circulation in the lungs through interference with or irregularity of the respiration." And later: "Obstructed circulation in the lungs and a rapidly-falling blood-pressure are more than enough to account for the dilatation of the whole heart, which occurred in his experiments, and which he wrongly attributed to the direct action of chloroform." Now this hypothesis of Surgeon-Major Lawrie's can be briefly and conclusively disposed of. There is an abundance of decisive evidence available. First, as regards the alleged influ- ence of obstruction of the circulation in the lungs in causing dilatation of the heart. In my paper in the British Medical Journal I stated the fact that such an explanation was incompetent to explain the cardiac condition, since the whole organ was dilated in my experiments. Dilatation of the right side of the heart might conceivably (if there were no evidence to the contrary) be accounted for by the presence of pulmonary obstruction. But dilatation of the left side (e.g., the left auricle) could clearly not be accounted for in the same way, since pulmonary obstruction necessarily diminishes in large measure the flow of blood into the left auricle and this part becomes small and collapsed. This seemed so obvious to me that I did not discuss the matter at any great length. I shall now state briefly some facts in regard to Surgeon-Major Lawrie's hypothesis of obstructed circulation in the lungs:339 was the case in my experiments, the amount of chloroform vapour in the air never exceeding four per cent. (2) On the other hand, there is decisive proof that pulmonary obstruction was not present in my experiments. Obstruction of the circulation would necessarily cause distension of the pulmonary artery as well as, and indeed earlier than, distension of the right heart. The pulmonary artery would become large and tense in consequence of the increased peripheral resistance to the outflow of blood from that vessel. Then the increased tension would react upon the right heart and cause distension there also. But in my experiments there was no distension of the pulmonary artery during the administration of chloroform. The vessel did not become distended; it was soft and compressible, and the tension within it was low. It is quite certain then that pulmonary obstruction could not have been the cause of the dilatation even of the right side of the heart. (3) Even if pulmonary obstruction had been present340 the action of chloroform; and that the hypothesis of pulmonary obstruction may at once be dismissed as entirely insufficient and inapplicable, as far as an explanation of the cardiac dilatation occurring under chloroform is concerned. Seeing that it is easy to dispose of the question of pulmonary obstruction in regard to the effects of chloroform upon the heart, I shall now advert briefly to the possibility of cardiac dilatation being dependent on a rapidly falling blood-pressure, as alleged by Dr. Lawrie. This is a matter which I carefully considered in my paper, and in regard to which I was able to state definitely that the cardiac dilatation is not due to a fall of blood-pressure. This is conclusively proved by the following facts:341 I have stated (vide The Lancet for June 21st, 1890), and still state that a probable cause of cardiac dilatation, when chloroform is pumped into the lungs with bellows, is pulmonary stasis. This statement is made on the authority of the greatest physiologists in the world342 heart dilatation can really occur without fall of pressure, it must be a natural condition and harmless. We have no right to expect the heart to do anything more than maintain pressure in the aorta. That is its sole function, and if pressure be maintained the heart cannot be said to fail. Professor Macwilliam's description of rhythmical dilatation is also very suspicious. If the dilatation were due to the chloroform action on the heart muscle it would assuredly go on increasing to the end. Professor Macwilliam assumes dilatation to exist because his base line rises whereas a rise of base line might be produced by anything that raised the heart as a whole. The entire arrangement is so artificial that it is very difficult to accept any of his results, or to believe that he can make all his levers and tambours, six in number, work in the perfect way he describes, and at the same time that he can watch the condition of the pulmonary artery so narrowly (in the cat !) as to be able to assert that it was soft and compressible, and that the pressure within it was low. The fourth fact is meaningless. No one would expect the heart to dilate with loss of blood. In bleeding, the blood is removed from the arteries and stored outside the body. By chloroform poisoning blood is not lost, but is removed from the arteries, the pressure falling in consequence, and stored in the veins, perhaps in the heart itself. Granting, however, that Professor Macwilliam's cardiac dilatation is real, its depressing influence is a pure assumption and is opposed to the very facts on which he relies to prove his case. The truth is that the Glasgow Committee in 1879, and Professor Macwilliam in 1890, drew conclusions from an inadequate number of experiments. The Glasgow Committee made their observations on less than half a dozen animals; Professor Macwilliam made his on 75 cats. Just as the Hyderabad Commission and Professor Macwilliam have shown that the fall of pressure, which the Glasgow Committee considered dangerous in chloroform administration, is harmless, and may be a safeguard, so some future observer will show that Professor Macwilliam's cardiac dilatation is not only harmless but is a safeguard also. It would not be surprising if Professor Macwilliam's dilatation of the heart turns out in this way to be an important physiological discovery of the same kind as Dr. Bomford's discovery of the safeguard action of the vagus nerve. It is likely enough that the whole vascular system is relaxed by chloroform, including the walls of the heart. Under such circumstances the safeguard action of dilatation may consist in an arrangement to allow the blood naturally to collect in the heart, which is the best place for it, ready to be pumped into the aorta at a moment's notice, and so restore the pressure. Suppose the heart is completely relaxed by chloroform, as the systemic muscles are, it will go on again if respiration is kept up. In any case there is no danger clinically from cardiac dilatation in chloroform inhalation. Clinical results cannot be accepted only when they favour the view that chloroform is dangerous. Probably as much chloroform is used in India as in the whole of Europe, and we have no evidence of dilatation of the heart, as a dangerous effect of chloroform, from one end of the year to the other. The Hyderabad Commission did not discover the key to the safe administration of chlo- roform, until they had made observations upon 565 animals and had reached their 148th mano- meter experiment. The tracings of this experiment are produced here, and ought to be com- pared with the tracings of the experiment of March 6th, 1890, which were so beautifully engraved in the January number of the Medical Chronicle. In experiment No. 148 chloroform was at
343 first given freely on a cap, held close over the animal's mouth and nose. Every time Dr. Brunton gave the signal to give chloroform, the cap was immediately held over the face, and the animal struggled, and held its breath, and gasped. The blood-pressure fell with extreme rapidity and irregularity, on each of the four occasions, when chloroform was given in this way between 2h. 50m. 0s. and 3h. 11m. 0s. After the fourth administration, at 3h. 11m. 0s., I warned the chloroformist to hold the cap some distance from the face, and allow the animal to breathe regularly. This was done at the next inhalation at 3h. 17m. 0s., and the contrast with the previous administrations was so marked, that Dr. Brunton thought the chloroformist was playing tricks, and said "You are not giving the chloroform." There was no struggling, holding of the breath, or irregular breathing, and no irregularity either of the fall of blood- pressure, or of the circulation. On the contrary, the tracing was perfectly regular, and the observation at Fick 7 shows absolute regularity of the pulse. These observations were repeated during the experiment with the same result. From experiment 148, when the clue was obtained, until the end of the research, the Hyderabad Commission gradually worked out to a satisfactory conclusion the problem of the safe administration of chloroform. We discovered that it is possible to give chloroform in such a way as to produce invariably uniform results. It was found that, in chloroform inhalation, if the breathing be kept perfectly regular, the fall of the blood-pressure, the action of the heart, and the circulation will be perfectly regular also; and under these circumstances it is impos- sible to overdose the animal, unless the administration is continued after full anæsthesia is produced. Any irregularity in any of these particulars in chloroform inhalation indicates a corresponding irregularity of, or interference with, the respiration and the normal oxygenation of the blood; and it is difficult to imagine a greater irregularity of respiration than is involved in pumping chloroform into the lungs with bellows as was done in Professor Macwilliam's experiments. We were able to demonstrate that it is in the very highest degree dangerous to administer chloroform to an animal while the breathing is irregular, particularly if there be struggling or holding of the breath. When either of these untoward events occurs, the animal may be forced to gasp in chloroform at an abnormal rate, and irremediable overdosing may take place, without warning, at any moment. The results arrived at by the Hyderabad Commission correspond precisely with those obtained clinically. I have now given chloroform for more than a year, on the lines indicated by the Commission, with absolute uniformity. In the human subject, as in animals, so long as the breathing is perfectly regular and the inhalation is stopped in good time, there is no danger whatever in pushing chloroform until full anæsthesia is produced. But it is excessively danger- ous to administer chloroform to a struggling patient, or if the patient's breathing is irregular, or to give it in such a way as to make him hold his breath. Hence the rule344 guards; and their experimental data correspond with clinical experience. The immunity from fatalities enjoyed by Syme and by hundreds of his pupils, in whose practice deaths from chloro- -form have been altogether exceptional, and amount to nothing like the London statistics of 1 death in every 1,236 administrations,* cannot be set aside as accidental or due to chance. Professor Macwilliam's present position is untenable, and his theory that dilatation of the heart is a danger of chloroform, and that therefore the pulse must be watched during its inhalation, has received its death-blow from one of his own supporters. In The Lancet for December 13th, 1890, Dr. Dudley Buxton describes a method of chloroform administration, in which feeling the pulse and taking it as a guide is an essential principle. This method causes, according to its author, general feebleness of the circulation with "distinct and unmistakable cardiac enfeeble- ment," which "is progressive, and likely, it has appeared to me in more than one case, to end in cardiac syncope unless prompt and vigorous measures were used." Dr. Buxton goes on to state that the anatomical counterpart of this faulty method is to be found in the relaxation and dilatation of the heart in Professor Macwilliam's experiments. It is probably true that Professor Macwilliam's experimental data correspond, as Dr. Dudley Buxton says they do, with "the procession of events which one has encountered again and again in the operating theatre," but there is little doubt that this agreement between the two is equally damaging to both, no less so to Professor Macwilliam's experimental methods than to Dr. Dudley Buxton's plan of giving chloroform. The Hyderabad Commission takes its stand on the fact brought out by its own experi- ments, and since verified clinically, that the only way to keep the pulse regular under chloroform is to keep the breathing regular. This requires all the unceasing skill, care, and attention of the chloroformist. Chloroform is administered in practice by inhalation. If the breathing is regular the anæsthetic will be inhaled in regular quantities; regular breathing constitutes in reality the only reliable means of measuring the dose; and no capricious or irregular effects can be produced on the circulation or the pulse. If the breathing is irregular, the chloroform will be inhaled in irregular quantities, which will give rise to irregularities of the circulation and of the pulse, and danger will always be imminent. It is obvious that without special risk to the patient the pulse cannot be taken as a guide by which danger can be averted under chlo- roform. Failure of the pulse indicates heart-failure,345 arise; and this object can be attained by any intelligent medical man who chooses to follow implicitly the teaching of the Hyderabad Commission. The matter can, however, very easily be brought to the proof. On the facts established by the Hyderabad Commission, I challenge the Glasgow Committee, or Professor Wood or Professor Macwilliam, to produce either an irregular trace or a dangerous dilatation of the heart with chloroform, before stoppage of the respiration, in any animal whose breathing is normal and regular throughout the administration. ARTICLE BY PATRICK HEHIR, M.D., F.R.C.S.E. Surgeon, Bengal Medical Service; President, First Hyderabad Chloroform Commission. [Reprinted from the "Medical Chronicle" of June 1891.] THE various, discrepant and irreconcilable opinions recently expressed in medical periodicals regarding the question as to the right method of inducing chloroform anæsthesia in the human being, indicate that even the highest authorities on the subject entertain almost opposite views. These opinions have poured in from all quarters during the last twelve months, that is, since the publication of the Report of the Second Hyderabad Chloroform Commission. When we consider that it is this very difference of opinion in regard to the proper method of producing insensibility by inhalation of chloroform vapour (in other words, that it is the varia- tions in the way of administering it) that lies at the foundation of the great disparity of mortality statistics from chloroform anæsthesia, we must admit that the question itself is a most momentous one, and one that might with credit to the profession be removed from its present equivocal basis. The history of the origin of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission is too well known to require any further explanation here beyond that of stating that the object in view was to show that the principles upon which the late Professor Syme administered chloroform were sound and reliable. We cannot be too frequently reminded as to what these principles are: "Free admixture of air with the vapour of chloroform, which is ensured by using some soft, porous material, as a towel or lint, presenting a large surface; no stint in the quantity of chloroform given; watch the respiration."* He considered that there was never any occasion to feel the pulse or examine the heart either before or during anæsthesia. The main practical points brought out by the Hyderabad Chloroform Commissions, were: (1) that primary cardiac syncope during chloroformisation does not occur, and (2) that the respiration is the only safe guide to the effect of chloroform. In the report of the First Hyderabad Chloroform Commission we made the following statement:346 in what manner the anæsthesia is induced. Death from primary cardiac syncope never took place." Further, "With regard to the anæsthesia produced by chloroform in dogs, once in- sensibility is brought about, so long as respiration is kept up, there is no fear of a cumulative effect, the drug is rapidly eliminated. Interference with this eliminative process brings about changes in the respiratory mechanism, which ought to arouse suspicion and prepare us for arti- ficial respiration. The keenest watchfulness of the respiration was indispensable from the begin- ning to the close of chloroformisation, if safety was to be guaranteed." I am thoroughly convinced that the same remarks hold good with regard to chloroform anæsthesia in the human being. These conclusions were arrived at from simple observation, and record of the pheno- mena occurring during the chloroformisation of dogs. They were adequately substantiated, supplemented and placed on a scientific foundation by the experiments of the second Hydera- bad Chloroform Commission, and have not, as far as I have been able to glean from the various discussions that have arisen on the question, been as yet successfully controverted. Before the conclusions of the Second Hyderabad Chloroform Commission were made known, the fact that respiration is always affected before the heart caused the most scrupulous attention to be paid by the adherents of Syme's principles to the condition of the former during chloroform anæsthesia, and it was found that if the respiration ceased, which it occasionally did, there was always time to restore the patient by artificial respiration, Under this old system of administration, in all probability overdosing with the vapour not unfrequently took place, but the rapid elimination effected by the prompt artificial respiration, which was sometimes demand- ed, rendered the patient exempt from real danger. Surgeon-Major Lawrie has gone a step be- yond his former teaching: he now removes the amæsthetic as soon as there is any impediment to the respiratory mechanism, beginning it again as soon as uniform breathing is re-established. He now insists on (1) chloroform being given in such a way that the respiration is regular throughout the administration, and (2) the anæsthetic being entirely removed, and the patient taking a breath of fresh air if any struggling, holding of the breath, or irregular respiration occurs. The observance of this simple practical rule is an absolute safeguard against overdosing with chloroform vapour, and with this plan of administration it is difficult to imagine a death from chloroform inhalation taking place otherwise than under a combination of fortuitous circumstances, or as a purely accidental event. Formerly the respiration was watched for warnings whereby danger might be arrested, now it is attended to in such a way that danger can never arise. One great lesson to be learnt from the results of the Second Hyderabad Chloroform Commission's experiments is that regularity of the respiration is to be maintained throughout the administration of chloroform, and that a continuance of the anæsthetic during any inter- ference with regular respiration is associated with danger. Previous to the announcement of the conclusions of the Second Commission, all those who give chloroform on the late Professor Syme's principles watched the respiration, knowing that when it became shallow, embarrassed, or ceased, danger was to be apprehended if prompt artificial respiration was not resorted to; but now, in addition to watching the respiration, it is incumbent on us to the utmost degree possible
347 to keep it regular. The maintenance of this regularity of breathing is rightly insisted upon by Surgeon-Major Lawrie, and constitutes the key to the safe administration of the anæsthetic. The two occasions on which I have experienced any danger in connection with chloro- form administration were:348 chloroform four or five times daily in the Afsul Gunj and Residency Hospitals, and I hazard the statement that they do so with a saroir faire that would be in no way discreditable to special anæsthetists. To my reasoning, the whole theory of safe chloroformisation might be summed up in the aphorism349 taken as a guide, and it is manifestly unreasonable to compare the risks of ether and chloroform without stating with regard to chloroform which of these methods is employed. The importance of this point lies in the fact that there is not one case of death from chloroform recorded in which it is proved that the pulse was not taken as a guide; whereas in Syme's practice and in my own, where the pulse has never been taken as a guide, no death from chloroform has ever occurred. If the pulse is affected under chloroform it indicates chloroform poisoning either direct or through abnormal respiration. All the chloroformist has to produce is normal anæsthesia, and of this the pulse can never be any test whatever. It is therefore positively dangerous and useless to take it as a guide. The following table places the available figures in a most striking light:LECTURE ON CHLOROFORM BY SURGEON-MAJOR EDWARD LAWRIE. DR. LAWRIE, President of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission, delivered a lecture on Chloroform in the Grant Medical College, Bombay, on Monday, June 29th, 1891 before a large assembly of the medical profession. Surgeon-General Pinkerton, who presided, briefly introduced the lecturer, saying he had much pleasure in introducing Dr. Lawrie, of the Bengal Service, to them. He had come there that day to tell them about his experiments at Hyderabad. It was un- necessary for him (the chairman) to say much, as they would have read all that had been said on the subject, and Dr. Lawrie, he believed, was very anxious to give those who had taken it up a fair field and no favour. Thoroughly imbued with the results of his observations, he naturally wished to have the sympathy of all medical men, especially of all medical men in India. After Dr. Lawrie had given his views, he would be very glad if they discussed any point upon which they might differ, or which might not be clearly understood. Dr. Lawrie, who was received with applause, then proceeded with his lecture. He said: "MR. PRESIDENT, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,351 Syme's teaching, two distinct methods of chloroform administration are, and always have been, practised. In one the pulse, as well as the respiration, is taken as a guide, and deaths have been numerous. In the other, the pulse is never, under any circumstances, taken as a guide, and in Syme's practice and in my own, extending over a period of forty-three years, no deaths from chloroform have ever occurred. In 1879 the British Medical Association appointed a Committee in Glasgow to experiment with anæsthetics. They made a limited number of observations on dogs and rabbits with self-recording apparatus, and they showed by tracings that chloroform lowers the blood-pressure, and that sometimes during chloroform inhalation the fall is unexpected and capricious. The lowering of the blood-pressure the Glasgow Committee called the normal, but dangerous, effect of chloroform. The sudden falls with slowing of the heart indicated, in their opinion, a source of extreme danger. The tracing and report of the experiments of the Glasgow Committee appeared to demonstrate (1) that lowering of the blood-pressure is due to weakening of the heart's action; (2) that this effect is peculiar to chloroform and is never observed with ether; and (3) that death may occur at any time during chloroform inhalation by sudden stoppage of the heart. The terms 'primary and secondary chloroform syncope' crept into use and settled themselves in the nomenclature of medicine. The effect of the Glasgow Committee's report was enormous, far-reaching, and disastrous. No blame is to be attached to the Glasgow Committee, because they published their tracings, and anybody is at liberty to form his own opinion about them. Having accepted them, we made ourselves just as much responsible for them as they were. No one stopped to inquire whether a general fall of blood-pressure is harmless or dangerous, or whether the fall of blood-pressure registered in their experiments was due to direct weakening of the heart or not. Common sense was cast to the winds, and two erroneous principles became established on pseudoscientific basis. One is, that the pulse must be felt during chloroform administration, and the other is, that ether is not only a safe anæsthetic, but is, under all circumstances, a cardiac stimulant. To such an amazing pass have these two principles been pushed that the public have been made to believe that feeling the pulse is a safeguard in chloroform administration, and that it requires a specialist to do it. On the other hand, the blind and unfounded belief in ether as a cardiac stimulant has led to its employment hypodermically in cases of chloroform-poisoning, and even in ether-poisoning itself. The clinical experience and statistics Which the Lancet call- ed for after the Hyderabad Commission's report was published, have only brought out the curious fact that all chloroform deaths now-a-days are possibly the result of hypodermic injections of ether, which is always resorted to as soon as possible after symptoms of danger appear. It would be just as wrong to give subcutaneous injections of chloroform in ether- poisoning as to give subcutaneous injections of ether in chloroform-poisoning. "The report of the Glasgow Committee was accepted by the whole profession as practi- cally final. I remember, when it was published in 1879, I felt at first as if Syme's position was no longer tenable. As time went on, however, and it was found that chloroform could still be given on Syme's principles with the same safety as before, I began to realise that there must be some flaw in the experiments or conclusions of the Glasgow Committee. Accordingly in 1888 Sir Asman Jah, the Minister of Hyderabad, sanctioned the
352 appointment of a Commission with Surgeon P. Hehir as president, to make further experiments with chloroform. Dr. Hehir's Commission proved that in death from chloroform the breathing always stops before the heart, and in his report he made the original observation that as long as breathing is kept free there is no danger of a cumulative effect, and chloroform can be given with absolute safety. This conclusion was not accepted by the profession. It led to a tardy discussion, and in 1889 His Highness the Nizam appointed another Commission. Through the enlightened liberality of His Highness's Government, the Lancet sent out Dr. Lauder Brunton to represent it on the Commission, and at the same time the Government of India deputed Surgeon- Major Bomford. His Highness's Government was represented by Surgeon P. Hehir, Dr. Rustamji, and myself. No better selection could possibly have been made by the Lancet than Dr. Lauder Brunton. He came out to India thoroughly convinced that chloroform paralyses the heart. During the whole time the Commission worked, he tried to stop the heart in every conceivable way, and failed. The Commission found that shock and chloroform are not associates but incompatibles. It is im- possible to produce cardiac syncope, or even vaso-motor depression, by any form of shock in any stage of chloroformisation. When it was found impossible to produce any effect upon the heart by any of shock under chloroform. Dr. Bomford suggested that we should give chloroform and then stop the heart by electrical irritation of the vagus nerve, and see what happened. This was done, and what happened was this. We found that so far from being a danger under chloroform, stopping the heart actually proved to be a safeguard against poisoning by slowing the circulation and delaying the conveyance of chloroformed blood to the brain and spinal cord. " The next phase of the Commission's research consisted in demonstrating that the so-called normal fall of the blood-pressure under chloroform, which the Glasgow Committee considered dangerous, and the unexpected and capricious falls which they thought excessively dangerous are in themselves harmless. The cause of the gradual falls I shall refer to at a later period. We were able to prove that the sudden and capricious falls are due to inhibition or stoppage of the heart from stimulation of the vagus nerve from abnormal respiration or over-dosing, and are as much a safeguard against poisoning with chloroform as I have just shown that the inhibition caused by electrical stimulation of that nerve is." Dr. Lawrie here handed round and distributed among the audience several photographs of the tracings of the Glasgow committee's experiments, and of No. 148 of the Hyderabad Commission's experiments, and pointed out that the tracings of the Glasgow Committee's observations A & C are identical with observations 8, 9, 11, 15, and 16 in Fick tracing ii & iii, which were produced by chloroform and by ether. Dr. Lawrie explained that the Glasgow trace could always be reproduced by (a) stimulation of the vagus and (b) asphyxia; and he further added that it was frequently produced accidentally during the experiments of the Hyderabad Commission, by the animal holding its breath or struggling (vide experiment No. 148 and many others), or by stoppage of the respiration from over- dosing with chloroform. "In the third phase of the Commission's labours, a it was distinctly proved that uniform results can always be obtained with chloroform, provided it is sufficient-
353 ly diluted to allow of regular normal breathing throughout the whole administration. As long as these conditions are fulfilled, the fall of the blood-pressure is regular, and the heart's action and the pulse are invariably regular also. We proved that any irregularity of the heart or of the pulse under chloroform is a certain sign of chloroform- poisoning, either from direct overdosing or from overdosing through abnormal or irre- gular respiration. Of normal anæsthesia with regular breathing and without poisoning, which is, in practice, all the chloroformist has to produce, the pulse can never be any test whatever. It is only a test of irregular breathing or of overdosing, and it is, therefore, no less dangerous than useless to take it as a guide. " Such is a very brief outline of the conclusions and results arrived at by the Hyderabad Commission. It would be an insult to your common sense to exaggerate them, or to pretend that without further amplification they define the whole position with regard to chloroform. Undoubtedly they go a very long way towards doing so, but the old question still remains unanswered. That question is, does chloroform affect the heart directly ? This question is inextricably mixed up with the cause of the fall of the blood-pressure under chloroform, and in order to answer it the cause of this fall must now be determined. If chloroform in any way whatever directly weakens the heart, it is clear that its administration can never be free from risk. Clinically I Know that it does not weaken the heart, because I or anybody else can produce normal amæsthesia with chloroform, with regular breathing and without overdosing, entirely without risk. This fact, however, will never convert the profession; and though I have often been annoyed during the past eighteen months because our results have been so little acted upon, I now see that it is unreasonable to expect the profession to accept them until the fall of blood-pressure under chloroform is fully and satisfactorily accounted for. Last year, I had the honor of an interview with Professors Michael Foster and Gaskell at Cambridge, and they examined the tracings of the Hyderabad Commission's expriments. Professor Foster looked over them for a long time without saving a word. At last he stated his opinion that the one thing brought out by the whole of the tracings is that the blood-pressure is lowered by chloroform, it is by all anæsthetics, and that this appears to indicate danger to the heart; but be added, 'against this we must remember that when a poison is introduced into the system, everything that happens afterwards is of necessity in the nature of a safeguard.' Apart from vagus stimulation, there are two possible ways of lowering the blood-pressure: one by weakening the heart, and the other by vaso-motor dilatation354 the respiratory muscles, and during this time the blood-pressure is falling355 sudden lowering of the blood-pressure at 2h. 17m. 50s. and at 2h. 48m. 25s.; the animal was quite out of chloroform at these times, and it was not even being administered. Chloroform administration was commenced with plenty of air and regular breathing at 2h. 18m. 35s. The gradual and regular fall of blood-pressure is very well shown in this observation. The breathing stopped at 2h. 24m. 5s., and electrical irritation of the vagus was begun at 2h. 24m. 15s., and continued until 2h. 25m. 10s. The only apparent effect of the vagus stimulation was to slow the heart without lowering the blood-pressure. Artificial respiration was not employed, and the animal recovered rapidly. " Ludwig II.-In this observation chloroform administration was commenced simul- taneously with electrical irritation of the vagus at 2h. 35m. 50s. The blood-pressure fell suddenly almost to zero. This was followed by a pause and then two slow beats of the heart. The pulse trace then slowly returned, and the pressure gradually rose to a little more than half its former height, and then gradually fell again as it does in normal chloroform admin- istration. The pulse remained slow. The respiration ceased entirely at 2h. 37m. 15s. The vagus irritation, which was begun at 2h. 35m. 50s., was continued until 2h. 39m. 5s., when it was stopped, and normal breathing at once recommenced without any further steps being taken to revive the animal. In this observation the effect of the vagus irritation was to suddenly lower the blood-pressure and to slow the pulse. The stoppage of the respiration is to be particularly noted and kept in mind with reference to the next observation in Ludwig III. " In Ludwig III, chloroform inhalation with normal breathing was commenced at 2h. 53m. 35s. The blood-pressure fell gradually and regularly. The breathing stopped at 2h. 55m. 45s., but it was not recorded till 2h. 56m. 0s. in order to make sure that it had quite stopped. Electrical irritation of the vagus was commenced at 2h. 56m. 10s, and continued till 2h. 57m. 25s. The blood-pressure fell suddenly and remained low, with slow action of the heart for one minute and fifteen seconds. The animal recovered spontaneously without artificial re- spiration or any other treatment. (If Ludwig IV is now examined, it will be seen that the chloroform observation of Ludwig III was repeated. When the breathing stopped, the animal was left entirely alone and he died.) The question that arises about the animal's recovery in the experiment recorded in Ludwig III is, what was the recovery due to ? It must be noted that the vagus was not divided. The visible effect of the irritation of the entire vagus was to lower the blood-pressure which was already dangerously (?) low, and slow the pulse. It might be objected that the irritation of the uncut vagus stimulated the respiratory centre, and so saved the animal's life. But if this might be said about Ludwig III, it might equally fairly be sail about Ludwig II that the irritation of the vagus at 2h. 35m. 50s. saved the dog's life by stopping the respiration, which would be absurd, as the irritation of the vagus cannot be a safeguard, or save life, by stopping the respiration in one case and exciting it in another. If lowering the blood-pressure were dangerous and due to weakening of the heart, it is clear that the stimu- lation of the vagus at 2h. 56m. 10s., when the animal's breathing had stopped and the pressure was already perilously (?) low, was the very worst and most dangerous expedient we could
356 have adopted, as it at once caused a further fall of the blood-pressure, and kept it down nearly to zero for considerably over a minute. So far from being a dangerous procedure, however, it saved the dog's life; and this fact alone is sufficient to upset the hitherto accepted belief that general lowering of the blood-pressure is dangerous, or that it is due in chloroformisation to weakening of the heart. The last point to notice with reference to Ludwig tracing III is, that it is evident that the pulse beats increased in force from the time chloroform was admin- istered at 2h. 53m. 35s. till the commencement of the artificial fall of the blood-pressure at 2h. 56m. 10s., and that at the end of this fall at 2h. 57m. 25s. the pulse tracing was at first pretty large, and that as the animal's pressure rose during recovery it gradually got smaller and smaller. If the lowering of the blood-pressure were due to weakening of the heart, the reverse of this ought to have occurred, the pulse ought to have become smaller and smaller up to the stop, and afterwards begun by being very small and gradually increased in size as the animal recovered. " Finally, with reference to the fall of the blood-pressure in all the tracings exhibited this evening, it is to be observed that the sudden (unexpected and capricious) falls, which the Glasgow Committee considered exceptionally dangerous, did not actually prove to be so in their experiments (their animals did not die); and have been demonstrated in ours to be a safeguard. If the sudden falls are a safeguard, a fortiori the gradual falls, which occur in normal chloroform administration, are a safeguard also. "We have now the proof, why normal chloroform anæthesia is free from danger. It is because Chloroform never, under any circumstances, directly affects the heart, and that the fall of blood-pressure is due to vaso-motor dilatation, and, so far from being a risk, is in all cases, it not harmless, a safeguard. I have only one word to add in conclusion. If you examine the tracings you will see what splendid work was done by Dr. Bomford for the Commission. Each tracing is a work of art; but each one was completed by Dr. Bomford, and everything that occurred was written on it as the drum revolved at the time of the experiment. Nothing was added to any one of them after the experiment was over, so that nothing was trusted to any one's memory. In the second place, Dr. Bomford discovered the safeguard action of the vagus nerve, and this proved to be the key to the safe adminis- tration of chloroform. In everything I have written since the Commission ended the physiology is a reproduction of Dr. Bomford's views, generally in his own words; and I feel proud to think that work so permanent and lasting as that of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission was carried to a successful conclusion mainly through the instrumentality of a member of that Service to which I and so many of my hearers have the honour and the happiness to belong357 inquired into yet, but, from his own clinical experience, he believed the views and conclusions of the Hyderabad Commission were not far from the truth. Dr. Arnott said he was glad to find the views of Dr. Lawrie were the same as he had been taught by Professor Lister twenty-five years ago; in that Sir Joseph Lister insisted that the great safeguard in the giving of chloroform was the dilution of the chloroform, and that the giving of the chloroform in a concentrated form, such as a closed cone, closely applied over the nose and mouth of the patient, was not a safe method of administration; but that some method of dilution must be adopted to the amount which Dr. Lawrie had quoted, and which, he thought, was about the amount quoted by Professor Lister some twenty-five years ago. He had no doubt that the administration of diluted chloroform was as safe as Dr. Lawrie had said. Dr. Hatch next explained his experiences in chloroform administration. During ten or twelve years he had only known of two deaths, and one of those he had some doubts about before administering. In these case the chloroform was administered with the closed cone, which it was not necessary to place close to the nose. Dr. Blaney said he had been Coroner of Bombay for fifteen years, and every death that had been reported as haying occurred from chloroform or from any other anæsthetic, had been inquired into by him, as it was his duty to do, but he said it was to the credit of the medical profession of Bombay that they stood behind no other city he knew of in the successful administration of chloroform. Those reports he had received of deaths from chloroform, he did not consider worth the paper they had been written on. Chloroform, during the time he had been Coroner, must have been administered in Bombay many thousands of times, but there were only two deaths during that time which really resulted from chloroform or anæsthetics. Some other gentlemen reported their experiences, saying they had had no deaths from chloroform, and expressing the opinion that there was no danger from chloroform if properly administered and diluted. At the same time it was necessary, some thought, to watch the pulse as well as the respiration. Dr. Lawrie said that before the Commission he used to watch the respiration for signs whereby danger might be arrested, but that since the session of the Commission he did not merely watch the respiration, but insisted on its being kept absolutely regular throughout the whole administration so as to produce normal inhalation and normal anæsthesia. Surgeon-General Pinkerton proposed a hearty vote of thanks to Dr. Lawrie for coming there and delivering that lecture; and to H. H. the Nizam for affording the means of research. The motion was heartily responded to, and the meeting separated.
PART IX.359 The administration of chloroform in the Afzulgunj Hospital is now conducted in the following manner. When all is ready for the operation the surgeon gives the signal to begin the inhalation. The method of adminis- tration is described on page 286. While it is proceeding no one is allowed to do anything in the operating room, not even speak, and everybody's attention is thus concentrated on the administration until the patient is fully anæs- thetised. From the moment the inhalation is commenced until anæsthesia is produced, the surgeon records every event, even of the most trivial kind, with the exact time of its occurrence. This is in strict conformity with Dr. Bomford's plan of recording on the tracings everything, as it took place, during the manometer experiments of the Commission. Each entry is notified to the class as the surgeon records it, and after the operation is finished, and the patient has been removed, one of the students is made to describe from memory what happened during the inhalation. His description is compared with the record, and finally, the record is read out to the class. In the cases detailed it will be remarked that the respiratory pauses, which are sometimes referred to as "apn360 Cases of chloroform administration at the Afzulgunj Hospital. August 22nd, 1891.361 Observations. H. M. S. A. 9 3 0. 362 August 24th, 1891.363 H. M. S. F. 8 33 10.364 Observations. H. M. S. A. 1 0 0.365 August 25th, 1891.366 H. M. S. G. 8 56 50.367 H. M. S. D. 8 21 20.368 In this case after the patient had been removed one of the most intelligent students was made to describe from memory what had happened during the administration. He could only recall very imperfectly and inaccurately what he had seen a few minutes before. For example, he was under the impression that full anæsthesia had been produced in four minutes instead of six. The experiment was repeated in every case subsequently, with the result that, though the by-standers were always warned to pay particular attention with a view to giving evidence afterwards, in no single instance could the witness give anything like an accurate description of what occurred during the admi- nistration of the anæsthetic. The fact that it is extraordinarily difficult to remember precisely what takes place when every thing is normal during an administration, shows how entirely unreliable and worthless statements made from memory by " the competent witnesses who have recorded human deaths under anæsthesia"* must be, when they are obscured by the shock of a patient dying, and by the excitement of frantic efforts to restore animation. August 26th, 1891.369 H. M. S. K. 9 4 30. 370 Observations. H M. S. A. 8 50 30. 371 H. M. S. C. 9 16 15. 372 August 28th, 1891.373 H. M. S. D. 9 1 35. 374 August 28th, 1891375 August 20th, 1891.376 August 29th, 1891.377 August 29th, 1891.378 August 31st, 1891.379 Observations. H. M. S. A. 8 31 15.380 Observations. H. M. S. A. 9 4 10.381 September, 1st. 1891382 H. M. S. E. 8 19 30.383 September 1st, 1891.384 H. M. S. E. 9 54 20. 385 Observations. H. M. S. A. 8 0 45. 386 September 2nd, 1891.387 H. M. S. G. 7 58 55. 388 September 3rd, 1891.389 H.M.S. F.113245.390 September 5th, 1891.391 September 6th, 1891.392 Observations. H.M.S. A.85235.393 H.M.S. F.92745.394 is all the chloroformist has to produce, chloroform syncope will become a figment of the past. The clinical and experimental data of the Hyderabad Commission completely expose the fallacy underlying the wide-spread belief in the direct action of chloroform upon the heart, a belief which is founded mainly on fatalities under chloroform that have never been proved to be due to anything but abnormal inhalation. Much discussion has taken place lately with reference to the quality of the chloroform as a factor in anæsthesia. It may therefore be as well to note that in all the second and in more than half the first series of cases reported in this section, the anæsthetic employed was Duncan and Flockhart's methylated chloroform, and that vomiting occurred in less than five per cent. of the admini- strations. The Commission, does not attempt to make its conclusions retrospective. It is sufficient to recall the fact that deaths with chloroform have, with few exceptions, happened in the practice of those who take the pulse as a guide as to its effects, and to repeat that the pulse can only give indications of actual danger and of abnormal administration. When it is considered how universal has become the custom of taking the pulse as a guide in chloroform inhalation, more especially during the last ten years, it is evident that but for natural safeguards which surround the administration of chloroform, namely, lowering of the blood-pressure, stoppage of the respiration, and stoppage of the heart the mortality from abnormal inhalation would have been considerably higher than the one in so many hundreds or thousands shown in the useful statistics of Mr. Roger Williams and Professor Wood. The Commission desires to prove that in the practice of surgery death from chloroform should be impossible. The question is: Will any surgeon henceforth accept the responsibility of refusing to follow the teaching of the Hyderabad Chloroform Commission seeing that it demonstrates how normal anæsthesia can invariably be secured ?
PART X.396 VI. In children crying ensures free admission of chloroform into the lungs; but as struggling and holding the breath can hardly be avoided, and one or two whiffs of chloroform may be sufficient to produce complete insensibility, they should always be allowed to inhale a little fresh air during the first deep inspira- tions which follow. In any struggling persons, but especially in children, it is essential to remove the inhaler after the first or second deep inspiration, as enough chloroform may have been inhaled to produce deep anæsthesia, and this may only appear or may deepen after the chloroform is stopped (vide supra sub-paragraphs 2 and 9 of conclusions in paragraph 30). Struggling is best avoided in adults by making them blow out hard after each inspiration during the inhalation. VII. The patient is as a rule, anæsthetised and ready for the operation to be commenced when unconscious winking is no longer produced by touching the surface or the eye with the tip of the finger. The anæsthetic should never, under any circumstances be pushed till the respiration stops; but when once the cornea is insensitive the patient should be kept gently under by occasional inha- lations and not be allowed to come out and renew the stage of struggling and resistance. VIII. As a rule, no operation should be commenced until the patient is fully under the influence of anæsthetic so as to avoid all chance of death from surgical shock or fright. IX. The administrator should be guided as to the effect entirely by the respiration. His only object, while producing anæsthesia, is to see that the respiration is not interfered with. X. If possible, the patient's chest and abdomen should be exposed during chloroform inhalation, so that the respiratory movements call be seen by the administrator. If anything interferes with the respiration in any way, however slightly even if this occurs at the very commencement of the administration; if breath is held, or if there is stertor, the inhalation should be stopped until the breathing is natural again. This may sometimes create delay and inconveni- ence with inexperienced administrators, but experience will make any adminis- trator so familiar with the respiratory functions under chloroform that he will, in a short time, know almost by intuition whether anything is going wrong, and be able to put it right without delay before any danger arises. XI. If the breathing becomes embarrassed, the lower jaw should be pulled, or pushed from behind the angles, forward, so that the lower teeth protrude in front of the upper. This raises the epiglottis and frees the larynx.
397 At the same time, it is well to assist the respiration artificially until the embar- rassment passes off. XII. If by any accident the respiration stops, artificial respiration should be commenced at once, while an assistant lowers the head and draws forward the tongue with catch-forceps, by Howard's method, assisted by compression and re- laxation of the thoracic walls. Artificial respiration should be continued until there is no doubt whatever that natural respiration is completely re-established. XIII. A small dose of morphia may be injected subcutaneously before chloroform inhalation as it helps to keep the patient in a state of anæsthesia in prolonged operations. There is nothing to show that atropine does any good in connection with the administration of chloroform and it may do a very great deal of harm. XIV. Alcohol may be given with advantage before operations under chloroform, provided it does not cause excitement, and merely has the effect of giving a patient confidence and steadying the circulation. The Commission has no doubt whatever that, if the above rules be followed, chloroform may be given in any case requiring an operation with perfect case and absolute safety so as to do good without the risk of evil. The practical conclusions are reproduced here in their original form. They were written before the Commission had had time to realise the full meaning of their experimental data, or opportunity to put them to the test of clinical expe- rience. They were not regarded as final by the Commission, as it was hoped and expected that surgeons and physiologists would examine the tracings and descriptions of the experiments for themselves, and draw their own conclusions from them. It only remains for the Commission to show, by comparison of Syme's princi- ples with the facts established that it has accomplished the object for which it was appointed. "The Commission was applied for because it was felt that Syme's principles, which both experience and experiment had shown to be pra- tically sound must be founded upon a firm physiological basis." In his original
398 lecture Syme said, " The points that we consider of the greatest practical importance in the administration of Chloroform are"399 tirely by the respiration; you never see any body here [Edinburgh] with his finger on the pulse while chloro- form is given." pulse can never be a guide to normal chloroform anæsthesia. Syme said that the duty of the chloroformist was to be guided by the respiration; the Commission has proved that it is the chloroformist's duty not to be guided by, but to guide the respiration, and to keep the inhalation regular so as always to produce normal anæsthesia. The report thus ends by showing how thoroughly the Hyderabad Com- mission has succeeded in proving that the late Professor Syme's principles of chloroform administration are right. This is the most fitting tribute the Com- mission can pay to the genius and wisdom of the illustrious surgeon, who, by his teaching and example elevated and ennobled British surgery and paved the way for the new era inaugurated while yet he had full time to appreciate it, by his equally illustrious son-in-law Sir Joseph Lister. EDWARD LAWRIE, President. T. LAUDER BRUNTON, G. BOMFORD, RUSTOMJI D. HAKIM. Members.
