IP/6/RC.6 REPORT ON THE CULTIVATION AND USE OF GÁNJÁ. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913563.tif] CALCUTTA: Printed at the Bengal Secretariat Press. 1893.
REPORT ON THE CULTIVATION AND USE OF GÁNJÁ. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74913581.tif] Calcutta: PRINTED AT THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT PRESS. 1893.
FROM SURGEON-CAPTAIN D. PRAIN, I.M.S., Curator of the Herbarium, Royal Botanic Garden, Sibpur, TO THE SECRETARY TO THE BOARD OF REVENUE, L.P. Dated Sibpur, the 21st June 1893. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit a report on the cultivation and use of gánjá, in obedience to the instructions contained in Board of Revenue, Excise, No. 295B., dated 18th February 1893. 2. In compliance with the orders conveyed in that letter, I proceeded on deputation on the forenoon of March 18th; the period of deputation, which was originally limited to two months, not proving sufficient, an extension of another month had to be asked for; the extended period of deputation expired on June 17th; on the afternoon of that day I reported my return to duty as Curator of the Herbarium at Sibpur to the Superintendent of the Royal Botanic Garden. 3. The points to which my attention was directed in the letter of instruc- tions above referred to were( 2 ) 6. In conducting the enquiries into the manufacture of gánjá, I have received the greatest assistance from the officers in charge of the gánjá mahals at Naogaon, more especially from Babu W. N. Ghosh, Sub-Deputy Collector there; in conducting the investigation into the chemical composition of the substance, I have had the benefit of being able to consult at every stage Surgeon-Major C. J. Warden, Medical Store-keeper to Government, and have received every assistance from the officers of the Chemical Examiner's Department, Calcutta, more especially from Assistant Surgeon C. L. Bose. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, DAVID PRAIN.
REPORT ON THE CULTIVATION AND USE OF GÁNJÁ. Part first: Ganja as an article of commerce. CHAPTER I.( 2 ) two-thirds their full size, it is only slightly developed.1 During the greater part of the time that its vegetative functions are most active, and while it is increasing in size, all the materials absorbed by the plant go to form new tissues. When it has nearly reached its full size, the excess material taken up by the plant, not being required to form new tissues, is used up, when it grows in temperate countries like Europe, in strengthening the tissues already formed. The result is the thickening of the walls of the cells of those tissues that, when the plant is ripe, are retted out to form hemp-fibre. At the corresponding stage in the life of the plant as it grows in a tropical country like the plains of India, the excess of material absorbed over new tissues formed, in place of being used up in thickening and strengthening existing tissues, is stored up in the shape of the resinous substance under discussion, to be made use of at a subsequent period in the formation of the new tissues of the fruit and seed. This reserve substance is probably retained in a state of solution, for it is diffused pretty generally throughout the tissues of the plant. In the case of male plants, so long as the leaves remain green and vigorous the substance remains thus diffused; as the leaves fade and the plant withers it disappears. In the female plant, the tissues of which are more fully charged with resinous matter than those of the male, as soon as the flowers are fertilised and the leaves begin to wither, the substance passes upwards to the flower-heads, gorging the tissues to such an extent, that it even fills certain small hairs that clothe the sur- face of the special leaves, called bracts, which cover the individual flowers, and of those that are situated at the bases of the small spikes on which the flowers are. To a less but still perceptible extent it also fills the corresponding hairs on the leaves in the neighbourhood of the flower-heads. By the time the fruits are ripe the whole of this substance becomes absorbed. If, however, the plant be prevented from setting its seeds, the substance is not absorbed but remains as a sticky exudation on the surface of the parts composing the flower-heads, till the plant withers. In the case of plants grown in the Himalayas, Tibet and Turkestan the substance does not remain diffused throughout the tissues. Its formation in these regions appears to be less necessary for the performance of its vital functions, consequently it begins early in the season to appear as a tolerably uniform glandular exudation on the surface of the young leaves and flower- bracts in female plants. Another consequence of its superfluous nature in this area is that the female plant, in which it is alone well developed, does not absorb the whole of the resin while ripening its seeds; it is not therefore neces- sary, in order to obtain the resin, to cultivate the plant so as to prevent its seeds from being set. The direct evidence of the connection that exists between the formation of this resinous substance and the development of the seeds is confirmed indirectly by two collateral facts. In all fields of cultivated gánjá in Bengal, there may be found a number of plants termed by the cultivators khásiá (emasculated); the term has reference to the resin-forming property, not to the sex of the plant; in these, as in male plants, resin never becomes deposited in the hairs of any organ. It has been said that these khásiá plants never bear any flowers,2 and Babu H. C. Kerr attempts to convey the force of the expression by calling these plants 'hermaphrodite' in the ordinary as opposed to the botanical sense of the Word. So far is it from being the case that khásiá plants have no flowers, they flower more copiously than any other plants in the field; they are in reality female plants which, though to all appearance organically perfect, seem incapable of setting seeds. In some hundreds of plants of the kind examined, though the flowers in all possessed ovules that were apparently perfect, no sign of seed formation was perceived and no trace of resin deposit was met with. The absence of resin from the flowering tops of these 'barren females' is almost cer- tainly due to their functional deficiency and consequent inability to induce the stimulus that determines the passage of the resinous substance from the leaves to the ends of the branches. If functionably defective, there is no impairment of the vegetative powers of these plants; as Babu H. C. Kerr remarks, they are more bushy and look more healthy than the others.3 1 Russell in Assam Excise Department Report, 1882-83, p. 22. 2 H. C. Kerr, Report on Gánjá, p. 8. 3 H. C. Kerr, Report, p. 9.
( 3 ) Again, if a plant that is ready for reaping and conversion into commercical gánjá chances to be exposed for a short time to rain and cloud, which are conditions that prevent its being harvested, a "second growth " takes place. This causes enlargement of the bracts at the base of the flower spikes, and to a less extent of the small leaves on the branches that bear these spikes; this unnatural vegetative activity goes on at the expense of the resinous matter, which, if the plant had been fertilized, would have been used up in the growth of the seed. No change takes place in the small special bracts belong- ing to the individual flowers beyond the absorption of the resin with which their hairs were gorged; as this resin is, however, the substance for which the plant is harvested, its disappearance means that the crop has been destroyed. CHAPTER, II.( 4 ) 3. Gánjá consists of the dried flowering-tops of cultivated female hemp plants which have become coated with resin in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely. The formation of seeds is prevented by the destruc- tion of all the male plants. Special men( 5 ) in the whole gánjá mahal, there is no attempt made to uproot the wild male plants to be found growing everywhere in fences and ditches. Besides which there are the abnormal male flowers on female plants for which the poddar cannot be held responsible, some of which escape the notice of the cultivator himself throughout the season; these are undoubtedly functionally perfect, and may easily account for the presence of seeds. That these abnormal males are mainly accountable for the seeds that occur seems probable from two circumstances. One of these, which has been pointed out by Mr. Kerr,1 is that seeds are often more numerous in fields where the owner has been ailing and unable to look after his crop by going round and removing the abnormal male flowers that make their appearance on female plants. I am not able to corroborate this observation, for even in the field already spoken of, which had received no attention for half the season, there were not more than an average number of seeds. This, however, does not contradict Mr. Kerr's experience: for, as has been said, only one plant with abnormal male flowers was found in the whole field. The other circumstance is the presence, in very considerable numbers, in every field, of functionless female plants, perhaps indicating fertilization by abnormal pollen, capable of causing an embryo to develope into a seed that will not only germinate, but produce a plant apparently perfect but incapable of reproduction; the presence of these abnormal males themselves may indicate the same thing. It must, however, be admitted that the want of function in a certain number of females may be only due to the unnatural conditions, resulting from high cultivation, under which they grow. The fact that, so far as all vegetative functions are concerned, these khásiá plants are unusually well developed, points rather in this direction. It may be mentioned in passing that the cultivator, looking at the plant entirely in its resin-bearing aspect, considers the sex that produces this substance the nobler of the two and calls it mardá or male; the worse than useless male, which if left would fertilize his field and ruin his crop, is to him mádi, or female; the useless but innocent khásiá, which he does not remove from the field while young or reap when mature, is, as its name indicates, collated with the sex to which it really belongs. The misapplication of the sexual names is not surprising; it prevailed in Europe three centuries ago.2 What, however, is surprising among people who are able to distinguish the sexes before the flowers appear, is that they have not attempted to distinguish between the seeds that will produce male and those that will produce female flowers. It has been said in Europe, though without being confirmed, that the seeds which produce male plants are longer, thicker and heavier than those that yield female plants, which are distinctly lighter and of a more rounded or oval shape.3 The following table shows the relationship of the three substances to the hemp plant and to each other: ( 6 ) fruits and flowering-tops mixed with the leaves indicate that everything borne on the stalk or branch has been roughly stripped off. The leaves have long stalks and the blades,( 7 ) things. That haschish does not also mean gánjá is no doubt due to the fact that no substance precisely like gánjá is produced in the countries where the word is used. This use of the word haschisch as the exact equivalent of bhang is not, however, very common. The more usual name in Arabic-speaking countries is benj, doubtless from the Persian beng, in turn derived from the Indian term. Haschish, meaning literally plant, as if hemp were, as Prosper Alpin puts it, the 'plant' par excellence,1 is equivalent in usage and in sense to the names Subji, the 'vegetable,' or Patti, the leaf;' whether this usage is indicative of borrow- ing by India from the Arabs or of the Arabs from India will be discussed in a subsequent chapter. The Malay name for bhang and indeed for the plant and its preparations generally is gingi, modified from the name now used in India to signify only the flowering-tops. Sometimes, though very rarely, the leaves are smoked; sometimes they are used as a medicine for cattle. CHAPTER IV.( 8 ) than the other two kinds. The charas of Hirát is in some parts of the Panjab supposed to be better and stronger than that from other places, and in conse- quence of this it has been generally stated that Central Asian charas is more powerful than Himalayan. So far is this from being the case, habitual users of charas much prefer the Nepal and Garhwal article to the Central Asian one; consequently, though its transit charges must be much lighter, Himalayan charas commands a better price than the best Central Asian charas. This is of course very easily understood; there must be less inert vegetable tissue in the resin collected by rubbing the flower-heads between the palms of the hands than in that obtained by beating the whole plant against a cloth; the facilities for adul- teration, too, are much greater in the case of Central Asian than in that of the Himalayan substance. The kinds of charas of which mention has been made so far agree in being the product of fresh plants. South of the Himalaya the substance is taken without the plants being reaped; in the trans-Himalayan area it is obtained after they are cut. But in the Panjab a substance which seems to be a kind of charas is derived from the plant after it is harvested and cured as bhang.1 Cloths are laid over heaps of bhang, and that substance is stirred up vigorously underneath them, so as to cause a fine dust to rise, which pervades the store-room in which the operation is performed and ultimately settles on the cloths in question. Distinctions are even drawn between three kinds of this dust, the general name for which is garda; a certain quantity of the powder adheres to the cloth when it is shaken; this is supposed to be the poorest quality; its stickiness, however, and its name, khaki, would indicate that it was at least to some extent of the nature of charas. The dust that is easily shaken off is of two kinds( 9 ) these bracts are covered with glandular hairs which are full of the resin that constitutes the narcotic principle of hemp. The large leaves of the stem and branches are all removed from the plant, so also, as far as possible, are the small leaves of the twigs close to the flowering-tops. These last, however, can never be completely got rid of; partly because they themselves are somewhat glandular and sticky, partly because of their proximity to the very sticky bracts, they become agglutinated to the latter, and therefore incorporated in the commercial article gánjá. It is, however, by its relative freedom from these small leaves that the gánjá dealer to a great extent assesses the value of a sample. Colour as an index to the manner in which it has been manipulated and smell as a guide to its richness in narcotic also are used, but, other things being equal, the best gánjá is that which has least leaf.1 Two sorts of gánjá are manufactured; three varieties are sold; one of these varieties occurs in two states; it is therefore necessary, in order to prevent confusion, to explain the exact relationship of these. Gánjá is usually manufactured by being trodden under foot so that the agglutinated flower-tops assume a flattened shape. This is cháptá, or flat' gánjá. If after being manufactured this flat gánjá is left upon the branches, which are cut about two feet to two feet six inches long, it is in the state known as 'large flat'; these branches are baled, heads inwards, in somewhat barrel-shaped bundles, a maund in weight, about 3 feet long, 1 foot 8 inches across, and 5 feet 8 inches round. If, on the other hand, instead of being thus baled, the branches are first broken into twigs about a foot long which are loosely tied into small flattish 'bundles' whose girth is roughly the grasp of both hands, and whose weight is roughly a quarter-seer, the state is known as 'flat twig'; bundles of flat twig gánjá occur heads inwards, in bales weighing a maund each, which are about 1 foot 8 inches long, 2 feet across, and 6 feet 6 inches round. The other sort of gánjá is not trodden but rolled under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops are less closely adherent and assume a rounded shape. This is goli, or 'round.' gánjá. Somewhat more care is taken with this at all stages of its manufacture; it is always less leafy than flat gánjá, the final dressing for removing the 'leaf' being clone by hand; only one-fifth of the whole gánjá crop is thus prepared. 'Round' gánjá is never baled large; and even after being broken into small twigs, these twigs are sickle-trimmed at the ends into lengths varying from six to nine inches. The twigs are tied, the short ones innermost, into neat round bundles, whose girth is the grasp of one hand with the breadth of the other, and whose weight is approximatly a quarter-seer. These bundles are packed, heads inwards, in bales that weigh a maund, and that are about 1 foot 1 inch thick, 2 feet. 2 inches across, and 7 feet 6 inches round. The flower-tops of gánjá detached from the twigs, whether of flat' or of round' gánjá, and whether the detachment has been accidental or deliberate, form chúr, or 'broken' gánjá. In making gánjá of either sort a certain number of flowering-tops get detached when the branches are being beaten to get rid of loose dry leaves and seeds; this is more common with 'round' than with flat' gánjá owing to adjacent flower-heads being less closely adherent round' than in the other sort. There is another reason also why, from 'round,' 'broken' gánjá, as an accident of manufacture, should be in excess of 'broken' gánjá from 'flat,' Much of the 'flat' is exported 'large,' and therefore there is no production of chúr by trimming. Even when reduced to small twig' the quantity of chúr produced from trimming is not great; from every 100 seers of 'small twig' made, only 8½ seers of 'broken gánjá' result. With care, doubtless, this might be reduced, but it is of little consequence to the cultivator, as he sells his chúr quite as readily as his small twig.' In the case of 'round,' however, all of it is trim- med, not merely, by being broken into what is the natural length of the twig, but by further cutting the twig to a standard length. Very frequently (one might almost say always) a flowering-top or two will be found attached to the piece cut 1 The 'leaves' to which the dealer refers when he speaks of a sample of gánjá being 'leafy' or the reverse, are the small leaves which have been already described as occurring towards the ends of twigs close under flowering-tops; they have short stalks and have usually only one, at most three, leaf segments. It is necessary to repeat this because, in some accounts of gánjá writers who have not seen the plant growing, have spoken of the article being sometimes largely mixed with leaves, in such a way as to convey the impres- sion that gánjá, the flowering-tops, is at times adulterated with stem leaves, i.e., with siddhi. From the nature of the case, this is, of course, as impossible as it would be to pass off a mixture of coffee-beaus and cowrie-shells. What is meant in the original descriptions which have been thus inaccurately paraphrased is that some samples of gánjá are much less completely divested of these leaves than others are. C
(10) off; such tops must be detached from the pieces of twig that fall aside if they are not to be lost altogether; from every 100 seers of 'round' gánjá made, about 15 seers of 'broken' gánjá result in this way alone. In the case of 'round' gánjá the chúr is a perquisite of the buyer; in those cases where the cultivator and not the dealer is in charge of the manufacture, as much care as possible is therefore taken to keep down the amount produced. Chúr is exported in bags containing a maund; these bags are 3 feet high, 1 foot 6 inches across, and 5 feet round. The following table will explain at a glance the precise relationship of the various named kinds of gánjá:( 11 ) Though much more powerful than siddhi(12) ploughing with small ploughs and harrowing with a narrow ladder between the ridges; this course immediately follows the trimming and is itself followed by a second course of manuring with powdered cowdung and oil-cake, after which the ridges are again rebuilt. About this time the first visit of the gánjá doctor( 13 ) The area of the gánjá mahal appears to be slowly but steadily decreasing; not only is the cultivation becoming more concentrated, but in spite of slight fluc- tuations, it would seem as if the cultivation of hemp were steadily diminishing within the gánjá area itself. The cultivation of sugarcane, another crop suited for these high lands, which the people appear to find nearly as remunerative and much less troublesome both in itself and from the absence of the fiscal restrictions that necessarily accompany gánjá growing, seems to be steadily if slowly displacing hemp culture. CHAPTER VII.( 14 ) Next morning the bundles are restacked, trampled, and pressed and left in stack an hour or two. About 10 o'clock the stuff is unstacked again; this time the bundles are placed in a double row, their heads inwards and overlapping, along the mats; two or three men now trample this row with some force. When they are done the bundles are turned and the process repeated. After being trampled on both sides the bundles are now taken up and the lengths forming them separated from each other; these are gently beaten on the mat to get rid of more leaves and seeds, and spread out in the sun. The men now take the individual lengths and dress them one by one with their feet as the bundles were dressed the previous day. When this is over the twigs are gathered up and gently shaken. All the large leaves by this time have fallen. Most of the small leaves have also been lost, and the greater part of the seeds. The flower-tops are now quite hard and firm and the manufacture is complete. The lengths are now most usually formed into the bundles known as 'large flat' gánjá; they may, however, be further converted into 'flat twig' gánjá, or still further broken into chúr. Hardly any chúr is obtained in manufacturing 'flat' gánjá. Most of the heads that fall off during the first day's operations get tram- pled into the mass; most of those that fall off during the second day are thrown away and burned. The waste caused in this way is, however, infinitesimal. The place of manufacture of round gánjá is usually a rice field situated some distance from the homestead, The part selected as the chátor is levelled and cleared of weed and stubble, while shelter huts are run up for the accom- modation of the labourers. The plants in this case are reaped in the afternoon and are laid out in the cháitor yard under the open sky till next morning, when the initial sorting already described takes place. For round gánjá, however, the lengths into which the plant is cut are shorter than for flat, and far more woody tissue is rejected from the beginning of the manufacture. After being selected, the pieces are exposed to the sun till near noon, when the real manufacture begins. For this a long horizontal bamboo is firmly tied four feet from the ground to a row of strong posts; mats are spread along each side of this bar, and a number of men, in a row along each mat, laying hold of the bar with both hands for support, proceed each to press and roll under his feet a bundle of lengths similar to the bundles mentioned under flat gánjá, though usually con- taining more pieces. Generally the stem end of such a bundle is tied loosely with string, but an expert roller can manage his bundle untied. After about ten minutes' rolling the bundle is taken up and its leaves shaken off. By the time this rolling (ekmalái) is finished( 15 ) A good deal of chúr results, as has already been explained, in the manufac- ture of round gánjá at the time that the ends of the bundles are cut and trim- med: this is more or less unavoidable. A good deal also results from the shaking the bundles get at their final examination for leaves. As has been said, chùr is a perquisite of the dealer when the cultivator makes the round gánjá, so that it is to the cultivator's advantage to keep clown the amount. When the gánjá, is made, as is often the case with round gánjá, by the purchaser, he may be expected to look after his own interest in the matter. As will be shown further on, his interest never can suffer by the making of chúr. Mr. Kerr mentions1 the fact that when the goládár, not the cultivator, makes the article, only the good plants are taken for manufacture; when the cultivator, not the goládár, is the manufacturer, the only rejections are the worst twigs; he also adds that the rejections are always greatest in the case of 'round' gánjá. This, again, is because in making 'round' gánjá, the twigs are so much more in. the hand of the maker, and are therefore so much more easily seen than the 'flat.' But Mr. Kerr speaks of this rejection 'wastage' in the preparation of the drug; if by 'wastage' he means waste, then I do not agree with him( 16 ) (b) It presses together the resinous parts on which the active principle is most plentifully deposited. These being rendered somewhat sticky by the presence of the resin, become more or less aggluti- nated, and are thus less liable to fall off in transit and so reduce the active power of the gánjá. The principles by which the manufacturer is guided are, therefore, simple in the extreme. Their application, however, is not so easy, since it is evident that the two results aimed at in the kneading process are somewhat antagonistic. The more thoroughly the flowering-tops are compressed, the greater number of small leaves must become inextricably imbedded in them; the more completely the small leaves are removed, the less thorough is the agglutination of the flower spikes: for, while the plants are becoming dry enough for the leaves to fall easily away, the stickiness pari passu disappears. It is this that explains the brittleness of 'round' as compared with 'flat' gánjá, shown by the fact already mentioned, that the amount of natural chúr or broken gánjá is greater in the case of 'round,' which always shows less leaf, than in the case of flat gánjá, as well as by the fact that 'round' gánjá is the most troublesome to keep in store, owing to the readiness with which it becomes powdery and falls to pieces. It will be seen, from what has been said in a previous paragraph, that the formation of chúr or broken gánjá cannot be legitimately looked upon as waste in the process of manufacture or, if there is waste in this direction, that it is not appreciable. There is, however, a cause of loss, equally active in the manufacture both of 'round' and 'flat' gánjá, that is very appreciable indeed. In making both kinds of gánjá, the rolling and pressing of the plants cause the soles of the feet to become covered, especially during the first stage of the work, with a sticky black coating. Considering the care that is taken by means of mats to keep the plant from coming into contact with the ground, there can be no more dust in this coating than was attached to the presser's feet when first he stepped on to the mat. Practically, therefore, this black substance is pure charas, collected as the charas of the Himalayan tracts is collected, only by the soles of the feet instead of on the palms of the hands. There is this difference: the substance so obtained is the article for which the hillman grows, or at any rate uses, the plant; the cultivator in the plains throws it away. I took some care in investigating the matter, it being one regarding which it was particu- larly essential to betray no interest, because of the possibilities( 17 ) found to be just over 0.6 gramme, while the average weight of gánjá obtained from each plant was about three ounces. Now three ounces = 1,426.5 grains of gánjá, representing 475.5 grains of the powder to which gánjá is reduced before being smoked, which quantity would yield 111 5 grains of resinous substance to alcohol. Now 0.6 gramme = 9.1 grains of charas which would yield to alcohol seven grains of pure resin. It would seem from this calculation that over eight per cent. of the resin proper must inevitably be lost in this way. And it has to be pointed out that the three ounces of gánjá obtained from each plant by the process in question is in excess of the average yield. According to Mr. Kerr's calculations, which I have repeated, and with which I agree, the yield per plant does not average more than two-and-a-half ounces. The loss of resin under the method of manufacture pursued should therefore amount to nearly ten (97) per cent., that is to say, about one-tenth of the really active part of the plant is lost during the preparation of gánjá. The percent- age given might be too high, for on examining the feet of the cultivators I noticed that the coating of resin on the soles did not increase in thickness beyond a certain point, and that after the first half-hour perhaps as much resin as was taken up by their feet from one plant afterwards became attached to another. At the same time the average loss, as derived from the plants manipulated by me, is undoubtedly put too low; in the first place, from the nature of the experiment, of which the estimation now given was but a secondary result, my endeavour was to lose as little, not to remove as much, as possible of the resin in this way;further, the weight given only refers to what it was possible to remove from the hands without the use of soap and water, and. much was necessarily left unestimated. There is therefore every reason to believe that at least 10 per cent. of the resin is lost from the plant during the process of manufacture of gánjá. It is difficult to see what could be done to prevent the loss without altering the system of manufacture, and in a case of this kind, where an elaborate system of manufacture, sound in principle, and, but for this defect, satisfactory in results, passes unchanged from one generation of cultivators to another, it is not to be expected that such a proposal, from one who has merely watched the process of manufacture for a single season, would find any favour in the eyes of either dealer or consumer, who more than the cultivator are the people to whose verdict it must be submitted. In connection with the experiment which incidentally led to the discovery of this considerable waste, a possible remedy was, however, apparently indicated. The experiment itself will be described in a subsequent chapter; it is sufficient to say here that it was made with a plant reaped at the stage when in the opinion of the cultivator the plant is best fitted for manufacture. At this stage the plant has become as rich in resinous exuda- tion as it will ever become, and no more. The flowering-tops and all the small leaves are still green. If left a few days longer, the small leaves wither like those below, though the resin is still almost as copious on and about the flowers. The leaves in this stage are so much more easily removed than before that one would expect this to be the best stage for gathering the plant. Experience, however, shows the manufacturer that, though the leaves are more easily removed, so also are the flower-spikes instead of agglutinating into the masses forming gánjá heads they fall off. For the purposes of the experiment in question, however, it was found that this stage, which to the cultivator is that of over-ripeness, was the most suitable, and it was seen also that the flower-tops could be then manipulated with far less waste of charas. Should it ever become necessary for Government to take the place of private enterprise in growing hemp, so as to supply its medical stores with the invaluable medicine which the hemp plant yields, it is possible that the process referred to may be found practicable and advisable. CHAPTER VIII.( 18 ) When disposed of, it is brought for weighment to the gánjá office, and after this operation its export is permitted. After weighment it is baled in a pre- scribed manner, packed in gunny, and the packages sealed. The system which makes it necessary that the cultivator should have custody of an exciseable article such as gánjá is open to many objections, the chief one being the possibility of smuggling. It is perfectly true that, when the matter is closely investigated, it becomes clear that no smuggling occurs, but it at the same time is true that there must be a contact succession of people sufficiently thoughtful to perceive that smuggling is possible and sufficiently imaginative to decide, and, without having had the means of making a full enquiry, to give expression to their opinion, that it therefore exists. The resources of Government and the time of its officers have on more than one occasion been unnecessarily expended in disproving assertions of this kind. It would therefore be of some moment were the possibility of storing gánjá by Government instead of by the cultivators demonstrated. That smuggling does not occur is easily ascertained from the care with which Government checks the amount of land under hemp cultivation and the quantity of gánjá made as compared with the export of the manufactured article. And though this system of ascertaining that smuggling does not go on cannot directly prevent the practice, a little thought shows that indirectly it does so most effectually. Even if the regulations now in force did not necessarily ensure the prevention of any contraband transaction, they almost necessarily ensure its detection; the consequences to the cultivator, already pointed out, would be far too serious to induce him to throw away his chief means of livlihood. It has, moreover, to be kept in mind that the people of the gánjá mahals happen to form one of the most peaceful and law-abiding communities in India. The measurements of the various kinds of gánjá, the relative positions of which have been shown in Chapter V, are shown below in two columns, the left-hand columns giving measurements "unbound" indicate the bulk of a maund of the article as it is stored in the houses of the cultivators, and therefore as it is presented for weighment; the right-hand columns show the reductions effected by the pressure exerted by means of a rope and levers when baling it in maund bundles for export. TABLE III.(19) It should be noted here that in 1876-771 Mr. Kerr reports the measurements of flat (no doubt 'large' flat) and round gánjá maund bales to have been respectively 5 feet 7 inches in circumference and 3 feet 7 inches in length, and 6 feet 6 inches in circumference and 1 foot 10 inches in height; he has not used his terms in the same sense as myself because the word height, which in 'round' gánjá indicates the dimension in which the twigs lie, has been used for 'flat' in a direction across the twigs. In the table the word height is used throughout in the same sense( 20 ) the smaller quantity( 21 ) adding the results to the amount of chúrexported as such. This gives, then, for these two seasons:( 22 ) found to be 2½ cubic feet. Had therefore the crops of 1890-91 and 1891-92 been thus treated, their bulk would have been reduced to 12,769 (say 13,000) cubic feet for the former, and to 15,043 (say 15,500) cubic feet for the latter. year. These figures seem then to show that the provision of golah ac- commodation sufficient for the housing of the gánjá crop is perfectly prac- ticable. The possibility of making these cakes depends on the stickiness of the flower-tops that form the gánjá. But, as has been already shown in Chapter VII, at least 10 per cent. of the resin to which this stickiness is due is lost in the process of manufacture. The parts that form the flowering-tops adhere firmly to each other, because from the commencement of the process of manufacture they have been closely in contact, and the resin which causes the adhesion therefore could not be rubbed off. The small leaves and bracts and flowers on the outside are thus closely attached to and protect those next beneath; these in turn are attached to those within, and so on to the centre of the flowering-top. But the outer side of the outmost leaves and bracts and flowers have to a large extent been denuded of resin. This resin, as has been explained, attached itself to the feet or hands of the cultivators during the process of manufacture. It is in consequence of this denudation that it has been found impossible to make the heads adhere by passing them between rollers. There is not enough resin on the outside to make them adhere, and the pressure is exerted for too short a time to squeeze out from within the heads sufficient resin to effect union. Even when placed under heavy weights or com- pressed in such a machine as the one referred to, it is found that, unless the cakes are subjected to pressure for some hours, nothing like permanent adhesion takes place. And even then it is found that if exposed to the air for some time, particularly if the air is moist, the apparently homogenous cake becomes in a short time resolved into the loose flowers-heads, or chúr, of which it is composed. This is an extremely fortunate circumstance, since the cultivators and dealers who were interested spectators of the experimental cake- manufacture, while admitting the great advantages that would accrue from having gánjá exported without twig and in cakes of a definite weight, feared that there would be greater loss in breaking up these cakes for retail sale than there is in handling chúr. When, however, they saw that the disintegration which the cakes spontaneously undergo on exposure simply reconverts them into chúr, this objection vanished. They naturally have raised other objections against this as they would against any other procedure outside their previous experience, and some of them have expressed the belief, while admitting that the chúr in these cakes is in the meantime exactly like chúr not made into cakes, that the cakes will go bad owing to the pressure to which the gánjá has been subjected. To this objection there is but one possible reply. Accordingly a number of these cakes manufactured both from 'flat' and. from 'round' chúr have been made up into parcels and packed in straw and gunny precisely as ordinary gánjá is packed. These parcels have been brought to Calcutta, to be stored in the Government gánjá golahs till March 1894 or later, before being opened and examined. When the proper time comes it will therefore be possible to test whether there be any foundation for the belief expressed by the cultivators and goládárs. Similar quantities of gánjá of both sorts made into the same cakes have been at the same time placed in tin boxes which have been soldered down. These will be kept unopened also till March 1894 or later when they will be examined and compared with the gánjá merely packed in gunny. A number of the cakes thus stored have already been examined by the Member in charge, The advantages of the proposed method of compression are first, reduction in bulk of the crop. Instead of occupying (as it did in 1890-91) 38,360 cubic feet, or (as it would have occupied in that year had it been reduced to chúr) 27,000 cubic feet, it would by this method have only occupied 13,000 cubic feet. Similarly for 1891-92, instead of 37,164 cubic feet, or 32,000 cubic feet, it would only have occupied 15,500 cubic feet, thus rendering it possible for Government to store the whole of the crop in their golahs and making it no longer necessary to permit its storage in the cultivators' houses. Again, when it was being compressed it would be a simple matter to make the weight of the cakes uniform (20 tolas( 23 ) suitable weight); the work of the gánjá office would be thereby greatly diminished and simplified. Finally, the gánjá instead of being in any way damaged would be reduced to a condition in which there is every reason to be- lieve the causes that now operate so as to deteriorate it would be prevented from acting on it. This point, however, will be dealt with in a subsequent chapter. In the event of the method of pressure being initiated, it would be necessary to have one or more large machines in which it would be possible to compress considerable quantities, say a maund or more, of chúr at one time. With the machine used in making these experimental cakes, it was possible to press four cakes, one above the other, simultaneously. With a machine that would exert twice the pressure that it was possible to apply by this one, eight cakes could be simultaneously pressed. The space occupied by the uncompressed chúr relatively to the cakes that result would probably make it inconvenient to press more than eight cakes in one column at one time. The present machine, consisting of but one cylindrical well, admitted of the pressure of only one column of cakes at a time. Machines could, however, be made that would admit of sixteen or more columns being simultaneously pressed. The present machine being cylindrical produced round cakes, against which, as has been said, there is the objection that in their storage space must be wasted. The new machine could be made so that the cakes produced would be square. An extremely convenient size would be 4 inches square, as each cake of 20 tolas made of that size would be as nearly as possible an inch thick, and four cakes, making a seer, would fill a cube of four inches side. Each cubic foot of golah accommodation would thus contain nine seers, and the estimate of weight, and consequently of duty leviable in any case, would thus, after the initial formation of the cakes to a weight of 20 tolas each, become merely a matter of measurement. Finally, as a practical point in connection with the possibility of storing the gánjá in sealed tins,( 24 ) various kinds exported should form the basis of calculation. If the rate of duty to be levied on the flower-tops has been decided, the amount of duty leviable on each kind is arrived at by multiplying the unit-rate of duty fixed by the chúr co-efficient of each. To take a simple instance as an illustration: (25) The altered rates announced as applicable from April 1893, which are as follows: - Per seer. Rs.A.P. 'Large flat' 600 'Flat twig' 'Round' 740 chúr 800 deviate still more from the natural rate. In the illustrative rates quoted above it will be seen what the true rates should be if the rate on chúr is, as it ought to be, made the basis of calculation. If the old method of calculating for 'large flat' be followed, the rates should be: - Per seer. Rs.A.P. 'Large flat,' unit-rate 600 'Flat twig' 765 'Round' 7125 chúr 8142 The question whether we are justified in assuming that chúr of 'flat' and of round' gánjás should be treated as equivalent seemed to require final settlement, and to decide this point the gánjá used in the experimental weighments was, after being converted into chúr, further reduced to powder in mortars and the powder freed from seeds and from the small woody parts, the cores so to speak, of the flower-heads, by sifting through a coarse sieve. The result proved, after repeated trials, that whereas a seer of 'flat' gánjá chúr. yields 76 tolas of powder, a seer of 'round' gánjá chúr yields 76¼ tolas. If stated as as a percentage, 'flat' ganja yields of the material that is actually placed by the gánjá consumer in his chilám 95%, whereas 'round' yields of the same material 95( 26 ) There is a slight excess revenue derived from 'flat twig' gánjá, but the amount thus received is trifling compared with the loss that occurs with 'round' gánjá and with both kinds of chúr. And, as is seen, the mere accident of a bad crop, increasing as it does the amount exported as chúr, upon which the duty levied is relatively inadequate, increases this loss. Thus in 1891-92 Government lost more than twice as much as it did in 1890-91. And the relative loss with the rates to be enforced from April 1st, 1893, must be still greater, as their relation to the natural standard is less satisfactory than the former one was. In connection with this subject may be mentioned the degree of variation that occurs in the case of 'round' gánjá in the number of bundles per maund. Theoretically, each bundle is 20 tolas weight, and 160 of these accordingly are supposed to make a maund. I noticed, however, that at the beginning of the present season the 1892-93 crop baled at 179-226 bundles per maund, though the higher number, it may be remarked, was only seen once. The records of the gánjá office were accordingly examined, and it was found that the average number of bundles per maund in 1890-91 had been 156, while in 1891-92 it had risen to 204. The difference admits of a simple explanation; the crop of 1890-91 was of good quality, and each twig therefore had over the average number of flowering-tops; while that of 1891-92 was one of the poorest crops on record, and the number of flowering-tops ( 27 ) Plants taken from the field at the stage at which they are reaped by the cultivators were treated as the cultivators treat their plants, and exposed to the sun and afterwards to the dew for an afternoon and night. Next day, when in ordinary manufacture the plant would have received the first treading and stacking, it was treated by having all its flowering-tops plucked off and divested of those leaves which it is the object of the cultivators in their method of manu- facture to get rid off. During this plucking also nearly all the seeds fell aside. The separated flower-heads were then packed into moulds or else placed in the screw-press, and pressure applied; in the first case by means of weights, in the second by the screw. Much of the resin was lost through becoming attach- ed to one's fingers. Cakes of various thicknesses from one-eighth of an inch to one inch were made. The cakes were kept under pressure during the time corre- sponding to that when the gánjá made in the ordinary way was being trodden and was in stack, and were exposed to the sun during the time corresponding to that when ordinary gánjá was so exposed; this alternate pressure and drying was kept up for three days. The results were interesting and instructive; thin cakes corre- sponding more or less to the thickness of a head of 'flat' gánjá developed the genuine gánjá smell, and had all the appearance of a somewhat too leafy sample of gánjá; thicker cakes had a darker appearance, were not quite dry at the end of three days, and did not, even when dry, develop the true gánjá colour and odour; the thickest cakes were quite unsatisfactory; they developed a distinctly disagree- able smell, which never entirely left them; before drying they underwent a dis- tinct fermentation, and remained dark coloured even when dry. As it proved to be more tedious to manufacture gánjá in this way with thin cakes than it is to make gánjá in the ordinary way, and as plants taken at this stage cannot be made into thick cakes without being of inferior quality, it was evident that a mechanical method cannot be made to replace the ordinary method at the first stage. Plants taken at the second stage were now used, as well as plants cut along with those taken first and left lying without any treading till the time that they should have been subjected to the second stage was reached. The plants that had been trodden and stacked were not found very satisfactory. It is during this first treading that the wastage in manufacture owing to the loss of resin chiefly takes place, and this loss was found materially to interfere with the adhesiveness of the flower-heads when these were being caked. Plants exposed during the same time but not trodden were found to be much more satisfactory; their leaves were more readily removed when the flower-tips were being plucked; the resin did not come so readily on to the hands; the flower-heads adhered to each other quite as well; and cakes half an inch thick dried with the true gánjá smell and colour. Plants that had been trodden were therefore not farther experimented with, but cakes were next made from plants that had been cut for three days. The results were even better than with those taken on the second day after cutting. This led, therefore, to experiments with plants not cut until they were riper than those reaped by the cultivators usually are. At first when the reaping begins only a few plants are ready for manufacture and the cultivator is easily able to cope with his crop. But after a week or ten days many plants ripen together, and when this happens it is usual to find that now and again a plant or two has been passed over which should have been taken and which when he next reaps( 28 ) into homogeneous cakes of any thickness up to an inch, that were already almost dry when removed from the mould. The extreme pressure of the machine was able to do what the cultivator had failed to attain, viz., to bring into due contact the resinous parts of the flower-heads and to keep them long enough in contact for the various parts thoroughly to adhere. In the press it was impossible for them to fall away from each other as on the chátor. These cakes have quite the gánjá colour and the gánjá smell, and neither physically nor chemically do they differ from the 'flat' gánjá; they have decidedly more 'leaf' than round,' but only a little more than 'flat.' The advantage of making gánjá into such cakes as these would be that the drug from the beginning would be in the condition most suited for storage and export; would occupy the smallest possible space; and would contain the smallest possible amount of wood. Examples of these cakes also have been already submitted for inspection to the Member in charge. CHAPTER XII.(29) powder in the case of 1893 gánjá is green; 1892, brownish-green; 1891, greenish- brown; 1890, brown (snuff-coloured). The difference in quantity obtained does, however, not depend in this case on the formation of a greater amount of the powder,( 30 ) as somewhat to resemble round gánjá, but were tied up in bundles more like those flat twig gánjá. Broken into chúr one sample yielded 61.4%, the other 65.4%; broken further into coarse powder, one yielded 95.6, the other 97.2%: the fine powder obtained amounted in both cases to about 25%( 31 ) The results in these tables indicate a good deal of irregularity, but they point very clearly to several important facts. The loss of moisture when the gánjá was dried by heating was in all except one instance greater than the loss when dessicated in a dry atmosphere at ordinary temperatures. The exceptional sample, it may be remarked, was derived from gánjá that could not be obtained in Calcutta, and had therefore to be obtained from Naogaon, where it had been stored under far less favourable conditions for keeping. As regards the samples of new gánjá, it will be noticed that while they did not in the dry atmosphere lose perceptibly more than did older samples when dried by heat, they lost markedly more weight than the others. This points to some of the volatile constituents of the drug having been driven off along with the moisture, and suggests the possibility of an alteration of the quality of the drug resulting from the heating. The absorption table confirms this suspicion, for it will be noticed that while the samples dried at ordinary temperatures re-absorbed in most cases rather more than the sum of what they had lost, and of what powdered drug not dried at all will take up in a saturated atmosphere, two-thirds of the samples that had been dried in the air-bath did not regain all that they had lost, while the remaining three regained the amount, but no more. Exposure to heat must therefore produce some permanent and deleterious change in gánjá. The effects of humidity are hardly less deleterious. The samples, after estimations of their weight had showed that this ceased to increase and that no more moisture could be absorbed, were left exposed either in the air or under a bell-jar; in every case by the third day in a saturated, by the fifth day in an ordinary, atmosphere they became covered with a crop of mould. The irregularity of the results of these physical estimations show the inadequacy of conclusions based on the examination in any one year of samples from crops of different seasons of growth. To overcome this defect, arrange- ments have been made which will render possible the examination of sam- ples of the same season and from the same field at different ages. From Naogaon were brought four samples of each of round and flat gánjás. These have been duly labelled and are now stored in the Government golahs at Calcutta. They are intended to be issued as follows: ( 32 ) in a flask with 100 cc. absolute alchohol and allowed to digest with frequent agitation for eight days. It was then filtered, the filter and residue being thoroughly washed with absolute alcohol, evaporated on a water-bath, and afterwards dried on a hot plate till it ceased to lose weight. In the subjoined table are given the results of the final weighments, corrected for moisture by the figures in the left-hand column in table VIII: ( 33 ) An examination of the same powder was also made to estimate the per- centage of ash. The results of this examination for the various samples are tabulated below; the details, along with the details of the examinations of the alcoholic extract, are contained in the second part of the present report, which deals with the excise, as opposed to the commercial, aspect of gánjá. TABLE XI.( 34 ) distinct in the case of the samples of 1889-90, whose petroleum-ether extract was quite inert, as in the case of the samples of 1892-93, where the corresponding extract produced all the symptoms characteristic of gánjá. It appeared, therefore, as if the effect was in no way due to these alkaloids, and this conclusion was confirmed by the fact that the ether extract gives distinct traces of the existence of the same or a similar alkaloid and yet the ether extract is quite inert in all the samples. Similarly, the alcoholic extract is quite inert, as is the watery extract. Finally, the residue is equally inert, and as the time at my disposal did not admit of a detailed examination of this, the investigation was not carried to a point beyond the demonstration that it was, from the point of view of the present enquiry, unnecessary. The differences in the ash-analysis are of less moment, and indeed, with the exception of that of the round gánjá of 1890-91, which was not a good sample, the results are very uniform. The excess in the sample mentioned was due to a small extra amount of silica, indicating probably that some of the heads which yielded the sample had come in contact with the soil. The clue to the changes that occur in gánjá appear to me to be indicated by the percentages of resin. With the exception of the flat gánjá sample for 1891-92 which, as has been explained, had been stored under less favourable conditions during the preceding year, and the round gánjá for 1890-91, which was a sample originally of indifferent quality, the amount of resin increases steadily; the different seasons showing to each other proportions of 11; 21; 27; 33. The narcotic principle of ganjá resides entirely in the non-volatile petro- leum-ether extract, and is therefore of the nature of a fixed oil. A fixed oil becomes converted into a resin by being oxidised. The quantity of resin increases as the age of the gándá increases, and this increase can only happen at the expense of the substance that constitutes or at least contains the active principle of the drug. To carry to completion a series of experiments that would establish or disprove this would require a much longer time than it has taken to obtain the data on which the surmise is based; it seems to me, however, that it is in this direction that a solution of the problem as to the precise changes that occur in gánjá is to be sought. In the meantime there is no doubt as to what is probably the best means of preventing the changes that certainly occur. As it is at present stored, gánjá undoubtedly loses the substances that give it the characteristic odour, and that not improbably produce some of the ex- hilarating and ultimately exciting effects when the drug is consumed; these substances escape by passing directly off into the air. And as the results of the investigations recorded above show, it is extremely probable that the sub- stances which produce the soothing and ultimately narcotic and depressing effects which characterise gánjá, are altered by the action of the oxygen of the air and converted into other substances which are inert. The only means of preventing either of these actions is to protect gánjá completely from contact with air. This can probably only be done effectively by sealing up the gánjá in tins. In order to test the effect of tinning up gánjá, the four check-samples of each sort that have been placed in tin cases in order that they may be opened for comparison when the corresponding samples packed in the ordinary way are opened, will, it is hoped, prove effective as experimental tests of this point also. CHAPTER XIV.( 35 ) ventured to express the opinion that this ought not to be considered as waste. It is a matter which affects the cultivator in his relations with the dealer, and, as has been shown, the quantity rejected by the dealer when he purchases the crop and manufactures it is always greater than the quantity rejected by the cultiva- tor when he manufactures the article. Whether there is in this a hardship to the cultivator will depend on whether the dealer purchases the crop outright as it stands in the field, or pays for it by the outturn of the manufactured article. As to this the cultivator may be left to take care of himself. These remarks apply only to 'round' gánjá, with respect to which these various modes of dealing pre- vail. But it is worth noting, as bearing out the opinion that there is no real waste in the matter, that from 'round' gánjá which, from its mode of manufac- ture, is at all stages more carefully inspected than 'flat,' the cultivators them- selves reject twigs more freely than from the other, simply because they are with it better able to see the poor ones as the process of manufacture goes on. There is doubtless a small loss in duty to Government when careful selection is made by the cultivators, as less inert matter is then brought up for weighment. But this loss is trifling compared with what accrues from the duty not being assess- ed on the scale of the natural relationship of the various forms of gánjá export- ed. A similar cause of 'waste' is due to the occasional manufacture of gánjá from immature hemp; this too must, I think, be left entirely to be regulated by the trade. Chúr has also sometimes been looked upon as a waste product. I have endeavoured to show that this view is not only without foundation, but is com- pletely opposed to the true facts of the case. I believe that it has been demon- strated that chúr is the most valuable to the dealer of all the substances exported, both in itself and because of the facilities which taking the gánjá in this form give him for decreasing the amount of duty he has to pay. And I have attempt- ed to demonstrate how serious in this case has been the loss to Government owing to deviation from the natural scale of which I have spoken. The only serious waste( 36 ) Moreover, it is evident that the 'twig' is also inessential, since much, of the 'flat' gánjá especially, is every year deliberately converted into chúr, which is simply flowering-tops divested of twig. The reasons why all gánjá is not every year converted into chúr are: ( 37 ) to examine only a certain number of the cakes then, and to allow the remainder to lie over for examination( 38 ) Part II.( 39 ) while 3-5 above them have a single stamen each, the bracts with which stamens are associated being thinner than the others. The end of the spike may or may not be terminated by a flower; if it is, this flower is always a female, gene- rally, however, deformed. The bracts with male flowers may or may not be separated by intervals; when they are compressed, they are thus converted into structures like the male flowers on the male plant. The whole plant is covered by fine hairs and has a somewhat sticky feel; this is owing to the presence among the hairs of modified hairs known as glands. These glands are club-shaped at the end, and on the younger leaves and bracts become filled with a resinous secretion that in the plant grown in warm and in certain temperate countries possesses narcotic properties. The leaves of the plants are somewhat rough, harsh to the touch; many of the cells of the epidermis contain a crystalline deposit of oxalate of lime. The bark underneath the epidermis contains a number of delicate fibres running more or less parallel to the stem; these are longer, stronger, and more numerous in male than in female plants, and in plants grown in cold than in those grown in hot countries, and in the former case are rated out to produce the hemp fibre. Within the fibrous layer in a thin brittle wood surrounding the pith. This inner portion is spoken of as the 'reed' in fibre extraction. The root calls for no remark; it is spindle-shaped, white in colour, breaking very slightly into large branches, but densely covered with small fibres. The fibre is used for making cordage and canvas; the seeds contain a fixed oil which is used in the arts; they are also used as food, but not largely, and they form one of the commonest birds' seed. The resinous substance, with which is apparently associated an essential oil, is physiologically active, and is employed medicinally and as an article of excise. Another use to which the plant is sometimes put in Eastern Europe and Northern Asia is as a hedge-plant round gardens in order to keep off insect blights. In India it would form but an indifferent protection; it suffers severely itself from 'red spicier,' and is infested by the caterpillars of moths and butterflies and the grabs of beetles. The plant is a native of Southern Siberia, being indigenous in the Kirghiz steppes, and indeed throughout the country to the east of the Caspian Sea and the Volga as far as Lake Baical and the province beyond. In other countries where it is "wild" it is not as a native but as an escape from cultivation that it occurs. It is grown throughout Europe, Northern Asia and North America as a fibre plant, as well as in Southern Africa. In North America it is used also for its narcotic properties medicinally, in South Africa also for these properties as an article of excise; in Central Asia and the temperate Himalaya it is used as in South Africa, both as a fibre-plant and as an intoxicant; in most tropical countries the narcotic quality is that for which it is alone collected. The hemp plant belongs to the nettle family, but to a very distinct section of that family; its nearest and indeed only intimate natural relationships are with the hop-plant (Humulus Lupulus, L.) which is characterised also, it is inter- esting to note, by the possession of narcotic properties. CHAPTER II( 40 ) Persia, the utmost that has been claimed for it by writers of any authority is that it is "almost wild." And as to Turkestan, if the population is now so sparse that in many parts the plant appears far from habitations, it has to be recollected that once the area was densely peopled, and it will be presently shown that there is evidence that here from very early times the plant was cultivated. It is, however, truly wild in the desert country immediately to the north of Turkestan,( 41 ) a fuller account of it than Dioscorides, though not fuller than Pliny. It would seem, then, that the use of the plant as a source of fibre was early known in Central Asia that it passed westward from Scythia along the northern outskirts of the Mediterranean civilizations that it either accompanied the wave of migration that carried the Celtic races into Western Europe, or was trans- mitted to these races by their contact with subsequent arrivals from the Cen- tral Asian area in which the plant is indigenous, and where its economic use was known; that its use did not, on the way westward, spread at once into the penin- sulas of Italy and Greece, but that the Greeks as well as the Latins learned it at quite a late period from the Gauls, and. in turn transmitted it to Syria and Palestine. The earlier Arab writers like Avicenna (A.D. 980) and Rázi, in whose writings the first Arab notices of hemp occur, have copied from Galen and Dioscorides both the uses and the name of the plant, and it is interesting to note that the Arab names for the plant as a fibre-yielding species, for the fibre it yields, and for the fabrics produced from the fibre, are all modifications of the Greek name, and indicate beyond the possibility of dispute that the channel by which the plant reached Arabia was from Greece, probably through Syria. The earliest notice of the plant in India is its mention in the Atharva Veda, where the context shows that the narcotic property was already known.1 The word used, however, indicates that the plant had received the name in con- nection with its economic use, and the perpetuation of that name in connection with the other property indicates fairly clearly that its economic use was that for which the plant was first brought eastward. The later appearance of a whole group of names that have reference to the narcotic quality would seem to indicate that this was becoming the more familiar use of the two. The absence of any reference to the plant in the earlier Vedas, and the circumstances mentioned above, seem to indicate that the eastern migration of hemp was very nearly parallel in its course to the western migration. The earlier invading tribes did not know of it; absence from the older Vedas of reference to it is parallel with the absence of reference from the older Greek and Latin authors. It is true that attempts have been made to identify the 'Nepenthe' of the Odyssey, which Helen gave to Telemachus, with 'hemp.' But as in the case of shesh in Hebrew, the suggestion will not bear examination. The hemp-plant was not known in Greece, even by its own name, till long after the Odyssey was known, and the substance mentioned in the Odyssey as a narcotic came from Egypt, where also, as we have seen, hemp was unknown. The most interesting feature in its history as indicated by the Indian names is the recognition of the narcotic powers of the drug, of which in the western notices except the reference by Herodotus there seems to be no indication. And the conclusion to which we seem impelled is that the plant was carried eastward to India by some wave of migration subsequent to the earliest, just as it was carried westward to Europe by some of the later waves of migration; that just as on its way westward it was taken by tribes who avoided coming into contact with the civilisations on the Mediterranean, it was carried eastward by tribes who avoided coming into contact with the civilisations of Mesopotamia. Finally, we must conclude that, having reached India as a fibre-yielding species, the plant developed the narcotic property for which it is now chiefly celebrated there. The connection between the narcotic property and the vital functions of the plant has already been shown, and reasons have been advanced for the supposition that the production of the narcotic substance is a case of response to the conditions of its environment. If this be true, the subsequent history of the plant ought to accord with the assumption. Having developed the narcotic property in India, the plant and its use have spread northwards into the Himalayan valleys, into Tibet and into China, where its original use was, as in Europe, as a fibre-plant westward into Persia, where its name bhang has been transformed into beng; and still further westward( 42 ) that just as the Greek word cannabis has been thoroughly incorporated into Arabic to indicate all the relationships of the plant as the source of a textile substance, so the plant itself, its use as an intoxicant, the state of intoxication it induces, and the subject of the intoxication, are indicated by modifications of the Perso-Arabic benj. Later than its western progress into Persia, Arabia, and Egypt, has been its progress into Malaya, where the name that it bears is gingi, a modification of the other common Indian name gánjá, which has not travelled westward. But there seem to be indications that long before it travelled westwards into Persia, it had travelled north-westward along the line on which it had reached India, and it has even been supposed that the narcotic property may have been developed in the plant in some extra-Indian, and therefore extra- tropical region. One of the circumstances that have been brought forward in proof of this supposition is that one of the common epithets of hemp as a narcotic is Káshmiri, which might indicate that the narcotic plant came from the Himalayas, and perhaps from beyond them. But so far from invalidating, this only confirms the Indian origin of the narcotic. Originally developed in the plains, the narcotic substance, as we have seen, remains there diffused throughout the tissues of the plant unless the male plant can be eradicated; this process of eradication, we have also seen, is one of late origin, and even now of by no means general application. In the hills, however, the same plant, not requiring, under the more temperate climatic conditions that there prevail, to use up the resinous substance it has pro- duced, exudes it, and it may well be that when the discovery was made that in this form the narcotic property was more highly developed than in the more familiar state known as bhang, this epithet was applied to the plant. Another circumstance that seems to indicate that its use had spread north- wards is the description by Pliny1 of a plant named Gelotophyllis, or the 'laughing-leaf,' found in Bactria on the banks of the Borysthenes. The description of its effects tally somewhat with those of hemp, but not com- pletely; and if it was hemp, certainly Pliny did not think so, since in another place he gives a full description of its cultivation and use. Finally, there is the notice of Herodotus which says that besides using its fibre the Scythians employed its seeds to medicate their vapour baths. It has been suggested that the seeds here mentioned really mean the resin-covered bracts,2 but it has been too much the fashion to suppose that Herodotus was mistaken. I prefer to understand when Herodotus says 'seeds' that he means 'seeds,' and if he does, there is nothing unusual in the statement; the belief that there was a virtue in the seeds has been by no means confined to Herodotus; it is expressed by Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny among the ancients, has passed from them to the Arab writers, and still seems to exist in Malaya; was prevalent in the middle ages in Europe, and has lingered on to within the first half of the present century in England. It is noteworthy, too, that the interpreta- tion of the passage has been disputed; some contending that the effects produced are those of stupefaction, others believing that what is indicated is excitement. It seems to me that a state of excitement is intended to be expressed, and this suggests at once the possibility of some such effect having been produced by the volatilisation of the fumes which are described by Bohlig and Personne as resulting from the inhalation of the essential oil obtainable, even in Europe, from the distillation of fresh hemp. There is, however, another and still stronger proof to my mind that the true narcotic effect of gánjá or charas is not referred to either by Herodotus or by Pliny. Avicenna, himself a native of Bokhara, more than 1,400 years after He- rodotus, and more than 900 years after Pliny, knew nothing whatever of the narcotic properties of Cannabis sativa, and was content to follow the account given of its properties by the later Greeks. Why this evidence should have been hitherto overlooked it is difficut to say; it seems, however, to prove clearly that though the hemp-plant passed as a fibre-plant from Central Asia to India, it passed back again as a narcotic-yielding plant from India to Central Asia, and probably not directly, but through the intermediation 1 Plinius, Historia, ed. Harduin, vol. 7, p. 615. 2 Compare H. C. Kerr, Report, p. 9, where the phrase 'unimpregnated ovaries' appears to mean the same thing; the 'ovaries,' impregnated or not, are of course always devoid of resin.
( 43 ) of Persia, and (as in the case of Syria, Arabia, and Egypt) long after it had reached Persia. Tradition gives the reign of Khusru I. (A.D. 550) as the date of its introduc- tion into Persia, but it does appear to have been in general use in that country till about A.D. 950; further west there is no clear mention of its use till Ibu Beithar (A.D. 1200), the Ikhtiárát (A.D. 1368), and the works of Taki-ed- din Ahmad. Makrizi, a little earlier than the last, indicate that its powers were known, and. its use general in Syria and Egypt. It would seem to have been carried first by sea to the Persian Gulf ports of Ormuz and Bahrein, and thence to have spread northwards through Khorasan to Turkestan on the one hand, and through Syria to Egypt on the other. It is a curious and interesting fact that numerous as are the allusions to the plant and its use by Arabic writers, the plant is to this day unknown in Central Arabia, either in a wild or a cultivated state, and its use is not indulged in by the inhabitants of Hayal or Riad.1 This is precisely what might be expected; if the plant was unable to find its way south- ward into the Semitic civilisations of Mesopotamia, Syria, and Egypt, it could hardly find its way beyond them into the uncivilized Semitic communities of Arabia. The most interesting of the Sanskrit names is neither bhanga, which has given rise to the common Indian bhang, the Persian beng, and the Arabic benj; nor gánjá, which has given rise to the common Indian gánjá and the Malay gingi, but s'ana. This, though it has given rise to no common modern Indian term, is clearly the name under which the people who first brought it to India knew it. This is the Sanskrit form of the name borne by the plant in all Aryan tongues the Greek kávvaßis, Latin cannabis, and Celtic canaib, with of course the French chanvre; the Russian konopl and Polish konopj; the Swedish and Danish hampa and hamp, the German hanf and Icelandic hanfr, Dutch hennup and English hemp, being all of them the same word. How in the presence of etymological evidence such as this and in direct opposition to every historical and phytogeographical fact the idea that the word cannabis was borrowed from the Arabs should continue to find a place in works of authority it is difficult to say. It does still flourish, and no doubt will continue to do so, like many others, quite as unfounded, in connection with the same plant. And. as such ideas die hard, it will be objected to the historical account here given that if the plant was not known to the Greeks, no explana- tion is given of how they happened to have a word Kávvaßis. The same objection might with more justice be raised against the Arabic kinnab itself, and indeed the objection has been already met by the ingenious suggestion that kinnab is but a bouleversement of the word bhang.2 This would be all very well if it were not for the fact that the Arabs must have had the word kinnab before they had the word benj. For if one thing is more certain than another, it is that the Arabs got the word benj through the Persian beng within historical times, and that it first came into general use in the 13th and 14th centuries. Now, if kinnab was not older than benj, how could the Greeks before the time of Herodotus get it from Arabs? It will not be contended that the Arabs reversed the words 'in anticipation,' and even the most de- termined upholder of the Arab origin of hemp will hardly insist that the compiler of the Atharva Veda derived the word bhanga by bouleversement from kinnab ! There is no such difficulty in connection with the Greek origin of the word; even if we suppose that there was neither plant nor word in Greece originally, it might be supposed, since we are forced to believe that the plant travelled from Gaul to Italy and Greece, that the Celtic canaib became the Latin cannabis, which the Greeks simply transliterated. This, however, would scarcely explain the use of the word by Herodotus. The explanation, however, is simple enough. The Greeks, and the Latins too, did bring with them from their original Aryan head-quarters the word cannabis,( 44 ) plant did come to Italy and Greece, the one they had always known became to them cannabis sylvestris, kávvaß( 45 ) a stimulating effect. And there is no doubt that the belief in the possession of active properties by the seeds has been very widespread. Thus Dioscorides remarks that if too largely used as food they destroy virility; Pliny makes the same statement, but says also that it was a custom to roast the seeds and send them round after a banquet; they were supposed to promote mirth, and increase the desire to drink; if taken in too great quantities, however, bad symptoms supervened; the symptoms, it may be remarked, might have been due to the wine. Galen repeats Pliny's account without augmentation. The early Arab physicians Avicenna and Rázi follow the Greek writers, and give only the properties mentioned by Galen. The belief that there is a virtue in the seeds still prevailed among the people of the East when European authors first became acquainted with the Indies, and Garcia d'Orta and Rumphius both mention the practice of using them, but for the opposite purpose of increasing the sexual appetite, which the early writers alleged to be destroyed by their use. But Rumphius, a very careful observer, found that in Malaya at all events the seeds had no effect, the one way or the other. If the preparations of the Turks and Persians had some effect, he quite justifiably concluded that it must be owing to substances which these peoples added to their hemp-seeds.1 But in Europe in the middle ages this same belief had arisen, for Matthiolus says that, so far from having the effect of causing sterility, hemp-seeds render fowls fed upon them more prolific, and. cause them to lay eggs in whiter, though they are not naturally given to laying at that season.2 The most recent statement of any action being produced by the use of hemp-seeds is that by Burnett,3 to the effect that bullfinches and gold-finches fed too long on them have their plumage changed from red and yellow to black. Pereira, who quotes the statement, doubts it,4 but apparently no experiment has been made which positively disproves it. However, there is no doubt that O'Shaughnessy is quite justified in con- cluding, as Rumphius had already, that the seed is " devoid of all narcotic properties."5 In the gánjá mahal of Bengal the seeds are eaten without any idea of their being unwholesome and without any ill-effect. The Persian epithet for the seeds, Shahdanay, or 'kingly grain,' would appear not to refer to any power supposed to reside in them, but to be merely a complimentary term conferred on them, because they produce such a power- ful plant. Complimentary Sanskrit terms were Indrásana, Sakrásana (words of great interest as embodying also the original Aryan name S'ana), 'food of Indra,' terms equivalent to the Greek 'nectar,' and 'ambrosia.' Similarly complimentary, as has been said, may be the terms haschisch and subji, which also (subz) was used in Persia, though the fact that haschisch began life as a low cant phrase would rather indicate its original use as an euphemism. Dioscorides mentions the juice of the plant as being useful in earache, which suggests a knowledge of its narcotic power, but as Pliny enlarges on this property, and says that it is useful in expelling worms or other animals that may have entered the ears, we must conclude that if its use in Greece was as an anodyne, its powers in that direction were not relied on in Italy. It is of interest to note that the Chinese have long used an extract of the plant as an anæsthetic in some surgical operations, and that recently in England it has been found useful in this way, when rubbed on the gums before the extraction of teeth. In the Susruta the plant with a masculine name, and therefore indicating the female plant, is described as useful medicinally, and this idea has prevailed in India to the present day. The powers ascribed to it are, however, apparently more or less fanciful, and it seems that when the plant is yet too young to be narcotic, beyond some diuretic properties, it possesses no especial virtue. In the middle ages in Europe the plant in the same way had medicinal powers, chologogue, styptic, and others, which are not borne out by modern experience, ascribed to it. 1 Rumphius thought that the inadequacy of the Malayan preparations might be at least in part explained quod Mogollenses, Pers( 46 ) One of the names applied to the plant in India, matcunári, or enemy of bugs,' would seem to indicate that it has been supposed to act as an insecticide, or at least an insectifuge. This is in a way parallel to the northern usage of planting a row of hemp plants as a protection round gardens. The root has had medicinal virtues ascribed to it in Europe, and also in the east; there can be no doubt that they are without foundation. We find, then, that the main interest of the plant lies in its narcotic principle, and that the early references to this are confined entirely to eastern literature. Besides what may be called its every-day use, it has been variously employed( 47 ) depraved pleasures. The place in which this use reached its highest develop- ment, and where it is still most rampant, is, as has been said, Egypt, though in India and Malaya this use of the drug has always been popular. That the drug has no effect in this way, or has at best but the indirect effect due to the excitement of the earlier stage of intoxication, has been long known. It is ad- mitted in the Arab and Persian writings themselves that it is only in this in- direct way that it acts, and there has been almost from the beginning a tacit admission by the makers and users of the drug that this is the case; for such purposes a simple preparation of hemp is never used, but one fortified by cantharides, nux vomica, and other dangerous substances. The criminal use of hemp is the last point to be touched upon. This is not of very great interest except for the fact that occasionally those who know little or nothing of its effects have attributed to hemp qualities that it does not possess. As an accessory to crime its use has no doubt been only too frequent; the history of the assassins being a case in point. But the question whether this use is criminal or not will depend on the standpoint of the individual; the Saracen doubtless took quite a different view of the movement that produced the assassin from the Crusader, whose right to be in Syria at all was by no means so clear to the Saracen as to himself. In any case, this aspect of the question is not a criminal aspect in the ordinary sense of the term. In this ordinary sense it has not infrequently been asserted that a victim has been drugged by hemp and murdered or perhaps only robbed. So far as the effects of hemp are known, this is highly improbable; that an overdose of hemp will induce in any one a condition, if not of insensibility, at least of inability to resist, such as would admit of this being done, is no doubt true; that it would be possible for the criminal to get his victim to take a dose sufficiently large for this effect to be produced, is so unlikely that the possibility may be put on one side. What the assertion does mean in such a case probably is that hemp being, in one form or another, a substance of which many people partake, is a very suitable vehicle for the administration of more rapidly potent narcotic substances, such as dhatura, which will effect the criminal's purpose. Hemp is a substance that many wayfarers will be got to take without suspicion, and its own effects are sufficiently strong to disguise at the outset those of the more powerful substance the hemp is used to conceal. The sweetmeats of hemp( 48 ) disrepute extends in many parts of India not only to the consumer of hemp- preparations, but to the grower of hemp as a fibre-plant.1 At first sight this might seem to be an instance of the transfer of a feeling developed by an accidental attribute of the occupation to the occupation itself, and ultimately to its manifestation towards the occupation even when the attribute is absent. The matter, however, is not so simple as this, for it seems that in most districts where it exists it is to the grower of hemp for fibre that the opprobrium chiefly attaches. And as in many parts of India where hemp is not grown, the same contempt is expressed for the grower of sún (Crotalaria juncea, L.), it is almost certain that the explanation which most naturally suggests itself is not the true explanation. It has to be remembered, too, that the growing of hemp for its fibre is, even in India, the original motive for its culture; all this considered, therefore, it seems more probable that the contempt felt for the narcotic, and therefore for its use, is really a remnant of, or a reflection from, an original contempt felt for the grower of the crop as a fibre-plant. The historical notices of the ultimate effects of the use of hemp are also very numerous, and also all eastern, though they are all comparatively modern. None of the Sanskrit names appear to indicate them; one or two indicate the worst symptoms of an overdose, none of them the results of continued use, and it is worth remarking also that the Sanskrit terms which signify disrepute in connection with the use of hemp are the latest of origin. The first to speak of the ill-effects of its use would seem to have been Taki- ed-din Ahmad, and he confines himself to describing the moral deterioration that ensues from the practice; indeed, he expressly says that 'nobility of external form alone remains' to those who become habituated to its use.2 In the Ikhtiárát, Haji Zein says little of the ultimate effects, though he speaks of its being possibly poisonous, and describes the treatment to be adopted in a case of the sort. The Makhzan-el-Adwiya would seem to be among the first of the Eastern works to describe its ultimate effects; they are said to be indigestion, wasting of the body, melancholy, impotence, and dropsy. Rumphius clearly points out why the effect of over-indulgence in the drug causes sterility. It is from no special action of its own, but is the natural result of indulgence in the practices which the drug, or rather the substances for which it is made a vehicle, are taken to promote. The fact that Rumphius based his opposition to the views of Garcia and Acosta, that the plant was not aphrodisiac, on the doctrine of Dioscorides, which are that the effect of its seed was in the contrary direction,3 has not prevented him from very clearly demonstrating the soundness of the position he has taken up. The present general belief that indulgence in the drug leads to per- manent melancholia, dementia, and even mania, does not seem to be traceable in the earlier writers, The infatuation or fury of which they speak means always the immediate, not an ultimate, effect of using hemp. CHAPTER IV.( 49 ) who, experimenting with the European plant, were able to throw no light on the nature or amount of the active principle of the plant. Tscheppe's account, which is the one best known, does not so much as mention any resinous extract. For the next eighteen years one finds no reference of any importance either to the plant or the drug. But in 1839, when O'SHAUGHNESSY1 first issued his classical account of the plant and its effects, which two years later was incor- porated in the official Bengal Dispensatory, the subject was taken up and fairly thoroughly worked out by a number of investigators. O'Shaughnessy himself made an estimate of the amount of extract that fresh gánjá yields to alcohol, of which he says that he obtained 20 per cent. It has been for some reason the experience of subsequent investigators that this estimate of O'Shaughnessy's is too high. As has been shown in a former chapter, this is not the case; doubtless the lower results obtained by other chemists have been owing to their treating the substance differently; one of the chief defects in those accounts of the plant in which the amount of extract obtained has been used as a means of estimating the strength of the sample examined, is the omission of any details of the treatment to which the sample was subjected prior to its being treated with alcohol. O'Shaughnessy's account was rapidly followed by the accounts of SCHLE- SINGER2 and BOHLIG,3 who examined the leaves of European hemp. The most noteworthy results of their analyses were the detection of 5 per cent. of green resinous extractive by Schlesinger, and the observation by Bohlig that an oil, of which he was able to obtain from the fresh plant about 1/3 per cent., had physio- logical properties. In 1844 KANE4 re-examined the plant very exhaustively without adding anything material to our knowledge. In 1846 the resin of hemp was isolated by Messrs. T. and H. SMITH, a firm of chemists in Edinburgh, in the following manner: Powdered gánjá was treated repeatedly under pressure with warm water till the washing ceased to be coloured. It was then left for two or three days to digest at moderate temperature in a solution of bicarbonate of soda, in the proportion of one part of the salt to two parts of the dried plant. Brown colouring matter, chlorophyll and a peculiar oil were thus for the most part removed. The residue was now carefully dried and digested in rectified spirit, the resulting tincture being; treated with lime-water in the proportion of an ounce of fresh quick-lime to each pound of gánjá. This removed all fatty matter and the remaining green colour- ing matter. After filtering, the lime in solution was precipitated by means of sulphuric acid and removed; the solution being still slightly coloured was rendered clear by animal charcoal. After filtration the greater part of the alcohol was distilled off; the remaining solution was then mixed with twice its measure of water, and the rest of the alcohol allowed to evaporate, the resin meanwhile sinking to the bottom of the vessel. The fluid portion being run off, the resin was treated with cold water and then dried in thin layers. This resin was termed by the Messrs. Smith cannabin. This resin is a brown amor- phous solid, burning with a bright flame and leaving no ash. It has a powerful intoxicant effect. From this time till 1857 nothing material was added to the chemical history of the plant though in 1851 A. CHRISTISON6 and in 1856 G. MARTIUS7 wrote important papers on the general history and use of the hemp plant, the latter separating the resin from the ordinary alcoholic extract. In 1857 PERSONNE8 repeated the distillation performed by Bohlig seventeen years before, and found that when water is repeatedly distilled from fresh hemp in large quantities, new hemp being used for each distillation, ammonia passes over and with it a volatile oil lighter than water. This oil is amber-coloured, has the hemp-smell, some- times deposits in part as a crystalline substance, and may be separated with ease into two bodies cannabene, liquid and colourless, with the chemical formula C18 H20, the other a solid, separating in platy crystals from alcohol, hydride of 1 On the preparations of the Indian Hemp or Gánjá, their effects on the animal system; Calcutta (1839). 2 Pharmaceut. Centralblatt. (1840), p. 490. 3 Pharmaceut. Centralblatt. (1840), p. 519. 4 Philosoph. Magazine, February 1814. 5 Pharmaceut. Journal, vi (1847), p. 171. 6 Edinburgh Monthly Journal of Medical Science, July 1851, On the nature, history, action and uses of Indian Hemp. 7 Studien ueber den Hanf, Leipzig, 1856. 8 Journal de Pharmacie, vol. 39 (1837), 48 II
( 50 ) cannabene, with the chemical formula, C18 H22. Personne found, as Bohlig had done, that the substance named cannabene was physiologically active. He went farther, however, and decided that it was the only active substance in the plant; that Smith's cannabin, which was admittedly active, was a mixed substance which, if purified, became inert, But as Personne's purification really involved its des- truction by alkalis and intense heat (300° C. being the degree that he admits using), this statement is of no importance. Moreover, the Smiths had already exposed their resin to a heat of 82° C. for eight hours and still found its effect unimpaired, so that it was already demonstrated that the active constituent of their resin was non-volatile. Supposing, therefore, that the observation of Bohlig and Personne is correct-and there is no reason whatever to doubt its accuracy-the volatile oil and the resin are both active; that is, the 'active prin- ciple' of gánjá is not a simple substance, but consists of at least two distinct things. It will be observed, therefore, that the cannabene of Personne is not the same thing as the cannabin of Smith and Martius. No contribution to the chemistry of hemp of any note followed that of Personne till in 1871 BOLAS and FRANCIS1 undertook an examination of the resin as isolated by Smith and Martins. These authors found that by treating cannabin with nitric acid a derivative substance, oxycannabin, was produced. This is, they say, obtainable in large prisms from a solution in methylic alcohol. It melts at 176°C. and then evaporates without decomposition; it is neutral. In the following year, on the occasion of an enquiry of the nature and scope of the present one instituted by the Government of Bengal, an exhaustive series of estimations was made by the Chemical Examiner, DR. MACNAMARA,2 of the relative strength of gánjá from various parts of India. As the results of these examinations are difficult to obtain and have been overlooked by European authors, it seems advisable to give them in full:- TABLE XII.-Statement of analysis of samples of gánjá by Dr. Macnamara, 1892. The samples are estimated according to their comparatire richness in resinous extract yielded to alcohol. Province. District. Sample. Percentage of resinous extracts. REMARKS. BENGAL Rajshahi Chúr 3.9 Round 5.0 Flat 5.8 Orissa Gurjhat 3.8 Patti 2.3 NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES Muzaffarpur 2.0 Jalun A 1.8 B 3.4 C 3.8 D 2.1 E 1 5.8 2 4.9 3 6.2 4 5.6 5 5.6 6 1.4 Bareilly 3.7 Each of these three in ver small quantity; therefore al examined together. Badun Moradabad Kumaon 3.9 Terai 1.4 BOMBAY Ahmednagar 10.5 Khandesh 5.3 Solapur 6.7 MADRAS Vizagapatam 1 5.2 Two other samples, Nos. 5 and 6, were sent in too small quantity for examination. 2 5.1 3 4.5 4 3.9 7 4.5 Kistna G 8.8 Of samples A to H, only one (G) was sufficiently large to be examined. Cherikal Taluq 7.6 Only one of three samples taken. Malabar Urguad Taluq Poresh 7.3 A sample of Kuruvin gánjá sent with these was spoiled. Chada 12.0 Coimbatore 2.9 Tanjore 1.5 1 Chemical News, vol. 24 (1871), 77. 2Letters Nos. 71 and 78 from Chemical Examiner to Board of Revenue, dated 1st March 1872 and 26th April 1872.
( 51 ) Province. District. Sample. Percentage of resinous extracts. REMARKS. MADRAS Salem Adai Gánjá, Tripatur 3.6 Gánjá with seeds Tripatur 3.5 Gánja without seeds, Tri- patur. 1.8 Arcot North 2.3 South 8.7 Bazars 5.2 Godavery A. 2.5 B(Coconada) 2.8 Nellore 3.4 Rajamandry 3.8 Chingleput 5.5 South Kanara 6.0 Kurnool A. (three samples) 7.7 All taken together, quantities being small. B. (Nandial) 8.0 Madura A. 14.3 Sample B too small for examination. C. 10.3 D. 11.9 E. 6.1 F. 4.1 G. 4.5 Atee, etc. 5.5 Several small samples taken together. Bellary Harpembali 10.1 Penkunda 6.7 Bellary 9.9 Dharmsala 6.5 Madaksira 7.9 The most striking features in this table are the extreme variability of the quantity of resinous extract obtainable from different samples and the low percentage of even the richest as compared with that given by O'Shaughnessy. Dr. Macnamara's report being only a statement of results, it is impossible to ascer- tain whether or not the gánjá was reduced to powder before digestion in alcohol, or how long the sample was digested( 52 ) the surmise is correct that there is no nicotine. It turns out, however, that after all there is an alkaloid, if not more than one, present, but that it is of no physiological importance. SIEBOLD and BRADBURY1 at the British Pharmaceutical Congress of 1881 read an elaborate paper, in which they proved that while in mixtures of 7 ounces of hemp to 1 ounce of tobacco, and even in a mixture of half a drachm of tobacco to 8 ounces of hemp, it was perfectly possible to detect nicotine by its characters and reaction, they could find no trace of nicotine when they examined as much as 10lbs. of pure Indian hemp, though they did find a thick oily yellowish liquid, which dried up into a varnish, with a strong mouse-like odour, which developed more powerfully on heat being applied. This smell is, accord- ing to these authors, quite different from that of nicotine, and is more like that of coniine, though less nauseous. The substance is soluble in alcohol and in ether, is only slightly so in water, is alkaline in reaction and neutralises acids; it can be reprecipitated by caustic alkali from acid solutions. To this substance the name Cannabinine is given by them. In the same year VALENTA2 redistilled the essential oil of hemp, already examined by Bohlig and Personne, by distilling fresh leaves with water, and agitating the milky distillate with ether. The oil, dried over calcium chloride and distilled repeatedly from sodium, is colourless and mobile, its boiling point is 256°-258;° specific gravity at 0° = 0.9292. Analysis gives the formula C15H24; its vapour density is not determinable by ordinary methods, as at 300°C. it decomposes. It mixes in all proportions with alcohol, ether and chloroform. Bromine acts on it, a crystalline compound, not yet investigated, being the result. Nothing like Personne's solid hydrocarbon could be found, and the formula obtained differs from that given by Personne. This oil resinifies on exposure; its vapour density has since been ascertained to be 7.1.3 About this year MERCK, a Darmstadt chemist, issued a substance called cannabinum tannicum, which is the resin treated with tannic acid. This has been said by some authors to be active,4 by others to be inert.5 Though known in Germany in 1882 and 1883, it was not apparently known to HAY, who about this time instituted an examination into the composition of gánjá, for the absence of any reference to his preparation induced the manufacturer of this cannabinum tannicum to write a letter6 complaining of the absence of any reference to it in Hay's paper. Unlike the Smiths, who published an account of their process, Merck says nothing of the method of preparing his drug, regarding the composition of which there is more reason for suspension of judg- ment than the mere diverstity of experience among therapeutists, since Merck himself speaks of it as a glucoside. We know that there is no glucoside in hemp, and this would seem to have been explained to Merck subsequently, for the same preparation is spoken of as cannabinon,7 a balsamo-resinous substance, in 1886. The paper by Hay,8 referred to in Merck's letter, describes the isolation of an alkaloid from hemp. A watery infusion of Cannabis indica was treated with a solution of sub-acetate of lead and filtered. The filtrate was heated with ammonia and the precipitate removed by filtration. The filtrate acidulated with sulphuric acid was treated with phospho-wolframic acid to precipitate the alkaloids. The abundant precipitate was retained on a filter and washed with dilute sulphuric acid, then mixed with barium hydrate and water, thus precipitating the wolframic acid and liberating the alkaloids. Excess of baryta was now removed from the filtrate by a stream of carbonic acid gas. The filtrate was again filtered, evaporated almost to dryness by a gentle heat, acidulated with sulphuric acid and treated with absolute alcohol. The sulphate of the alkaloids was partly soluble in the alcohol, partly not. The soluble portion was examined; the sulphate was converted into a chloride by treatment with barium hydrate, then with carbonic acid to remove excess of baryta, finally with hydrochloric acid to neutralisation. The chloride was evaporated and treated with absolute alcohol in which it was 1 Year-Book of Pharmacy (1881), p. 453. 2 Journ. of the Chemical Society (1881), p. 248. 3 Watt's Dictionary of Chemistry, ed. Morley and Muir, (1888), art. Cannabis indica. 4 Fronmueller and Hiller quoted by H. C. Wood Therapeutics, p. 202. 5 H. C. Wood. Therapeutics (ed vii), (1888), p. 202. 6 Pharmaceutical Journal, ser.iii, vol 13, p. 1052. 7 Chemisches Centralblatt for 1886, quoted by Brühl, Proceedings As, Soc. Bengal (1887), p. 227. 8 Pharmaceutical Journal, ser. iii, vol. 13, p. 998.
( 53 ) partly soluble. From the solution, to which excess of carbonate of soda was added, by agitation with ether an alkaloid was obtained in the form of colour- less needlelike crystals. This alkaloid is easily soluble in water, is soluble in alcohol, more slowly soluble in ether and chloroform. Its physiological action on frogs resembled that of strychnia, with which, however, it was found not to be chemically identical. The quantity obtained was so small that elementary analysis of it was impossible. This important paper shows therefore that, though Preobraschensky was in error in supposing he had found nicotine, he had probably obtained some trace of another alkaloid. As the paper indicates, it would seem to be but one of several alkaloids present. Like them it is, however, present in quantities much too small to be of importance physiologically. The name proposed is tctano-cannabin. In the following year a notice appeared1 of the treatment by BOMBELIN of cannabinum tannicum with zinc oxide, giving pure cannabinum, a greenish-brown powder not agglutinating on being exposed to the air, and volatilising without residue. This is said to be somewhat more powerful than cannabinum tannicum. In December 1884 WARDEN and WADDELL2 operated on a large quantity of hemp by means of destructive distillation, so as to reproduce the conditions that must occur when gánjá is being smoked. They obtained by this method an amber-coloured oil which contained phenol, ammonia and other products of this process. Exposure to air or the action of alkalies turned its colour to dark reddish brown. The oil had a mild tobacco-like odour with a warm aromatic taste. The nicotine-like principle in the oil appeared to be an alkaloid. It formed salts which, when treated with alkalies, had a nicotine-like odour. Physiologically, however, it was inert, as was the oil itself. This oil is perhaps not the same as the oil obtained by Bohlig, Personne, and Valenta, but a product of that oil owing to the high temperature at which it was necessary to distill the hemp and of a fixed oil of which the extract of hemp is largely composed. In 1886 KENNEDY3 read before the American Pharmaceutical Association a paper which confirmed by another method the results of Siebold and Bradbury, and demonstrated besides that an alkaloid, not nicotine, is present. In 1887 JAHNS4 separated a base which he identified with choline both from hemp and from commercial cannabinum tannicum. His results agree with those of previous investigations, except that the substance does not behave towards ether or as to crystallization like the substance described by Hay. In the same year ROUX5 stated once more that the active principle of hemp lay entirely in the resin, making the further remark that the alcoholic extract excites while the ethercal is inert. And in the same month appeared a reference6 which seems to indicate the substance prepared by Merck. This asserts that haschisch is the alcoholic extract of hemp. As we have seen, the name "haschisch" is sometimes so applied. When treated with caustic alkalies all acid ingredients are rendered soluble and removeable; the residu- um, haschisch purum, is a mixture of a soft resin, cannabinon, and an alkaloid, tetanin. This combination forms a brown soft resinoid material, insoluble in water, but making golden yellow solutions in alcohol, ether, chloroform. This substance is said to be stimulant, and in large doses excitant, ultimately causing sleep. If from this 'pure haschisch' the tetanin be removed by tannic acid, the residual cannabinon does not stimulate but is only narcotic. This cannabinon is a soft brown resin with the physical properties of haschisch purum. With reference to this article it may be as well to state here that this cannabinon has more than the physical properties of haschisch purum; it is the same thing. When haschisch purum obtained from alcoholic extract by treat- ment with caustic soda is treated by digestion for hours and with heat with tannic acid, the substance is the same after as before this is done, and not only is there no tetanin taken out, there is none to take out. The substance does not exist( 54 ) alkalies does more than remove acid substances, of which, by the way, there are - but faint traces. It removes, in a state of fine division which makes the liquour opaque and pale green, a substance that, on being neutralised and eva- porated down, is obtainable as a dark green resinous material which is physio- logically active like the brown cannabinon. Neither of them were found excitant when administered to cats, though both were powerfully narcotic. Both are soluble in alcohol, ether and chloroform and, it may be added, in methylic alcohol and in petroleum ether A paper by BRUHL1 also published in 1887, both because of its value and because of its having been ignored by European chemists, requires to be noticed. Like Hay's paper it is unfortunately only a preliminary and a qualitative one, also like Hay's it has unfortunately not yet been supplemented by its author. The gánjá examined was divided into three portions: one was macerated about seven hours with dilute acetic acid (2 per cent. glacial acid); the other two were digested twice with very dilute sulphuric acid at 40°( 55 ) Gánjá therefore when distilled with steam yields an essential oil which is resinified on exposure. Its vapour density is 7.1, specific gravity at 0° is 93; its polarises light [a]D= ( 56 ) (b) Agitated with ether yielded an extract, ether extract =.138 per cent., with slightly acid reaction, no bitter or acrid taste, and yielding no alka- loids. B. Filtrate n. I.( 57 ) thrown down. Agititated with ether, the ether solution on being evaporated left a sticky, dark-coloured residue, which is entirely soluble in alcohol and has an acid reaction. Made into an emulsion with solution of starch and adminis- tered to a cat produced no symptoms. 2. A larger quantity of alcoholic extract was made by digesting two pounds of fine powder of flat gánjá, season 1892-93, with 80 ounces of rectified spirit in a Thorn's digester. The extract removed from the digester was evaporated on a water bath. The extract produced has a pleasant odour and a sweetish (liquorice-like) taste, but a pungent (peppermint-like) flavour, not at first per- ceptible, developes after half a minute and persists. The feeling developes into a slight paralysis of taste, somewhat like that caused by the essential oil of Zanthoxylon, but less complete and less enduring. Two grains of this extract administered to a healthy cat produced after One hour some dilatation with immobility of pupil and considerable disturbance of locomotion, with drowsiness. 27.58 grammes were taken in order that the alkoloids indicated by the pre- ceding examination might be obtained in larger quantity. Treated with tartaric acid, neutralised with bicarbonate of soda, and agitated with ether. The substance obtained on evaporating off the ether =.009 per cent. This substance gave the following reactions:( 58 ) the case of the primary petroleum-ether analysis, should be looked for there. Two grains of this extract administered to a cat produced full narcosis. The residue on the filter was now examined by being treated with ether. The ether extract amounted on evaporation and drying to only 0.3 per cent. of the total. The whole, amounting to 10 grains, was administered to a cat and produced no effect, thus confirming Roux's statement that the ethereal extract is inert. The remainder undissolved by petroleum-ether or by ether was treated with absolute alcohol, which only took up 0.25 per cent. The whole amount administered to a cat produced no effect. It was not considered necessary to carry the investigation further, and the remaining residue, 8 grains in weight, was administered to a cat and pro- duced no effect. 3. Another examination was made with alcoholic extract in order to separate the resin directly by treatment with alkali and further to separate from the resin, by means of tannic acid, the alkaloid supposed to be associated with it. On this occasion 28.61 grammes of extract were treated with caustic soda and heated, and afterwards washed with large quantities of hot water. In this way 8.14 grammes of a brown, sticky resin quite free from chlorophyll or re- movable colouring matter, was obtained. This resin is a varnish-like substance viscid at ordinary temperatures and fluid when heated; is insoluble in water, but soluble in ether, alcohol, petroleum-ether, amylic alcohol, and chloroform. Three grains of this resin administered to a cat produced narcosis like that described in former cases, the effect being marked in half an hour, and on this occasion lasting 50 hours, after which the cat was quite well. There was no initial excitement; the narcosis was profound from the commencement. This resin was afterwards heated, and when in a fluid state a warm solution of tannic acid added, the vessel being left on a hot plate for some hours. No alkaloid or any other substance was removed by the tannic acid, and the narcotic effect of the resin was found to have been in no way altered; owing to the severity of the former effects only one grain was on this occasion administered. The substance removed by the alkali was found on neutralisation with acetic acid and evaporation to extract consistence, to have considerable physiolo- gical effect, perhaps owing to some resin having passed through the filters. The result of these examinations is to confirm the statement that one or more alkaloids are present in the substance, but to prove that these bodies, even if physiologically active, are not practically important. These examinations were, however, only subsidiary to an extended investi- gation into the composition of gánjá conducted simultaneously by a different method. The principle underlying the method adopted has been that of fractional removal, by means of differents solvents, of the various consti- tuents of the plant. The system followed has been that elaborated by Pro- fessor DRAGENDORFF of Dorpat, whose methods have been closely followed throughout. Owing, however, to the shortness of the time at my disposal it was impossible to carry out in detail all the steps of a complete examination, and it was necessary, therefore, to modify and abbreviate his system. In doing this I have had the benefit of the advice and assistance of Surgeon-Major C. J. H. WARDEN, late Chemical Examiner, who, on my explaining the nature of my instructions and the time at my disposal, kindly drew up the modified programme that has here been followed. As in the case of the alcoholic extract, only the examination of the samples of 1892-93 is described. The examination of the other samples was in every way the same, and the results are given in TABLE XI. Gánjá converted into chúr is powdered in a mortar, and all the small woody particles and seeds sifted out. The coarse powder when required for use is subjected to a second sifting through a wire sieve with a mesh of 36 to the inch, and the fine powder obtained placed under an air-pump bell-jar and dessi- eated in a partial vacuum by means of strong sulphuric acid. After three or four days when the powder is quite dry, 10 grammes of this moisture-free powder is weighed off and introduced into a marked flask with 100cc. of petroleum-ether of known purity and free from any compound boiling above 45°C., and left to digest in this solvent during eight days. The ash of the samples to be examined may be estimated during the time occupied in drying the powder for
( 59 ) digestion in petroleum-ether, and the extent to which they are capable of absorbing and losing moisture ascertained during the time the powder is being treated with petroleum-ether, the flasks being agitated daily during this time. After thorough digestion it is to be noted if any petroleum-ether has been lost; if so, sufficient petroleum-ether should be added to make up 100cc. With a pipette 20 to 25cc. of the supernatant fluid should be drawn off and placed in separate small flask to be used for quantitative determinations. The remainder is to be filtered, the residue washed with petroleum-ether till the solvent passes through uncoloured, and the filter and residue dried at the ordinary temperature for a day by aspiration and afterwards under a bell-jar beside strong sulphuric acid. When quite dry the substance is to be removed from the filter (which must be kept for subsequent solutions) and placed, in the same flask as was used for petroleum-ether, with 100cc. ether and left to digest for eight days. The interval may be utilised in examining the petroleum-ether extract. When the substance has been thoroughly digested with ether with frequent agitation, sufficient ether having been added, if necessary, to make up to 100cc., enough may be drawn off for quantitative analysis and the rest filtered through the same filter as was used for petroleum-ether. The ether solution should be allowed to evaporate spontaneously, and the filter and residue dried by aspiration or beside sulphuric acid. When quite dry the residue is to be removed from the filter, the filter kept for future use, and the substance placed in the same flask as before with 100cc. absolute alcohol and left to digest for eight days The interval may be utilised in examining the ether extract. When thoroughly digested with absolute alcohol, filtration will again take place through the same filter after sufficient alcohol has been added to make up to 100cc., and after sufficient supernatant solution has been drawn off with a pipette for quantitative estimation. The filter and substance well washed with alcohol may be dried in a water-bath at 60°C. and kept under a bell-jar till the examination of the alcoholic extract is completed. The residue is then removed from the filter and placed in the same flask with 100 cc. distilled water and digested with much agitation for several hours. Filtered through the same filter as before, a measured quantity of the filtrate should be taken for quantitative estimation. Beyond this point it is not necessary to go, since both the residue and watery extract should be found inert. I. Examination of the petroleum-ether extract. 1. Estimation of the essential oil. 5cc. of petroleum-ether solution was drawn off by a pipette and placed in a tared glass dish with vertical sides and ground-glass cover. This was placed under a bell-jar and aspirated with dried air at ordinary temperature till Petro- leum-ether ceased to be present. The 'co-efficient of evaporation' obtained by weighing after intervals of one minute( 60 ) The total extract has to be again treated with petroleum-ether to ascer- tain whether all is again redissolved; the essential oil taking into solution a certain quantity of resin which but for its presence petroleum-ether could not dissolve, and which will prove insoluble after all the essential oil has been driven off. The residue is to be carefully dried and weighed, and the sum subtracted from the weight obtained after drying in the air-bath. In the case of gánjá of 1892-93, the results of this weighment were: ( 61 ) dryness to be an amber-coloured resinous substance, totally soluble in rectified spirit, or partially so in proof spirit. This also was powerfully active. II. Examination of the ether extract. 1. Estimation of the amount of extract. 5cc. of the solution drawn off with a pipette were placed in a glass evaporating dish with vertical sides, and allowed to evaporate spontaneously; when sufficiently evaporated, the dish was then placed in an air-bath at 110°C. and heated till it ceased to lose weight; the total weight was then noted. After this it was treated with petroleum-ether to remove any fatty matter that had escaped solution originally by petroleum-ether and the residue weighed, the second weight being taken as the true amount of ether extract, and the difference between the weights added to that of fixed oil. The weights obtained were: ( 62 ) 2. Examination of this extract was not carried beyond ascertaining that it contained no glucoside, and that it was physiologically inert. The ash and moisture had been estimated from the fresh drug in the ordinary way during the drying of the powder for digestion in petroleum ether, and while digestion in that solvent was going on. CHAPTER VI.-PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION OF HEMP. We have next to review the physiological action of hemp as ascertained by experiment, apart from the effects attributed to it in the older writings and in the popular mind, and apart from the composition of the plant. The seeds and the oil that can be expressed from them are physiologi- cally inactive. The juices of the plant before it has become old enough to secrete the resinous material are slightly diuretic. The woody portions of the stem and twigs and of the roots are at all stages inert; so, practically at least, are the large leaves which are lowest down on the stem, and are formed before the secretion of the resinous substance begins. Of the two sexes, the male is, as compared with the female, physiologically inactive. It would appear not to be altogether inert, though experiments are yet wanted to demonstrate the relative power of male and female plants. It is probable that both sexes are represented in bhang, but it is certain that in good bhang female plants largely predominate. In the samples examined by me, seeds are plentiful, but I have not yet succeeded in detecting male flowers. The leaves of male plants are smaller as a rule than those of female ones; but as the largest leaves are rejected from the latter sex in collecting, and as all the leaves arc reduced to a frag- mentary condition in commercial bhang, it is impossible to distinguish the two in any sample. No male plants have been obtainable since the present enquiry commenced to enable such an examination as is called for to be undertaken. The effects of bhang, or siddhi, the form in which the resinous material is diffused throughout the tissues of the leaf, are precisely the same as those produced by administering gánjá mixed with water. In the one case, however, more of the active principle is taken than in the other, and the effect of taking gánjá appears to be, as nearly as may be judged when equal doses of each are employed, five times that of bháng. There is at first a distinct stage of excite- ment which, however, passes off and gives place to a torpid condition and sometimes, but not always, immediately to sleep; sleep usually comes ulti- mately, but there may be a prolonged period during which there is a feeling that the mind is in some manner divorced from the body. The stage of excite- ment is often accompanied by an extreme tendency to laugh, by great thirst, often also by increased appetite; sometimes, however, there is a feeling of constriction of the throat, with a disinclination to attempt to swallow. The tendency to laugh usually noticed may, however, be replaced by a quite different tendency to apprehend danger and even to shed tears. These are, however, the effects produced when a considerable dose is administered to a subject unaccustomed to use the drug; such as are accustomed to it would with the same dose exhibit little of the excitement and perhaps none of the subsequent symptoms. The use of gánjá, however, is not as a drink. The substance is reduced to powder and smoked with tobacco in a special small bowl. The effects even in those unused to the drug, unless the smoke is inhaled, appear to be slight. When inhaled, however, by those unaccustomed to it, it produces a dizzy intoxication. In the case of those accustomed to its use, the effects vary according as it is intended to intoxicate or to merely stimulate. In the latter case it does not seem to have any very special outward effect, beyond a marked suffusion of the conjunctiva; even this is by no means invariable. Bhang, on the other hand, is never smoked; it appears at an early stage in the history of smoking hemp to have been so used, but it is never used in this fashion now-a-days. The effects of charas when smoked (which is almost invariably its mode of consumption if used as an intoxicant) are precisely those of gánjá; a smaller dose, say less than one-third the weight of charas that there is of the fine powder which the gánjá smoker puts into the chilam, is used. As the amount of narcotic
( 63 ) matter employed by the two is, dose for dose, practically identical, the effects produced by the use of the two substances are also practically identical,( 64 ) resin that is administered in an overdose. Again, in Indian subjects the symptoms are similiar whether gánjá or the extract be used. The stage of joyous excitement, though not invariable, is usual, and the subsequent state of trance often assumes a pseudo-cataleptic form. The racial idiosyncracy, put briefly, causes apprehensive feelings and depression with rarely muscular disturbance in Europeans; feelings of exhilar- ation with often muscular disturbance (usually pseudo-cataleptic) in Indians. The individual idiosyncracy is generally much more marked in Eastern than in Western subjects. The variability of result is as marked in the case of animals as of men. Monkeys appear to be affected very much as human beings are. And the following details of experiments with cats will show that the effect produced depends largely on the individual:( 65 ) will not purchase it if he can get the freshly made article. By the end of a second year it has become in his belief quite inert and is not fit for use. Experiments with animals show the same result. Monkeys exhibit slighter symptoms when gánjá of a year old is administered than when fresh gánjá is used; perhaps one-third the effect might be safely given as an estimate of the result with the older drug. Cats to whom extract of gánjá a year old was administered exhibited district physiological effects; those that received two years' old gánjá extract showed very slight effects; the effects of extract from three years' old gánjá were imperceptible. Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel E. G. RUSSELL, who has for many years been interested in the subject of gánjá and hemp, and has made a series of experi- ments that bear on this subject, has very generously placed at my disposal a précis of his observations. As he has permitted me to make any use of these results that may seem desirable( 66 ) gesticulates; plays on imaginary musical instrument and sings; converses with imaginary persons; illusions and delusions, usually of a pleasing nature; ob- jective of these very responsive to external impressions and suggestions; rarely quarrelsome or combative. Then ensues condition of repose and quiet contem- plation with fixed stare and immobile pupil. Then drowsiness and restless sleep, in from 2 to 3 hours, lasting several hours; on waking, dullness, heaviness, profound depression, and irritability lasting for many hours. "Most medical officers serving in India will have seen, in the course of their medico-legal duties, cases of irritable mania or of dementia, lasting for many days or even years, attributed to prolonged excessive abuse of gánjá. Our asylum records show numerous cases of insanity (often curable) recorded as due to this cause. "II. Physical effects.( 67 ) tea, coffee, cocoa, kola and the other similar substances used in this way in different parts of the world. It is, in its common every-day use, a valuable food- accessory; compared with its employment in this manner, its other uses are trivial. Yet we are unable to express in a statistical form the extent of its use. The only rational attempt to estimate the number of people using hemp has been that made by Mr. Kerr,1 who has employed as the basis of his calculation the quantity of drug exported and sold, and the results are so vague that it is evident that no reliable judgment can be thus formed. Short of obtaining an accurate census of gánjá consumers, it is impossible to arrive at the truth. At the same time an accurate census is probably an impossibility. For we have seen that a cloud hangs over hemp and the trade in its products; the growth, handling and use of them are disreputable and low; the user of gánjá will not admit that he does use it, at all events to any one whose motive for asking is merely a wish to pry into his habits and affairs. It is immaterial whether the feeling of disfavour towards the plant be or be not older than the knowledge or the use of its narcotic properties; the point is that such a feeling is directed against them now. Moreover, the very fact that the plant and its products are excisable, increases the difficulty of arriving at a conclusion. Even if it be true that people in the plains rarely, if ever, have an opportunity of using contraband hemp, the most elaborate fiscal arrangements will scarcely prevent this from sometimes happening in the hills. This particular use of hemp is confined to those who indulge in the smoking habit; charas therefore and gánjá, the two forms of the narcotic that arc smoked, are alone employed in this way. The habit once formed becomes part of the man's life; he has his three whiffs of smoke as occasion calls for it precisely as he would, could he afford it or had he acquired the taste, take tea or kola or cocoa. Under ordinary circumstances he takes it daily, when his day's labour is over and during the interval when he cooks his evening meal; under extraordinary circumstances he takes it to sustain him in the midst of severe or of prolonged exertion. The habit does not affect his appetite; on the contrary, it enables the poorest of our fellow-subjects to partake with a heartier appetite of their some- what uninviting fare; it does not affect digestion or interfere in the slightest degree with bodily or mental health. Finally, and most important circumstance of all, it is a habit which does not grow upon its votary. In this it is exactly like the narcotics just mentioned, and this is one of its greatest and most striking advantages. It is true that among certain classes in Europe, people as a rule on the border-line between the lower-middle and the lower classes, a pernicious state of mal-nutrition and anæmia, due to tea-poisoning, is of not infrequent occurrence, and it may well be that sometimes such a state may occur with gánjá-smokers. But I have not met with any instances of it, and it is highly improbable that it is common( 68 ) It is, I know, not infrequent, in cases where excessive gánjá-smoking( 69 ) and when made into a paste, are drunk. The decoction is always mixed with some reputed digestive( 70 ) hold aloof, there is wanting the check on their conduct that respect for public opinion in their native village would inspire; leading a lazy, and therefore in itself demoralising, life, they are further deteriorated by the opportunities for petty extortion which their position offers. Even those unaccustomed to the external effects of the habitude will have recognised the insouciance of manner which so frequently accompanies the use of the intoxicant; this style of address is the effect of the distorted sense of relativity which accompanies the use of bhang. The dose of siddhi taken on such an occasion may be from three to five tolas, but it is not quite easy to say how much is taken, as it is usual for a large quantity to be made, of which a company may partake. Among durwans, for example, it is a common enough custom in establishments where the practice prevails (it should be understood that there are also many where none of the durwans use it at all) for one man to make a decoction to be used, at the com- mencement of the day, by himself and his intimates. The effect of taking the dose is that the man feels 'pulled together' by the stimulant effect of his morning dram, and spends the rest of the day more or less under the subsequent depressant influence of the drug. Temperament comes in to modify the effect, and the man may be talkative and smiling, dull and quiet, rarely sub-melancholic, or surly and uncivil( 71 ) when the stimulant effect of the first close is approaching its maximum, the stimulant effect of the second is beginning to act, and by the steady repetition of doses a cumulative stimulant effect is produced. The state of exhaustion that is supposed to follow the 'possession' is no more than the narcosis that must result when the excitement has passed off, while the fact that much hemp is required to induce the stimulant effect, renders the narcotism that follows the more severe. That the ignorant on-looker should suppose the condition super- natural is not of moment, but that the Sany asi himself should be, as is the case, quite free from any desire or attempt to deceive in the matter, and is himself deluded, is of serious import. It indicates the mental deficiency concomitant in all faiths with supersaturation by religious sentiment; consultation of our asylum records shows that not infrequently men of the class, once the practice is established, develop insanity. It may be mentioned in passing, however, that it is extremely rare for the true relationship of cause and effect to be noted. The reporting authorities in such cases, with scarcely an exception, return such a patient as insane from the use of gánjá instead of recording the fact that the use of gánjá in such a manner as to produce dementia is due to insanity. This would be of less consequence were the fallacy not repeated in our lunacy statistics, thus vitiating still further the already sufficiently unreliable nature of the figures these exhibit. The use of gánjá by smoking sometimes takes the place of the use of bhang for the purpose of producing this condition. There is, however, another non-objective mode in which hemp is used by the mendicant class; this may be now described. Instead of using bhang, gánjá alone is employed, and instead of taking smaller doses frequently repeated, the subject takes one large dose. The habitual gánjá-smoking mendicant can keep the initial stage of excitement that follows quite under control, and can then enjoy the sedative after-effect, which is what he aims at and attains. The suffused eyes, sodden aspect and far-away look, of the members of a school of fakirs are familiar to all, and are characteristic of the condition. If one of these men be spoken to, however, and if he will reply (not at all a necessary consequence), it will be found that he is perfectly conscious, and if well inured to the drug, quite rational in his replies. He is exhibiting, in fact, the full physiological effects of hemp in a subject accustomed to its use. In this case the dose has been deliber- ately taken in order to blunt the feelings of heat or cold, to dull the call of the appetites, to keep the mind unimpressed by surrounding objects. This is an intelligent fakir's account of his condition and his motives. The condition we know to be correctly described; the motives are not necessarily exag- gerated. Many medicants are, however, religious only in name, and though they use the substance as extensively as their worthier brethren, probably only do so for its intoxicant effect, and, like a class to be mentioned presently, concen- trate their attention on anything but holy thoughts. One thing, however, which these people agree in insisting on is that the substance suppresses the sexual appetite. Perhaps they ( 72 ) Not dissimilar from this last use is the employment by the jaded sensualist of hemp-preparations to induce an intoxication wherein he can concentrate his mind on animal thoughts. An historical account of this practice on a large scale is the story that is told by Taki-ed-din Ahmad of the use, the appearance, and the fate of the famous Djanina suburb of Cairo, which a virtuous Sultan, anticipating the nineteenth century in hoping to suppress a vice by scattering its votaries, razed to the ground in A.D. 1287. The associated practices will be mentioned in another paragraph; bhang and majun, very rarely gánjá, are made use of for this purpose. Whether the continued use of bhang in this manner tends to insanity it is difficult to say. It is usual to ascribe mental aberration to this particular practice, but it would appear that the undoubted cases of dementia that occur have arisen from the use of bhang to induce frenzy, not from gánjá to induce-a con- templative state. Most of these mendicants become sodden with gánjá daily, and appear to go on like this for years, showing as little mental as they do physical deterioration. The use of hemp, in order to produce intoxication that is beyond control, with an objective motive, is of greater historical than every-day interest. The history of the assassins is a case in point. The use of the narcotic must have been the same as in the last case( 73 ) the only genuine cases, so far as can be ascertained, of insanity induced by hemp. A man has domestic troubles of the usual Indian kind, and as a result he indulges in bhang; so far as I can ascertain, gánjá is rarely used as the intoxicant, never by those unaccustomed to hemp, though sometimes by those who are gánjá smokers that is who use gánjá but not as an intoxicant. The man's mind was full of his wrong when he took the dose, and it would be hard to say whether the object of taking it was to drown his cares or to concentrate his mind on them; whatever the purpose, his mind does dwell on them; the result of his brooding is the development of a homicidal tendency. This appears to be in- variable, though the remarkable feature that it presents is that it is not a general tendency to slay; it is something quite unlike the feeling which makes the sub- ject run amok. The man moves about muttering a threat to kill some one. It is not improbable that if the guilty person is known, or even only suspected, he is at once made the object of attack, and the crime is not then distinguishable from ordinary cases of the sort where human passion is itself a sufficient stimulus to prompt the criminal act. But in this case the peculiar effect of the drug again comes in, and, perverting the sense of relativity, leads the subject of intoxication to attempt to compass the death of any one individual, no matter who, in revenge for the wrong that has been endured. Here, again, it is a question, though one savouring of casuistry, whether the crime, if committed, which fortunately it rarely appears to be, can be said to be due to the drug. In the other class of cases the usual cause is a sudden infatuation leading the subject day after day to a house of ill-fame. The excessive use of gánjá in this case arises from specific motives; being unaccustomed to hemp, the subject comes completely under the influence of the drug. This appears to be a very common cause of temporary excessive use of the drug( 74 ) gánjá consumers are either people who are utterly dissipated, or people who use the drug in the legitimate fashion as a food-accessory. The last point to be referred to in connection with the abuse of gánjá is what may be called the objectively criminal employment of the drug. As has been said, there seems reason to believe that the effect of gánjá or bhang never is directly to incite to crime, though there is no reason to doubt that these drugs are sometimes taken to enable a criminal to carry through his enterprise. This is, then, the subjective criminal use of the drug. The objective usage has, as it happens, this same indirect connection with the deed. We now know enough about the action of the drug to be assured that the cases where gánjá has been reported to have been employed to induce a state of prostrate intoxication in, or to poison, a victim are probably all mistakes. The doses necessary to accomplish either of these intentions are too large for their administration to be practicable. But we also know that the use of hemp and its preparations is very general, and that these preparations form very convenient vehicles for substances, dhatura being the chief one, that will produce the desired effect. CHAPTER IX.( 75 ) substance. The effects of either stage are largely influenced by racial and by individual idiosyncracy, and are in a complementary manner equally power- fully modified by temperament. One of the most marked and by far the most important of its effects is diminished power of interpreting the relationship of the subject to the environment,( 76 ) drug, for the time being consider themselves the equals of their fellowmen, and thus develop the peculiar rudeness of speech and roughness of behaviour, which figures in Indian medical accounts of the effects of hemp intoxication as one of the worst and most marked symptoms of excessive use of hemp. As this same blunting of the sense of relativity leads sometimes to ridiculous behaviour on the part of the intoxicated person, Indian gentlemen have therefore both subjective and objective reasons for disliking the habit. The result, therefore, is that those of good position who indulge in the practice, itself harmless, of taking siddhi as a refreshment, will not admit the im- peachment. The custom is not ( 77 ) subject himself to indicate supernatural possession. By smoking, on the other hand, the same class induce a state of intoxication in which their minds can be fixed intently on holy thoughts. The depraved use it in the same way to enable them to fix their mind on thoughts of a different nature. Frenzy has also been deliberately induced, in order to enable the subject to carry out enterprises of difficulty and danger, either deliberately thought over beforehand, or only decided upon in a general manner. This has usually hap- pened in the case of religious fanatics of the Muhammadan faith. A condition much short of this is also sometimes induced by criminals in order to en- able them to keep up their courage while committing an offence. Though different in degree, the two uses are the same in kind. But the murder that may result in the first case, or the robbery in the second, are not inspired by the hemp. The illogical conclusion has been not infrequently drawn that hemp incites to crime, and some authors are even careful to point out that, in their belief, while the use of bhang, that is, hemp-drinking, is harmless, the use of gánjá, that is, hemp-smoking, is pernicious, and that they base their aversion to gánjá on the fact that it has led to the excesses mentioned above. The most commonly cited case is that of the assassins, to the history of whose terrible deeds much of the Western aversion to gánjá is due. Waiving the question of the point of view from which such an historical fact is considered (Geneva conventions did not regulate eleventh century warfare, and the Crusader's right to be in Syria was less evident to the Saracen than to himself), it is necessary to point out that the conclusion involves an anachronism. Gánjá is a substance that is only smoked, and a substance that was probably not prepared till after the habit of smoking was imported; in the days of the assassins hemp-prepara- tions were of necessity always taken internally, and corresponded therefore to bhang. If there is one thing more certain than another, it is that gánjá has practically nothing to do with the acts of violence that sometimes are associated with hemp. It has been stated that a frenzied condition may arise from the use of it by smoking. I have not seen a case and have not heard of one that has the slightest pretence to authenticity, or is supported by evidence that would be admitted in a court of law. The frenzied state it seems only possible to induce by the cumulative effect of repeated doses taken internally. Of course, if gánjá were taken internally, it would produce the effect even more rapidly than bhang does, but not more certainly, and internal use is not the use to which gánjá is put. The use of gánjá in the less extreme form, not to excite frenzy, but only to sus- tain resolution, is perhaps possible, but even for this purpose bhang is what is generally taken. This use is akin to the use of the stimulant effect of alcohol for the same purpose,( 78 ) gánjá, I have no reason to doubt that these do occur. The testimony of several competent medical men is in support of the belief. But, even in what would seem to be undoubted cases, the details of which I have had opportunities of discussing, there has not been one where the evidence was unimpeachable; not one in which it was impossible to say that the effect produced might not have equally resulted from some other cause in a person who had developed the habit of taking gánjá to excess. In most of the cases, indeed, the evidence points entirely to hemp as being at worst only an aggravating or proximate cause. In the case of every religious mendicant who succumbs to the habit of intoxi- cating himself to frenzy, it is possible that hemp has aggravated the condition, but it must also be admitted that the mental defect on which the habit depended, not the habit itself, was the true origin of the insanity. Then, even if one grants that in such a case the cause to be entered is the proximate one( 79 ) hemp. As it is, this comparative use of the provincial statistics is absolutely impossible. Another circumstance that renders asylum statistics unfit for use, even if they were otherwise correct, is their irregularity. The smoking-habit, the use of gánjá, is not differentiated from the drinking-habit, the use of bhang. In former years cases attributed to gánjá and bhang were entered in separate columns; but from the internal evidence supplied by the history of cases, it is clear that of the cases even proximately due to the hemp-habit many, if not most, of those attributed to gánjá were really induced by the drinking of hemp with or without other substances superadded. About twenty years ago the supposed results of the use of gánjá and bhang, REPORT ON THE CULTIVATION AND USE OF GÁNJÁ. CALCUTTA: Printed at the Bengal Secretariat Press. 1893.
