IP/25/PZ.4 IP BULLETIN OF THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF SOUTHERN INDIA, COONOOR. NO. 3. 1910. PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE ASSOCIATION. MADRAS. PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1911.
BULLETIN OF THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF SOUTHERN INDIA, COONOOR. No. 3. 1910. PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE ASSOCIATION. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1911.
STAFF. Director: J. W. CORNWALL, M.A., M.D., D.P.H., Major, I.M.S. Assistant Director: A. G. MCKENDRICK, M.B., CH.B., Captain, I.M.S. Assistant Surgeon: M. KESAVA PAI, M.D. | Sub-Assistant Surgeon: S. RAMASAMY AIYAR.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. SECTION I.BULLETIN OF THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF SOUTHERN INDIA. SECTION I. NOTES ON RABIES. I. Deviation of Complement by Fixed Virus Brain Extract. Numerous authors have recorded their failures to obtain a specific deviation of complement reaction with antirabic serum and the blood, brain or other tissue of an animal suffering from rabies, and our own experiments also (Bulletin 1, 1908, page 24) in this direction have been, until recently, negative. By using extracts of brains we have now obtained some positive results, though the reaction could not be demonstrated at will, even when the conditions which had been successful were reproduced as nearly as possible. The extracts were prepared by taking equal weights of fixed virus rabbit brain and of normal rabbit brain, pounding them in a mortar with 0.85 per cent. NaCl, and leaving the resulting emulsions (1 in 10) in the ice box for 24 hours. The solid matter was then deposited by centrifugation and the faintly opalescent fluids used. TABLE No. 1. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Fresh antirabic horse serum 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.42 0.42 0.42 Extract, fixed virus brain . 0.75 1.2 Extract, normal brain 0.75 1.2 Salt, 0.85 per cent. 0.75 0.13 0.13 1.33 20 per cent. sensitized sheep RBCs 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 Lysis. Partial. Complete. Complete. Slight. Partial. Nearly complete. The extracts were incubated with the antirabic serum for 1½ hours before the sensitized RBCs were added. Column 1 shows less lysis than column 2, and column 4 than column 5. The amount of complement available in column 2 was
2 sufficient to mask the deviation due to albuminous substances in the extract of normal brain which is made evident by the difference in lysis in columns 5 and.6. A similar experiment in which the result was more marked is shown below:3 3. Cutaneous Reaction in Antirabic Inoculations. The method of treatment in this Institute is to inject once daily 4 cc. of an emulsion of fresh fixed virus for a period of 14 days. The injections are started about 2 cm. below the umbilicus and 3 cm. from the middle line, and 2 cc. are injected on each side. The succeeding injections are made in straight lines directly below the first, about 1.5 cm. separating each puncture from the one above it. On the eighth day the injections are made on a level with, and 2.5 cm. outside, the first, on the ninth day outside the second and so on, until at the end of the fourteenth day the patient presents two double rows of punctures, fourteen on each side. In perhaps a quarter of the total number of patients the injections give rise to no redness or swelling whatever, only the needle marks are seen during and at the end of the treatment, and itching is but rarely complained of, so that it is only in persons who happen to have a short space between the umbilicus and pubes, and in small children, that any alteration has to be made in the, routine lines. It has long been noticed, however, that the last of the first row of injections, or 7th, and much more frequently the first of the second row, or the 8th, gives rise to a slightly elevated, hyperæmic patch, of irregular outline, from 2.5 cm. in diameter. The 9th injection and also the 10th and 11th then have to be more spaced out, for a puncture into one of these hyperæmic areas leads to a little bleeding which it is as well to avoid. In such persons the 12th, 13th and 14th injections cannot be fitted into the space available, and a third row has to be formed, or one or two put in above the umbilicus. The 8th, 9th and 10th injections are the ones which cause the most noticeable reaction; and the patients who are affected complain a good deal of the itching. The 11th-14th injections give less reaction and the itching becomes less. When a reaction appears after the first or second injections it is generally a sign that the health of the patient is not perfect, he is alcoholic, dyspeptic, or obese; and the reaction is probably an indication that the absorptive power of his sub- cutaneous tissue is not good. It has not been noticed that such persons exhibit more severe reactions about the seventh day than healthy subjects. Reactions on the eighth day have seldom been observed in persons with no subcutaneous fatty layer and a skin so loose that a prominent moveable ball is the immediate result of an injection. On the other hand, women, who have a thick layer of sub-cutaneous fat, seem to react but rarely. An eighth day reaction consisting merely of a pink area, say 3 cm. in diameter, without swelling or itching, which would pass unnoticed in a dark skinned Indian, is obvious in unpigmented skins. The reaction has never been regarded in this Institute as indicative of a specific susceptibility to rabies, nor can it be supposed to afford any information as to the progress of immunity as a result of the inoculations. Stimson, who has lately called attention to this reaction for the first time in print (Journal of Medical Research, November 1910) has been more precise in his observations than we have, and gives a graphic representation of the intensity of the reaction which culminates on the eighth and ninth days; but he does not seem to draw a sharp enough distinction between the really specific reaction, which, as our observations go, does not manifest itself earlier than the sixth day and most frequently the eighth, and the swelling due to local irritation and faulty absorptive power in persons who are below par in health. The reaction is evanescent in a certain number of people and nearly all trace of it may have disappeared within 24 hours. Stimson has observed also that, when a reaction occurs suddenly after any one puncture, it may be evident, not at that site only, but at the site of several previous punctures. This is beyond our experience, which is that it is not uncommon for several punctures to be in reaction at the same time, i.e., the reaction at any one spot may last several days. We have never noticed for example the 8th puncture to show a reaction after the 10th injection: if the 8th puncture intends to react it will A-I
4 show unmistakeable signs on the 9th morning. Stimson, however, was probably- working with dried cord emulsions which may have introduced other factors. His conclusion we accept in default of a better: " the reaction would therefore seem to be caused by the foreign proteid of the rabbit nervous tissue itself and (is) an expression of hypersensibility established by the early injections." SECTION II. HÆMOLYTIC DATA. I. Some Factors which influence the Lysis of Erythrocytes by Hypotonicity. (I). During the course of endeavours to define the physical conditions which tend to promote and to inhibit hæmolysis by a specific serum it was noticed that the range of lysis of RBCs of different species of animals seemed to occupy distinct spaces on the scale of NaCl solutions of varying degrees of concentration. To ascertain whether any relation exists between the resistance of RBCs to hypotonic lysis and their resistance to lysis by serums a number of observations was made on the RBCs of eight species with the view of arranging them in order of resistances. Method.To face page 4 CHART No. 1 Position on the salt percentage scale of the mean range of lysis of the R B Cs. of eight species. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918115.tif] Position on the salt percentage scale of the mean range of lysis of erythrocytes from eight different species. Percentage NaCl S.O./1911 Reg: No. 1268 Copies 5 This point, approximately, may be considered to be as follows:6 The removal of the NaCl renders the cell more resistant to lysis: one concludes, therefore, that the negative ion is the dominant one, for when NaCl is re-supplied the cell resistance again falls. The fact of the increase of resistance of RBCs following removal of. NaCl has been noticed previously by Bang (Biochem. Zeit. XVI, p. 225). * * * * * (4) Augmentation of the acidity of a suspension of RBCs by the passage of CO2 causes lysis. RBCs suspended in 0.85 per cent. NaCl are rapidly lysed by the passage of CO2; suspended in 8 per cent. sugar they are not lysed; in 2 per cent. NaCl lysis is hindered until Hb is reduced; in sodium citrate 2.55 per cent. Hb is reduced, no lysis; in Na2CO3, 1 in 3300 in 0.85 per cent. NaCl, lysis; in NaH CO3 1 in 2000 in 0.85 per cent. NaCl, reduction of Hb, slight lysis after a long time; defibrinated goat blood was not lysed, but, when diluted with 1 per cent. NaCl lysis quickly followed. Lysis by CO2 seems to depend on the chemical composition of the medium of suspension: when it can act directly on the RBCs lysis is rapid, if, however, there is an unsaturated substance such as NaHCO3 present, lysis is delayed until the affinities of that substance have been satisfied. Serum appears to absorb a large volume of CO2. Experiments by Hamburger and Van Lier (related in Engelmann's Arch. Physiol. page 492, 1902) show that by the passage of CO2 through blood or through a suspension of RBCs in salt solution the alkalinity of the fluid is increased. To what extent this occurs in the circulating blood when there is an excess of CO2 in the air breathed does not seem to have been ascertained. No such formation of alkalinity is observed after the passage of CO2 through RBCs freed from NaCl and suspended in isotonic sugar or Na2SO4 solutions. The explanation offered by the above-named authors is that CO2 penetrates the RBCs and reacts with their protein contents forming carbonates. The envelope is permeable to kations so Cl' passes in and CO3" and HCO3' pass out, rendering the suspending fluid alkaline. For every CO3" molecule passing out two Cl' molecules must pass in and likewise sufficient water to equalise the osmotic pressure. Hence the lysis of the RBCs. When RBCs are suspended in sucrose there is no interchange of kations and no lysis; when suspended in Na2SO4 the SO4" balances the CO3" and there is no entrance of water and so no lysis. If a neutral salt of a tribasic acid could be found for a suspending fluid which had no specific. action on RBCs and did not react with CO2, lysis on the passage of CO2 would probably not occur, for the RBCs would lose water. * * * * * (5) To find if treatment with a foreign serum has any effect on the resistance of RBCs to lysis by hypotonicity, guinea-pig RBCs were subjected to the action of horse serum which normally has scarcely any lytic action on them, though it agglutinates them. Washed guinea-pig RBCs were divided into three portions of 1.5 cc each,. A was suspended in 10 cc of 0.85 per cent. NaCl, B in 10 cc of fresh horse serum, C in 10 cc of heated horse serum 55°C, and the three tubes were kept at 37°C for 2 hours, then centrifugated, washed twice in salt solution and put up with hypotonic NaCl solutions with the result shown below, expressed in percentages of NaCl:To face page 7 CHART No. 2 Chart showing the effect of equi- molecular solutions of different salts on lysis by a specific serum. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918130.tif] T = Trace lysis S = Slight 7 (6) Experiments were made to determine whether the inhibition of specific lysis by different metallic salts is related to their respective molecular weights. Calcium chloride and magnesium sulphate were heated to 200°C to render them anhydrous, and equimolecular solutions of these and of dried sodium chloride were prepared. 1 per cent. NaCl = 1.89 per cent. CaCl2 = 2.06 per cent. MgSO4. Proportionally increasing strengths of these solutions were used as the diluting agents in a hæmolytic system consisting of sheep RBCs sensitized in goat- antisheep-serum with fresh sheep serum complement. The inhibitory action as shown by the diagrams (chart No. 2) was greatest in the case of CaCl2, next of MgSO4 and least of NaCl. It is evident that the prevention of lysis is not a function of the molecular weight of a salt, but depends on some other property such as the degree of ionisation. As regards lysis by hypotonicity the following strengths of the above salts are approximately equivalent:8 method of decomplementing a serum. We have found that equally good results can be obtained by using RBCs heated for a shorter time to a higher temperature. All that is necessary is to heat the RBCs in a tube in a waterbath until they are thoroughly browned and aggregate in clumps, leaving the fluid clear or slightly brownish. Provided with such heated RBCs it can easily be shown that, unless they have absorbed amboceptor, they will not absorb complement; e.g., horse serum, which contains little or no amboceptor for rabbit RBCs, cannot be decomple- mented by rabbit RBCs, whereas sheep serum which normally lyses rabbit RBCs strongly can be completely decomplemented by treatment with heated rabbit RBCs. In heating various kinds of RBCs for these experiments we noticed that there were considerable differences in the temperatures required for the browning and in the time the heat had to be maintained. Slight lysis is the first effect of the heat on all RBCs, but it is more marked in some species than in others. We thought it might be possible to arrange the RBCs of different species in order, with regard to the degree of temperature required to brown and clump them and the duration of its application, but after some trials it appeared that the experi- ments would require more time than could be spared for them. The variations are, however, so well marked that such an arrangement would probably be quite feasible, in spite of the non-existence of a definite coagulation temperature. The coagulation of hæmoglobin is said to take place logarithmically, the coagula- tion rate at any moment being proportional to the concentration of uncoagulated protein. The temperature coefficient for Hb = 1.3 per degree C., i.e., increase in amount coagulated. There is therefore no definite coagulation temperature, as coagulation proceeds at different rates at different temperatures. * * * * * (3) The union of RBC receptor and specific amboceptor is generally held to be a chemical one, and the only method of dissociation hitherto published is to place unsensitized RBCs in contact with fully sensitized ones, which results in the transference of a portion of the sensitizer from the latter to the former. It seemed of interest to determine whether the destruction of sensitized RBCs by hypotonicity leads to a disruption of this union, or whether the resulting fluid still. retains the power of absorbing complement. Muir (Studies on Immunity) has shown that the stromata of lysed RBCs retain the power of absorbing both amboceptor and complement when separated by centrifugation from a lysed suspension, but his experiment does not cover the possible dissociation of the amboceptor molecule by distilled water from its attach- ment to a RBC. We took 10 cc washed sheep RBCs, sensitized in goat antisheep serum, and lysed them in 48 cc distilled water (Fluid A). 10 cc of unsensitized sheep RBCs were similarly lysed (Fluid B). NaCl was added to both fluids to 0.85 per cent. Series were put up of the two fluids, with varying quantities of fresh sheep serum as complement, and were incubated for half an hour at 37°C. A sus- pension of sensitized sheep RBCs was then added and the series again incubated. No complement was abstracted from the series containing fluid B, and the several tubes showed precisely the same degree of lysis as did the control series (0.1 cc complement = C lysis), whereas, in the series containing fluid A, so much complement had been fixed by the fluid that 1.0 cc did not give complete lysis of the added RBCs. It is evident that hypotonic lysis of sensitized RBCs neither dissolves the union between sensitizer and RBC receptor, nor does it prevent the subsequent absorption of complement. The converse of this experiment, as was to be expected, led to the conclu- sion that lysed RBCs unite with amboceptor and complement just as well as un- injured RBCs and that their disruption is a purely mechanical phenomenon which does not alter their combining affinities in the least.
9 This experiment was performed by lysing 17 cc washed sheep RBCs in 85 cc distilled water and adding NaCl to 0.85 per cent. Series were then put up, (A) containing specific sensitizing serum and complement, and (B) containing an equal quantity of a non-specific serum with complement. Both were then incu- bated. Sensitized sheep RBCs were subsequently added and the tubes again incubated. It was then found that the disrupted RBCs (A) had combined with. the sensitizer and removed complement, so that in series (A) complete lysis was shown by a tube containing 0.25 cc complement, whereas in series (B) 0.06 cc complement produced complete lysis. The occurrence of lysis is, therefore, a purely accidental phenomenon, and the liberation of hæmoglobin is simply an indication that amboceptor and complement have united with some part of the substance of the RBC and is not an integral part of the reaction. * * * * * (4) The effect of inspissation and desiccation on a specific amboceptor appears to be small. Goat antisheep serum was inspissated at 70°C. On breaking up the jelly next day and extracting it with distilled water equal in quantity to the original bulk of serum, the extract was found to contain the sensitizer unimpaired in quality as far as could be judged by comparing its action with that of the original serum. Extract prepared from another portion of the inspissated serum which had been kept in the ice box showed considerable deterioration after 20 days. Serum desiccated rapidly in vacuo over H2SO4 retains its sensitizing power nearly unimpaired for at least six months, when kept at room temperature (15°-20° C). Even after 20 days such a desiccated serum had not entirely lost its complement. * * * * * (5) The sensitizing molecule is attached to the globulin fraction of the serum and is easily precipitable with the globulin by the saturation of an immune serum with MgSO4, or semisaturation with (NH4)2SO4. For example, the serum of a pony, which had been immunised with sheep RBCs was semisaturated with (NH4)2SO4 by adding slowly an equal bulk of saturated solution of (NH4)2SO4. The precipitate was collected on a filter and redissolved in another portion of saturated (NH4)2SO4 and a third time precipitated. Finally the precipitate was dissolved in a quantity of distilled water equal to the original serum and dialysed in running water for 72 hours to get rid of the (NH4)2SO4. A few drops of chloroform were added to prevent decomposition during dialysis. The tonicity of the solution was then ascertained by means of RBCs, and sufficient NaCl was added to bring it up to 0.85 per cent. A series of tubes, put up with fresh sheep serum as complement, showed that this dissolved globulin solution contained active sensitizer for sheep RBCs. The filtrate from which the globulins had been removed was dialysed in run- ning water and a little chloroform was added to it to prevent decomposition. After removal of the (NH4)2SO4 the tonicity of the solution was made to equal 0.85 per cent. NaCl, but it had no sensitizing effect whatever on sheep RBCs;so it is evident that the whole of a specific amboceptor is precipitated with the globulins of a serum and that no recognisable quantity is left in the albuminous filtrate. It was thought to be not unlikely that by fractional precipitation of the globulins the amboceptor might be obtained in a more concentrated state. 94 cc of pony antisheep serum were taken and a saturated solution of (NH4)2SO4 was gradually added till the serum contained the solution in 20 per cent. concentration. The precipitate (A) was filtered off, and more (NH4)2SO4 added to the filtrate till the concentration was 40 per cent. Precipitate (B) was filtered off and the concentration of the filtrate raised to 50 per cent. This gave precipitate (C)10 The precipitates were dissolved in distilled water, reprecipitated by similar concentrations of (NH4)2SO4, filtered, re-dissolved in distilled water and dialysed free from salts. They were then dried in vacuo over sulphuric acid, and solutions were made up from each with 0.85 per cent. NaCl corresponding in volume with the original bulk of serum. It is always difficult to induce globulins which have been thus precipitated and re-dissolved to give a clear solution in the end, but a preliminary experi- ment with another portion of dried globulins had shown that clear fluid could be obtained by filtration through paper which did not differ demonstrably in amboceptoral content from the turbid liquid. It may be assumed, therefore, that the amboceptoral molecules are more readily soluble in 0.85 per cent. NaCl. than the globulins with which they are precipitated. Series were then put up with fluids A, B and C to test their relative amboceptoral powers on sheep RBCs with 0.2 cc guinea-pig complement. 0.75 cc Fluid A was required for complete lysis. 0.05 cc 11 We performed several experiments with the view of demonstrating the passage of amboceptor from sensitized RBCs into the medium of suspension. Sheep RBCs were sensitized to their limit in goat antisheep serum, washed and suspended in 0.85 per cent. NaCl. Whether incubated at 38° C for 2 hours and tested immediately, or kept in the ice-box for 24 hours after incubation for 4½ hours, or kept in the ice-box for 24 hours without previous incubation, no amboceptor could ever be extracted by fresh sheep RBCs from the fluid after the sensitized RBCs had been removed by centrifugation, showing that there had been no appreciable diffusion and that the amboceptor originally attached to the RBCs remained attached. The sensitized RBCs, moreover, required precisely the same quantity of fresh sheep serum as complement to lyse them, after being given every opportunity of losing amboceptor by diffusion, as was required by another portion of sensitized RBCs which had been tested at once. For this reason alone it must be considered that the union of RBC and amboceptor is a close one, and that a state of equilibrium between corpuscles and sensitizing fluid as regards amboceptor does not exist. In the case of goat RBCs obtained from goat-antisheep-blood, which were washed and incubated in contact with an equal quantity of sheep RBCs, no lysis was obtained with fresh sheep serum complement, showing that no transference of sensitizer had occurred from goat RBCs to sheep RBCs in appreciable quantity. It may therefore be taken as a fact the RBCs of an immune serum contain none of the immune body. A further experiment shows that amboceptor, far from being in equilibrium between RBCs and the surrounding fluid, has such a powerful affinity for RBCs that it can be extracted from the fluid almost completely, even when the latter is highly diluted. For example 1.5 cc sheep RBCs were suspended in 2 cc of goat- antisheep-serum and a similar quantity in other 2 cc of the same serum diluted in various degrees up to 1 in 40. The suspensions, after one hour in the incubator with one or two shakings, were centrifugated and the sensitized RBCs put up with fresh sheep serum complement. All the series showed precisely the same degree of lysis, showing that the affinity between RBCs and sensitizer in the case of immune serum is so great that for experimental purposes it does not matter whether the sensitizing- fluid is pure or is diluted with 0.85 per cent. NaCl 40 times (in another experiment 98 times); the sensitizer is picked out by the RBCs from the dilute fluid just as surely as from the pure serum. Given high dilutions the factor of time would doubtless have to be considered; but the result would be in the end in all probability the same. * * * * * (7) It is generally held that complement cannot be removed from a serum by RBCs unless they have been previously sensitized. Sheep serum does not lyse dog RBCs and it follows that treatment of sheep serum with washed dog RBCs will not result in abstraction of complement. 5 cc of washed dog RBCs were suspended in 15 cc fresh sheep serum and the tube was incubated for 1½ hours at 37° C. No lysis occurred. After centrifugation the treated sheep serum was put up with guinea-pig RBCs, using as a control another portion of the same serum which had been incubated for the same time. Precisely similar degrees of lysis followed in both the series showing that no complement had been removed by the dog RBCs. To test whether any sensitization had occurred in the dog RBCs they were put up with fresh guinea-pig serum as complement. There was no lysis, so it may be concluded that there had been no sensitization. Even when. RBCs have been sensitized they do not always extract complement. If the available complement fits the sensitizer it is abstracted and lysis occurs; if it does not fit the sensitizer it is not abstracted and there is no lysis. Abstraction of complement by sensitized RBCs can be most clearly demonstrated by using heated RBCs (vide section 2, p. 7) for the subsequent tests are not then interfered with by B-I
12 a fluid coloured by hæmoglobin. Thus heated RBCs may be used to extract amboceptors from different heated serums, and their sensitization made evident by their power of abstracting complement from other serums. Whenever complement is thus abstracted lysis would have occurred if the RBCs had not been heated. Horse serum does not lyse man RBCs. Sensitization of man RBCs by horse serum cannot be demonstrated, and so horse serum treated with man RBCs has no complement abstracted from it. Horse serum does, however, lyse guinea-pig RBCs slightly, and treatment of horse serum with washed guinea-pig RBCs results in slight lysis, and the consequent abstraction of complement from the serum can easily be demonstrated. * * * * * (8) There seems to be no limit to the number of amboceptors which can be present normally in a serum, though some serums contain more, some less and some, such as horse, scarcely any at all. For example we were able to extract from the same 20 cc of heated dog serum in succession the following sensitizers: man, rabbit, guinea-pig, goat, sheep, horse and man, and to demonstrate in each case, on the one hand, the sensitization of the RBCs by complementing with fresh guinea-pig serum and, on the other hand, the absence of much more of that sensitizer from the dog serum by means of the addition of a fresh portion of the RBCs in question together with guinea-pig complement. Compared with an immune serum, which results from the injection of a foreign serum or foreign RBCs, a normal serum is remarkably deficient in sensitizer for heterogenous RBCs; but there is great variation among individuals in this respect. As a general rule a normal serum which is potent against one kind of RBCs is potent against all, and one which is weak against one is weak against all; but the variations exhibited from time to time in the lytic power of a serum for one kind of RBCs are not necessarily accom- panied by variations in the same direction for others. Sheep serum, for instance, which was largely used in the course of numerous experiments for several years, was found to vary considerably in its relative lysin content for the seven kinds of RBCs generally used; that is to say, if the quantity of lysin present for man RBCs is large, it does not follow that the lysin for rabbit RBCs is also large, and vice versâ. No relation can be made out between the variations in the quantities of the different lysins from time to time. Vide Chart No. 3. It may be that plurality of amboceptors has some relation to diet and that the species whose diet includes the widest range of proteins has naturally the most diverse store of antibodies in its blood. We thought it possible that the resistance shown by the RBCs of different species to hypotonic lysis might be related with their resistance to lysis by normal serums, but the large number of data collected do not lend support to this view. Endeavours to arrange RBCs according to their resistances to coagulation by heat failed, as mentioned before, owing to time not permitting a sufficiently delicate method of measurement being devised, though there were certainly indications that this order corresponded in some degree with their resistance to hypotonic lysis. A number of experiments made it seem probable that some relation also exists between the specific gravity of RBCs and their resistance to hypotonic lysis, though here again we failed to elaborate a method of sufficient accuracy in the time which could be devoted to it. The specific gravity as determinedTo face page 12 CHART No. 3 Showing the variations in the lysin content of the serum of a normal sheep for the R B Cs of Horse, Man and Rabbit from April 4th to July 1st 1910. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918151.tif] S.O. 1911 Reg: No. 1260. Copies 13 Horse 1.75 Rabbit 1.83 Guinea-pig 2.41 Man 2.48 (cf. list on p. 5.) Specific gravity, coagulation by heat and hypotonic lysis are, however, all concerned with the physical conformation of RBCs, whereas serum lysis is a chemical reaction; and there is no obvious indication that there should be any relation between physical characters such as these and chemical composition. To return to the action of normal serums on washed RBCs: of the eight tested (serum from 20 individuals of each species), dog serum was unquestionably the most potent, horse easily last and guinea-pig last but one. A peculiar feature of these experiments was the appearance with considerable frequency of natural deviation of complement, a phenomenon which we believe has not been recorded before. A series of tubes, each containing 0.05 cm. RBCs and altogether 2 cc. of fluid, with serum in percentages descending from 100 to 2.5 would show "partial" and "not complete" lysis in the tubes containing from 100 per cent to 60 per cent. serum, "complete" lysis from 60 per cent.14 TABLE No. 4. 15 Taking Table 4 as it stands, the order of potency of the eight normal serums is as follows:16 valid reason why it should not be so for natural amboceptors also. On the other hand the method will give indications, for instance in the case of horse serum. Fresh horse serum by itself will not lyse man RBCs and has only a slight action on guinea-pig RBCs, but when these RBCs, are sensitized in heated horse serum, 74 parts serum to i part RBCs, lysis of both is obtained with guinea-pig complement, showing that horse serum contains some sensitizer for man RBCs as well as for guinea-pig RBCs but that horse complement for some reason does not lyse the former. Experiments were made to determine whether better results were obtained by previous sensitization of RBCs in a heated immune serum, before adding them to the lytic mixture, than by adding the immune serum directly to the mixture. To secure exactly comparable quantitative results is by no means a simple matter. It is probable that amboceptor is absorbed by sensitive RBCs at a rate inversely proportional to its concentration in the RBCs and, therefore, it takes an infinite time for a serum to be entirely freed from sensitizer. It is likewise probable that, if amboceptor is available in a hæmolytic system, the avidity of the RBC substance for it varies with the amount of union with complement which has taken place, i.e., if a molecule of amboceptor has been put out of action by union with RBC and complement, the remainder of that RBC will be more avid of amboceptor than it would have been if merely the union of an amboceptor molecule had taken place in the absence of complement. Hence it is possible that, even when equivalent proportions of RBCs and sensitizer are used, there will be more amboceptor available for the RBCs if the immune serum be present in the system than if the RBCs had had to fix all the sensitizer they could within a limited time from a similar quantity of serum. On incubation of two such series lysis occurs much more rapidly in the RBCs already sensitized for the reason that half the reaction, that is union of amboceptor, has already taken place, but the final results are very much the same. The differences noted in our experiments were so small and inconstant that they are attributed to error. * * * * * (10) Bordet several years ago showed that when amboceptor is in excess RBCs can absorb more than they actually require for complete lysis with the minimum active dose of complement, and that a given quantity of serum will lyse more RBCs when they are added simultaneously than when they are added in successive amounts. As deviation could not be demonstrated in the ordinary way with sheep RBCs sensitized in our Goat B antisheep serum, we desired to find whether the above held good in this particular case. It proved that when the sheep RBCs were added altogether the time required for complete lysis was immensely pro- longed when the quantity of RBCs was doubled. Fresh Goat B serum 1.0 1.0 1.0 Sheep RBCs 0.4 0.6 0.8 Time required for complete lysis in minutes 6' 17' 53' but when the sheep RBCs were added 0.2 cc at a time to the same quantity of serum, waiting for complete lysis of each lot before the addition of the next, the lysin was soon exhausted. Fresh Goat B serum 1.0 Sheep RBCs 0.2 0.2 0.2 Time required for complete lysis in minutes 4' 43' 3 hours not complete.
17 so I cc. fresh B serum dissolved 0.4 cc. sheep RBCs added at once, completely in 618 3. On the Ponderability of Amboceptor. Having noticed that sensitized RBCs are more quickly sedimented by centrifugation than unsensitized ones and that this holds good, though in a lesser degree, even when the RBCs are not visibly agglutinated during the process of sensitization, it seemed by no means unlikely that it would be possible to show by means of the balance an increase of weight following sensitization. Addition of matter to the RBCs must be accompanied by an equivalent loss from the sensitizing serum. Of several methods attempted the following seemed to give room for least experimental error and were attended with fairly satisfactory results:19 4. Isolysins. Goat B which had been injected at intervals for the past three years with citrated sheep blood was found to have developed an isolysin in its serum which lysed the RBCs of all the different goats tested, with the aid of guinea-pig. complement. Its own RBCs alone remained intact. This amboceptor could not be complemented by either fresh sheep or fresh goat serum. Horse serum however complemented it slightly. There was some difference noticed between the degree of lysis obtained with the RBCs of different goats with this isolysin and guinea-pig complement, and this difference was even more marked with horse complement. Evidently there was a difference between the RBCs of different individuals as regards their ability to absorb this amboceptor; and the fact that Goat B's own RBCs were not able to absorb it at all renders it certain that the RBCs of individuals of the same species are not exactly alike in their reactions with lyric agents. With heterolysins this fact has not been recorded: it is possible that a goat injected with sheep RBCs from one sheep only would not develop a lysin potent against the RBCs of all other sheep, but only against a certain number. Todd and White, (Proc. Roy. Soc., B., Vol. 82, p. 416, 1910) with the unique material at their disposal, have shown that isolysins are developed in the serum of cattle which have been injected with the blood of other cattle, and that these isolysins are effective against only a certain proportion of the RBCs of other individuals. By mixing the serums of these immunised cattle they were able to obtain an isolysin potent against the RBCs of all the cattle tested. They do not definitely state whether the inoculations each animal received were derived from one animal only, but presumably this was not so. As in the case of our goat, whose isolysin cannot be complemented by goat serum, Todd and White's isolysins could not be comple- mented by ox serum, but were well complemented by guinea-pig serum; nor was any isolysin effective against the RBCs of the individual from which it was derived. There is a distinction between Todd and White's isolysins and ours in that theirs were the result of the inoculation of cattle blood into cattle, irrespective, it is true, of breed, whereas ours was the result of the inoculation of a goat with sheep blood. Evidently the goat and sheep are so nearly allied and so little difference exists between the composition of their RBCs that injection of the RBCs of one induce the formation of a specific lysin for both. Todd and White's isolysins were effective also against goat RBCs. Sheep and horse apparently were not tested. When the heated serum of our goat was treated with goat RBCs only the specific goat isolysin was extracted, leaving the specific sheep heterolysin intact, but when treated with sheep RBCs both lysins were extracted and the serum no longer was able to sensitize goat RBCs. Homogenous RBCs therefore, do not extract a specific lysin, but the heterogenous RBCs for which the lysin is specific extract both the specific lysin and the isolysin. In addition to the goat isolysin Goat B had also developed a slight amount of lysin for horse RBCs, which was complemented by guinea-pig serum, but not by sheep, goat or horse serums. This goat, as stated before, had been strongly immunised against sheep RBCs for a period of three years. A less strongly immunised goat developed no isolysin, and a horse which had been treated with sheep blood for about nine months developed no horse isolysin and only a poor goat heterolysin; so it appears that isolysins are not as easily or as quickly formed as heterolysins. The formation of the horse heterolysin in Goat B indicates a comparatively close relationship between the horse and the sheep, and it is possible that a prolongation of the period of immunisation would induce the formation of a greater quantity of the sensitizer for horse RBCs. Ehrlich several years ago recorded the formation of isolysins in goats which had been injected with goat blood, and showed that these isolysins also lysed sheep RBCs. He obtained isolysins of various kinds, some effective against the RBCs of one group of goats but not of another, others C-I
20 effective against the RBCs of some out of each these groups. Some of his isolysins dissolved sheep RBCs, some did not. Again, some goats did not develop an isolysin at all. His isolysins, however, were all tested directly and not with the aid of guinea-pig complement. The serum of a pony which we have injected with sheep blood for a year now lyses goat RBCs readily, but it contains no isolysin for horse RBCs. It seems clear that the RBCs of any one species contain some substances in common with the RBCs of nearly allied species, so that the injection of the RBCs of that species into an animal of another species gives rise to the formation of immune bodies against each of those substances. Judging by the length of time required for the formation of isolysins, comparatively speaking, the amount of these common substances must be relatively small. It is also clear that the RBCs of individuals are not of exactly similar com- position, since isolysins are not uniformly active against the RBCs of all indi- viduals. Indeed, if an isolysin is totally inactive against the RBCs of some one individual, one can only assume that the structure of that individual's RBCs is entirely different from the structure of the RBCs with which the animal providing the isolysin was immunised. Todd and White found that by mixing their serums they obtained an isolysin which was universally potent. Our Goat B, which has been injected with the blood of a different sheep on each occasion during the three years, has probably had a sample of most of the possible varieties of sheep RBCs. It has not failed to lyse the RBCs of any goat which has been tested, except its own, so that with the RBCs from a large number of different sheep it has prob- ably also received most of the possible varieties of the substance common to sheep and goat RBCs, and is, therefore, probably universally potent against goat RBCs, though, as we demonstrated, not in equal degree in every case. Why does this difference exist in the potency of isolysins against the RBCs of different individuals when it has never been recorded that a specific heterolysin has failed against the RBCs of any one individual ? Might it happen that the serum of a horse immunised against sheep RBCs would fail against the RBCs of certain sheep, if the blood used for immunisation on each occasion had been obtained from the same sheep; or without complete failure is there a recognisable difference in the degree of lysis obtained with RBCs from various individuals ? Answers to these questions cannot as yet be given, nor can a clear explanation be put forward to account for the escape from autolysis of the RBCs of the animal furnishing the isolysin, unless we postulate the simultaneous production of anti- autolysin. In the cases of our Goat B and Todd and White's cattle the isolysins were not able to be complemented except by guinea-pig serum. Ehrlich's isolytic serums apparently sufficed in themselves without a heterogenous complement. It is conceivable that the specificity of artificially produced lytic serums is relative only.If one injects a goat with sheep RBCs, first a sheep heterolysin is formed; then gradually a goat isolysin, which increases its range over individual goats as the number of individual sheep providing RBCs for injection is multi- plied. Thirdly, a horse heterolysin appears. Supposing that it were practicable to inject a goat with RBCs from an infinite number of sheep, a sufficient variety of substances, proceeding from an infinite number of varying RBCs, might be injected to produce lysins for the RBCs of other less nearly allied animals, per- haps for all orders. 5. Some Facts relating to Complement. (I) Lability of complement21 which has been allowed to clot, when the defibrinated serum is used immediately it can be prepared and the serum from the clot directly a sufficient quantity has sepa- rated. Serum which is obtained from blood drawn the previous day and allowed to clot, even though kept in the ice box in the interval, is generally found to be less potent than serum obtained from defibrinated blood and used immediately. The loss of lytic power is not, however, necessarily proportionate for all kinds of RBCs that may be tested. The following table shows the relative amounts of lysis in one experiment:22 * * * * * (3) Possessing three animals, which had been immunised against sheep RBCs by repeated injections, experiments were made to determine the relative values of various complements with these three amboceptors. The animals immunised were Goat B, Goat K and a country bred pony. None of these three serums had any lytic power against sheep RBCs originally. The three serums at the time of the experiment differed in their individual amboceptoral activities, Goat B being the most potent, Goat K next and the pony last. Equal quantities of washed sheep RBCs were sensitized in equal parts of these three heated serums, respectively, and after washing were put up with serums from a normal horse, sheep and goat as complements. Nine series were thus obtained for comparison, namely23 TABLE No. 8. Quantities of complement required for "partial" lysis, 3o to 40 per cent. 24 Roughly, the relative strengths of these five complements may be expressed as under:25 that the complement normally present in a serum is able to give more lysis with RBCs sensitized in a foreign immune body than with the unsensitized RBCs. One would conclude, therefore, that amboceptor is deficient in a normal serum and that there is always sufficient complement present for any one amboceptor at least. If another amboceptor be present there is still some complement to combine with it after the first has been exhausted. When a serum naturally lyses RBCs it seems likely to lead to fallacies to compare its complementing power with that of a serum which does not naturally lyse those RBCs. It does not seem justifiable, therefore, to conclude from the above table that goat, sheep and horse are actually so much poorer in complement for sheep RBCs sensitized in goat K antisheep serum as might at first sight appear, but, all things considered, it is certainly prob- able. One thing at least stands out without doubt, and that is, that guinea-pig serum, which normally has but little lytic power against sheep RBCs and may on that account be rightly compared, is vastly superior in complement content to goat, sheep or horse. 6. The Complementing Power of Homogenous Serums. It appears that except in the case of the guinea-pig the fresh serum of verte- brates can exert little or no complementing power when in contact with RBCs of the same species which have been sensitized in heterogenous serums. In the table given (No. 13) not all the serums employed were able to lyse the RBCs sensitized in them in the fresh state, through deficiency of either amboceptor or complement. In the case of lysis by guinea-pig complement natural deviation* was several times observed, i.e., a higher degree of lysis occurred in the middle tubes of the series than at either end. TABLE No. 13. Complementing power of homogenous serums. RBCs sensitized in heterogenous serums and then washed. Animals furnishing the RBCs and complement. Animals furnishing the serum used for sensitization. Guinea- pig. Rabbit. Man. Goat. Sheep. Horse. Dog. Hen. Cat. Guinea-pig S-P S S P S P O 26 In this and the following tables27 Arranging the complements as far as possible in order of potency we get, roughly:28 RBCs in the proportions of IO and IOO of serum to I of RBCs. The homo- genous serums were used as complement, but no lysis occurred with either IO to I or IOO to I sensitization, even when 84 per cent. complement was present in the tube, except in the case of the guinea-pig RBCs; and even with them only slightly more lysis was given by the IOO to I sensitization than by the IO to I. It is evident that the amboceptor had not been fixed, and the conclu- sion arrived at is that mere increase of the quantity of a normal serum, up to practically infinity, does not cause foreign RBCs, which are strongly lysed by that serum when unheated, to fix enough amboceptor to enable them to be lysed by large doses of their homogenous complement.The presence or absence of added isotonic NaCl in the sensitizing fluid has no effect on the fixation of amboceptor. That a certain quantity of amboceptor, and occasionally the greater portion, can be fixed in a normal serum by foreign RBCs is easily demonstrated, also that complement cannot be withdrawn from a normal serum by its homogenous RBCs. In one experiment it was found that treatment of rabbit serum by heated rabbit RBCs did not lessen the lytic power of that rabbit serum against sheep RBCs, so no complement had been withdrawn. It was also found that if heated rabbit RBCs were sensitized in heated dog serum and then digested with unheated rabbit serum, enough complement was withdrawn from the latter to prevent it giving any lysis with sheep RBCs. 7. Deviation of Complement. For specific precipitation to occur it is necessary that the molecules of precipitinogen should fix a certain number of molecules of precipitin. If the precipitinogen is in excess in the first place, the molecules of precipitin are so distributed amongst them that no precipitinogen molecule can fix sufficient preci- pitin to enable a precipitate to be formed. If the precipitinogen is not in excess to begin with, a precipitate is formed and is not re-dissolved on the addition of more precipitinogen. For lysis to occur it is necessary that the RBCs should fix a certain number of molecules of complement. This they cannot do at all until sensitized. If the sensitizing molecules are insufficient, sufficient complement cannot be fixed. If the sensitizing molecules are sufficient, enough complement is fixed for complete lysis. If the sensitizing molecules are in excess, they may be attached nevertheless to the RBCs, but since the complement is in defect, the proportion of the two which is necessary for the optimum degree of lysis is not appropriate and "deviation" appears. It is probable that the proportion of amboceptor to complement required for the optimum degree of lysis varies with the RBC and with the sensitizer, and that the range of combination which results in the optimum degree of lysis also varies widely, so that in some cases a slight excess of sensitizer shows deviation and in others almost an infinite quantity is required to demonstrate it.RBCs probably lose their affinity for sensitizer in proportion to the amount of it that has been fixed. It is quite possible that in certain cases RBCs may be unable to fix a much larger number of sensitizing molecules than is absolutely required for the optimum combination. Deviation of complement can then be demonstrated with difficulty or not at all. Deviation can only be demonstrated clearly when RBCs can fix sensitizing molecules in notable excess of the actual requirements for the optimum combination. The complement molecules are in this case divided up amongst the attached sensitizing molecules, but not necessarily equally amongst the RBCs present, and so many RBCs do not get enough to permit them to be lysed. If the excess of sensitizer is great there may be only "slight" lysis or "trace" lysis, or conceivably none at all.
29 Sheep RBCs generally have not been able to fix much more of our Goat B antisheep sensitizing molecules than they require for the optimum combination. We found that 2.6 cc. of heated goat B serum on one occasion gave the maximum degree of sensitization obtainable with 10 cc. washed sheep RBCs, using fresh sheep serum in excess as complement. When up to 4.5 times that quantity of sensitizing serum was used, no further sensitization occurred, as shown by an increased range of lysis with diminishing quantities of complement, nor was any trace of deviation noticed when the quantity of complement remained at the previously found optimum. Working with Goat K antisheep serum another method was tried. Instead of sensitizing RBCs in varying quantities of the immune serum, mixtures were made, each containing 1 cc. of fresh Goat K serum and increasing quantities of heated goat K serum, and series were put up with these mixtures. The several mixtures contained diminishing amounts of complement and increasing amounts of ambocep- tor. Even when the relation of amboceptor to complement was as 8 to 1 no deviation occurred and the degree of lysis resulting appeared to vary inversely as the quantity of complement present. The matter may be rendered clearer if put into tabular form. Let us assume that RBCs sensitized with30 Series A had evidently absorbed rather more amboceptor than was compatible with complete lysis by the minimum active dose of complement as indicated by B & C. The concentration of amboceptor in the serum was somewhat reduced by the removal of the amount absorbed by A, considerably reduced by B, yet enough remained to sensitize C as fully as B. Some information as to the influence of the available quantity of amboceptor and of its concentration in the sensitizing fluid was gained in further experiments. (a) 1.2 cc. washed sheep RBCs were sensitized in 1.8 cc. heated goat B serum, and another (b) 1.2 cc. RBCs in 1.8 cc. serum + 198.2 cc. of 0.85 per cent. NaCL. The actual quantity of amboceptor in (b) was the same as in (a), but its con- centration was only 1/100. In the two series put up after sensitization precisely similar degrees of lysis were given by guinea-pig complement (0.017 = C lysis), so in spite of the great diminution of concentration the RBCs in (b) had in one hour picked up sufficient amboceptor for full sensitization. As long as amboceptor is in excess of the absorptive limits of RBCs it does not appear to matter whether its concentration in the fluid is greately reduced or not. It is possible that with a lowered concentration more time would be taken to reach the limit of absorption, but on this point we have made no observations. Other facts to be related presently make it seem probable that, if the concen tration of amboceptor in an experimental fluid can be raised much above that which may be considered possible in the serum of a living animal, the absorptive power of RBCs rises in proportion. There seems to be a certain degree of concentra tion of amboceptor below which RBCs cannot fix enough to enable deviation of complement to be demonstrated, although there may be in actual quantity sufficient to sensitize many times the number of RBCs to their apparent limit. Deviation is more easy to demonstrate when the immune serum itself is present than when RBCs are sensitized and then washed; and it is often clearly marked during the first 20 minutes of incubation in an experiment in which 1 1/2 hours will render the lysis complete. Deviation could not be demonstrated by sensitization of sheep RBCs in our pony-antisheep-serum, washing and adding complement, but was well shown in one time-experiment, performed with another object, in which the serum itself was present in the hæmolytic system (vide Chart 4). When, however, the amboceptor was presented to the sheep RBCs in the form of a solution of the dried globulins of the antisheep serum, obtained by salting out, dialysing and drying in vacuo over H2SO4, complete deviation was readily shown. It seems as if the amboceptor were more powerful in the absence of the albuminous and lipochrome elements of the serum than in the whole serum, but this we have not proved with exactitude. It is easy by this means to obtain a solution containing amboceptor in 4 times the concentration in which it is found in the original serum. The oretically a much higher concentration is possible, but in practice it is found difficult to induce the dried globulins to dissolve in greater concentration than 4/1 in 0.85 per cent. salt solution. Even then the solution is turbid and contains much suspended matter. A nearly clear solution can be obtained by filtration through paper, or centrifugation; and the removal of the undissolved portion does not seem to reduce the amboceptoral potency of the fluid appreciably, so it may be presumed that the amboceptor molecules are more soluble than the globulins with which they are associated. A similar concentration of amboceptors could be obtained by drying the whole serum and re-dissolving it in one-fourth of its original volume of distilled water, or by evaporation, but all the other elements, including the salts, would be concen- trated likewise, and lysis would be interfered with thereby.
To face page 30 CHART No. 4 To illustrate the deviation of complement occuring during the early period of incubation which in course of time becomes masked. In 7 minutes 0.075 amboceptor permits complete lysis, while 0.2 is partial. 0.2 amboceptor is not complete till 19 minutes. The quantity of complement is fixed throughout. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918208.tif] Time of incubation in minutes. S.O/1911 Reg: No. 1261 Copies31 8. The Latent Antilytic Property of Normal Serum. Sachs (Ehrlich's Studies on Immunity, p. 603) describes how a heated normal serum, which has been extracted with certain RBCs, has an antilytic effect on the lysis of RBCs of the same species by a heated immune serum and complement. One of the experiments performed by Sachs was as follows:32 In (7) the exact conditions of sachs's experiment were imitated and his find- ings were fully confirmed. Sachs explains his experiment by assuming that the normal amboceptors circulating in the blood have a higher degree of affinity for complement than artificial amboceptors, and that the union of normal amboceptor molecule and complement molecule can occur in the test tube without previous union of the amboceptor with a RBC. In his experiment A heated normal-rabbit-serum containing various ambocep- tors is incubated with fresh guinea-pig serum. Then heated rabbit-antisheep-serum and sheep RBCs are added. The sheep RBCs attach both the normal amboceptor of the normal-rabbit-serum and the artificial amboceptor of the rabbit-antisheep- serum. Lysis is effected by union of the complement with the attached normal amboceptor, for which it has a greater affinity than for either the attached artificial amboceptor or the free normal amboceptors of other kinds. In his experiment B the same procedure is followed but the normal-rabbit-serum is first digested with washed sheep RBCs which extract the normal sheep amboceptor from it. When the antisheep serum and sheep RBCs are finally added the RBCs find no normal amboceptor to fix, but only artificial amboceptor. The guinea-pig complement is supposed to have a higher degree of affinity for the free normal amboceptors of other kinds in the rabbit serum than for the artificial amboceptor attached to the RBCs. The complement molecules consequently remain united to these free amboceptors and do not combine with the artificially sensitized RBCs. Hence there is no lysis. The free normal amboceptors, therefore, are supposed to act as anticomplements and to deviate the complement. On this hypothesis in our experiment (3) the absence of prevention of lysis can only be explained by assuming that goat complement has a greater affinity for goat antisheep amboceptor in combination with sheep RBCs than it has for free normal amboceptors, whereas the converse is the case with guinea-pig complement. This is supported by our experiment (4). Sachs's interpretation involves the view that there can be union between amboceptor and complement molecules without union of the former with RBCs, which is by no means generally accepted (vide "Deviation," p. 28). It is recognised that the reactions (1)RBC + Amboceptor=(RBC + Amboceptor) and (2)(RBC + Amboceptor) + complement = lysis take an appreciable time,the length of which is related to the quantities present and to the temperature If amboceptor and complement were already united in the fluid it would seem probable that the reaction (C + A) + RBC = lysis would be more rapid than the reaction RBC + A + C = lysis To put this to the test we took heated pony-antisheep-serum for amboceptor, fresh guinea-pig serum for complement, and washed sheep RBCs. Two series, A and B, were put up, and the degree of lysis in the tubes noted every three minutes. In A, amboceptor and complement were incubated together for an hour before adding the RBCs; in B, amboceptor, complement and RBCs were incubated separately. The racks, pipettes and tubes used were all similarly incubated, and the final mixtures were made with the utmost rapidity. No acceleration of lysis was observed in series A in which amboceptor and complement had been given an opportunity of uniting before the addition of the RBCs; so it must be concluded either that amboceptor and complement do not unite in the absence of RBCs or that, if they do unite, the combination thus formed does not produce lysis with greater velocity than when amboceptor and com- plement meet the RBCs without previous combination.
To face page 33 CHART NO.7 Showing the effect of incubation on the degree of lysis obtained when the complement is in high dilution. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918217.tif] S.O./1911 Reg: No. 1264 copies To face page 33 CHART NO. 6 Showing the effect on lysis of dilution of four different concentrations of complement Dilution of complement [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918220.tif] Percentage concentration of complement S. O./1911 Reg: No. 1283 copies To face page 33 CHART NO. 5 Showing the effect on lysis of the dilution of the complement. the actual quantity remaining constant. Time of incubation 1½ hours [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918223.tif] S.O. 1911 Reg: No. 1262 copies 33 9. Various Factors which influence Specific Lysis. For practical purposes it is desirable to be aware of the effect of dilution of complement and of the lessening of lysis that may be expected on this account. Series were therefore put up with each tube containing equal quantities of previously sensitized RBCs and of complement, but increasing volumes of salt solution. Chart No. 5 shows graphically the result of the experiments. When the con- centration of complement was above II percent. complete lysis occurred; when the concentration was 8.30 per cent. there was 75 per cent. of lysis, when 5.75 per cent. there was 50 per cent; of lysis; and when only 3.9 per cent. there was practically no lysis within one and a half hours, the time limit of the experiment. Within limits it may be seated that the degree of lysis in a given time, the quantity of complement remaining constant, is inversely proportional, to the concentration of that comple- ment in the mixture. Chart No. 6 shows that, under the particular conditions of an experiment, complete lysis occurred with dilutions of complement below 10 per cent. and "trace" lysis with a dilution of 30 per cent. Again for practical purposes it is desirable to be certain whether different periods of incubation within the ordinary experimental limits have an influence to, be reckoned with in dealing with small quantities of complement, i.e., whether a quantity of complement which does not give an appreciable deree of lysis, say, in 3034 goat-antisheep-serum, with fresh sheep serum as complement, and different propor- tions of sheep serum (55°C.) as the inhibiting, agent. It will be seen that in the presence of 72 per cent. sheep serum (55°) twice as much complement was required for complete lysis as when the serum was re- placed by 0.85 per cent. salt solution, 54 per cent, inhibited in a lesser degree, 36 per cent, scarcely at all, while 18 per cent. on the other hand had an auxilytic influence. A similar result is produced by the heated serum of an animal homogenous with the erythrocytes used, when a heterogenous serum is the lytic agent. For example, when fresh man serum was used as the lytic agent against sheep erythrocytes, a concentration of 0.11 gave complete lysis. When 60 per cent, heated sheep serum was present three times that quantity of man serumgave only a trace of lysis. Sixty per cent. fresh unheated sheep serum also inhibited lysis considerably, but less than the heated serum. When sheep serum which had been decomplemented by the action of heated rabbit erythrocytes was used as the inhibiting agent, it wasfound that heating from 30To face page 34 CHART NO. 8 Showing that increasing quantities of complement are required to produce lysis as the percentage of heated serum is increased S.O/1911 Reg: No, 1265 copies To face page 34 CHART No. 9 Shows that 0.05 concentration of complement effected complete lysis when 0.85 % NaCI. was the diluent. When either 40% or 70% of sheep serum which had been heated to 55° C. for ½ hour was present complete lysis was not effected with the highest concentration of complement used; the points are outside the limits of the chart. when 40% sheep serum which had been heated to 55° C. for 24 hours was present complete lysis was effected by 0.1 concentration of complement; 70 % serum increased this to 0.12. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918235.tif] Concentration of complement in tubes. S O./1911 Reg: No. 1266 copies 35 Reformatsky and Levi (quoted p. 345 of Mellor's Chemical Statics) have shown that the velocity of a chemical reaction is not lessened when the viscosity is increased by gelatine, agar or silicic acid. Still, whatever the cause, increase of viscosity in this case was accompanied by less lysis. Small quantities of both egg-albumin and gelatine in the mixture were accompanied by a higher degree of lysis than when salt alone was present. TABLE No. 16. No. Viscous medium. Percentage in mixture. Concentration of complement. Lysis. 1 Heated sheep serum 65.0 per cent. 0.04 Complete. 2 Dextrin 5.0 " 0.06 " 3 Gum arabic 3.2 " 0.088 " 4 0.85 per cent. NaCl control 0.13 " 5 Gum arabic 5.0 per cent. 0.22 Not complete. 6 Do 6.4 " 0.22 " 7 Dextrin 13.0 " 0.22 " 8 Do. 23.0 " 0.22 Partial. Viscosities of 2 & 3 viocosity 1 " 5 & 7 = " 1 " 6 & 8 > " 1 Table No. 16 shows, like Table No. 15, that the higher concentrations of viscous substances such as dextrin and gum arabic tend to interfere with lysis, whereas low concentrations such as 5 per cent. and 3.2 per cent. appear to favour lysis even more than simple admixture of 0.85 per cent. salt. On this occasion an increase of lysis was found in the presence of 65 per cent. heated sheep serum. This cannot have been due to added amboceptor, as normal sheep serum contains no isolysin for sheep cells: nor was it due to insufficient heating, for controls showed that it contained no complement. No explanation will be offered at this moment. If the inhibition by heated serum were, as a rule, clue to complementoids blocking the union of complement with amboceptor, one would expect the effect to be the more marked the better opportunity the complementoids have, i.e., if additional heated serum containing complementoids were incubated with sensitized RBCs before adding complement, one would expect more inhibition of lysis than if the complement were added immediately. This however does not prove to be the case, so if the inhibition of heated serum is clue to complementoids they have such an affinity for the amboceptor that they can block it quickly in presence of complement. Another explanation may be that any possible blocking of the complement ophile group of the amboceptor of sensitized cells that can occur has already taken place in the process of sensitization, so that the subsequent exposure to heated serum after washing the sensitized RBCs has no effect. When 1.5 times the full dose of complement for a particular degree of sensitization was present 25 per cent.36 The inhibitory effect of the heated serum cannot be due to the deviating action of a precipitum. Precipitin in the mixtures used in our experiments would be found in the heated anti-sheep serum, and, even if this clung to the sheep RBCs sensitized in it after washing, such a minute amount would be conveyed into the mixture that its effect would be negligible. Precipitinogen in large quantity would be supplied by the heated sheep serum. It was found moreover that washing the sensitized RBCs even six times made no difference in the amount of lysis. When washed guinea-pig RBCs 0.05 cc are treated with fresh horse serum, concentration 20 per tent. in mixture, "Slight" lysis (30 per cent.) results. If heated goat serum is present in the mixture in concentrations of37 D. 20 per cent. suspension rabbit RBCs sensitized 1 in 20 parts heated sheep serum 0.25 Partial 50 per cent. Salt 1.5 Fresh guinea-pig serum 0.25 E. Desensitized serum from D 1.0 Partial 50 per cent. Fresh guinea-pig serum 0.25 Salt 0.7 Rabbit RBCs 0.05 If no other auxilytic or antilytic agencies are at work a just representation of the amount of lysis occurring should be made by the following equation:38 had been removed. Complete lysis on each occasion was again given by 15 per cent of the serum so no loss of complement was demonstrable. The serum was not tinged with hæmoglobin as a result of the intravenous injection. No anaphy- lactic symptoms were observed after the second intravenous inoculation. Rabbit 101 received 1 cc washed goat M RBCs subcutaneously daily for 6 days. Forty-five days later 6.5 per cent. of its serum in a total of 2 cc fluid lysed 0.05 cc goat M RBCs completely. It then received 6 cc washed goat M RBCs intravenously. Blood drawn 20 and 40 minutes after the injection contained hæmoglobin, clotted very slowly and very little serum separated from the clot. While 6.5 per cent. gave complete lysis of goat M RBCs before the injection, 50 per cent. or 7 times the quantity gave no lysis either 20 or 40 minutes after. This rabbit contained probably about 130 cc blood or, say, 65 cc serum. If 0.13 cc before injection lysed 0.05 RBCs, 15.6 cc would be required to lyse the 6 cc injected, leaving about 50 cc unaffected. Theoretically, the lytic power would have been reduced by less than ¼ by the injection, and, instead of lysis of 0.05 RBCs being accomplished by 0.I 3 cc, 0. I 7 cc would have been needed. Actually, however, 1.0 cc or nearly six times that quantity gave no appreciable lysis.The injection, therefore, put out of action far more lysin than was really needed for the complete solution of all the RBCs it contained. This intra vitam experiment has its counterpart in vitro in the experiment de- tailed on p. 16 in which. 1 cc immune serum dissolved o.6 cc RBCs in 17 minutes, but, when the RBCs were added in successive lots of 0.2 cc each, lysis was not complete in 3 hours. The retardation of the clotting of the rabbit's blood may have been due to the partial removal of some essential element such as calcium from the plasma by the lytic reaction, or to leucopenia. Chart No. 10 shows the lysin content of the rabbit's serum during the period of its immunisation, and Chart No. 12 that of sheep R. Sheep R received daily for 6 days 7 cc washed goat M RBCs subcutaneously. Forty-five days later its serum gave partial lysis with goat M. RBCs (1.95 cc serum and 0.05 cc RBCs). It then received 38 cc washed goat M RBCs intravenously, and blood was drawn 10, 40 and 9.0 minutes later. As in the case of the rabbit there was haemoglobinaemia, clotting was very slow and very little serum separated. There was probably not enough blood in the sheep to lyse completely all the goat RBCs injected, judging by the amount of lysis given by the sample taken immediately before inoculation, though, had the injection been given 8 days after the last subcutaneous inoculation, there would have been ample lysin present to have dealt with the whole inoculum. The lytic power of sheep R's serum deterio- rated for some unknown reason very rapidly after reaching its maximum on the 8th day, and on the 45th day was less than 1/10 its previous maximum power. The intravenous injection rapidly removed all the available lysin from sheep R serum, so that 10 minutes afterwards no lysis of goat M RBCs could be accom- plished by it, even with the aid of added complement. The sheep passed hæmo- globin in its urine 1½ hours after the injection, but grazed and showed no sign of discomfort 4 hours later. During the night, however, it died. The autopsy showed the spleen to be soft, but not enlarged; the kidneys hyperæmic; the lungs To face page 38 CHART No. 10 Showing the increase in the lysin content of the serum of rabbit 101 as a result of 6 subcutaneous inoculations of 1cc each of goat RBCs. C = Complete lysis. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918250.tif] S.O./1911 Reg: No.1267 Copies To face page 38 CHART No. 11 Showing the fall in the percentage of polymorphonuclear leucocytes as the immediate result of the intravenous injection of goat R B Cs. into sheep R. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918253.tif] S. 0./1911 Reg: No. 1268 Copies To face page 38 CHART No. 12 Showing the changes in the amount of lysin in the serum of sheep R as a result of 6 sub- cutaneous inoculations of 7cc each of goat R B Cs. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74918256.tif] O = O lysis T = Trace P = Partial NC = Not complete C = Complete S. 0./1911 Reg: No. 1269 Copies 39 TABLE NO. 18. Animal. Sheep S. Sheep R. Rabbit 101. Relation of RBCs injected to weight of animal. 1/1920 1/320 1/160 Method of injection 7 cc once intravenously. 7 cc daily for 6 days sub- cutaneously. 1 cc daily for 6 days subcutaneously. Time which elapsed before final injec- tion. 18 days. 45 days. 45 days. Relation of RBCs of test injection to weight of animal. 1/790 1/350 1/160 Method of test injection 17 cc intravenously. 38 cc intravenously. 6 cc intravenously. Result of test Recovery. Death 20 hours. Death 1½ hours. The above table shows the data of the experiment. The rabbit, whose immunity was the highest and which received the largest proportionate doses of washed sheep RBCs, was the first to succumb to the test injection; Sheep R succumbed after a longer period and sheep S, in which the presence of immune body could only be demonstrated by means of additional complement, showed no ill effects. The death of these animals was due to the condition called anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis is an accident to an immunised animal which can but rarely occur under natural conditions and then only in a modified degree; and the fact that an animal, when in an immune state, is under certain conditions at the same time highly susceptible to an anaphylactic accident in no way detracts from the value to be placed on acquired immunity. It would appear that, in the case of animals sensitized to foreign RBCs, there is a certain definite relation between the amount of lysin present in the blood and the amount of the test inoculation which is required to produce death. Small quantities produce precisely the same influence as larger, but of lesser degree; and the existence of this influence is demonstrated by the leucopenia and proportionate reduction of the polymorphonuclears which occur. Andrewes (loc. cit.) has shown that such leucopenia is due to the retention of the polymorpho- nuclears in the capillaries of the lungs whither they are conceived to retire in order to recuperate, whether to renew their stock of complement by oxygenation or for other purposes is not known. That the blood is not the sole container of comple- ment in the body is shown by Todd and White (Proc. Roy. Soc., Vol. 82, p. 418) who injected a powerful isolytic serum intravenously into a bull. This serum had no lytic action in vitro on the RBCs of the bull, unless foreign complement was added, and yet the tissues of the bull somehow furnished complement in vivo, as bæmoglobinuria followed. The exact significance of death by anaphylaxis has not yet been decided. In the case of the sheep immunised against goat RBCs a more harmless intravenous injection than washed goat RBCs could scarcely be imagined, yet death occurred within 20 hours. Death can scarcely be dependent on the removal of the immune body from the serum, for that is an artificial product, and, therefore, in no way essential to the life of the animal. Nor it is likely to depend on the removal of complement, whatever that may be, from the serum, for that substance, if Todd and White's experiment is a criterion, can be supplied from the tissues. The solution of foreign RBCs in the plasma cannot enter into the question, for such solution may occur in the blood of a non-immune animal without harm to it. The degree of leucopenia found is not greater than may be met with in malaria for example. The dyspn