INDIAN MEDICAL REVIEW
3 95 h IP IP/QB.3.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74939506.tif]
AN INDIAN MEDICAL REVIEW BY Major-General E. W. C. BRADFIELD, C.I.E., O.B.E., K.H.S., I.M.S., Director-General, Indian Medical Service. 1938. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74939512.tif] PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI, 1938.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74939515.tif]
Introduction. The Provinces and States of India publish annual records of the activities of their Medical and Public Health Departments, which, in so far as they relate to the incidence of disease, vital and health statistics, are summarised in the Annual Report of the Public Health Commissioner with the Government of India. If this Review of the medical organisa- tions of all-India reproduces information contained in the latter report, it is because the Medical and Health Departments are both concerned with the same problems which affect the health of India. Major-General Sir John Megaw between 1931 and 1933 published several papers con- cerning medical administration in India, while Sir Cuthbert Sprawson, in 1935, wrote a valuable note on the medical schools. These have been consulted in compiling this Review, while my thanks are also due to the Administrative Officers of Provinces, to Dr. A. G. Young, Editor of the Journal of the Christian Medical Association of India, and others who have supplied material for its publication. The preparation and analysis of the statistics has been done under the supervision of Mr. Khushi Ram, Superintendent of the Medical Section of my office, and I also gratefully acknowledge the help of Major A. N. Chopra, I.M.S., in reviewing and correcting proofs. The views expressed on the statistics and information collected are purely personal. E. W. C. B.
AN INDIAN MEDICAL REVIEW. TABLE OF CONTENTS. CHAPTER PAGE. I.(ii) CHAPTER VI.(iii) CHAPTER PAGE. XI.CHAPTER I. General. 1. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION. An account of the history of the medical and health organisation in India will be found in Section VI of the "Souvenir", 1927 (which includes a short note on the indigenous systems), edited by Colonel (now Sir) Richard Christophers, and in Section II of Major General Sir J. D. Graham's "Health Organisation in British India",, 1927. 2. The general constitutional position under the Government of India Act, 1935, is that while public health and hospitals and dispensaries are provincial legislative subjects, the Central Government has responsibilities for medical research, port quarantine, higher medical education, and for medical and health affairs of areas under its direct administrative control. The Director General, Indian Medical Service, is the principal medical adviser to the Government of India in the Department of Education, Health and Lands. He is also the head of the Indian Medical Service and the Indian Medical Department (Military Assistant and Sub-Assistant Surgeons) and controls the Medical Store Depots, a brief account of which is included in Chapter X of this book. He is assisted by a Deputy Director General, an Assistant Director General, and, in matters relating to public health and research, by the Public Health Commissioner, who is the technical adviser to the Government of India in public health matters. The Public Health staff also includes a Deputy Public Health Commissioner and a Statistical Officer. 3. In the Presidencies of Bombay, Madras and Bengal, the medical services are administered by Surgeons General, while the corresponding position is held by the Inspectors General of Civil Hospitals in other provinces, except the two newly created provinces of Sind and Orissa where the heads of the medical departments are designated as Director of Health Services and Inspector General of Prisons and Director of Health and Inspector General-of Prisons, respectively. The chief admi- nistrative medical head is the medical adviser to the local Government in all provincial medical matters. 4. Provinces are divided into divisions, each of which consists of several districts, the average population of which may roughly be taken as one million. Each district has a headquarters for all Government depart- ments, one of which is the 'medical' presided over by a Civil Surgeon. Besides managing the headquarters hospitals (i.e., Civil and Police Hospitals, etc.), he controls in his area several branch hospitals and numerous dispensaries staffed by officers of the Provincial and Subordi- nate Medical Services; his work is largely in the hospital, though much of it is administrative. The responsibility of the Civil Surgeon for public 4
2 health varies in the different provinces of India, and while in all there is a Director of Public Health, it is only Madras, Bengal, United Provinces, Punjab, Bihar and Orissa that public health has been placed under the control of whole time District Public Health Officers. 5. In Madras there is a Chief Leprosy Officer, while Group Leprosy Officers are in charge of several adjacent districts and, according to Sir Frank Connor's note on the Madras Medical Department, it has been proposed to increase their number so as to allow of each heavily infected district being provided with a separate Leprosy Officer. 6. Propaganda and survey in regard to Leprosy have necessitated the appointment of a Leprosy Officer each in Bengal and the Punjab. In the Central Provinces there are three Sub-Assistant Health Officers for the purpose. 7. The appointment of special officers for Tuberculosis is under con- sideration in the various provinces. Bihar has given lead in the matter by appointing one officer of the rank of Assistant Director of Public Health on the staff of the Inspector General of Civil Hospitals. 2. MEDICAL PROFESSION. It is estimated that there are 35,0003 spirit and has no particular yearning for the company of his own kind, the village is an admirable place to work in if he can bring himself to forgo the close contacts and associations by which alone he can steadily become more proficient in his calling. Not many, we must infer, are so endowed. The doctor who does work in the villages is quite likely to find that, after all his years of study, a charm or a line of ancient verse is regarded as a more reliable help in time of trouble. It is a difficult situation not to be put right by good advice alone". 2. It is only in provinces where a Council of Medical Registration exists that it is possible to give the number of doctors registered and these are as follows:4 Assistant Surgeons. Sub-Assistant Surgeons. (d) Provincial Civil Medical Services5 CHAPTER II. Hospitals and Dispensaries. 1. ADVISORY COMMITTEES FOR HOSPITALS. Advisory Committees for hospitals are now a feature of medical admi- nistration in all provinces, though their scope and composition varies, and except in Delhi Province they do not exist in the Centrally Admi- nistered Areas. The principal function of these Committees is to keep the head of the provincial medical department and the local Government informed of the needs of the hospitals as viewed by the public and they aim at maintaining touch with the Medical Department on the one hand and the public on the other. They enquire into the working of the institu- tions and advise on all matters connected with the welfare of the hospital, the comfort and well-being of the patients and in some cases management and control of accounts. These Committees have no execu- tive authority, for the entire supervision and management of the institu- tion and its establishment are in the hands of the Medical Officer in charge of the hospital subject to the control of the Provincial Admi- nistrative Medical Officer. 2. In a note on the Madras Medical Department, Major-General Sir Frank Connor writes "The reports received on the working of these Advisory Committees during my term of office show, with few exceptions, that these committees have not been working satisfactorily. The District Medical Officers complain that it is difficult at many meetings to get a quorum. General apathy is one reason for this state of affairs, but another important reason is the failure of the administration to carry out the majority of the recommendations made by them; this results very naturally in their losing interest. The reason for this failure is, in the majority of cases, the inadequacy of finance made available by Govern- ment. "An improvement in the working of Advisory Committees in the City of Madras is noticeable. Non-official members have been taking greater. interest in ascertaining the requirements of hospitals, with the result that many useful suggestions have been made and accepted by the Surgeon- General. It is to be hoped that this improvement will extend to mofussil areas and that more money will soon be available to activate proposals for improvements made by Advisory Committees." 3. The Visiting Committees for State institutions in Bengal are appointed by Government and consist of officials as well as non-officials. The Managing Committees for private hospitals are appointed with the sanction of the Commissioner of the Division and consist of non-officials except for the District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Officer and Civil Surgeon who are ex-officio members.
6 4. The Advisory Committees for Bombay City hospitals consist of seven members nominated by the Surgeon General, with the Medical Officer in charge of the hospital as Secretary. In the mofussil the Civil Surgeon is the Chairman, with six other members of whom at least three should be Indians and two ladies. One of these six members is nominated by the District Board and another by the Municipality. The tenure of members is one year. The Committees are appointed for Government hospitals at provincial headquarters and district civil hospitals with accommodation for 50 or more beds. The decisions of the Committee are acted upon by the Medical Officer and where he has no power to give effect to them, referred to the Surgeon General with the Government of Bombay. 5. In the Punjab a committee consisting of non-official visitors, nomi- nated by Government, is appointed for various hospitals in Lahore. Of these at least four are ladies. In the districts for every provincialised hospital there is a committee consisting of two members nominated by the Municipal Committee, two members nominated by the Dis- trict Board, three members nominated by the Deputy Commis- sioner of the District and the members of the Provincial Legislative Council from the district. The Civil Surgeon of the district acts as President. The tenure of membership is one year. 6. In the Central Provinces and Berar the composition of the Boards of Management for provincialised hospitals and Dispensary Fund Com- mittees for local fund hospitals varies from place to place, but the salient feature is that they consist of a few ex-officio and a few non-official members nominated by the Local Government or the Commissioner of the division concerned. 7. The Managing Committees in Bihar are nominated by Government for Government hospitals and by local bodies for local fund institutions subject to the approval of the Commissioner of the division concerned in the latter case. Usually the District Magistrate, the Civil Surgeon and the Sadr Sub-Divisional Officer are ex-officio members of each committee. The Committees in Orissa are formed on the same lines as in Bihar. 8. Advisory Committees in Assam consist of the Deputy Commissioner of the district as President Civil Surgeon as Vice-President, two mem- bers nominated by the Municipal Board, two nominees of the Local Board and two members nominated by the Deputy Commissioner. 9. The Advisory Committee for the Irwin Hospital, New Delhi, is nominated by the Chief Commissioner, Delhi, and consists of the Chief Medical Officer, Delhi, the Civil Surgeon, New Delhi, an Executive Engineer of the Public Works Department, a representative of the Lady Hardinge Medical College, two nominees of the Delhi Municipal Com- mittee, one nominee of the New Delhi Municipal Committee, the Chief Health Officer, one lady each nominated by the Delhi and New Delhi Municipal Committees, one non-official medical practitioner of the Delhi Province, the Superintendent of Nurses and the Senior Assistant Surgeon of the Irwin Hospital.
7 10. The Advisory Committee for the Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar, consists of the Inspector General of Civil Hospitals, North-West Frontier Province, as Chairman, the Civil Surgeon, Peshawar, as Secretary and three members of the North-West Frontier Province Legislative Assembly and three nominees of the Municipal Committee, Peshawar, as members. 11. In Sind there are Advisory Committees at the Civil Hospitals, Hyderabad, Sukkur and Mirpurkhas. The Advisory Committee consists of the Civil Surgeon. as Chairman and six other members of whom at least three shall be Indians and two ladies, who shall hold office for a period of one year. The District Local Board and the Municipality of the district is entitled to send one representative each to serve on the Com- mittee. 12. The general consensus of opinion is that these committees serve a useful purpose, that they offer useful suggestions for improvement in the efficiency of the hospital staff and often help in raising donations and procuring articles or special comfort for the patients. 2. AVERAGE AREA AND POPULATION SERVED BY EACH HOSPITAL OR DISPENSARY. Province. Total number of hospitals and dispensaries in the province. Average area served by each hospital or dispensary. (Sq. miles). Average popula- tion served by each hospital or dispensary. 1 2 3 4 Madras 1,134 126 41,217 Bombay 429 180 41,940 Bengal 1,449 540 34,585 United Provinces 597 178 81,087 Punjab 896 111 26,318 Central Provinces 343 291 45,212 Bihar 528 131 61,310 Assam 343 160 25,138 Sind 108 429 35,991 Orissa 164 145 32,355 Delhi 24 24 26,510 North-West Frontier Province 114 118 21,272 Baluchistan 41 1,327 11,305 Ajmer-Merwara 10 271 56,029 Coorg 11 145 14,848
8 3. EXPENDITURE ON MEDICAL RELIEF. Province. Expenditure on Medical Relief during 1936. Per Capita. Per square mile. 1 2 3 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Madras 0 2 7 53 2 5 Bombay 0 4 9 65 7 0 Bengal 0 2 1 84 0 0 United Provinces 0 1 0 29 0 4 Punjab 0 5 7 51 12 9 Central Provinces and Berar 0 1 5 13 11 10 Bihar 0 1 3 35 11 8 Assam 0 1 8 14 5 5 Sind 0 4 0 20 15 3 Orissa 0 1 6 23 5 8 Delhi 1 2 5 1,272 0 0 North-West Frontier Province 0 6 3 70 0 0 Baluchistan 0 8 8 4 9 9 Ajmer-Merwara 0 4 11 63 0 10 Coorg 0 11 2 71 9 7 4. RULES REGULATING GRANTS-IN-AID TO HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES. Madras.9 the fulfilment of certain conditions prescribed by Government. The grant is sanctioned by the Surgeon General with the Government of Madras, on the recommendation of the District Medical Officer. Building grants are sanctioned by Government for institutions run by registered medical practitioners provided the Surgeon General is satisfied about the necessity of the grant. In case where the cost of the proposed work exceeds Rs. 50,000, the Surgeon General forwards the plans and the estimates to Government. The amount of grant is usually equal to one-half of the total cost of the building. Grants to Local Boards and Municipalities are maintenance grants given as fixed grants, half grants, percentage contributions and building grants. Half grants are equal to half the cost (initial and recurring) of the hospital or dispensary while Government pays the entire salaries of civil Assistant Surgeons or Sub-Assistant Surgeons. Percentage contribu- tions are given to institutions located at stations other than at Taluk Headquarters. The Government contributes 22 per cent. and 10 per cent. of pay and allowances respectively of civil Assistant Surgeons in Local Boards, and 17½ per cent. and 5 per cent. of their pay and allowances respectively in Municipalities in consideration of work done by those institutions for the Government. Half grants are given to local bodies for medical buildings if they are considered to be necessary and expedient in the public interest. Bombay.10 when the only condition attaching to it is the continued active existence of the local body or private institution to which it is given. Administrative departments of Government and subordinate authorities empowered to sanction grants, specify conditions or quote rules or orders under which the grant is sanctioned and supply a copy of such order of sanction to the Examiner, Local Fund Accounts. In case of non-com- pliance with the stipulated conditions the grants are required to be refunded in part or in entirety at the discretion of the sanctioning authority. The Examiner, Local Fund Accounts, has to record in his audit report a note to the effect that the grantee has spent the grant in accordance with the terms attaching to it, and has to report to Govern- ment in the Finance Department instances of diversion of large unspent balances. Punjab and Central Provinces and Berar.11 satisfied that adequate allotments are guaranteed by the Local Board under the different heads of expenditure, recurring as well as non-recur- ring, for the establishment and maintenance of the dispensary. Bihar and Orissa.12 5. Ex-Madras areas and ex-Bihar and Orissa areas, which now constitute the Orissa Province, are governed by the rules regarding hospital fees in force in Madras and Bihar respectively. 6. In the Central Provinces and Berar the system of charging a fee of two pice from each new patient, except paupers, attending a hospital or dispensary had been in force since 1933. The amounts received on that account in most cases were insignificant and with a few exceptions there had been an undoubted fall in the out-patients' attendance. It was thought that if the system were conscientiously worked out it was bound to lead to a "set-back" to the popularity of scientific medicine and the Local Government therefore allowed its discontinuance in the year 1936. 7. In the North-West Frontier Province an innovation of interest has been the starting of a "paisa" dispensary, where everybody is required to pay one pice for the day's medicine supplied and the income thus derived goes towards the running expenses of the dispensary. The success of this dispensary has led to the opening of similar dispensaries elsewhere. 8. A complaint frequently made against the administration of Indian hospitals is that large number of patients who can really afford to pay are treated free of charge. The problem is not simple because modern scientific medicine is costly and although a person may not be indigent as regards the ordinary necessities of life, he often is in respect to even minimum requirements when sick. In the absence of an almoner .system hospital abuse is not easy to detect, but is probably less common than is frequently suggested. The increasing employment of honorary medical officers in hospital out-patients' Departments will probably be a useful corrective, since the final decision as to a patient's eligibility for free treatment rests largely with the doctor. On the whole the revenue obtained from the payments of ordinary patients is not large but fees paid by patients occupying private or paying wards should cover the cost to Government (or the Hospital Management) and in general do so. 6. BUILDINGS. Madras.13 The most important work under construction in Madras was the remodelling of the Government General Hospital at Madras. H. R. H. the Prince of Wales Hospital for Children, as an adjunct to the Govern- ment Victoria Caste and Gosha Hospital, Madras, was completed and opened during the year. The construction of the new hospitals at Madura and Cocanada was nearing completion by the end of 1936. A new out- patient department has been added to the Government Victoria Caste and Gosha Hospital, Madras and a Venereal out-patient block to the Government Rayapuram Hospital, Madras. Bombay.14 (iv) Provision of a new dispensary block at Mukerian in the Hoshiarpur district. (v) Construction of the Teka Devi Health and ante-clinic centre in association with the Lady Willingdon Hospital, Lahore. (vi) Construction of a new hospital at Phalia by the Red Cross Society, Punjab Branch. Bihar.15 Sind.16 Ajmer-Merwara.17 2. In addition there are small quantities of Radium in the hands of private doctors. The Barnard Institute of Radiology, located at the General Hospital, Madras, is by far the finest institute of its kind in India, probably in the East. It has recently installed apparatus for the manufacture of Radon with which it will be possible to utilize the curative power of Radium to an increasing extent both in Madras and in outlying districts. The Institute, which, to quote Sir Frank Connor's note on the Madras Medical Department, "is a fitting memorial to the impatient industry of Captain Barnard, the Director" undertakes training classes for medical men, and proposals are under consideration for the establish- ment of a Diploma and University Degree in Radiology. 3. The Tata Memorial Hospital, Bombay, which has been founded by the Trustees of Sir Dorabji Tata Trust, and which will open early in 1939 will also have a large quantity of radium. It seems probable that there will be a bomb for beam therapy and also a supervoltage machine capable of producing neutrons as well as X-rays. In addition, several other therapy and diagnostic roentgen machines of various types and capacities will be maintained. 4. X-Ray facilities available in the various provinces can hardly be regarded adequate, as will be seen from the figures set forth in the follow- ing table. Province. Major sets. Minor sets. Remarks. Madras 12 Figures for major and minor sets not given sepa- rately. Bombay 10 1 Bengal 22 9 United Provinces 9 *11 *Plus 2 private owned sets and 3 minor sets. Punjab 10 3 Central Provinces 7 6 Bihar 1 8 Assam 3 Sind 2 1 Orissa 2 Delhi 3 3 North-West Frontier Province 1 4 Baluchistan 1 Ajmer-Merwara 1 B
18 9. BEDS FOR MATERNITY CASES AND NUMBER OF LABOUR The following table gives an dea of the number of beds available for maternity cases and the number of labour cases attended to in each province during the year 1937. Province. General Hospitals. Women's Hospitals. Maternity Homes. No. of beds available for maternity cases. No. of delivery cases attended to. No. of beds available for maternity cases. No. of delivery cases attended to. No. of beds available for maternity cases. No. of delivery cases attended to. Normal. Abnormal. Normal. Abnormal. Normal. Abnormal. Madras 609 10,626 3,012 838 15,117 7,178 93 1,389 205 Bombay 413 11,471 1,579 836 4,416 1,434 1,386 17,482 1,982 Bengal 333 7,525 1,194 369 8,179 2,875 119 6,132 1,810 United Provinces. 40 881 251 388 3,806 2,937 45 194 19 Punjab 113 3,403 972 343 3,403 1,659 46 1,653 119 Central Provinces and Berar. 144 2,297 584 264 2,218 668 182 2,086 54 Bihar 92 *6,798 *2,763 143 Assam 47 510 165 64 99 50 9 19 10. HONORARY MEDICAL OFFICERS. The system of appointing honorary medical officers to Government insti- tutions is in force in the provinces of Madras, Bombay, Bengal, the United Provinces, the Central Provinces and Berar, Bihar, Orissa and Sind. A résumé of the rules regulating such appointments in these provinces is given below. The Bombay rules apply to Sind. In Orissa the rules regulating such appointments are under preparation. For the present the Madras rules are applicable to South Orissa. MADRAS. Scope of appointment.20 Honorarium.21 from the hospital for the purpose of treating him as a private patient. It is, however, open to any honorary medical officer to take under his care a patient who has been discharged from the hospital in accordance with the rules governing the discharge of patients from Government hospitals. Leave.22 Qualifications.23 In No. 3 the members of the honorary staff are designated as (i) House Surgeons, (ii) House Physicians, (iii) Honorary Surgeons and (iv) Hono- rary Physicians. Qualifications.24 UNITED PROVINCES. Scope of appointment.25 once daily and oftener, if necessary, and to answer all emergent calls relat- ing to them. Except at the special request of the Civil Surgeon or in his absence of the Senior Assistant, the honorary officer may not deal with cases not assigned to him or with other miscellaneous work of the hospital. Duties.26 Qualifications.27 service. The instruction is separate from that given to under-graduates and is imparted to Assistant Surgeons at the Medical College, Calcutta, and to Sub-Assistant Surgeons at the Campbell Medical School, Calcutta, and at the Medical School, Dacca. In the Bombay Presidency no regular post- graduate course for either class exists though immediately on recruitment Sub-Assistant Surgeons are given practical training as House Surgeons or Physicians at the General Hospitals in Poona and Ahmedabad, and a short course in Hygiene. While Sub-Assistant Surgeons in the United Provinces are given no such training, Assistant Surgeons have to take up in two ins- talments a course each of three months' duration at the King George's Medical College, Lucknow, between the fourth to seventh and tenth to fourteenth years of their service. Failure to attend the first course within the first eight years of service and the second within fifteen years of service renders the Assistant Surgeons concerned liable to stoppage of further in- crements. In the Punjab also Sub-Assistant Surgeons are given no post- graduate training, though the system is in force for Assistant Surgeons, who have to undergo two courses each of 3 months' duration at the King Edward Medical College, Lahore, at the end of the fifth and tenth year of service respectively. An examination is held at the conclusion of each course. Instruction in hospital courses is imparted along with under-graduates, but in other subjects separate classes are held. In Bihar both classes of doctors have to undergo post-graduate training, which lasts for three months between the 5th and 7th and 12th and 14th year of service for Assistant Surgeons and between the 6th and 8th and 13th and 15th year of service for Sub-Assistant Surgeons. The instruction is given separately to gra- duates and under-graduates, for the former attend the Medical College Hospital, Patna, and the latter the Medical School Hospital, Darbhanga. An examination is held at the end of each course. With minor variation of details almost a similar system obtains in the Central Provinces where Sub- Assistant Surgeons are given training at the Robertson Medical School, Nagpur, and Assistant Surgeons at the Medical College, Calcutta. In Assam the system of giving post-graduate training to Assistant Surgeons is in abeyance due to financial stringency, but it is given to Sub-Assistant Surgeons, who have to undergo two courses each of 3 months' duration between the 4th and 7th year of service and between the 11th and 14th year of service. The instruction is given at the Campbell Medical School, Calcutta, separately from that imparted to under-graduates and an exami- nation is held at the end of each course. In Sind the system of imparting post-graduate training to Sub-Assistant Surgeons obtains on much the same lines since 1930 as in Bombay, while the scheme for Assistant Surgeons has not been worked at all since they have not taken advantage of the system. Orissa follows the same procedure as in Bihar except that Sub-Assistant Surgeons are trained at the Cuttack General Hospital. In the North-West Frontier Province Assistant Surgeons have to attend a three months' course at the Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar, before-completion of 5 and 10 years of their service. An examination is held at the end of the course. No such system of instruction exists for Sub-Assistant Surgeons, though the latter possessing licentiates' qualification only have to appear at written and oral professional examinations after 5, 10 and 15 years' service.
28 12. MENTAL HOSPITALS AND PSYCHIATRIC CLINICS. There are 17 Mental Hospitals in British India distributed as follows:29 5. Increasing use of Mental Hospitals.30 was formed in 1937 and instruction in sense training, simple story telling, picture drawing etc. was given and facilities for excursions, outdoor games, amusements and certain simple cottage industries provided. 10. In Bombay the training of mentally defective children is under- taken at the Byramjee Jeejeebhoy Home for Children, Matunga, which is maintained by the Society for the Protection of Children in Western India. A specially trained lady teacher has been engaged for the purpose and she works under the direction of the Honorary Psychiatrist of the Home. The children are taught on Montessori lines and the training includes classes on sewing, embroidery, raffica work and bead work, etc. 11. Mentally defective children in Bengal are trained at the Kurseong Home in Darjeeling District and the Bodhana Niketan in the suburbs of Calcutta. Both are private institutions. 12. No facilities for the training of mentally defective children exist in the United Provinces, Punjab, Bihar, Central Provinces and Berar, Assam, Sind, North-West Frontier Province, Orissa, Baluchistan and Coorg. 13. Arrangements for the care of the mentally defective are undoubtedly inadequate, a condition which obtains in most agricultural countries and which is not peculiar to India. With increasing urbanisation and educa- tion there is a greater demand that these patients should be cared for and that institutional treatment for the indigent mental patients is a charge on the State. A greater part of the accommodation in existing mental hospi- tals is occupied by incurable patients, and the only important advance made in recent years has been the organisation of Psychiatric Clinics at medical teaching institutions in Bombay, Bengal and United Provinces. Funds are not available anywhere to provide adequate accommodation for mental patients in India, but wherever possible psychiatric clinics should be opened at the larger hospitals. Such clinics deal especially with the early curable cases and when combined with a Neurology clinic often produce the confi- dence which attracts patients. Indian medical practitioners are becoming increasingly interested in this branch of medicine and specialists who have taken European training are practising in larger centres. 13. MEDICAL INSPECTION OF SCHOOL CHILDREN. A regular system of medical inspection of school children is in force in all provinces, except Madras, Bombay and Sind. The system of medical examination of college students prevails only in Bengal and Bihar while at the Bombay University it is confined to students of Intermediate classes. In Baluchistan the system has not been regularised, but doctors visit schools occasionally, while in the United Provinces, Punjab, Bihar, Orissa and North-West Frontier Province it has developed to a considerable extent. 2. There are 13 whole-time and 55 part-time inspectors in the United Provinces, 15 whole-time and 92 part-time medical officers in the Punjab, 4 whole-time school medical officers assisted by 4 sub-assistant surgeons and one lady Doctor for girls schools in Bihar, 2 medical officers in Orissa and 4 whole-time and 9 part-time inspectors in the North-West Frontier Province. In Calcutta there are 3 part-time medical officers. In
31 Delhi there are 6 whole-time and 5 part-time inspectors and one lady doctor. In Assam Sub-divisional medical officers work as part time school medical inspectors. 3. In the Punjab a number of schools in urban areas group together and open a dispensary, while others are required to stock a few ordinary medi- cines for ailments that can be dealt with on the spot. In the United Provinces there are five central school clinics at Lucknow, Agra, Allahabad, Cawnpore and Benares and many schools in rural areas keep village aid boxes. All Anglo-Vernacular schools in the United Provinces are required to stock a few ordinary medicines for treatment of ailments on the spot. There are two school clinics in Delhi. In the rural areas of Delhi first aid medical boxes are provided in some schools for the treatment of school children. In the North-West Frontier Province a medicine chest is main- tained at every school. In Bengal no arrangements for the treatment of ailments at the spot exist, though students with delicate health are supplied with Cod Liver Oil and Calcium Salts free of charge and about 100 poor students with defective eye-sight given free spectacles every year. In other provinces the children who need treatment are required to go to the nearest hospital or dispensary. 4. Features peculiar to certain plans in vogue in the various provinces may briefly be stated as follows. In the Bengal Presidency Medical Inspec- tion of school children is confined to Government and Government aided schools in the city of Calcutta. The students of the primary classes in Calcutta and of both primary and secondary classes in Mofussil are yet outside the scope of the existing schemes for medical inspection of school children. The system as obtaining in Calcutta is inadequate and unsatis- factory as three part-time medical officers can hardly cope with the work of examining 8,000 students of 33 schools scattered over an area of about 10 miles. An extension and improvement of the scheme is recommended by the local authorities. In the Punjab there is a separate scheme each for urban and rural areas. In the urban areas a group of schools in larger areas combine, engage a whole-time doctor, open a dispensary and conduct medi- cal inspection and treatment of school children and teachers. In smaller areas in urban centres every school is expected to arrange with some local practitioner or hospital doctor to get every student examined once a year and to get treatment and medicines for students suffering from any ailments. A scheme for the medical inspection of school children in rural areas was introduced as an experimental measure in the districts of Gurgaon, Jullundur, Sialkot, Shahpur and Multan in 1926. Rural Dispen- sary doctors are required to examine at least once a year and treat free of charge students belonging to schools of villages where the dispensaries are located. In Bihar the system of medical inspection of school children is in force since 1920 and covers high and middle schools situated in places where high schools exist. College students are medically examined under arrangements made by the Governing Bodies of the Colleges concerned. Since 1935 students of Middle Schools in rural areas are examined by the neighbouring Dispensary Doctors under the direction of the District Board. Health Staff. In Assam students of Government schools at District and Sub-divisional Headquarters are inspected once a month.
32 5. The schemes of medical inspection of school children as obtaining in the various provinces are under the control of Public Health Department except in Assam, Baluchistan and Coorg, where they are under the Medical Department, while in Bengal the responsibility rests with the Director of Public Instruction who functions through the Physical Director in this behalf. 6. The medical inspection of school children is one of those branches of medical activity where the Medical and Public Health Departments can and often do usefully co-ordinate. 7. Apart from the United Provinces, Punjab, Bihar, Orissa and North- West Frontier Province, medical inspection of schools is not an established success, partly due to lack of co-operation on the part of the teachers and the parents, for while defects in children are detected by the school medi- cal inspectors, they are not properly followed up. But the desirability of the extension of the existing system is universally acknowledged. Primary classes, as also schools in rural areas, should be brought under the scheme where they are still outside its scope. A system for the examination of girls schools should also be established and Lady Medical Officers employed for the purpose, for so far Bihar and Delhi are the only provinces where there is a Lady School Medical Officer. There is a suggestion from the Punjab that there should be a separate Medical Inspector of Schools for every district and that children should be examined at least twice a year. Bihar suggests provision of funds for free distribution of spectacles and cer- tain medicines to the poor students. There is a suggestion from the same province that arrangements should be made for the occasional visits of Dentists and Eye Specialists, and also, where possible, for a cheap but nutritious midday meal for school children as this will considerably reduce the cases of malnutrition. Teachers should take more interest in the health and physique of children in their care. Assam recommends that a quarterly School Medical Record card should be maintained for each student. 8. It is important that the results of these experiments should be re- viewed in each province periodically and the schemes extended by employ- ment of additional whole or part-time medical inspectors, where necessary, who should receive special training in the work. The establishment of school clinics should be encouraged as far as possible as this is an import- ant factor on which the success of the plan depends to a great extent. 14. EFFECTS OF EARTHQUAKES IN BIHAR AND BALUCHISTAN AND PROGRESS THEREAFTER. A devastating earthquake occurred in Bihar in 1934 and was responsible for the complete demolition of numerous buildings, and for the tremendous loss of life. Among the hospital buildings most affected by the earthquake were the Bettiah Raj Hospital, the Purnea District Hospital, the Motihari District Hospital, the Darbhanga District Hospital, the Sitamarhi and Madhubani Sub-divisional Hospitals. These institutions required complete reconstruction. At Bettiah a new hospital building has been put up at a cost of Rs. 6 lakhs. Every effort has been made to make it one of the best designed hospitals of India. The plans and estimates for the re-building of the Purnea and Motihari District Hospitals were ready in 1937, though
33 building operations could be started in the case of the former only. The new Darbhanga Hospital was expected to be ready by March 1938, at a cost of Rs. 7½ lakhs. The Madhubani Sub-divisional Hospital has been rebuilt, while the Sitamarhi Hospital was still under construction in 1937. Several small District Board dispensaries that had been destroyed by the earthquake have been or are being reconstructed. The earthquake of June 1935 had an equally disastrous effect on the buildings in Baluchistan. The Civil Hospitals at Chaman and Quetta and the Lady Sandeman Dufferin Hospital, and the Mission Hospital, Quetta, were completely demolished by the earthquake. It is proposed to re- construct the two civil hospitals at Chaman and Quetta. As a result of the earthquake the Church of England Zenana Mission Hospital and the C. M. S. Hospital at Quetta ceased to work, but they restarted working in May 1936. The Lady Sandeman Dufferin Hospital, Quetta, restarted work in February 1936 in the compound of the Civil Hospital at Quetta, which itself continued to work in the temporary huts put up at its old site in 1935. The Quetta Municipal Dispensary which ceased to function after the earthquake has not yet been revived. *15. LEGISLATION REGARDING CONTROL OF PRACTITIONERS, OF THE INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE. For sometime past there had been a demand from the public of the Bombay Presidency for the recognition by Government of the Ayurvedic and Unani systems of medicine. There is accordingly now under con- sideration in the Bombay Legislative Assembly, a Bill to regulate the quali- fications and to provide for the registration of practitioners of Indian sys- tems of medicine. The Bill provides for the establishment of a Board of Indian Systems of Medicine, with one President and twelve members. Registered practitioners of the Indian systems of medicine shall, under the provisions of this Bill, be regarded as "legally qualified" or "duly qualified" medical practitioners and certificates granted by them shall be recognised by law. The Board of Indian Systems of Medicine shall prescribe the course of training and qualifying examinations including training and examinations in pre-clinical subjects and no person shall be eligible for registration unless he has passed a qualifying examination. The qualifying examination and every prior examination leading up to it shall be inspected by the Inspectors to be appointed by the said Board at least once in four years or oftener, if the Board so decides. If the Provincial Government is, on the report of the Board or otherwise, satisfied that the course of study and examinations prescribed by any of the institutions are not such as to secure to persons obtaining such qualifications requisite knowledge and skill for the efficient practice of their profession, it shall be lawful for the Provincial Government to direct the removal of the name of such institution from the list of ins- titutions authorised to hold a qualifying examination. A list of practi- tioners for the time being registered and their qualifications shall be pub- lished every year and in any proceedings it shall be presumed that a prac- titioner entered in such list is a registered practitioner. No person other * The information contained in this rote has been extracted from the daily press.
34 than a practitioner registered under the aforesaid Bill or under the Bombay Medical Act, 1912, shall be eligible to practise any system of medicine, Surgery or midwifery, but the Provincial Government is authorised to direct that this provision shall not apply to any person or class of persons or in any specified area. 2. The Madras Government have recently accorded a certain amount of recognition to the practitioners of the Indian systems of medicine inasmuch as candidates who have acquired the diploma in medicine of the Govern- ment Indian Medical School, Madras, are, besides medical graduates and licentiates, eligible for appointment to subsidized rural dispensaries. 3.In response to a number of requests the Punjab Government have recently decided to appoint a Committee with the Inspector General of Civil Hospitals, Punjab, as President, to consider steps that can be taken to give protection to practitioners of indigenous systems of medicine on the lines of the rules introduced by the Government of the United Provinces in 1931 for the registration of vaids and hakims and whether any legislation on the subject is necessary, and if so, on what lines. 4. With a view to recognising the Ayurvedic and Unani systems of medicine the Government of the United Provinces propose to introduce legislation on the subject at the next session of the Assembly. The Hon'ble Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, Minister for Local Self Government and Public Health, United Provinces, recently received a deputation of Vaids and Hakims. It is contemplated to adopt a system of registration or otherwise of recognition. The Ministry have recently addressed Local Boards inviting their co-operation in inaugurating a system of subsidising Vaids and Hakims in the villages which would include the provision of a cheap system of medical treatment in rural areas. A sum of Rs. 40 lakhs available in the current year's budget for this purpose is being utilised for the proposed subsidy. 16. RURAL MEDICAL RELIEF. During recent years the problem of Rural Medical Relief has received considerable attention from Provincial Public Health and Medical Depart- ments, and in 1934-35 the Government of India allotted a sum of Rs. 1 crore for rural reconstruction, to be distributed on a basis of rural popula- tion. The various schemes evolved deal with the more pressing needs of village life and include measures to deal with sanitation, malaria, water supplies, drainage and roads. 2. The Rockefeller Foundation has played a very valuable part in recent years in developing health activities in rural areas. Their policy has been the establishment of Health Units in co-operation with provincial Govern- ments and the Governments of Indian States. Already units have been established in Partabgarh (United Provinces), Poonamalle (Madras), Najaf- garh (Delhi) and Neyyattinkara (Travancore), and a scheme is under pre- paration for starting a unit in Bengal. The activities of these units have been described in greater detail in the report of the Public Health Commis- sioner, but it may be pointed out that their role is intended to be purely preventive. It is therefore important that in the health unit areas the
35 Medical Department should co-operate in providing the requisite curative facilities for the people; otherwise there is a danger of the health units losing their proper function and to become dispensaries rather than centres for the practice and propagation of preventive methods. 3. The disinclination of the private practitioner to settle in rural areas has been referred to in Section 2 of Chapter I and is not a state of affairs peculiar to India. A professional man who has passed successfully through an arduous and prolonged scientific education is not generally willing to reside in a remote country area where amenities are few and earnings meagre. The solution will, it is believed, be found in improving communi- cations and increasing use of mechanical transport by the doctor who has initiative, while the sick man is himself by the same means able to travel to the nearest dispensary or hospital with less difficulty than is often imagin- ed. The real problem is to deal with remote sparsely populated areas where the communications are poor and which are frequently almost inaccessible during certain times of the year, e.g., in the rains. That problem still remains unsolved, but it should be stressed that every new road and every improved communication is a gain to the sick villager and a step forward in the solution of the rural medical problem. Some Governments, e.g., Bengal and the Punjab, have considered proposals by which only doctors who have practised in rural areas for a certain number of years shall be recruited in Government service, or to grant scholarships on condition that the successful candidate shall serve for a prescribed period in a country district. It is doubtful if such schemes can be anything but temporary expedients, or that they will ever provide an efficient modern medical service for the village. The most promising method will be to subsidize the prac- titioner or to provide him with transport or travelling allowance such as is done in the Highlands and Islands Services of the North of Scotland and, under similar schemes, in certain Colonies. 4. The desire of the medical profession to improve the standard of education of the Sub-Assistant Surgeon or Licentiate class will influence the quality and methods of rural medical relief. In Madras, training for this class of doctors has already been abandoned, and it is the intention that entry to the medical profession shall be only the M. B. or Graduate standard. In some other provinces the standard of preliminary education is being raised to that of Intermediate Science of a University. Graduates are willingly entering service in the Subordinate Medical Service, where they are placed in charge of dispensaries, and such employment offers great possibilities both to the Graduate of Medicine and to the village. 5. Rural medical relief is or can be afforded by one of the following means:36 It is quite possible for the dispensary doctor to be given a few key villages which he can visit on certain days of the week, and for him to become a rural area doctor rather than one who sits at his headquarters and waits for the patients to visit him. (ii) Travelling dispensaries.37 inevitably restrict the amount of treatment he is able to give. The dis- pensary doctor cannot be used as a sanitary inspector, though there are certain public health duties which he can easily undertake, for instance early detection and report of epidemic diseases, noting the relative incidence of the various communicable diseases, detection of villages in which vaccination is badly needed, reporting to the District Health Officer gross insanitary defects and cases of malnutrition among his patients and their family and propaganda for the improvement of health. The aim, on the whole, should be co-operation directed towards the greatest good of the people rather than rigid separation into compartments, since all efforts are directed towards the same objective of better health and less sickness. 8. The organisation of an efficient Rural Nursing Service is as impor- tant and necessary as the provision of doctors, and though the number of trained women available is still very inadequate, the profession is, if slowly, becoming more popular among educated Indians. In the United Provinces qualified midwives and nurses agreeable to settle down in rural areas are paid a subsidy of Rs. 100 per annum. In the Bombay Presidency the Government have sanctioned, as a part of the rural medical relief programme, a scheme providing for an increase in the number of qualified nurses and midwives attached to local board dispensaries. The Madras Government pay a subsidy of Rs. 300-400 p. a. to midwives working in rural areas. In the Delhi Province there are five maternity and child welfare centres in rural areas each in charge of a midwife or a nurse. 9. The various schemes for providing additional rural medical relief have been briefly narrated in the following paragraphs. 10. Madras.38 The Madras Government pay a subsidy of Rs. 30039 Government has also sanctioned as a part of their rural programme the opening of six tuberculosis clinics at the Civil Hospitals at Ahmedabad, Surat, Poona, Sholapur, Nasik and Belgaum, at a total annual cost of Rs. 14,680. Each clinic is to be in charge of an Honorary Medical. Officer acquainted with the modern methods of treatment and prevention of tuberculosis on Rs. 50 p.m. each. A nurse attached to each clinic, is to be paid Rs. 100 p. m. plus a house rent allowance of Rs. 15 p. m., half of which is to be met by the Red Cross Society. 12 Bengal.40 The medical officers in charge of these dispensaries are engaged by District Boards on a five-year contract, but for the purposes of discipline, leave and transfer they are under the control of the Civil Surgeons and the Inspector General of Civil Hospitals. The scale of pay sanctioned for them is Rs. 70-4-130, Rs. 150, after 20 years' service and Rs. 175 after 26 years' service, but it is open to District Boards to vary this scale if they can obtain men at cheaper rates. An experiment has been introduced in October 1937 whereby the Rural Dispensary Doctors in the districts of Lahore, Gujrat, Montgomery, Hoshiarpur and Karnal are placed under the district medical officer of health, with a view to encourage preventive propaganda side by side with curative work. The mere fact that the dispensary doctor is treating the sick in the village, makes his advice regarding general health work more readily acceptable. The medical officers in charge of Rural Dispensaries are required to tour at least twice a week in the area within four miles from the dispensary and are paid a fixed Travelling Allowance of Rs. 10 p. m. As an experiment two rural dispensaries in each of the four districts in the Punjab have been converted into subsidised dispensaries. 15.Central Provinces and Berar.41 17. Assam.42 20. Delhi.43 23. Ajmer-Merwara.44 Rural Medical Relief. (Excluding District Headquarters). Subsidized Rural Practitioners. Name of Province. Pay. Annual grant for drugs and instruments. Controlling authority. Method of appointment of practitioners. Duties Method of Finance, Government grant, local effort, etc. Remarks. Touring or area. Health 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a Graduates Rs. 600 p. a., L. M. Ps. Rs. 500 p.a. Rs. 360 p. a. Surgeon Ge- neral. Practitioners ap- pointed in consulta- tion with D. M. Os. with approval of the S. G. Within a radius of 5 miles. Yes, on pay- ment of Rs. 15 p. m. Subsidy paid from Provincial funds. In exceptional cases local body pays in addition 50 per cent. of Gov- ernment Subsidy. 419 rural medical practitioners at work. Bombay. Rs. 50 p.m. plus Rs. 25 p. m. fixed Travel- ling Allowance. Such amount as may be fixed by Government from time to time subject to a minimum of Rs. 350 p. a. President D. L. B. and C. S. of the District. Selected by the Pre- sident, D. L. B. and C. S. of the District subject to final approval of the Surgeon General. 3 or 4 villages Not definitely prescribed so far. Half to be borne by the D. L. B. and half by Govern- ment. So far only 5 dis- pensaries have been opened in the Dis- tricts of (1) Ahmed- nagar, (2) Nasik, (3)West Khandesh, (4) Belgaum, and (5) Ratnagiri. Bengal No scheme for Subsidized Medical Practitioners in force. United Pro- vinces. Graduates Rs. 1,000 p. a.; Licentiates Rs. 600 p. a.; an additional sum of Rs. 100 p. a. is also given for engaging a midwife. Rs. 360 p. a. Inspector General of Civil Hospi- tals. By local Boards in consultation with the Civil Surgeon of the District. ... ... Subsidy as shown under "pay" is paid by Govern- ment and Annual grant for drugs and instruments is paid by the local Board. 28 medical practi- tioners at work. Punjab Graduates or Licentiates Rs. 600 p. a. Rs. 500 Inspector Ge- neral of Civil Hospitals. Registered Medical Practitioners ap- pointed. No touring ... District Boards given grants-in-aid. 8 subsidized dis- pensaries function- ing for which Gov- ernment pay the subsidy, 1 for which D. B. pays. Central Pro- vinces. Subsidized practitioners scheme tried but proved a failure. Bihar Rs. 25 Annual grant not fixed. The doctor is given free qui- nine and has to provide medicine him- self. District Board. No order on the sub- ject. The doctor is required to inspect local schools to give lantern lectures to students and to treat free acute cases of malaria. He engages in free private practice. District Board fi- nance the Dispen- sary. There are only five subsidized medical practitioners in one district at present.
45 Assam Rs. 25 p. m. Rs. 150 Civil Surgeon Registered Medical practitioners to be appointed. Radius of 5 miles. Yes, Epidemic duty, if required. Financed by Government. 27 subsidized medical practitioners to be engaged. Sind Rs. 50 p. m. Rs. 400 President, District Local Board. Appointed by the President, D. L. B., in consultation with the Civil Surgeon and subject to the approval of the Director of Health Services and Inspector General of Prisons. Yes Government grant. 40 rural medical practitioners were to be appointed. This scheme has proved unpopular. Orissa L. M. Ps. Rs. 35 p.m. (North Orissa). Rs. 500 to Rs. 600 p. a. (in South Orissa). Rs. 300 Director of Health and Inspector General of Prisons, Orissa through C. Ss. and Chairman of District Boards. Registered Medical practitioners by selection. Area Yes Subsidy is paid by Government and medicines and instruments are paid for by Local Boards. In addition to eight subsidized rural dis- pensaries, in South Orissa, 4 more such dispensaries have since been sanctioned by Government for North Orissa which will function from the next financial year. In the case of these 4 dispensaries, Government will con- tribute half of the monthly subsidy and the other half plus the cost of medicines (Rs. 300) will be paid by the Local body, concerned. Delhi No scheme for subsidized practitioners exists. North-West Frontier Province Rs. 35p. m. plus Rs. 5 p. m. fixed Travel- ling Allowance. Rs. 200 I. G. C. H., N. W. F. P. By selection Radius of 5 miles. No Except for 3 places where local effort is made to maintain the subsidized dispensaries, the expenditure in all other cases is wholly defrayed by Government. There are 16 subsidized medical prac- titioners at work, 7 of whom have also been appointed Medical Inspectors of Local Schools on payment of a further subsidy of Rs. 10 p. m. each. Baluchistan. No arrangements for rural medical relief exist. Ajmer-Mer wara A scheme for medical relief through the agency of subsidized medical practitioners is under consideration.
46 17. MISSION MEDICAL ACTIVITIES. Medical Missions have played an important part in medical relief and particularly so in Mofussil areas. The first regular medical missions are said to be those founded and supported by the citizens of the United States in Southern India in 1830-40. Particulars regarding mission institutions in India (excluding Burma and Ceylon) run and aided by different Missions are given in the tables contained in Appendix II. It will be observed that 182 hospitals, 111 dispensaries, 54 leper asylums and 9 sanatoria were functioning during the year 1936. These figures do not represent all the institutions but stand only for those which responded to the questionnaire issued by the Christian Medical Association of India, Burma and Ceylon. Hospitals with 10 or more beds for in-patients have been classed as hospitals and those with less than this number have been put under dispensaries. There were institu- tions that did not supply figures. These collected figures show that of a total yearly expenditure of approximately Rs. 47.62 lakhs by Missions on medical work a sum of Rs. 20.42 lakhs is found by fees and gifts from patients, Rs. 6.43 lakhs from Government and Municipal grants and Rs. 20.77 lakhs from private mission funds. Table showing particulars regarding Mission Medical Institutions. Particulars. Hospitals. 182. Dispensaries. 111. Asylums. 54. Sanatoria. 9. Number of Beds47 Particulars. Hospitals, 182. Dispensaries, 111. Asylums, 54. Sanatoria, 9. Out-patients48 Name of Railway. Medical Personnel. Number of Nurses. Hospitals Number of Dispensaries. Expenditure on Medical Department during 1937. Superior. Subordinate. Number. Beds. Europeans. Indians. Europeans. Indians. Assam Bengal 3 2 46 9 7 88 17 Rs.2,12,048 Bengal and North Western 3 28 11 5 75 10 1,64,381 Rohilkhand and Kumaon 1 8 3 1 20 5 44,181 Bengal Nagpur 4 3 1 178 20 5 182 48 6,09,627 Eastern Bengal 1 5 61 13 14 238 26 7,64,000 2 A. M. 0. East Indian 2 9 238 36 8 252 56 8,66,300 1 A. M. 0. Great Indian Peninsula 3 10 162 31 7 196 30 5,89,834 Madras and Southern Mahratta 3 3 64 10 4 116 33 5,39,006 North Western 5 3 3 116 18 11 235 60 7,95,109 South Indian 2 3 4 634 5 5 86 25 3,58,992 H. E. II. Nizam's State 3 1 29 7 3 132 5 1,91,392 Bombay, Baroda and Central India 4 4 154 14 11 168 35 5,66,000 Total 33 52 8 1,718 182 81 1,788 350 57,00,870
49 CHAPTER III. Co-ordination between Government Medical and Public Health Departments. The activities of those responsible for medical relief and prevention of disease are so closely inter-related that it is impossible to draw any sharp line of distinction between them, and the necessity for co-ordinating their activities is now fully recognised. No apology is therefore required for a brief reference to this subject which has attracted the attention of both administrations and of authorities concerned with medical education. The Central Board of Health at its first meeting passed a special resolu- tion which stressed the need for co-operation between Medical and Public Health Departments, and recognising the important position which pre- vention occupies in every phase of medical practice, both the Medical Council of India and the General Medical Council of Great Britain recom- mend that "throughout the whole period of study the attention of the student should be directed to the importance of the preventive aspects of medicine". 2. In most countries all branches of medicine are administered by one Health Ministry with separate higher directing staffs, and India is in fact peculiar in the extent to which in some areas the activities of medical and public health departments have been separated, or in a few cases even divorced from each other. For this result the history of the development of modern medicine in India is partly responsible, while the magnitude of their tasks, the limited facilities available, and the need for expanding the efforts of both require concentration to a large extent on their own affairs. The inadequacy of existing arrangements has been outlined both in this Review and in the annual reports of the Public Health Commissioner. *Sir John Megaw in 1933 wrote:50 "The position is now very different. The prevention of disease has come to be universally recognized as being the chief aim of medical work and most of the administrative medical officers are now enthusiastic advocates of disease prevention; indeed some of them have been specialists in public health for the greater part of their previous service. All of them state that they are prepared to co-operate with the Directors of Public Health and to insist on a similar co-operation on the part of the members of their staff. This combination of effort does not mean the swallowing up of one department by another, nor does it imply the elimination of the principle of division of labour. It does mean that whenever it is in the interests of efficiency and economy, the medical man ought to engage both in medical relief and public health work and that ever increasing emphasis must be laid on disease preven- tion." 3. Opening a discussion on the organisation of Health Departments at the first meeting of the Central Advisory Board of Health on the 23rd June 1937 the Public Health Commissioner (Colonel Russell) drew attention to the need for co-ordination in the following words:51 the necessity for improvement in the teaching of hygiene and public health as part of the Medical Colleges and Schools curricula for medical qualifications and registrations". (ii) "In order to promote co-ordinated effort in preventive medicine between the Medical and Public Health Departments, the Board recommends the establishment of Central Health Board (or Committee) at the headquarters of each province and of a Health Bureau (or Committee) in each district." 5. While a satisfactory degree of liaison exists between the Directors of Medical and Public Health Departments, it is in the district, in the sphere of the Civil Surgeon and the District Health Officer that health presents its most important problems and where there is the greatest need for co-operation. Separate higher directing staffs technically qualified, co-ordinated by an administrative head, are essential for efficiency, but when we come down to the smaller district unit, such as the village dispensary, it is certain that India can never afford to maintain two experts for each small centre of her population. 6. While, therefore, the ideal is unattainable for financial and other reasons, the most promising line to follow is that of the District Health Bureau recommended and outlined by the Central Health Board, on which the Civil Surgeon and the public health expert of equal standing can co-ordinate all their activities. Further the dispensary doctor must be brought more intimately into the local health picture and his usefulness increased by improving the teaching of hygiene and public health in medical schools and colleges. In their knowledge of the people and the confidence in them, gained by frequent contact, the civil surgeon and the dispensary doctor are valuable assets which should be made full use of. D 2
52 CHAPTER IV. Tuberculosis. Details of the extent to which tuberculosis is prevalent in India will be found in the Public Health Commissioner's reports, but the extent of the problem and the inadequacy of the efforts which have so far been made to meet it necessitate a short reference. 2. Unfortunately the available data are inadequate, and our chief evidence regarding its widespread incidence comes from Dr. Lankester's report in 1920; a note by General Megaw based upon reports collected from medical officers and others throughout India; the figures collected from limited surveys in different areas, and conclusions which have been reached in the Public Health Commissioner's reports. 3. Dr. Lankester, who carried out an inquiry into the causes, preval- ence and possible measures for prevention of tuberculosis in India from July 1914 to June 1916 observed in his report which was published in 1920:53 that the disease is increasing steadily and rather rapidly. The estimate of just over two million cases of tuberculosis in India as a whole is probably much too low; every large town is known to be very heavily infected, and therefore an estimate which is based solely on the incidence of the disease in the agricultural villages must be unduly favourable. "Tuberculosis is a disease which has very special importance in India for the reasons54 the number of deaths. On the basis of this calculation, one million people must be temporarily or permanently invalided by the disease, 20 per cent. or 200,000 of whom are supposed to constantly scatter the infection, through sputum or other body discharges, to healthy people around them". 7. *It is generally estimated that there ought, in any country, to be as many beds available for tuberculous patients as there are deaths from tuberculosis during the year. At a rough estimate there are 500,000 deaths a year from tuberculosis, which means, on the above method of calculating the necessary accommodation, that there should be that number of beds, i.e., 500,000 available in India in hospitals or sanatoria for the treatment of tuberculosis. The table at the end of this chapter shows the number of beds available in India for tuberculosis patients together with the number of clinics which have been established to deal with the disease. In all India there are only 77 clinics and 39 sanatoria and the total number of beds available is approximately 2,768. 8. It is obviously impossible with the limited financial resources avail- able to provide the institutional accommodation in India which the League of Nations Report considered necessary. We must therefore concentrate, as far as possible, on methods which will safeguard future generations while providing as much aid as possible both by institutional and domiciliary treatment to the infected patients. An unofficial committee of doctors on behalf of the King George Thanksgiving (Anti-Tuberculosis) Fund con- sidered this problem in all its aspects and finally drew up the following proposals for a campaign against tuberculosis:55 perform the duties of tuberculosis Health Visitor. In some Provinces and States educated girls who have passed the matriculation examination may be given a short specialised course of training at a central well-organised dispensary and when con- sidered qualified may be posted as Health Visitors. In other places it may be found necessary to utilise men for this work and Sub-Assistant Surgeons, Sanitary Inspectors or even exceptionally efficient Dispensers or Dressers may be employed. In any case it seems desirable to observe the principle of having a uniform rate of pay in each Provincial or State Area for any person performing the duties of a Tuberculosis Health Visitor. (4) Care and Aftercare Committees.56 (9) Funds.57 (vii) Treatment.58 Table showing number of clinics and beds for tuberculosis patients in India. Province. Name of Anti-Tuberculosis Association in the Province. No. of T. B. Dispensaries and Clinics. Tuberculosis Sanatoria. No. of Beds. No. of beds in reserved General Hospitals for T. B. patients. Special T. B. Officers if any. Name of Sanatorium. Designation of Managing Body. Madras Anti-Tuberculosis S u b-Committee, Madras Presidency Branch, Indian Red Cross Society. 9 1. Government T. B. Hospital, Royapettah. Madras Government 80 About 157. 2. Government T. B. Sanatorium, Tambaram. Madras Government 40 3. Union Mission T. B. Sanatorium, Madnapalli, District Chittoor. Union Mission 250 4. Visrantipuram T. B. Sanatorium, Rajahmundary, Goda- vary District. U. L. Mission 50 5. T. B. Sanatorium, Perundurai, Coimbatore District. 6. Shakuntala Memorial T. B. Sanatorium, Guntur. Bombay Anti-Tuberculosis S u b Committee, Indian Red Cross Society, Bombay. 9 1. Turner Sanatorium, Bhai Wada Hill, Parel, Bombay. Bombay Municipality 40 About 129. 2. The Hindu Sanatorium, Karla 40 3. Bel-Air Sanatorium, Dalkeith, Panchgani. Trust managed by a Committee. 140 4. Hill-side Sanatorium, Vengurla 35 5. Sir William Wanless T. B. Sanatorium, Miraj. 131 6. Maharashtra T. B. Sanatorium, Panchooti, Nasik. Poona Anath Vidyarthi Griha Society. 10 7. Dr. Bahadurjee Memorial Sanatorium, Deolali. Private Concern 17 8. T. B. Sanatorium, General Hospital, Hukeri Road, Bel gaum. The Karnatak Health Institute. 20
59 Bengal Tuberculosis Association, Bengal, Calcutta. 7 1. T. B. Hospital and Senatorium, Jadabpur. Calcutta Medical Aid and Research Society. 120 About 175 There is a proposal to appoint a specialist Anti-T. B. Officer. 2. Lowis Jubilee Sanatorium, Darjecling. Managing Committee 8 3. Kurseong Sanatorium Calcutta Medical Aid and Research Society. 20 United Provinces Anti-Tuberculosis League, Lucknow. 3 1. K. E. VII Sanatorium, Bhowali, Naini Tal. K. E. VII Memorial Consumptive Sanatorium Trust. 140 A few beds in certain hospitals. 2. Hillcrust Sanatorium, Jeole Kote, Gethia, Naini Tal. A private concern 30 3. The Sanatorium, Almora Run by Dr. Miss E. C. Cousins. 35 4. Sri Mangla Prasad Samnatorium, Sarnath, Benares. Mangla Prasad Trust 12 5. T. B. Hospital, K. G. Medical College, Lucknow. 44 6. T. B. Hospital, Allahabad 12 7. Karella Bagh Sanatorium A private institution run by donations. Punjab Anti-Tuberculosis sub -Committee, Punjab Provincial Branch. 4 1. King Edward Sanatorium, Dharampore. Consumptives' Home Society, Bombay. 92 2. Lady Irwin Sanatorium, Sanawar. Pubjab Union Mission. 58 3. Jubilee (Mohd. Hussain) Sanetorium, Samli. Board under Chairmanship of Commissioner, Rawalpindi Division. 74 4. S. G. Tuberculosis Hospital, Model Town, Lahore. S. G. Memorial Hospital Trust. 28 5. Krishan Bhagwan Sanatorium, Multan. K. B. Sanatorium Society. 35 6. McGuire T. B. Sanatorium, Dharamsala. Dharamsala Municipality 7 7. Memorial Mission Hospital, Ludhiana. Mission 18 8. R. B. Amar Nath T. B. Insti- tute and T. W. Wards in Mayo Hospital, Lahore. 74 9. K. G. Jubilee Memorial T. B. Hospital, Rawalpindi. 32
60 Province. Name of Anti-Tuberculosis Association in the Province. No. of T. B. Dispensaries and Clinics. Tuberculosis Sanatoria. No. of Beds. No. of beds reserved in General hospital for T. B. patients. Special T. B. Officers if any. Name of Sanatorium. Designation of Managing Body. Central Provinces & Berar. Anti-Tuberculosis Committee, Indian Red Cross Society, Nagpur. 4 Pendra Road Sanatorium Union Board of 11 Missions. 100 29 Bihar Anti-Tuberculosis sub-Committee, Bihar Provincial Branch. 16 Clinics are to be opened. Itki Sanatorium, Ranchi Bihar Government 128 About 38 One Provincial Specialist in charge Itki Sanatorium and one specia IT. B. Officer of the rank of A. D. P. H. for tour- ing. Assam Anti-Tuberculosis sub-Committee, Assam Provincial Branch. 1 There is a proposal to open a Sanatorium with the money received from the Silver Jubilee Fund. North-West Frontier Province. ...... 34 1. 10 beds are reserved for N.-W. F. P. in Samli Sanatorium. ...... 10 44 2. Dadar Sanatorium under construction. ...... 64 beds when opened. Sind Indian Red Cross Society, Sind Pro- vincial Branch. 3 Parpati Awatsing Sanatorium, Jherrach, Karachi District. Run by charitable funds 20 Orissa ...... ... 2 beds are reserved in Itki Sana-torium, Ranchi. Bihar Government 2 1 Delhi Anti-Tuberculosis sub-Committee, Delhi Provincial Branch. 2 Silver Jubilee Tuberculosis Hospi- tal, Kingsway, Delhi. Delhi Municipality 93 ... Baluchistan There are no anti-tuberculosis activities in Baluchistan for the present. Ajmer-Merwara (Raj- putana). Anti-Tuberculosis Committee, Ajmer- Merwara, Ajmer. 1 1 Mary Wilson Sanatorium, Tila- unia. American Methodist Mission. 80 for women. 30 2 Madar Sanatorium Ditto 40 for men. Total ... 77 39 2,165 603
61 CHAPTER. V. Medical Education and Registration. 1. MEDICAL COLLEGES. Medical Colleges built at Government expense were established at Calcutta and Madras in 1835 while half the initial cost of the Bombay College built ten years later was defrayed by the friends of Sir Robert Grant after whom the new institution was named. Although numerous schools sprang up to provide training for a subordinate class of medical officers (hospital assistants and sub-assistant surgeons), except for Lahore (1860), it was not until 1906 that the need for more teaching of a Univer- sity standard was recognised. The example of Lucknow (1911) was followed by other centres and there are now 10 University medical colleges, including one exclusively for women, established in India. At first the Colleges, which were used almost entirely to train medical men for Government service, granted their own diplomas but Calcutta became affiliated to a University in 1857 and was followed soon after by Madras, Bombay and Lahore. 2. The connection of Indian Medical Colleges with the General Medical Council of the United Kingdom began in 1892 when that Council accepted Indian degrees as being of sufficient standard to be placed on the British Medical Register. After the War the General Medical Council, who were dissatisfied with the reports received concerning the teaching of midwifery, deputed Sir Norman Walker to inspect and report on the standard of medical education in India. Inspection of standards of recognised qualifi- cations is one of the duties imposed upon the General Medical Council and Sir Norman Walker's visit was followed by an all round improvement in medical education. Some colleges were unable to attain to the required standard and when India was unable to accept their proposals for regular inspection the General Medical Council were compelled to withdraw recognition from Indian degrees. This state of affairs existed from 1924 to 1933 when the Indian Medical Council Act, 1933, passed by the Central Legislature came into force. By this Act responsibility for the maintenance of a uniform minimum standard of higher medical qualifi- cations for the whole of British India was entrusted to the Medical Council of India who were given necessary powers to inspect courses of instruction and examinations and to recommend to the Governor-General in Council the medical qualifications which should be included in the Schedules to the Act. In accordance with the powers conferred upon it the Council has in 1934, 1935 and 1936 carried out detailed inspections of all the Indian Medical Colleges and their examinations and as a result the medical qualifications of all the Universities except those of the Andhra Univer- sity have now been placed on the First Schedule of the Act. As a result of two careful and detailed inspections of the Vizagapatam Medical
62 College the Medical Council of India at their meeting held in August. 1937 decided that "Andhra University be informed that pending the provision of proper facilities for all teaching for the M. B. B. S. degree the Council is unable to recommend to the Governor-General in Council the inclusion on the First Schedule of the qualifi- cations of the Andhra University." 3. The Medical Council of India has also framed a series of recom- mendations for professional education. These recommendations now govern the requirements and standards of University medical education in India and except in a few minor details are already being followed closely by the recognised Medical Colleges. These recommendations are repro- duced below:63 commencement of his study of the subjects comprising the medical curri- culum and the date of his final qualifying examination; provided that the last three years of the period must have been spent in the continuous study of the clinical group of subjects. 2. That the first two years should be occupied in the study of the professional scientific subjects with an introduction to clinical methods, and that no student should be certified as attending classes in the clinical group of subjects until he has satisfied the Examiners that he has a com- petent knowledge of the subjects of these two years. This examination need not include clinical methods. 3. That throughout the whole period of study the attention of the student should be directed by his teachers to the importance of the preventive aspects of medicine, and of measures for the assessment and maintenance of normal health. In every course of professional study, and in the examinations, the fol- lowing subjects should be included:64 IV. Period of Clinical Studies (third, fourth and fifth years). 2. Pathology and Bacteriology.65 (h) Instruction throughout the periods of medical clerkship in Clinical pathology, to be arranged by the teacher of pathology and of the clinical subjects. (i) Instruction in the following subjects:66 (k) Instruction in the following subjects:67 number of cases attended during this month be less than twenty, the remainder must be attended as soon as possible thereafter. A certificate showing the number of cases of labour attended by the student, in the maternity hospital and in the patients' homes respectively, should he signed by a responsible medical officer on the staff of the hospital and should state:68 5. Several colleges are required to select their students on a communal basis as shown in the following table. Communities for which reservations are made. Medical College, Madras. Medical College, Vizagapa- tam. Grant Medical College, Bombay. Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College, Bombay. Medical College, Calcutta. Carmichael Medical College, Belgachia. King George's Medical Col- lege, Lucknow. King Edward Medical Col- lege, Lahore. Prince of Wales Medical College, Patna. Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi. % % % % Non-Brahmin Hindus 41 41 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Brahmins . . . 17 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mohammedans . . . 17 17 10 . . . 21 seats . . . . . . 40 8 seats . . . Christians, Anglo- Indians and non- Asiatics . . . 17 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other communities including schedul- ed classes . . . 8 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Backward classes Hindus . . . . . . . . . 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sikhs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 . . . . . . Beharee Hindus, Anglo-Indians and Christians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 seats . . . Oriyas (from Orissa) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 seats . . . Domiciled Bengalees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 seats . . . Sons of Government servants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 seats . . . 6. Women students.69 and Public Health lasting for nine months and terminating in the exami- nation for the Diploma of Public Health of the Calcutta University. At the All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health training is provided for courses leading to D. P. H. and D. Sc. (Public Health) of the University of Calcutta, and D. P. H & Hy. and D. M. C. W. of the Faculty of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene of Bengal. Besides these courses, a three months post-graduate course of instruction is offered in the various subjects to those who wish to specialise in them. The course at the field station of the Malaria Institute, Karnal, is designed for the training of medical officers in the basic principles and advanced aspects of malariology. It lasts for six weeks and consists of 40 lectures and about 120 hours of practical instruction in the laboratory and in the field. The subjects taught include the identification and dissection of mosquitoes and their larvae, the bionomics of mosquitoes, the parasitology, pathology and epidemiology of malaria, modern methods of investigating and measuring the extent of malarial incidence and the principles and practice of control measures. A practical, written and viva voce examination is held at the end of the course and certificates are issued to those who pass the examination. 8. Non-medical classes.70 5. Enquiry in mycetoma of fungus foot diseases at the Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College, Bombay. 6. Researches on study of bone-marrow, etc., at the Carmichael Medical College, Belgachia. 7. Enquiry into thromboangeits oblitrans at the Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College, Bombay. 8. Pharmacological investigation of oroxylin at the Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College, Bombay. 9. Indigenous Drugs Enquiry at the King Edward Medical College, Lahore. Several research papers were published by the members of the staff of the various colleges during 1936-37. 10. Summary of history and activities of Medical Colleges in India. MEDICAL COLLEGE, MADRAS. The Madras Medical College was founded as a Medical School by the Right Hon'ble Sir Frederick Adam, K.C.B., by an Order of Government, dated the 13th February 1835, and it opened its first session with 10 medical apprentices and 11 Indian pupils on the 1st July 1835, in the rooms adjoining the quarters of the Surgeon to the General Hospital. The School removed in 1836 to a new building erected for the purpose. The first curriculum of studies embraced Anatomy, Materia Medica Medicine and Surgery, the duration of the course being two years. As the School continued its work, additional professorships were sanctioned for Anatomy, Physiology, Midwifery, Opthalmology and Chemistry and the duration of the course was exended to 3 years. Private students were first admitted in 1838. The School at this period consisted of three departments71 Hygiene and Physiology Laboratories at an estimated cost of Rs. 1,70,000 was sanctioned in 1907 and the classes for the First Class Health Officers and candidates preparing for the B. S. Sc. degree of the University of Madras were opened in 1914. The L. M. & S. degree was abolished in 1925. The grade of Lady Apothecary was also abolished and the period of study for the M.B., B.S. degree was extended to 5½ years with the introduction of the 6 months pre-registration course. The College at present affords instruction for the M.B., B.S. degree of the University of Madras, for the B. S.Sc. degree, and Licentiate in Public Health, for the Sanitary Inspectors, Chemists and Druggists, and for post-graduates in various subjects. Candidates for admission to the College are selected annually by a Committee appointed for the purpose, preference being given to those domiciled in the Madras Presidency. Candidates seeking admission must have completed 17 years of age on or before the date of registration as a medical student. The number of seats ordinarily reserved for non-Madrasi candidates is 11, 6 being earmarked for Travancore State, 2 for Cochin State, 1 for Pudukottah Durbar and 2 for areas other than Travancore and Cochin, preference being given to applicants from Banganapalli and Sandur. The States of Travancore and Cochin are authorised to select their own candidates provided they possess the minimum educational qualifications. Additional seats, if available, are allotted to candidates from Travancore and Cochin. Of the seats allotted to Madras candidates, 45 per cent. go to the candidates from Telugu Districts, the same percentage to those from Tamil Districts and the remaining 10 per cent to candidates from West Coast; 41 per cent. being allotted to non-Brahmin Hindus, 17 per cent. to Brahmins and Mohammedans each, an equal percentage to Christians, Anglo-Indians and non-Asiatics, and the remaining 8 per cent. to other communities including scheduled classes. Candidates from the same community in the same linguistic area are selected according to their educational qualifications. Generally 20 to 25 women students are admitted every year; the question of reservation of seats for them is under consideration. The number of students working at a time in a practical class does not exceed 60. Twenty-two papers and 23 pamphlets or books on various subjects of medical interest were published by the members of the staff during the year 1936-37. MEDICAL COLLEGE, VIZAGAPATAM (MADRAS). It is a Government institution which was founded by the Government of Madras in 1923 in response to the wishes of the people of the Telugu districts and is affiliated to the University of Madras for the M.B., B.S. degree. The College opened on the 1st July 1923 with Departments of Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Anatomy and Physiology, in the building originally constructed for a Medical School by Maharani Lady Goday Chittijanakiammah Gajapathi Rao Garu. The building proved insufficient
72 and extensions became imperative; a block was constructed in close proxi- mity to the King George Hospital for teaching Pathology and Bacterio- logy and was occupied in July 1925; the Departments of Physiology, Biology and Anatomy were housed in a building erected in 1927 near the old College buildings and those of Pharmacology, Hygiene and Biochemistry in another building completed in 1932. The College has attached to it a hospital with 348 beds where facilities exist for imparting clinical education to the students of the College. Additions were made in 1928 to the Hospital buildings to provide accom- modation for 40 beds for Maternity and Gynaecological cases, and another block was completed in 1932 to accommodate 80 beds for the Eye and Ear, Nose and Throat Departments. The Mental Hospital at Waltair, situated 3 miles away from the King George Hospital, Vizagapatam, is also attached to the College, where clinical instruction in mental diseases is given. A comprehensive scheme for enlarging and modernizing the College and its Hospital is at present under the consideration of Government. If sanctioned, it will provide for new Operation Theatres, outpatients depart- ments and wards for venereal, infectious and tubercular cases, besides a new Anatomy and Chemistry Department and several other improvements. The rules of admission are the same as those of the Medical College, Madras: the maximum number of students that can be admitted in any one year is 50. No seats are reserved specifically for women students or students from other Provinces. The number of students working at a time in a practical class does not exceed 100 in Anatomy dissections and 48 in Biochemistry and Pharmacology; 42 in Physiology (Histology) and 38 in Pathology and Bacteriology; 36 in Experimental Physiology and 30 in Organic Chemistry; and 28 in Inorganic Chemistry, 26 in Biology and 25 in Physics. A special class for Chemists and Druggists was started in July 1937. The number of admissions to this class is limited to 6 students. Those who have qualified for a Secondary School-leaving certificate taking. Physics or Chemistry as 'C' group subjects are eligible for admission. The course extends over two years. At the end of the course students should appear for the examination at Madras, and a diploma in Pharmacy will be awarded by the Government of Madras to the successful candi- dates. 37 papers on various subjects of medical interest were published by members of the staff during 1936-37. GRANT MEDICAL COLLEGE, BOMBAY. It is a Government institution established in the year 1845 to com- memorate the memory of the late Sir Robert Grant, Governor of Bombay, with the object of imparting medical education to the natives of Western India. It began its first session with only 12 students. Half of the initial cost of building the College was defrayed by the friends of Sir Robert
73 Grant and the other half by Government, who is also responsible for providing funds for the maintenance and upkeep of the institution. The College was affiliated to the University of Bombay in 1860. It has attached to it a laboratory for scientific medical research74 foundation of a medical college in association with the King Edward VII Memorial Hospital which the Corporation had already undertaken to build, equip and maintain. The endowment was made under certain conditions the most important of which was that the professors and teachers to be employed should be all properly qualified independent Indian gentlemen not in Government service. The cost of constructing and equipping the College amounted to Rs. 18,96,132 and of the Hospital to Rs. 52,91,915. The College was opened in June 1925. The Hospital accommodates 370 beds at present and the Bombay Municipal Corporation have approved of its extension by 106 beds Besides this, there are two more hospitals where clinical instruction is imparted to the students of the College: one is the Nowrosji Wadia Maternity Hospital which was completed in 1927 and has 150 beds and an ante-natal department, and the other is the Bai Jerbai Wadia Hospital for Children which was completed in 1929 and accommodates 126 beds and a solarium. Both these hospitals owe their origin to the princely donation of the Wadia brothers amounting to Rs. 40,42.865. The College possesses an Anatomy museum and a Pathological museum called the "Seth Jamnadas Lallubhai Pathological Museum". The Hostel which has accommodation for 144 students was constructed at a total cost of Rs. 3,29,172. The College, together with the Hospital and other associated buildings occupies an area of about 17 acres. The College was affiliated in 1926 to the University of Bombay for the M. B. B. S. degree. It is also affiliated to the University for under- graduate and post-graduate courses of study in Animal Physiology, Com- parative Anatomy, Embryology, Bacteriology and Microbiology. It is affiliated to the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Bombay, for all its examinations. The College and the Hospital have been recognised for post-graduate degrees and diplomas granted by the University of Bombay, as well as for various examinations held by the Conjoint Board (London), the Royal College of Surgeons (England) and for D. 0. examination of the University of Oxford. Eighty students are admitted every year. Candidates desirous of admission must have passed the Intermediate examination in Science of the Bombay University in the group of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, or an equivalent examination of any other recognised University with Organic Chemistry as one of the subjects. No seats are reserved for women students or for students from backward or special communities. Sixty seats are reserved for students from the City of Bombay and the Bombay Suburban District and five for nominees of the C. P. Government. The number of students working at a time in a practical class is approximately 70 in Pathology and Bacteriology, 50 in Experimental pharmacology, 27 in Physiology and 25 in Practical Pharmacy. The pro- portion of teachers and/or demonstrators to students is 1 to 20 in the practical classes of Anatomy, Physiology, Pharmacology, Pathology and Bacteriology and approximately the same in Medical and Surgical classes, and 1 to 12 in Gynaecological classes and 1 to 9 in Midwifery.
75 The staff of the College published 13 papers on various subjects of medical interest during 1936-37. MEDICAL COLLEGE, CALCUTTA (BENGAL). It is a Government institution and is one of the oldest Medical Colleges in India. It was the first to teach the preliminary Sciences and give clinical training under the same roof. On the recommendation of a Com- mittee on Medical Education appointed by Lord William Bentinck, His Lordship in Council issued an Order dated the 28th January 1835 abolishing the Native Medical Institute together with the medical classes in the Sanskrit College and at the Madarassa in Calcutta and decreed that a new College should be formed for the instruction of a certain number of Indian youths in the various branches of medical science. A Medical College was accordingly started in 1835 in the buildings formerly occupied by the Petty Court Jail. Although the College had no hospital in the beginning, arrangements were made for imparting clinical instruction to the students at the various city dispensaries and hospitals. In 1838, however, a ward with 20 beds and an outpatients department was opened. In this year a Hindustani class was also opened for the education of subordinate doctors. An outpatients dispensary was established in 1839. The first examination was held in October 1838 after 3½ years study, and Government approved of the results. In 1840 a female lying-in hospital with 100 beds was constructed within the College premises with the aid of funds raised by public subscription. By 1844 the hospital had 3 wards with accommodation for 112 beds. In 1845 the system of instruction was overhauled and the period of study extended to 5 years. As a result of these changes the College received the recognition of the Royal College of Surgeons in England and of the Apothecaries Society of London, and four students were sent to England for higher study. In 1851 a section for the training of doctors through the medium of Bengali was added to the Hindustani class. In 1852-53 a large hospital with accommodation for 350 beds was opened, 50 being reserved for maternity and allied cases. The College had at this time 10 Chairs, viz., those for Anatomy, Physiology, Zoology, Chemistry, Botany, Materia Medica, Medical jurisprudence, Midwifery, Surgery, Medicine and Ophthalmic Surgery and possesed an ample museum. The College was affiliated to the University of Calcutta in 1857. In 1860 a Code of Rules was drawn up for all classes of the Medical College dividing the students into four classes,viz., (i) the primary and Ceylon classes taking the full University Curriculum of 5 years, (ii) the Apprentice class, (iii) the Hindusthani class and (iv) the Bengalee class (the latter pursuing a 3 years' course). The native apothecary class and the verna- cular licentiate class with a total number of 873 students were transferred to a new school in the Campbell Hospital. Training in dentistry was started in 1861 and in Hygiene in 1864-65. A woman student was admitted for the first time in 1884. The minimum qualification for
76 admission into the Medical College was raised to the first examination in Arts in 1874. College and Hospital extensions were also made. In 1891 the present Old Eye Hospital was opened with 57 beds. In 1876 the construction of nurses' quarters and a new ward for alcoholic cases was sanctioned. Chunnilal Seal's outdoor dispensary was completed in July 1880. The Eden and Ezra Hospitals were opened in 1881 and 1887 respectively. The Isolation Block of the Eden Hospital was completed in 1894. In 1899 the actual number of beds in the Medical College group of Hospitals was 449. In 1906 the L. M. S. qualification of the University was abolished and the duration of the course was extended to 6 years. In 1904 the control of the medical education of the Province was transferred from the Director of Public Instruction to the Inspector General of Civil Hospitals. In 1916 the preliminary qualification for admission was raised to the Inter- mediate in Arts or Science. Besides a large Administrative block containing a library, a theatre, an examination hall, the office and the students' common room, the College has at present 3 blocks of buildings housing the Chemical Examiner's Department and the Departments of Chemistry, Botany, Zoology, Physics, Physiology and Pathology with its museum and of Anatomy with its museum. There are 744 beds, at present, in the various hospitals attached to the College, where clinical education is imparted to the students. Two classes of students are admitted to the College, (i) Military medical students, of whom 10 are selected for training by the Director General, Indian Medical Service (ii) the Civil students class whose admis- sion is governed as follows:77 Besides other research work carried out and in progress, 14 papers on various subjects of medical interest were published by members of the staff during 1936-37 and 10 papers were read at the 5th All-India Ophthalmological Congress held at Lahore in December 1936. Dr. M. Chakravarti was awarded the Dr. Chandra's Research Scholarship for his thesis on "The Pharmacology and Therapeutics of Ocimum bacilicum". CARMICHAEL MEDICAL COLLEGE, BELGACHIA (BENGAL). The Carmichael Medical College was the first non-official Medical College to be recognised in India and came into existence in 1916. The institution had its origin in the year 1886 and was known as the 'Calcutta Medical School and College of Physicians and Surgeons of Bengal'. The School continued to be housed in a rented building for seventeen years and the bulk of the present site was bought in 1896 and the School removed to Belgachia in 1903. The curriculum was modified in 1887 and framed according to that of Government medical schools; the name was also changed to "Calcutta Medical School". From 1888 the students attended the Mayo Hospital for clinical instruction. The Albert Victor Hospital with 40 beds increased to 100 in 1909 was opened in 1902. The College of Physicians and Surgeons of Bengal, another private institution started in 1895, amalgamated with it in 1903 when the combined institution was named the 'Calcutta Medical School and College of Physicians and Sur- geons of Bengal'. With a view to affiliating the College to the University of Calcutta, the Government of India offered to give (i) a capital grant of Rs. 5 lakhs, provided the Committee of the institution raised 2 lakhs from the public, and (ii) a recurring grant of Rs. 50,000, provided Rs. 30,000 was paid annually by the Calcutta Corporation and Rs. 10,000 by the University. These conditions were ultimately fulfilled and the first affiliation to the University of Calcutta obtained in April 1916. The College was then opened as the "Belgachia Medical College" by Lord Carmichael, the then Governor of Bengal. In July, 1917, the College, was affiliated to the Calcutta University up to the standard of the First M. B. Examination, and in 1919 up to the Final M. B. Examination. The first batch of students appeared for the final M. B. examination in 1922. The present name of the College was given to it in 1919. The College curriculum follows the M. B. Examination rules laid down in the Regulations of the Calcutta University and the management of the College is in the hands of a Council consisting of 14 members of whom three are nominated by the Government of Bengal. The number of students to be admitted is determined annually by the Council of the College who appoint a Selection Committee for interviewing the candidates. There is no reservation for any community. Any candi- date irrespective of caste or creed coming from any University and possessing requisite qualifications for admission under the rules of the Calcutta University is admitted provided he is found suitable by the Selection Committee at the interview. The Committee selects candidates
78 according to their educational qualifications, health and means of main- tenance; mode of expression in English being one of the considerations. They also examine candidates' certificates of conduct. Seats are reserved for nominees of other provinces provided the provincial Government con- cerned agree to pay a capitation charge of Rs. 1,500 per annum for each student. The University regulation of one demonstrator for every 20 students is generally observed. The number of students working at a time in a practical class does not exceed 250 in Anatomy, and 56 in Physics, Botany, Zoology, Experimental Physiology and Chemistry; 54 in Histology and 53 in Chemical Physiology; 48 in Pathology, 30 in Pharmacology and 20 in Medicine, Surgery, Midwifery and Ophthalmic Surgery. Facilities for training nurses exist at this Institute. 24 papers on various subjects of medical interest were published during 1936-37 by members of the staff, in addition to the 18 read at various conferences and meetings. A revised edition of his Materia Medica and Therapeutics was published by Dr. B. N. Ghosh, F.R.F.P. & S. (Glasg.) L.M. (Dub.), F.S.M.F. (Bengal). THE KING GEORGE'S MEDICAL COLLEGE, LUCKNOW (UNITED PROVINCES). It is a non-Government institution founded, on the initiative of late Raja Sir Tasadduq Rasul Khan, K.C.S.I., of Jehangirabad, to comme- morate the visit to India in 1905 of the late King Emperor, George V (then Prince of Wales). The foundation stone was laid by His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales in 1906 and on his second visit to India for the Coronation Durbar as King Emperor, His Majesty was pleased to give his consent to designate the College as "The King George's Medical College, Lucknow". The College began its first session in October 1911 in the building constructed for the purpose. comprising a fine adminis- trative block, an Anatomical block, a combined Pathological and Physio- logical block and a Medico-legal Department. The construction of the King George's Hospital, which is attached to the College, was completed in 1913. This Hospital has an isolation block and separate cottage wards in addition to the main Hospital Block. A feature of the College is its excellent and well arranged Pathology Museum. The total cost of the construction of the College and its associated hospitals came to about 30 lakhs of rupees which was met by public dona- tions and a grant of 10 lakhs of rupees by the Government of India. The first batch of students qualified in 1916. The College remained affiliated to the University of Allahabad till 1921 when it was attached to the Lucknow University for purposes of examinations and control. A Provincial Hygiene Institute, complete with lecture theatre, museum laboratories and facilities for research, was constructed in 1928 at a cost of Rs. 3,36,000, and the University decided to give a Diploma in Public Health. The Institute can train 20 D. P. H. students, in addition to
79 those trained for the State Board Examination, 75 candidates for Sanitary Inspectors' certificate and a class of Lady Health Visitors. 48 students are admitted to the College each year. Candidates desirous of admission to the College must have passed the Intermediate Examina- tion in Science with Chemistry, Physics and Biology of the Board of High School and Intermediate Education, United Provinces, or Rajputana (including Ajmer-Merwara), Central India and Gwalior, or the Intermediate Examination of an Indian University incorporated by any law for the time being in force. Selection is made by means of a competitive exami- nation called the Pre-medical Test. Candidates are also examined physi- cally. Two seats are reserved for women students and 3 for students from Indian States and other provinces which have no medical colleges of their own, provided that such a student obtains one of the first 48 places at the Pre-medical test and the Provincial Government or the Indian State concerned agrees (i) to pay an annual capitation charge of Rs. 2,000 per student, the student being required to pay the ordinary fees like other students and (ii) to recruit its medical service from the graduates of the Lucknow University. The number of students working at a time in a practical class does not exceed 100 in Anatomy, 80 in Physiology, 24 in Pharmacology and 50 in Pathology. No special non-medical classes are held in this College. Some lectures are given by the staff of the College to the L. P. H. classes, and the classes of Sanitary Inspectors and Nurses. Sixty-two research and other papers were published by members cf the staff during the year 1936-37. THE KING EDWARD MEDICAL COLLEGE, LAHORE (PUNJAB). It is a Government institution. In 1837, Sir John Lawrence thought of establishing a medical college in Lahore, but financial difficulties stood in the way and it was not until 1860 that the College was started in the old Artillery Hospital in Anarkali. The first hospital attached to the College was located in the stables of Raja Sucbet Singh in the Tibbi Bazar. In 1883 the College moved to the site of the Mayo Hospital. The cost of constructing the College and the Hospital amounted to more than 40 lakhs of rupees which was met partly by public subscription and partly by Government grant. Its present name was given to it in 1910 to per- petuate the memory of King Edward VII. The Medical School formed part of the College till 1920 when the former was located at Amritsar in the interest of both the institutions. Forty per cent. of the total number of vacancies are reserved for Mohammedans and 20 per cent. for Sikhs. 10 seats are reserved for women students and 5 each for candidates from the Punjab States and the North-West Frontier Province; 3 for candidates from the Delhi Pro- vince and 2 for those from Baluchistan. Military medical students are not trained in this College.
80 Generally the ratio of demonstrators and Assistant Professors to students is 1: 25 in Anatomy, Physiology, Materia Medica and Pathology. The number of students working at a time in a practical class is 60 in Pathology and Materia Medica, 26 in Anatomy demonstrations and 200 in Anatomy dissections. The following classes are also held in the College:81 Seventeen papers on various subjects of medical interest were published by members of the staff during 1936-37 besides the "Medical Curriculum" published by Lt.-Col. G. H. Mahony, I.M.S. LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE FOR WOMEN, NEW DELHI. It is a non-Government institution although supported almost entirely by the Government of India. It was founded to commemorate the visit to Delhi in 1911 of the Queen Empress. On the initiative of Lady Hardinge a sum of thirty lakhs of rupees was raised by public subscription to meet the cost of buildings and equipment, and after her death in 1914 it was decided to call it "The Lady Hardinge Medical College" in accord- ance with the wishes of H. I. M. Queen Mary. The College was opened by Lord Hardinge on February 17, 1916. It is a residential medical college for women students only and is staffed entirely by women. It is affiliated to the Punjab University and has attached to it training schools for nurses and dispensers. The College and its associated Hospital, together with separate hostels for 150 medical students and 80 nurses, and residences for the medical, teaching and nursing staffs, occupy an area of 50 acres in New Delhi, within easy reach of the old city. The grounds are enclosed and adequate provision is made for the seclusion of students and patients from outside observation. The College buildings consist of a central administrative block comprising the offices, the assembly hall, the library and the museums, together with two blocks for teaching, with the necessary class rooms and laboratories. There are playing grounds for Hockey, Basket Ball,Tennis and Badminton. The selection of candidates for admission to the medical course rests with a Committee composed of the Principal and two other members of the Senior Staff, the considerations weighing with the Committee being the age and qualifications of a candidate, her suitability for the medical pro- fession and the ability of her parents to meet the cost involved. The Punjab Government who pay an annual grant of Rs. 10,500 are entitled to 7 seats in the College and similarly the Bihar Government who pay an annual grant of Rs. 4,500 are entitled to 3 seats. The number of students working at a time in a practical class does not exceed 30. The Intermediate Science Classes have been discontinued since 1937 for additional accommodation and funds were required for the Medical Department. 11. Statistics.82 Medical Table College. Date of Founda- tion. Controlling authority. University to which affiliated. Degrees and Diplomas granted. Annual admissions. Total number of students during 1937-38. M W .. .. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 1. The Medical College, Madras. 1835 Government Madras. M.B., B.S., L.M. & S., B.S.Sc., M.D., M.S. 120 597 89 2. The Medical College, Vizagapatam (Madras). 1923 Do. Andhra M.B., B.S., M.D., M.S. 50 217* 5 3. The Grant Medical Col- lege, Bombay. 1845 Do. Bombay M.B., B.S., M.D., M.S, B.Hy., B.Sc., D.O. L.C.P. & S., M.C.P. & S., M.Sc., Ph.D. 120 619 99 4. The Medical College, Calcutta (Bengal). 1835 Do. Calcutta M.B., M.D., M.S., M.O. 105 683 30 5. The King Edward Medi- cal College, Lahore (Punjab). 1860 Do. Punjab M.D., M.S., M.B., B.S., D.L.O. 90 512 48 6. The Prince of Wales Medical College, Patna (Bihar). 1925 Do. Patna M.B., B.S., M.D., M.S. 40 279 3 7. Seth Gordhandas Sun- derdas Medical College, Bombay. 1925 Bombay Mu- nicipality. Bombay M.B., B.S., B.Sc., M.D., M.S., D.O., M.Sc., Ph.D. 80 412 53 8. The Carmichael Medical College, Belgachia (Bengal). 1916 Council of the Medical Edu- cation So- ciety of Bengal. Calcutta M.B., M.D., M.S., M.O. 110 726 .. 9. The King George's Me- dical College, Lucknow (United Provinces). 1911 Lucknow University. Lucknow M.B., B.S., M.D., M.S., D.P.H. 48 280 3 10. The Lady Hardinge Me- dical College, New Delhi. 1916 Governing Body of Officials and non-Officials. Punjab M.B., B.S. 25 .. 118 *Excludes 55 pre-registration students (53 men and 2 women). M83 Colleges. A. Number of students qualified during 1936-37. Attached Hospitals. Number of Hospital Beds available for teaching purposes. Surgical. Medical. Gynaecology. Obstetrics. Ophthalmic. Ear, Nose, and Throat. Children. Others. Total. (M) (W) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) 99 11 1. General Hospital, Madras 286 235 (262) 250 16 85 45 1,179 2. Hospital for women and children, Madras. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Ophthalmic Hospital, Madras. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Tuberculosis and In- fectious Diseases Hos- pitalz Madras. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32 1. King George Hospital. 90 68 20 20 68 12 8 62 348 83 16 1. Sir J.J. Hospital. 247 264 20 40 73 8 85 ... 737 2. Sir C. J. Ophthalmic Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Bai Motlibai Hospital for Women. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. B. J. Hospital for Children. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5. Sir Dinshaw Manekji Petit Hospital for Women. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 71 2 1. Medical College Hospital. 244 198 59 54 139 12 20 ... 726 2. The Ezra Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. The Prince of Wales Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. The Eden Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5. The Eye Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Sir J. Anderson Casualty Block. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7. The Cottages. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8. Chunni Lal Seal's Dis- pensary. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. In addition, there are special Departments for Skin, Tuberculosis, Ear, Nose and Throat, Dental, Venereal Dis- eases X-ray and Radium .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 60 2 1. Mayo Hospital. 156 170 36 22 (148) ... 75 .. 2. Lady Willingdon Hos- pital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Infectious Diseases Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Punjab Dental Hos- pital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39 1. The Prince of Wales Medical College Hos- pital. 138 96 35 35 74 12 16 ... 406 52 8 1. King Edward VII Memorial Hospital. 113 121 35 150 32 8 26 35 520 2. N. Wadia Maternity Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. B.J. Wadia Hospital for Children with a Solarium. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66 1. Albert Victor Hospital 110 167 42 56 33 20 10 10 448 2. Surgical Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Sir Kedarnath Mater- nity Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. B. C. Dey Infectious Hospital. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5. Nirmalendu Tuber- culosis Sanatorium. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Nalini Gupta Radium Annexe. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7. Raja Debendra Nath Mullick Outdoor Dis- pensary. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8. Panna Lal Seal Out- door Dispensary. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41 1. King George's Hos- pital, Lucknow. 96 80 26 18 42 4 6 94 366 2. Queen Mary's Hos- pital, Lucknow. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12 Lady Hardinge Medical College Hospital, New Delhi. 48 48 50 20 24 ... 67 20 277 NOTE.84 Medical Table College. Hostel Accommodation. Number of students for whom ac- commoda- tion is avail- able Monthly rent payable by each student. Cost of messing per month per student. M W M W M W 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. The Medical College, Madras .. 50 .. 3 .. 20 to 25 2. The Medical College, Viza- gapatam (Madras). 48 .. 3 .. 18 .. 3. The Grant Medical College, Bombay. 226 .. 8* .. 27 .. 4. The Medical College, Cal- cutta (Bengal). 247 22 6 to 8 785 Colleges. B. Teaching Staff. Professors. Assistant Professors or Readers or Lecturers. Demonstrators. I.M.S. P.M.S. Others. P.M.S. Others. P.M.S. Others. Stipen. diary. Hony. Stipen. diary. Hony. Stipen. diary. Hony. 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 4 14 1 .. 32 4 3 2 8 7 1 12 .. .. 25 4 . 9 2 .. 3 4 12 1 2 5 1 .. 38* .. 6 8 1 .. 4 .. .. 10 15 .. 9 1 .. .. 18+286 Medical Table. College. Receipts for 1936-37. Total expendi- ture for 1936-37. Govern- ment grant. Grants from other public bodies. Income from endow- ments. Fees from students. Income from other sources. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. The Medical College, Madras. ... ... ... 1,14,787 85,749 5,80,058 2. The Medical College, Vizaga- patam (Madras). ... ... ... 47,795 2,460 2,81,325 3. The Grant Medical College, Bombay. 91,838 ... 497 1,78,769 17,073 2,88,177 4. The Medical College, Calcutta (Bengal). 4,18,853 7,497 6,203 1,13,409 84,275 4,18,853 5. The King Edward Medical Col- lege, Lahore (Punjab). 4,29,973 ... 13,178 96,167 18,019 5,56,449 6. The Prince of Wales Medical College, Patna (Bihar). 2,48,189 ... ... 43,083 ... 2,48,189 7. Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Me- dical College, Bombay. ... 1,48,978 ... 1,07,384 ... 2,56,362 8. The Carmichael Medical College, Belgachia (Bengal). 15,000 ... 462 1,82,976 26,093 2,19,181 9. The King George's Medical Col- lege, Lucknow (U. P.) 2,79,372 ... 11,886 47,313 18,857 4,18,458 10. The Lady Hardinge Medical Col- lege, New Delhi. 1,84,181 11,000 10,040 35,316 18,596 2,30,351
87 Colleges. C. Expenditure for 1936-37 on Annual charges for each foreign student. Total amount of fees charged from a student for the whole medical course. Scholarships or Freeships awarded Library. Read- ing Room. Stu- dents Club. No. Amount. Staff. Stu- dents. M W M W M W 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. (5,570) ... ... (400*) 900 F 1788 MEDICAL COLLEGES. TABLE D. Particulars regarding the teaching of Midwifery in Medical Colleges. Particulars. Medical College, Madras. Medical College, Vizagapatam. Grant Medical College, Bombay. Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College, Bombay. Calcutta Medical College, Calcutta. (a) Students Annual Entry... 120 50 120 80 105 (b) Maternity Beds . . . . . 116 157 40 150 64 (c) Students signed up for labour cases in 1936. 95 28 121 52 77 (d) Confinement cases available in 1936 4,007 4,057 Sufficient to en- able students to conduct 20 each. 1,040 1,476 (e) Increase in (d) from 1932 to 1936. 552 300 338 670 585 (f) Time allotted to (i) Midwifery and In fant Welfare. 4 months. 2 months. 6 months. 12 weeks. Students do three months' duty in the Obstetrical and Gy- naecological wards including 1 month's internal duty. (ii) Gynaecology. 2 months. 1 month.. 12 weeks. (g) Is (f) whole time . . . . . 3 months whole time. Yes.. 3 months whole time. (i) Yes. (ii) No. One month on whole time duty as internal duty students. (h) Deliveries personally conducted by each student. 20 20 20 20 10 or more if possible. (i) Is (h) shared by other students.. No. . . No. . . No. . . No . . Yes. (j) Number of systematic lectures given an nually. 74 75 90 30 to 34 and 30 clinical de monstrations. 80 lectures and 20 clinical demonstra- tions.
89 TABLE D.90 Medical Colleges. TABLE E. Statement showing the number of beds per student available for teaching purposes in the United Kingdom and India. United Kingdom. India. Name of the Institution. Number of beds per student. Name of the Institution. Number of beds per student.. 1 2 3 4 1. London University (a) Charing Cross Hospital Medical School. 2.91 (a) The Medical College, Madras 1.71 (b) Guy's Hospital Medical School. 0.64 (b) The Medical College, Vizaga- patam. 1.57 (c) King's College . . 2.74 (c) The Grant Medical College, Bombay. 1.15 (d) The London Hospital Medical College. 1.93 (d) Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College, Bombay. 1.1 (e) Middlesex Hospital Me- dical School. 1.50 (e) The Medical College, Cal- cutta. 1.02 (f) St. Bartholomew's Hos- pital Medical College. 0.94 (f) Carmichael Medical College, Belgachia. 0.61 (g) St. George's Hospital Medical School. 4.69 (g) King George's Medical Col- lege, Lucknow. 1.3 (h) St. Mary's Hospital Me- dical School. 2.50 (h) King Edward Medical Col- lege, Lahore. 1.08 (i) St. Thomas's Hospital Medical School. 1.37 (i) The Prince of Wales Medical College, Patna. 1.44 (j) University College Hos- pital Medical School. 1.73 (j) Lady Hardinge Medical Col- lege, New Delhi. 2.35 (k) London (Royal Free Hospital) School of Medicine for Women. 0.89 2. Leeds University . . 1.15 3. Manchester University. 1.21 NOTE.91 Medical Colleges. TABLE F. Name of the College. Cost of teach- ing per student per year. Cost per bed for teaching: per year. Rs. Rs. 1. The Medical College, Madras . . 2,781 1,558 2. The Medical College, Vizagapatam, (Madras) 2,107 1,580 3. The Grant Medical College, Bombay . . . 1,006 1,246 4. The Medical College, Calcutta, (Bengal). . 2,211 2,175 5. The King Edward Medical College, Lahore, (Punjab) 2,207 2,047 6. The Prince of Wales Medical College, Patna, (Bihar) 2,136 1,030 7. Seth Gordhandas Sunderdas Medical College, Bombay. 2,011 1,444 8. The Carmichael Medical College, Belgachia, (Bengal) 705 1,097 9. The King George's Medical College, Lucknow (U. P.) 2,964 2,170 10. The Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi. 3,960 1,687 Cost per student. = Expenditure on College + all attached hospitals. / No. of students. Cost per bed for teaching. = Expenditure on College + all attached hospitals. / No. of beds. Medical Colleges. TABLE G. Hostel accommodation provided for students during 1937-38. Category. Number of students. Hostel accommo- dation provided for Ratio of columns 2 and 3. Average cost* per student per month. 1 2 3 4 5 Per cent. Rs. Government . . 3,101 963 31 26 Non-Government 1,621 701 43.2 26 * This includes hostel rent and messing charges only.
92 2. MEDICAL SCHOOLS. The first medical school in India was established at Calcutta in 1822. Similar schools were started in Madras in 1835 and in Bombay in 1878 Since this time the number of Medical Schools has increased rapidly and there are now 18 Government and 9 non-Government schools in British India training a class of medical men and women known as Licentiates or Sub-Assistant Surgeons. Several schools began as Unani and Ayurvedic teaching institutions but all of them have abandoned this system. During the 1937-38 session there were 6,492 students in these schools; 973 students qualified during 1936-37. 2. Preliminary education standard.93 would obviously be expensive and lengthy and is outside present consi- deration. But meanwhile some thing can be done and to this end infor- mation has been collected on some essential points in medical education at the schools and some of that information is given here. Certain details have been obtained from the annual reports of the medical schools and questions on other practical points have been sent to the School authorities to enable this information to be enlarged. Here I take the opportunity of thanking those authorities, whether of Government or private schools for sending me their reports and the answers to my questions. The parts of this information that lend themselves to tabulation are given in Table- 'G' (pages 150-151) and some explanatory notes and comments of my own are given in the following paragraphs. "In the comparative statement we have not tabulated replies to all the enquiries made, though the replies on other points are also interesting. Enquiry was made as to the cost to the educating authority per student per annum after laying down for the sake of uniformity certain principles on which this calculation should be made. The average cost seems to be- about Rs. 300 per annum per student, though schools for women only usually cost more, probably because of the fewer number of students in comparison with the number of staff to be paid. There is, however, extraordinary variation in the replies received. Thus in School J the cost is only Rs. 60 per annum and 80 per cent. of the students are private, and in School F the cost is Rs. 62 per annum and all are private: while in School N, a women's school, the cost is Rs. 960 per annum and none are private, and in School V, where the sexes are mixed, the cost is Rs. 952 for a stipendiary and Rs. 564 for a private student; presumably reckoning without the student's fees the cost, would be Rs. 952 for every student. This difference in cost per student is apparently reflected in the standard of instruction, because School N certainly compares well with others. "Question was asked also on the preliminary standard of education be- fore entry to the medical course. In all provinces the Matriculation or School Leaving Certificate is the standard usually taken, though one province is obtaining an appreciable number of Intermediate-passed entrants. Another province accepts women students at a lower entrance standard. I believe this to be a mistaken policy. It can be defended by representing the need for women doctors and the lack of applicants unless the entrance doors are widened: but it is doubtful if a woman who has not attained Matriculation standard can take with profit a medical course, and at any rate the time has now come when a higher demand should be made on women entrants. We should have women doctors of satis- factory standard or not at all. This leads naturally to the much bigger question whether we should try to educate a large number of students in an inferior manner or fewer students in a comparatively satisfactory manner; whether we should have many inferior schools or a few satisfactory ones. Because we cannot have it both ways. There are only a few places in each province with hospitals large enough to provide clinical material for a medical school. Further, the cost of the school and hospital
94 buildings, and the cost of the equipment necessary to instruct students properly both in school and hospital, are such that no province would be prepared to provide a correct standard of buildings and equipment for more than one or two schools. Perhaps more important still is the matter of the teaching staff. Except in the two largest cities where the services of a well-qualified staff can usually be obtained on a voluntary basis, there is not yet in any province a sufficiency of medical men, highly qualified enough to be considered of medical education standard, to staff more than one or two medical schools in addition to the medical colleges. If, therefore, we multiply medical schools they must, at any rate for the present, be inferior in several respects. It is a matter of policy to be decided therefore whether we should have several inferior or a few satis- factory schools and different provinces have followed different lines, while the same province has apparently changed its policy with the times. The Madras Presidency formerly had 6 or 7 medical schools, but now (1935) has only 3, two Government and one private. The Bengal Presidency has 9 schools, 6 Government and 3 private, and some of them of recent establishment. Which is the correct policy ? It may be argued that many cheap doctors are wanted for the villages, to replace inferior practitioners or supply some sort of medical aid where none exist; that it is no good sending expensive doctors there because the people cannot pay them; that it is better to send out registered medical men with some sort of qualification, however inferior, than to leave the rural population to ignorant and unqualified practitioners. It has even been said we should multiply compounders and send them to the villages since doctors will not go and cannot get a living. This question was considered at length in Madras in 1929 when a Medical Education Committee was established that decided that the Presidency did not so much need more doctors as better doctors. Experience seems to show that the average medical man, if not properly educated, when he is let loose on the world to practise his profession, himself tends to degenerate and to become hardly better than the man he is intended to replace. It is only the exceptional man who, without a satisfactory education, can make good and educate himself until he becomes a really good doctor. If that is so, it certainly seems better to have a few satisfactory schools rather than several inferior ones and that seems to be the generally accepted policy, because the average number of medical schools per province or State area works out to about 2½. "Before examining the tabulated statement we may consider what standard in certain respects we should try to attain. From what has been said above it will be expected that most of the medical schools will be overcrowded with students, and indeed that is so, except in the case of a few schools for women. This is certainly regrettable, because overcrowd- ing of students in proportion to laboratory accommodation and equipment, amount of clinical material, and number of teaching staff, are the most potent causes of inefficiency of education. The province with the largest number of schools has them even more overcrowded than the other pro- vinces.
95 "Here I propound seven standard rules to which I consider a school should try to attain. All these rules are concerned with the proportion of patients and certain equipment to the number of students. There are doubtless other rules of proportion: I am suggesting only a few that experience has taught me are important. If anyone thinks that these standard rules tend unduly to restrict the number of students I can only give it as my experience that lower numbers tend to better education. Standard Rules. Let x = Total number of students in the School. and y = Number of students admitted annually. Where the instruction is a 4-year course it will generally be found that x=4½y, and in a 5-year course that x=5½y or a little more. This allows for failures in examination and for some students abandoning the course. If these numbers are not approximately in this proportion, and a study of the tabulated statement will show that they are often not so, then there must be some other factor dislocating the proportion, such as an unusual admission number in one or more years, or an exceptional number of students abandoning a medical career. (i) The sanctioned number of beds in the hospital or hospitals, in- cluding special departments, should be not less than 5½ times y. (ii) The number of beds in the hospital should be not less than x. (iii) The daily average of in-patients should be not less than 5 times y. (iv)The daily average of in-patients should be not less than x. (v) The average annual number of confinements available for teach- ing students should be not less than 10 times y. (vi) The number of microscopes available for teaching physiology should be not less than 4/3 y. (viii) The number of microscopes available for teaching pathology should be not less than 5/4 y. I will not stop to explain why I have fixed on these arbitrary numbers except to say they are the result of experience. I have fixed on the item of microscopes because they are the most expensive articles of equipment a student uses and they form a fair gauge of the general adequacy of laboratory education. I do not regard a microscope as fit for physiology teaching unless it has 2/3 and 1/6 objectives, nor for pathology teaching unless it has 1/12 oil immersion in addition to the other two. Deficiency in microscopes is the only item in which every medical school is below the standard of these Standard Rules and the real reason is the expense. The methods different schools employ to obviate this deficiency are numerous; the explanations given are, that the students do not require to prepare specimens themselves, but are shown those prepared by demonstrators; that the students do their practical classes in batches; that two or more students share one microscope; that microscopes are used in common between physiology and pathology; that microscopes are borrowed from the medical college. All these methods are unsatisfactory.
96 A microscope is an individual article of equipment that should be in the care of one student during the course of the practical classes. Although no school attains what I consider the correct standard so far as micros- copes are concerned, the deficiency of some schools is deplorable. How can School H with 50 students admitted annually teach pathology with only 4 microscopes and School I with 115 admissions with only 8 patho- logical microscopes? School K has only 5 and School L but 2, while School U has only 3 microscopes for physiology, and Schools X and Y have but 3 and 2 respectively for pathology. These are notable deficiencies." 4. It will be observed that General Sprawson laid down certain standard rules and the statement annexed to his notes (Table 'G', pages 150-51) indicated the extent to which each school conformed with these rules. The information collected in connection with this Review permits of an assessment being made as to whether the schools are still deficient in the numbers of beds and microscopes available for teaching as judged by the standards prescribed by General Sprawson and this is indicated in the following table. School. Total number of students during 1937-38. Annual Entry. Number of beds available for teach- ing. No. of Micros- copes avail- able for teaching. Deficiency or otherwise according to General. Spraw son's formula. Physiology. Pathology. i ii iii Government. 1. Stanley Medical School, Madras. 334 66 634 88 1 for each Conforms to standard in all respects97 School. Total number of students during 1937-38. Annual Entry. Number of beds available for teach- ing. No. of Micros- copes avail- able for teaching. Deficiency or otherwise according to General Sprawson's formula. Physiology. Pathology. i ii iii Government98 and in Assam the 2nd and 3rd year students are given four chances to re-appear at the examination in which they fail. After the fourth failure their names are struck off the rolls of the school. In Bengal and the Punjab the 2nd and 3rd year students can continue to appear at their annual examinations till the fourth failure, but Bombay allows its students only two chances in the first professional examination for the L. C. P. S. and three chances in the second professional (first L. C. P. S.) examina- tion. In the Punjab the first year students are allowed four chances, in the Central Provinces five and in Bihar and Orissa 2, but in Assam and in some of the schools in Bengal the first year students are not retained in the school if they fail to pass the annual examination. 6. Hostel accommodation.99 East India Company when they were styled as Dressers and later on called Hospital Assistants trained under a 3 years' course in the Medical College, affiliated to the Madras University, till 1882 when they were transferred to an Auxilliary Medical School at Royapuram. But as these measures proved abortive they were again transferred to the Medical College in 1887. Finally they were transferred to the School established at Rayapuram in 1903 and became a separate entity thereafter. The three years' course of training being found insufficient, the Government raised it to 4 years in 1904. In 1911 the designation of Hospital Assistants was changed to that of "Sub-Assistant Surgeons" and in 1912 Government ordered that students passing out of the School may affix the letters L. M. P. (Licensed Medical Practitioner) to their names. From the academic year 1933 the Government sanctioned the introduction of a five years' course for the L. M. P. to afford the students the opportunity of more thorough medical education and thereby place them professionally on a par with those who acquire the Medical Diploma given by the Royal Colleges in England. His Excellency the Rt. Hon'ble Sir George Frederick Stanley, P.C.G., C.I.E., C.M.S., Governor of Madras, and Lady Stanley inaugurated the five years' course and on this occasion His Excellency very graciously acceded to the request to call the School by his name and from that date onwards the School is known as the Stanley Medical School, Madras. A new building for the School is under con- struction and will ere long remove a long felt necessity. Admission to the School is made on the basis of educational qualifi- cations, graduates being given preference to the Intermediate and Matri- culation passed candidates100 course. Students who fail in more than one subject are required to reappear at the Board examination in all the subjects and no compart- mental system is allowed. No student is promoted to the next higher class unless he passes the Board examination in all subjects, but this rule does not apply to students who fail either in Hygiene or in Pharmacology in third year Board examination. A student who fails in the Final Part I examination in January has to appear in April examination and one who fails in April examination has to reappear in October next while failing in October has to appear in January next. There is one Demonstrator for every 20 students in a practical class, the Lecturers, etc., also acting as Demonstrators for the purpose. Not more than 40 students work at a time in a practical class. A student's Union is functioning and there is a reading room attached to the Hostel. During 1936-37 a paper on "The value of the Aldehyde and Stiburea tests in the diagnosis of Kala-Azar" by members of the staff was published in the Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene101 Governor of Madras, opened the Deep X-Ray Therapy and Radium build- ing. S. S. L. C. with good marks in English and Science is the preliminary education standard required for admission. While selecting candidates for admission preference is given to applicants belonging to the Madras Presidency and possessed of best educational qualifications and reliable recommendations. Five seats are allotted to students coming from Travancore. The number of applications received during 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 64, 75, and 66 respectively out of which 7, 9 and 10 respectively were from candidates with I. Sc. qualifications. Government orders regulate the procedure in regard to failed students. About 20 to 25 students work at a time in a practical class. Arrangements exist for the training of compounders, laboratory techni- cians and nurses. The sports Club provides facilities for tennis, badminton and basket ball, etc. THE LADY WILLINGDON MEDICAL SCHOOL FOR WOMEN, MADRAS. It is a Government institution open only for women students. It was opened by H. E. Lady Willingdon in 1923. It commenced its gfirst session in July 1923 with 20 stipendiary students in the Victoria Buildings, Egmore, Madras. In 1927, a house next to Victoria buildings was rented and in 1933 the School was transferred to 'Laxmi Villa'. From the very beginning the students study Anatomy in a building on the Lloyd's Road, not far from the Queen Mary's College. Clinical instruction is imparted to the students at the Victoria Caste and Gosha Hospital, Triplicane, and twice a week at the Royapettah Hospital. Candidates are selected on the basis of their educational qualifications, the minimum qualification required being a pass at the Matriculation examination of the Madras University or an equivalent thereof. The number of applicants during 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 26, 39 and 43 out of which 1 in 1935 was of Intermediate standard. The annual examinations are held in April every year. Those who fail to pass these examinations in April undergo a further course of study in the subject or subjects concerned and appear at the Board examination in October. If they pass in October, they are promoted to the next higher class and study from October to September next and appear for the Board Examination in the following October. This batch of students is known as the "B" Batch as against the students who take their exami- nation in April every year and who are known as the "A" Batch of students. The students in the 3rd year who fail in Hygiene or Pharma- cology are, however, allowed to proceed with their studies in the fourth year. The number of students working at a time in a practical class does not exceed 10. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74940566.tif]
102 BYRAMJEE JEEJIBHOY MEDICAL SCHOOL, POONA (BOMBAY). This school was the outcome of a health disaster that forced the Bombay Government to provide facilities for the training of medical men in the Presidency. As the name of the School indicates, its foundation was in part due to the munificence of Mr. Byramji Jeejibhoy, C.S.I., who donated Rs. 10,000 and a large plot of land with a bungalow to serve as residence for students. The School was started on the 1st November 1878 with 82 pupils but was formally opened by Sir Richard Temple on the 7th December of the same year. At first the course of studies covered a period of 3 years, successful candidates being given a diploma of Hospital Assistants103 and a bungalow for the Superintendent. In 1917 the School was affiliated to the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Bombay. A Committee was set up in 1936 with the Surgeon General as Chairman and Sir Mangaldas Mehta as an additional member to find ways and means for improvement in teaching, etc. The Committee drew up a scheme for the guidance of the heads of the schools. This scheme was approved by Government in 1936, and the School has undergone many changes. The preliminary education standard required for admission has been raised from the current year (1936-37) to Intermediate Science, B group. Prior to this Matriculation was the minimum qualification required. The number of applications received in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 302, 292 and 72 with 9, 28 and 42 respectively having I.Sc. qualifications. Of the total vacancies 25 per cent. are reserved for women students and 25 per cent. for students from the backward classes. To pass the examination a student must obtain, in aggregate, at least 40 per cent. of the total marks, the pass marks for each subject being 30 per cent. Unsuccessful candidates are allowed 2, 3 and 5 attempts at the 1st, 2nd and final L.C.P.S. examina- tions respectively. On an average 25 students work at a time in a practical class of Chemis- try, Physics, Biology, Physiology and Materia Medica and 12 in a practical class of Bacteriology and Pathology. Students have their own Library and Reading Room where they play in- door games as well. MIRAJ CHRISTIAN MEDICAL SCHOOL, MIRAJ, (BOMBAY). The Miraj Christian Medical School is a non-Government institution and was started in 1900 by late Sir William Wanless with a class of 3 students with the object of training men for Hospital Assistants to work in the Miraj Mission Hospital which was founded by him in 1892. He with his colleagues gave a three years' course to these students. With the co-opera- tion of other Mission Hospitals 12 students were admitted to a new class three years later. This class was given a 4 years' course and since then a single class was taught under that system till 1915. The School is now maintaining only two classes simultaneously admitting students once in two years. In 1918 the School was affiliated to the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Bombay, and in 1919 for the first time it sent its students for the Final L.C.P. S. examination of Bombay. All non-matriculates had to take up then an entrance examination at the B. J. Medical School, Poona, before they were admitted. The last three classes have been given a 5 years' course of study. The preliminary education standard now required for admission to the School is Matricülation. At the time of selection for admission preference is given to students supported by the various Missions, Native States and private Institutions. The number of applications received in 1936was 62 out of which 15 were from candidates with I Sc. qualification. There no admissions in 1935 and 1937.
104 Only two chances are given for students appearing for the First and Second Professional Examinations and a third chance is given, though rarely, to those who fail in one or two subjects but pass with credit in others. On an average 20 students work at a time in a practical class. Besides the School Library which contains medical books and journals, students run their own Reading Room and conduct all indoor and outdoor games such as tennis, football, cricket, base ball, ping pong etc. During 1936-37 a member of the staff published papers on (i) Causition, Pathology and Treatment of Duodenal Ulcer and its Complica and (ii) Transplantation of the Ureters, in the Christian Medical Journal of India. THE NATIONAL MEDICAL COLLEGE, BOMBAY. It is a non-Government institution and was founded in 1921, by a few zealous workers engaged in the medical and scientific professions, amongst whom the name of Dr. D. D. Sathaye deserves special mention. The object was to diffuse amongst the youths of the country knowledge about the progressive western medical science and also to preserve and popularise the best in the Ayurvedic and Unani systems. The College was affiliated to the "Tilak Maharashtra Vidya Peeth". In 1924 the Ayurvedic and Unani departments were abolished and the Institute was affiliated to the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Bombay. The management of the Institution is vested in a council called the College Council. In 1925, the late Dr. A. L. Nair, the well known philanthropist of Bombay, built and equipped a chari- table hospital in memory of his mother, Bai Yamunabai L. Nair, and handed over the same to the Council of Management of the College to be used as a training ground for its students. The College was accommodated in a rented house up to 1927, when the College building was completed and opened by H. E. Sir Leslie Wilson, the then Governor of Bombay. This institute is dependent for its funds on public support and is a unique example of voluntary effort and co-operative spirit on the part of many eminent medical men of the city. This feature of the Institute was highly commended in his speech by H. E. Sir Leslie Wilson. The minimum education standard required for admission to the College is I. Sc. from June 1937, before which matriculates of a recognised Univer- sity were eligible for admission. Students are admitted according to merit and not on communal basis. About 10 seats are reserved for women students. The number of applications received during 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 353, 346 and 196 respectively. Out of these 4, 46 and 121 applicants in 1935, 1936 and 1937 respectively were of the Intermediate Science standard. No special rules exist for the failed candidates but they are governed by the rules and regulations laid down by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Bombay. The number of students working at a time in a practical class, on an average, is 25 to 30.
105 There is a students' Gymkhana in which the students are given facilities for participating in all indoor and outdoor games. A Reading Room also exists for the students, where medical books and periodicals and daily and weekly newspapers are provided. CAMPBELL MEDICAL SCHOOL, CALCUTTA, (BENGAL). It is a Government institution. In the earlier part of the 19th Century in Bengal two systems of medi- cine viz., Ayurvedic and Unani were practised, systems which were un developed and run mostly on speculative lines. With the increasing demand for Indian doctors it was deemed necessary to establish a central institu- tion for a more uniform and better system of education in medical science and with the approval of the Government of India a school was opened in October 1822 in two sections106 held. Those who pass the examination are then required to undergo a further year of training as an apprentice in the Dispensary attached to the hospital or that of a recognised Chemist or Druggist. They are then eligible to sit for the Compounders' Certificate examination held by the State Medical Faculty of Bengal. A course of instruction in First Aid to the injured is given annually to the second year Licentiates and Compounder students by a Demonstrator of Anatomy specially detailed for the purpose. Football, cricket, tennis and hockey are played under the auspices of the Students' Athletic Club. During 1936-37 articles on (1) A few facts regarding Cerebro-spinal fever as seen amongst the patients of the Campbell Hospital and (ii) Cholera107 A paper on 'a case of Rhino-Meningorrhea' was published in 1936. THE LYTTON MEDICAL SCHOOL, MYMENSINGH, (BENGAL). It is a Government institution. In 1920 it was resolved at a public meeting to submit a representation to the Government asking for the establishment of a medical school. A committee was formed known as the "Medical School Foundation Committee" who submitted a memorial to the Government and decided in consultation with the Surgeon General with the Government of Bengal to locate the school at Mymensingh. In 1921 the Government of Bengal approved the scheme at an estimated cost of Rs. 5,10,000. The local District Board agreed to contribute Rs. 58,882 towards the initial cost of the scheme. Some help was also received from the King Edward Memorial Fund, but on account of financial stringency, the Government of Bengal could not contribute their full quota, with the result that the scheme for the construction of hostels and teachers' quarters had to be postponed. The School opened in July 1924. It. has accommodation for 200 students. The minimum qualification required for admission to the School is the Matriculation certificate. Candidates seeking admission are required to appear before a selection committee appointed for the purpose. As far as possible selection is made on a territorial basis, 25 per cent. of the total number of vacancies being reserved for Mohammedans. Women and mili- tary medical pupils are not admitted to this School. Students from other provinces are admitted if seats are available. The number of applicants in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 49, 76 and 84 respectively of which 6, 5 and 4 respectively were those who had passed the Intermediate Science examina- tion. If a first year student fails in the February test, his name is struck off, but the 2nd and 3rd year students are allowed four chances to pass the examination. There As no such restriction Ain, the case of the 4th year students. The number of students working at a time in a practical class does not. exceed 15 in Physiology, Pathology and Materia Medica, 16 in Anatomy demonstrations and 125 in Anatomy dissections. The School maintains a class for compounders in which 25 students are trained annually. There is the Lytton Medical School Society with athletic, social, dramatic and literary sections. The Superintendent is its president.. There is one common room for students and books and journals are distri- buted to students for reading. RONALDSHAY MEDICAL SCHOOL, BURDWAN, (BENGAL). It is a Government institution. The foundation stone was laid in 1920 by His Excellency Lord Ronaldshay, the then Governor of Bengal, and the school was opened on the 16th January, 1922. The hostel buildings are a free gift made by the Maharajadhiraj Bahadur of Burdwan. The preliminary education standard required for admission is Matricu- lation or an equivalent examination of a recognised University. Admission
108 is made on the merits of candidates and on a territorial basis by a selection committee appointed by Government. 25 per cent. of the total vacancies are reserved for Mohammedans and 15 per cent. for depressed classes. There is no arrangement for the training of women students. Students from other provinces are admitted but no seats are reserved for them. 138, 118 and 99 applications were received in 1935, 1936 and 1937 out of which 16, 14 and 8 respectively were from candidates with I.Sc qualifica- tions. Unsuccessful students have to undergo training for another session (six months) in each subject and to attend special practical classes held for them. Students who fail in the final year examination have also to do hos- pital duty besides attending the usual lectures and practical classes. For purposes of practical classes students are divided into batches; each batch consists of 10109 JACKSON MEDICAL SCHOOL, JALPAIGURI, (BENGAL). It is a Government institution and was started in 1930. 64 students have since passed out of the School after obtaining the L.M.P. diploma. Matriculation or an equivalent examination is the minimum educational qualification required for admission to this school. Admissions are made by selection. Preference is given to Mohammedans and depressed classes upto 25 and 15 per cent. of the total vacancies respectively. No women students are admitted. The number of applications received during 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 57, 59 and 49 respectively. 3, 4 and 3 applications in 1935, 1936 and 1937 res- pectively were received from students with I.Sc. qualifications. Failed students are required to attend a further course of training and are allowed only four chances to reappear at the examination at which they fail, but there is no such restriction for the final year failed students. The maximum number of students working at a time in a practical class. is 16. The Athletic Club, which provides mainly for football, hockey, cricket and tennis, is managed by an Executive Committee formed of staff and students. The School has a Reading Room within its premises equipped with books and journals. BANKURA SAMMILANI MEDICAL SCHOOL, BANKURA, (BENGAL.) To meet the growing demands for qualified medical practitioners in the mofussil and for the spread of medical education in the Presidency, as well as for the establishment of a fair-sized decent and well equipped hospital in the District town, the Bankura Sammilani Medical School was started by the Bankura Sammilani in 1922. It trains students for the Licentiate Examination of the State Medical Faculty of Bengal and is recognised by the Bengal Council of Medical Registration. The preliminary education standard required for admission to the School is Matriculation or an equivalent examination of a recognised University. Students from all districts and provinces are treated alike for admission to this institution. No reservation of any kind obtains. The number of applications received in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 98, 62 and 54 respectively out of which 1 application each in 1936 and 1937 was received from candidates with I.Sc. qualifications. It is compulsory for the failed students to attend all the lectures, de- monstrations and practical classes in the subject or subjects concerned for a period from the publication of the result upto the Test Examination and no student is sent up for the Faculty Examination unless he passes in the Test Examination. For purposes of practical classes students are divided into groups, each group consisting of 20 students. In Physiology, Pathology and Anatomy two groups work simultaneously while in Materia Medica, Chemistry and Physics only one group works at a time.
110 The Reading Room is under the the charge of a teacher who is also the Secretary for the Common Room. It contains about 620 books and journals. There is no separate club for students but they participate in games of all kinds, particularly Foot-ball and Badminton. THE CALCUTTA MEDICAL SCHOOL, CALCUTTA. (BENGAL). It is a non-Government institution. In 1923 the Calcutta Medical Institute, a Society registered under Act XXI of 1860, took over the management of the Calcutta Medical School and Hospital which was founded by late Dr. S. K. Mullick, under the name of the National Medical College of India. In 1924 the School was recog- nised temporarily up to the Intermediate standard and since 1926 it is affili- ated up to the Final L.M.F. standard of the State Medical Faculty of Bengal. The hospital, which formerly contained only 50 beds, has been enlarged since 1933 to contain 150 beds to provide adequate facilities for hospital training to the students who had previously to attend various other hospitals in Calcutta for the purpose. The preliminary education standard required for admission to the School is a pass at the Matriculation or an. equivalent examination. Students are .admitted from all provinces without distinction of paste or creed. There is no special reservation of any kind. The number of applications received during 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 257, 225 and 220 respectively out of which 67, 54 and 45 respectively were received from students with I.Sc. qualifi- cations. Failed students have to undergo a further course of training for six months in the subject or subjects concerned and also hospital training for 6 months in the case of senior students. The maximum number of students working at a time in a practical class is 30. There are two clubs. The one is Athletic Club which arranges for almost all indoor and outdoor games, while the other is Entertainment Club under which theatrical performances are organised. Students read books in the School Library. During 1936-37 papers on (i) Anaemia in Pregnancy, (ii) Delay in Labour and (iii) Osteomalacia were published in the book of Midwifery 'An Introduction to the study of Midwifery, 1937' by Dr. J. C. Chatterjee. NATIONAL MEDICAL INSTITUTE, CALCUTTA. (BENGAL). It is a non-Government institution. It was first started in 1921 with 500 students having a five years' college course but was ultimately reduced to the school standard of the State Medical Faculty of Bengal to which it was affiliated in 1927. It is in receipt of a grant from the Calcutta Municipal Corporation and got a grant of Rs. 4 lakhs from the Government of Bengal for the purchase of land, construction of buildings and equipment etc. The Indian National Congress and Late Mr. C. R. Das gave a great impetus and sub- stantial help to found this Institution. The School as well as its attached
111 hospitals are controlled by a Society called the 'Bengal Council of Medical Education'. Matriculation of a recognised University or its equivalent examination is the minimum education standard required for admission to the School. No restriction of any kind is imposed on the admission of students. The number of applicants during 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 187, 168 and 141 respectively out of which 11, 7 and 5 respectively were of Intermediate standard. Failed students are governed by the Rules and Regulations of the State Medical Faculty of Bengal. The maximum number of students working at a time in a practical class is 40. Students' Common room is used as a Reading Boom and for indoor games. A paper on "Role of infection in the Aetiology of Infantile Cirrhosis of the Liver" and another on "Summer fever in Children" were published in the Indian Medical Gazette, Vol. LXXI, No. 6 in June 1936 and, "The Anti- septic" in March 1937 respectively. MEDICAL SCHOOL, AGRA. (UNITED PROVINCES). In 1854 Government proposed to establish a medical school attached to the Thomason Hospital, Agra, which was built in the same year, for the instruction of apprentices of Government dispensaries in vaccination work. Dr. John Murray, the then Civil Surgeon and subsequently the first Princi- pal of the School, however, suggested a general scheme which was duly sanc- tioned, for the education of native doctors. Under this scheme the course of training was to run for three years. The subjects to be studied were Anatomy, Materia Medica, Chemistry, Botany, Medicine, Surgery and Midwifery. In 1855, 35 pupils were enrolled and were paid a maintenance allowance of Rs. 6 p.m. each. The first batch of 12 native doctors passed out of the school in 1857. The final examination was held once a year in April and students had to obtain 75 per cent. of the total marks in order to pass the examination. In 1865 it was decided that only those students who had done a year in the School dispensary or in a Regiment should be admitted. It was in 1878 that a civil hospital. assistants class, as distinct from the military medical class, was formed for the first time. The number of students studying at the School rose to 193 men and 49 women in 1894. The School was affiliated to the United Provinces State Board of Medical Examinations in 1913, but with effect from the 15th November, 1926, State Medical Faculty has been instituted in place of the old United Provinces State Board of Medical Examinations. First Membership examination was held in 1929. The stipendiary or indenture system was abolished in 1924 and since then all students are treated as private students and pay for their education at the school. The preliminary education standard now required for admission is a pass at the High School Examination, with Chemistry and Physics, of the United
112 Provinces Board of Intermediate and High School Education or an equivalent or higher examination of a University of the United Provinces. The ad- mission to the School is made by a competitive pre-medical test in Chemistry, Physics, English Composition and Viva voce. No system of communal reservation obtains. Two candidates from Delhi Province can be admitted if they pass the pre-medical test. The number of applications received during 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 120, 146 and 160 out of which 8, 25 and 33 applicants respectively had I.Sc. qualifications. In 1936 and 1937 four applications were received from candidates possessing B.Sc. qualifications. No candidate is promoted to the next higher class unless he passes in all the subjects. Each unsuccessful candidate is given two chances to re- appear in the subjects in which he fails. If he fails in both the chances, he is required to re-appear in all the subjects subsequently. The number of students working at a time in a practical class does not exceed 40. No special courses exist for compounders or sanitary inspectors' classes. There is a Students' Clinical Society which publishes a biannual journal named the "Clinical Society Journal". Meetings of the Society are held regularly when papers of clinical interest are contributed by members of the staff and students. The students' Reading Room subscribes to periodi- cals and daily newspapers. 12 Research papers were published by the staff during the year 1936-37. WOMEN'S MEDICAL SCHOOL, AGRA. (UNITED PROVINCES). Medical training for women students was first started in Agra in 1883 when 4 women students were admitted to the Agra Medical School. A Maternity Hospital for women was built in 1916 and the Women's Medical School and Hospital were completely separated from the Men's School in 1923. The School is financed by Government but it also receives assistance from the Central and Provincial Dufferin's Fund. The preliminary education standard required for admission is a pass at the Matriculation or an equivalent examination. The number of appli- cations received in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 109, 99 and 120 respectively out of which 2 in 1935 and 1 in 1936 were from students with I Sc. qualifi- cations. No reservation of seats is made on any communal or other basis. Prefer- ence is given to students domiciled in the United Provinces. Not more than 16 students on an average work together at a time in a practical class of Chemistry and 14 in a class of Physiology. There is a Students' Club and a separate Reading Room MEDICAL SCHOOL, AMRITSAR. (PUNJAB). The School was started in Lahore in November, 1860 as a part of the Medical College there, with two classes of students (i) the English speaking class and (ii) the Hindustani speaking class which constituted the begin- ning of this school. In 1910 on the death of King Edward VII, it was
113 decided to perpetuate his memory in the Punjab by a King Edward Memo- rial in the form of a new King Edward Medical College and School which was formally opened by Lord Hardinge, the then Viceroy of India, in 1915. Owing to the steadily increasing number of students seeking admission to the combined institution and the need for providing requisite facilities and teaching material for students, the school was separated in 1920 and trans- ferred to Amritsar, where it was at first accommodated in a small building. The School building now consists of three blocks114 There is a Students Union which runs a School Magazine and holds social and literary meetings of students. Reading Room subscribes to19 publications. Library consists of 2833 volumes. During 1936-37 a paper on Prognostic Significance of Icterus Index in Lobar Pneumonia was published and research work on Ankylostorniasis is being done in the Physiology Department. A Tuberculosis Enquiry with reference to the types of Tubercle Bacilli causing Surgical and abdomi- nal tuberculosis in Amritsar is being conducted in the Pathology Depart- ment of the school. It is financed by the local Municipality. THE LUDHIANA MEDICAL SCHOOL FOR MEN, LUDHIANA. (PUNJAB). The existing accommodation at the Medical School, Amritsar, being found inadequate to cope with the pressing need and increasing demand for medical education in the Punjab, the late Dr. B. D. Soni, M.B., B.S., with the co-operation of some spirited public workers started this school on 11th June, 1934 and obtained recognition by the Punjab Medical Council on 23rd February, 1935. The School is at present recognised upto the III Year class. After the death of Dr. B. D. Soni, the Governing Body of the school, faced with financial difficulties, handed over the institution to the Managing Committee of the Arya High School, Ludhiana, which has now appointed a Managing Body for the control and management of the School. The minimum educational qualification required of a candidate for admission to the school is Matriculation with Science as a special subject. Preference is given to F. Sc. students. The number of applications received in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 43, 43 and 46 respectively. 4, 5 and 2 applications in 1935, 1936 and 1937 respectively were received from students possessing F. Sc. qualifications. Admission is made by a special committee appointed for this purpose. Students are called for personal interview and the best of the lot are selected. No seats are reserved for any community. Every unsuccessful candidate is given four chances to reappear at an examination, and if he is even then unable to qualify he ceases to be the student of the school. On an average 45 students work at a time in a practical class of Physics, Physiology, Histology and Anatomy and 25 in a class of Chemistry, Pathology and Pharmacy. The general activities of the students are regulated by the students' union called the Ludhiana Medical School Union, under which there is a Sports' Committee. Reading Room subscribes to Medical Journals and other daily newspapers. Library consists of 200 books and a large number of old journals. WOMEN'S CHRISTIAN MEDICAL COLLEGE, LUDHIANA. (PUNJAB). The School was founded in 1894 by Dr. Edith Brown, D.B.E., M.A., M.D., starting with a class of 4 students. At present the number of students is 130. During the past forty-three years 333 students have
115 graduated. The expenditure has increased from Rs. 4,500 in the first year to approximately rupees 2 lakhs now. Admission to the school is made on the basis of educational qualifica- tions. I.Sc. and F.Sc. students are given preference to 1st division Matriculates with mathematics, and 2nd division Matriculation is the minimum qualification required for admission. The number of applications received in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 100, 156 and 129 respectively. The number of students with I Sc. qualifications admitted to the school in 1935 and 1937 was 1 and 4 respectively. 50 per cent. of the seats are reserved for the Punjab province and two seats for North-West Frontier Province, 1/3 being for non-Christians. Preference is given to Mohammedans on account of the difficulty they have to face in studying in Men's schools. Students are admitted on 3 months' probation and if their work is not upto the standard they are asked to leave the school after that period. A failed candidate is given 3 chances to reappear in the examination. After that he is expected to leave the school. The maximum number of students working at a time in practical classes is 20. Arrangements exist for the training of Nurses, Midwives, Nurse-Dais and Indigenous Dais, and Lady compounders. Students are divided into groups under the care of members of the staff. These groups compete in games. There is a Ranger Company in connection with the Girls Guides' Association. The students' Reading Room subscribes to a daily newspaper and other magazines. ROBERTSON MEDICAL SCHOOL, NAGPUR. (CENTRAL PROVINCES). It is a Government institution and was opened in July 1914 with a view to afford facilities for medical education to the residents of Central Provinces and Berar. The minimum educational qualification required for admission to the school is matriculation for male students. There is a competitive entrance examination for all male candidates except graduates and State candi- dates. Candidates, in order of merit, from amongst the successful ones are selected for interview and if found suitable are admitted. Women applicants are called for interview after they have passed a test conducted by the Director of Public Instruction, Central Provinces, which is of the matriculation standard, and if found suitable are admitted. Admissions are limited to about 40 per annum, 20 per cent. of the vacancies being reserved for women candidates. Applications received during 1935, 1936 and 1937 were 175, 235 and 223 respectively. 5, 11 and 20 candidates with I.Sc. qualifications applied in 1935, 1936 and 1937 respectively. First and second year students are given 4 chances to reappear at the examination in which they fail. Afterwards their names are removed from the rolls of the school. 30 students on an average work at a time in a practical class. H 2
116 Arrangements exist for the training of compounders in an annual nine months training class. Two months special training is given to compounders trained elsewhere who either do not hold the trained compounders' diploma or are sent by the Civil Surgeons for refreshing their knowledge. Papers on (i) Some reflections on diagnosis and treatment of poisoning in general and (ii) Asthma, were published by a member of the staff during 1936-37. DARBHANGA MEDICAL SCHOOL, LAHERIASERAI (BHIAR). It is a Government institution. The late Maharajadhiraj of Darbhanga had contributed five lakhs of rupees towards the scheme for raising the Temple Medical School to a Medical College at Patna and opening of a Medical School elsewhere, as it was not possible to house the Medical School and a Medical College together. Darbhanga was decided upon as the most suitable place for the Medical School, as it had 2 large Hospitals, one maintained by the Maharajadhiraj of Darbhanga and the other local Sadr Hospital, and the site for the Medical School was selected between the two hospitals. The foundation stone of the Medical School was laid by Sir Henry Wheeler in 1923. On the establishment of the Medical College, Patna, the old Temple Medical School which was established in 1874 and opened by Sir Richard Temple, the then Governor of Bengal, was transferred to Darbhanga in August 1925 and designated as "Darbhanga Medical School". The minimum qualification required for admission to the school is 2nd division Matriculation of Patna University or 1st division Matriculation of any other University. Admission is made in order of merit and best candidates are selected. No communal reservation obtains and no seats are reserved for women students. The number of applications received in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 208, 178 and 210 respectively. Out of these 10, 8 and 13 applications in 1935, 1936 and 1937 respectively were received from students possessing I.Sc., qualification. Only in first year if a student fails to pass his annual examination he is given chance to appear again after 6 months. If he fails to pass the Primary Board Examination even then, his name is struck off but he may seek admission as a fresh candidate. 20 students, on an average, work at a time in a practical class except in Anatomy where 80 students dissect bodies at a time. There is a students' Library, Athletic Club, Dramatic Club and Students' Thrift Society. The School runs a Students' Magazine.
117 BERRY WHITE MEDICAL SCHOOL, DIBRUGARH. (ASSAM). Formerly tea gardens used to employ Board passed compounders who, after a certain number of years' garden work, used to be examined by a Board consisting of the Civil Surgeon, Lakhimpur, and two European Medical Officers of the tea gardens. Dr. John Berry White, who was one of the members of the Board, thought that a higher standard of efficiency in these medical subordinates was necessary. He donated a sum of Rs. 50,000 with which the Berry White Medical School was started in 1900 for training Licentiates. Matriculation is the minimum educational qualification required for admission to the school. Admission is made on a communal and territorial basis. With effect from the year 1937 two seats have been sanctioned by the Local Government for women candidates but no woman candidate applied for admission. The number of applicants who applied for admission to the school in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 138, 150 and 144 respectively. Out of these 10, 14 and 26 in 1935, 1936 and 1937 respectively possessed I.Sc. quali- fications. A first year student who fails at the school test examination shall automatically be removed from the rolls. He can obtain permission to have his name retained, but his retention will depend upon the report of the teachers with regard to his conduct, diligence and regularity of attendance. Second and third year students are given 4 chances to re- appear at the examination in which they fail. After the fourth failure their names are removed from the rolls of the school. A fourth year failed candidate is retained in the same class until he passes. The number of students working at a time in a practical class is 30 to 50 in Anatomy and Chemistry and 10 to 16 in Physics, Pathology and Pharmacy. Arrangements exist for the training of compounders. The period of training is 2 years. A Dhai class also exists in the School. The duration of the course of training for this class is 12 months. The school has a separate Common Room which is used both as a Reading Room and a Club. The "Berry White Medical School Journal" is published quarterly by the staff and students but during 1936-37 only one issue was published. ORISSA MEDICAL SCHOOL, CUTTACK. (ORISSA). It is a Government institution and was established in 1875 under the auspices of Sir Richard Temple the then Lieut.-Governor of Bengal, Mr.
118 T. E. Ravenshaw, Commissioner of Orissa and Lieut.-Colonel W. D. Stewart, Civil Surgeon of Cuttack. The course of study was three years upto the end of 1895-96. From 1896-97 to 1898-99 only 3 students took up the 4th year course annually as bonded students on a stipend of Rs. 20 per month each on the condition that they would take up Govern- ment service on acquiring the necessary qualifications. The four years' course was regularly started from 1899-1900. Upto 1903-04 the students qualified themselves on the result of the oral examination only held by a Committee appointed by Government, but since 1904-05 the examinations were partly written and partly oral. The present system of examinations and licensing was introduced by the Bihar and Orissa Medical Examination Board in 1916-17. Matriculation of a recognised University or any other examination recognised by Government as equivalent thereto is the minimum quali- fication required for admission to the school. Admission of male candidates to the school is restricted to natives of the Province or persons domiciled therein119 apear at the next Board examination provided he passes in the sessional examination held before the Board Examination. The maximum number of students working at a time in a practical class is 100 in Anatomy, 20 in Pathology, 12 in Materia Medica and Prac- tical Pharmacy and 23 in Physiology. There is a compounders' training class which turns out on an average about 21 qualified compounders every year. Gymnasium is provided for students in the school. There is a common room in the hostel. A School magazine is published by the staff and students. MEDICAL SCHOOL, HYDERABAD. (SIND). It is a Government institution. At the suggestion of the Surgeon General with the Government of Bombay, in 1879, the Commissioner in Sind took steps for establishing a medical school in Hyderabad and a sum of Rs. 1,00,000 was raised by public subscription. The school was started with 20 students in 1881 as an experimental measure; provision was also made to admit 10 fresh candidates annually. Subsequently sanction was given for the maintenance of the School on a permanent basis. The School remained a local fund institution managed by a committee until 1928, when its management was taken over by Government. The preliminary standard of education required for admission was Matri- culation till June 1937 when it was raised to Intermediate Science examina- tion. The number of applications received in 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 85, 63 and 13 respectively of which 5, 2 and 9 respectively were from students with I. Sc., qualifications. 25 per cent. of the total number of vacancies are reserved for Mohammedans, but no reservation is made for women, military medical pupils or students from other provinces. Students who fail to pass the 1st and 2nd L.C.P.S., examinations have to attend a full term before they are allowed to appear at the subsequent examination, but those failing at the final L.C.P.S. examination have to undergo four months' training at a recognised hospital before they are eligible to appear again at the said examination. The number of students working at a time in a practical class in the 1st year does not exceed 16 in Chemistry and 10 in Physiology, and in 2nd year, 25 in dissections and 12 in Histology and Experimental Physiology. The number of students in 3rd and 4th years working at a time in the Patho- logy Department Laboratory is 4. There is a students' club and a reading room.
120 KING EDWARD HOSPITAL MEDICAL SCHOOL, INDORE. (CENTRAL INDIA). It is a non-Government institution and was founded in 1878 as a result of the efforts of Dr. Beaumont, who enlisted the sympathy of Maharaja Tukoji Rao Holkar II. A beginning was made by admitting for training a few promising youths for employment in Holkar State. As the experiment proved successful, other States also joined in the movement, one of the earliest and most generous supporters being His Highness the Maharaja Scindia of Gwalior. During the last five years the average number of students admitted annually from States has been 37, the total number of fresh admissions being 69 every year. During 1936, 5 women students were admitted. The number of students on roll has not fallen below 300 during the last ten years. Matriculation or an equivalent examination is the minimum educational qualification required for admission but preference is given to I.Sc. passed candidates and to those Matriculates who pass with Chemistry and Physics. Admissions are made on the result of an Entrance Examination held in English, General Knowledge and Viva Voce. Candidates other than 'nominees' are admitted in order of merit. Any party which makes an annual contribution to the King Edward Memorial Fund can nominate for admission to the School one candidate for each complete sum of Rs. 600 so contributed. In the case of minor States of Central India with an income of less than Rs. 6 lakhs, this contribution has been fixed at Rs. 100. It is essential for such nominees to pass the entrance examination. The number of applications received during 1935, 1936 and 1937 was 183, 164 and 221, out of which 29, 27 and 36 respectively were received from candidates of Intermediate Science standard. Failed candidates can appear at a subsequent examination only after they have attended a further course of training for full one term, in the subject or subjects concerned. Their attendance at the School must be at least 75 per cent. of the total lectures delivered. The number of students working at a time in a practical class is 18 in Chemistry, Physics and Physiology, 24 in Biology, Anatomy and Pharmacy and 36 in Pathology. Arrangements exist for the training of compounders. Admission to this class has been restricted to residents of Central India and Rajputana. About 106 compounders in various grades are trained every year. A sum of Rs. 16 per student per annum is credited to "Students Union Fund" which finances the arrangements for various outdoor and indoor games. From this fund are paid the expenses of the Annual Social
121 Gatherings and the Annual Sports. There is also a Reading Room fur- nished with newspapers and periodicals. Students take part in the manage- ment of the affairs of the Union. There is also an Amateur Dramatic Society, whose profits are paid to the Hospital Charity Fund. 9. STATISTICS. Statistical and other information regarding Medical Schools is given in the following tables.
122 MEDICAL TABLE School. Diplomas granted. Examining Body. Admissions for 1937-38. Total number of students during 1937-38. Number of students qualified in 1936-37. M. W. M. W. M. W. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Government. 1. Stanley Medical School, Madras. L. M. P. Board of Ex- aminers, Madras. 66 ... 334 ... 71 ... 2. Lady Willingdon Medical School for Women, Madras. L. M. P. -do- ... 18 ... 86 ... 18 3. B. J. Medical School, Poona L. C. P. &S. College of Physicians & Surgeons, Bombay. 29 6 271 71 32 1 4. B. J. Medical School, Ahmed- abad. L. C. P. &S. -do- 46 2 267 19 20 ... 5. Campbell Medical School, Cal- cutta. L. M. F. State Medi- cal Faculty of Bengal. 147 16 506 38 78 5 6. Medical School, Dacca L. M. F. -do- 99 3 425 15 55 2 7. Lytton Medical School, Mymen- singh. L. M. F. -do- 54 ... 220 ... 19 ... 8. Ronaldshay Medical School, Burdwan. L. M. F. -do- 69 ... 217 ... 34 ... 9. Chittagong Medical School, Chittagong. L. M. F. -do- 65 ... 207 ... 14 ... 10. Jackson Medical School, Jal- paiguri. L. M. F. -do- 25 ... 131 ... 32 ... 11. Medical School, Agra L. S. M. F., M. S. M. F. U. P. State Medical Fa- culty. 50 ... 279 3 45 1 12. Women's Medical School, Agra L. S. M. F. -do- ... 21 ... 97 ... 14 13. Medical School, Amritsar L. S. M. F. The Punjab State Medi- cal Faculty. 88 15 459 65 58 3 14. Robertson Medical School, Nagpur. L. M. P. C. P. Medical Examination Board. 37 5 196 41 33 4 15. Darbhanga Medical School, Laheriaserai. L. M. P. B. & O. Medi- cal Examina- tion Board. 44 ... 213 ... 44 ... 16. Berry White Medical School, Dibrugarh. L. M. P. The Assam Medical Ex- amination Board. 54 ... 200 ... 31 ... 17. Orissa Medical School, Cuttack. L. M. P. B. &. O. Me- dical Exa- mination Board. 40 5 157 21 31 1 'M' denotes 'Men' and 'W' denotes Women." NOTE.123 SCHOOLS. A. Number of Hospital beds available for teaching purposes. Surgical. Medical. Gynaecology. Obstetrics. Ophthalmic Ear, Nose & Throat. Children. Others. Total. Attached Hospitals. 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1. Govt. Royapuram Hospital. 2. Ramaswamy's Lying-in-Hospital. 3. Govt. T. P. Hospital. 211 267 10* 75 35 4 57* 42 634 4. Mental Hospital. 5. Infections Diseases Hospital. 6. Vaccination Department. 1. Victoria Caste and Gosha Hospital, 2. Royapettah Hospital. 30 35 25 79 170 9 52 195 595 3. Government General Hospital. 4. Tuberculosis Hospital. 5. Infections Diseases Hospital. 103 71 10 35 ... ... 21 60 300 Sassoon Hospitals, Poona. 107 84 4 25 60 4 6 ... 290 H. & P. Civil Hospital; Ahmedabad 197 419 23 22 28 ... 16 12 717 Campbell Hospital. 83 104 ( 28 ) 46 * ... ... 261 Mitford Hospital, Dacca. 38 30 12 12 10 ... ... 22 124 Surya Kanta Hospital. 58 60 10 10 12 * ... ... 150 Fraser Hospital. 42 50 6 7 8 3 ... ... 116 Chittagong General Hospital. 31 40 8 2 10 ... ... 10 101 General Hospital, Jalpaiguri. 104 86 10 10 56 ... ... ... 266 Thomason Hospital. 38 38 20 20 ... ... 30 ... 146 Maternity Hospital. 122 62 48 1 ( 48 ) ... 12 293 Civil Hospital, Amritsar. 96 73 18 6 12 3 8 6 222 Mayo Hospital, Nagpur. 74 91 4 9 18 6 ... ... 202 Darbhanga Medical School Hospital. 26 39 ( 12 ) ... ... ... 52 129 Dibrugarh Hospital. 82 45 ( 10 ) 8 * 4 66 215 General Hospital, Cuttack. * Included in surgical and medical. diseases are not included.
124 MEDICAL TABLE School. Diplomas granted. Examining Body. Admissions for 1937-38. Total number of students during 1937-38. Number of students qualified in 1936-37. M. W. M. W. M. W. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Government125 SCHOOLS. A.126 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE B. School. Hostel Accommodation. Teaching Staff. Non-Medical etachears. Accommoda- tion available for students. Monthly rent payable by each student. Cost of messing per month per student. Lecturers. Assistant Professors & Demonstrators. I.M.S. P.M.S. Others. M.B.B. S. grade. Sub-Asst. Sur- geon grade. Stipendiary. Honorary. P.M.S. Others. P.M.S Others. Stipendiary. Honorary. M W M W M W Stipendiary. Honorary. Stipendiary. Honorary. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Government. Rs. A. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Stanely Medical School, Madras 284 ... 3 0 ... 12-8 to 13-8 ... 1 10 ... 4 ... 2 ... ... 11 ... 6 ... 2. Lady Willingdon Medical School for Women, Madras. ... 70 ... ... 3 ... 13 1127 14. Robertson Medical School, Nagpur. 150 14 2 0 2 12 12 ... 8 3 1 ... ... ... 4 3 ... ... ... 15. Darbhanga Medical School, Laheriaserai. 176 ... 8 4 to 11 4 (Half yearly) ... 12 ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... 16. Berry White Medical School, Dibrugarh 200 ... 0 4 ... 12 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... 17. Orissa Medical School, Outtack. 148 18 2 6 to 2 14 Free 10 8 1 ... ... ... 6 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... 18. Medical School, Hyderabad (Sind). 44 ... 3 12 ... 16 to 20 ... 1 3 2 2 ... ... ... ... 3 ... 1 ... Non-Government. 19. Missionary Medical School for Women,Vellore. ... 100 ... ... ... 12 ... ... 8 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 ... 4 ... 20. Miraj Christian Medical School, Miraj. 46 ... 1 0 ... 15 ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 21. National Medical College, Bombay. 40 ... 8 to 10 ... No mess- ing ar- range- ment. ... ... ... ... 9 ... 7 ... ... 3 ... 3 ... 22. The Bankura Sammilani Medical School, Bankura. 160 ... 2 0 ... 10 ... ... 13 13 ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... 2 ... 23. Calcutta Medical School, Calcutta. No School Hostel. There are several messes very near to the School under the super- vision of the School authorities. ... ... 9 1 ... 6 1 ... 7 1 3 ... 24. National Medical Institute Calcutta. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... 12 1 ... 7 ... ... ... 25. Women's Christian Medical College, Ludhiana. ... 130 ... 13 8 ... 14 ... ... 14 ... ... ... ... ... 13 ... 2 ... 26. The Ludhiana Medical School for Men, Ludhiana. 35 ... 4 0 ... 9 ... ... 2 8 ... ... 2 ... ... 2 ... 2 ... 27. King Edward Hospital Medical School, Ibdore. 226 6 College fee in- cludes hostel rent. 15 15 1 1 9 ... ... 2 ... ... 4 ... 4 ... 'M' denotes 'Men'. 'W' denotes 'Women'. *Men students manage their own messing and women students arrange with Seva Sedan at Rs. 25 p.m. 128 MEDICAL Table School Receipts for 1936-37. Government Grant Grants from other public bodies Income from endow- ments Fees from students Income from other source Total expenditure for 1936-37. 1 2 3 4 6 Government. Rs Rs Rs Rs Rs Rs 1. Stanley Medical School Madras. 76,60 ... ... 25,783 ... 1,02,383: 2. Lady Willingdon Medical School for Women, Madras. Govern- ment meets the whole expenses. ... ... 1,231 4,405 71,452 3. B. J. Medical School, Poona . 66,672 ... ... 29,509 2,550 64,867 4. B. J. Medical School, Ahmedabad 20,565 ... 3,415 33,253 60 57,293 5. Campbell Medical School, Cal-Cutta. 1,01,489 1,860 1,483 50,377 2,087 1,57,296 6. Medical School, Dacca. 41,351 ... ... 41,377 5,161 87,890 7. Lytton Medical School, Mymen- singh. 17,332 1,515 ... 18,379 7,100 44,326 8. Ronaldshay Medical Schoo, Burdwan. 29,165 ... ... 17,437 5,393 51,995 9. Chittagong Medical School, Chittagong. 12,998 ... 5,177 16,875 861 35,911 10. Jackson Medical School, Jalpai- guri. 12,091 ... 8,505 13,445 913 34,954 11. Medical School, Agra . 1,18,205 ... 11 10,067 2,946 1,31,218 12. Women's Medical School, Agra 43,878 ... 213 ... ... 44,091 13. Medical School, Amritsar . 1,00,582 ... ... 46,847 170 1,47,599 14. Robertson Medical School Nagpur. 92,348 ... ... 21,900 ... 65,750 15.Darbhanga Medical School Laheriaserai. 59,160 2,969 306 11,586 ... 73,741 16. Berry White Medical School, Dibrugarh. 73,549 ... ... 7,450 2,692 69,059 17. Orissa Medical School, Cuttack. 65,137 150 713 4,608 4,504 75,112 18. Medical School Hyderabad(Sind) 53,203 ... 100 13,309 1,605 53,203 Non-Government. 19. Missionary Medical School for Women, Vellore. * 982 4,000 5,583 42,756 53,322 20. Miraj Christian Medical School Miraj. ... ... ... 3,943 26,762 30,705 21. National Medical College, Bom-bay. ... ... ... 31,400 1,676 25,900 22. Bankura Sammilani Medical School, Bankura. ... 2,325 ... 32,096 19,868 48,055 23. Calcutta Medical School, Cal- cutta. ... ... ... 51,901 11,365 61,825 24. National Medical Institute, Calcutta. ... 400 ... 65,273 8,187 60,278 25. Women's Christian Medical College, Ludhiana. 84,450 19,390 ... 15,968 90,806 2,10,614 26. The Ludhiana Medical School for Men, Ludhiana. ... ... 3,753 6,254 1,608 22,923 27. King Edward Hospital Medical School. Indore. ... 18,988 ... 53,729 2,629 68,986 *Government grant to the extent of Rs. 5,936-10-8 is expected.
129 SCHOOLS. C. Expenditure for 1936-37. on Library. Annual charges for each foreign student. Total amount of fees charged from students for the whole medic course. Scholarships or Freeships awarded. No. Amount. Staff. Students. M. W. M. W. M. W. 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. ( 2,352 ) 500 ... 450 ... ... 5,364 ... 1,000(a) ( 468 ) ... 100 ... Free 52 ... 10,320 500(b) ... ... ... 400 200 108 2,400 2,430 146 400 ... ... 400 200 ... 1,340 427 (b)600 (b)300 ( 246 ) 660 660 570 554 96 8,496 4,800 Day scho- lars free. ( 247 ) ... ... 480 480 64 5,184 4,680 6 ... ... 480 ... 36 4,176 ... ( 195 ) 480 ... 480 ... 36 6,576 ... ( 200 ) ... ... 480 ... 32 3,328 ... ( 199 ) ... ... 485 ... 21 2,312 ... ( 600 ) 500 ... 120 ... 12 600 ... 100 ... ... ... ... Free 34 ... 16130 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE D. Chemistry. School. Average number of students. Number of Teachers. Laboratory attendants and servants. Lecturers. Assistant Lecturers. 1 2 3 4 GOVERNMENT. 1. Stanley Medical School, Madras. 40 1 1 3 2. Lady Willingdon Medical School for Women, Madras. 30 1 .. 1 3. B. J. Medical School, Poona. Science Department closed from June 1937. 4. B.J. Medical School, Ahmedabad. 29 1 1 1* 5. Campbell Medical School, Calcutta. 183 1131 Chemistry132 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE D.133 Physios134 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE D.135 Biology.136 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE D.137 Pharmacy (Materia-Medica).138 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE D.139 Anatomy140 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE D.141 Physiology142 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE D.143 Pathology144 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE E. Particulars regarding the teaching of Midwifery in Medical Schools. Particulars. Stanley Medical School, Madras. Lady Willingdon Medical School for Women, Madras. Missionary Medical School for Women, Vellore, Madras. B. J. Medical School, Poona. B. J. Medical School, Ahmedabad. Christian Medical School Miraj. (Bombay) (a) Students Annual Entry 66 22 20 60 50 to 60 25 every other year. (b) Maternity Beds 75 50 64 39 24 12 (c) Students signed up for labour cases in 1936. 57 25 7 53 19 See Note against (f). (d) Confinement cases available in 1936 3,134 2,000 301 500 255 76 (e) Increase in (d) from 1932 to 1936 707 987 15 145 TABLE E.146 TABLE E.147 TABLE E.148 MEDICAL SCHOOLS, TABLE F. Statement showing the proportion of applicants with I. Sc. qualification, to the total number of applicants for admission during 1937. Name of the School. Total number of applicants. Number of applicants with I. Sc. qualifica- tions. Ratio between the two. Government. 1. Stanley Medical School, Madras 201 36 1: .179 2. Lady Willingdon Medical School for Women, Madras. 43 .. .. 3. B. J. Medical School, Poona (Bombay) 63 63 1: 1 4. B. J. Medical School, Ahmedabad (Bombay) 72 42 1: .583 5. Campbell Medical School, Calcutta (Bengal) 366 42 1: .115 6. Medical School, Dacca (Bengal) 171 20 1: .1 7. Lytton Medical School, Mymensingh (Bengal) 84 4 1: .048 8. Ronaldshay Medical School, Burdwan (Bengal). 99 8 1: .08 9. Chittagong Medical School, Chittagong (Bengal). 71 4 1: .056 10. Jackson Medical School, Jalpaiguri (Ben- gal). 49 3 1: .061 11. Medical School, Agra (U. P.) 160 33 1: .206 12. Women's Medical School, Agra (U. P.) 120 .. .. 13. Medical School, Amritsar (Punjab) 3:0 24 1: .071 14. Robertson Medical School, Nagpur (C. P.) 223 20 1: .09 15. Darbhanga Medical School, Laheriaserai (Bihar). 210 13 1: .062 16. Berry White Medical School, Dibrugarh (Assam). 144 26 1: .18 17. Orissa Medical School, Cuttack (Orissa) 124 1 1: .008 18. Medical School, Hyderabad (ind) 13 9 1: .692 Non-Government. 19. Missionary Medical School for Women, Vellore (Madras) 66 10 1: .15 20. Christian Medical School, Miraj (Bombay) 62* 1* 1: .242 21. National Medical College, Bombay 196 121 1: .612 * These figures relate to 1936.
149 TABLE 'F'.150 MEDICAL SCHOOL. TABLE G. Sex of Students. Total No. of Students. Maximum number of annual admissions. Staff. Maximum marks 5 under each head. Percentage marks necessary for pass at final examinations. Appointment of Examin- ers. No. of beds in attached hospital. Daily average of in-patients. Annual number of confinements. Number of Microscopes for teaching. Length of course in years. Conformity with Standard Rules. School. Hospital. Arrangement of duties. Numbers. Qualifications. Numbers. Qualifications. Satisfactory + Unsatisfactory 151 P M & F 416 100 4 3 4 3 3 50 + 176 300 17 30 32 4 152 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE H. Name of School. Cost of teaching per student per annum. Cost per bed for teaching per annum. Government. Rs. Rs. 1. Stanley Medical School, Madras 1,370 1,232 2. Lady Willingdon Medical School for Women, Madras 3,492 475 3. B. J. Medical School, Poona 1,018 1,027 4. B. J. Medical School, Ahmedabad 802 641 5. Campbell Medical School, Calcutta 1,068 712 6. Medical School, Dacca 604 833 7. Lytton Medical School, Mymensingh 456 676 8. Ronaldshay Medical School, Burdwan 450 560 9. Chittagong Medical School, Chittagong 502 831 10. Jackson Medical School, Jalpaiguri 930 1,004 11. Medical School, Agra. 1,094 1,098 12. Women's Medical School, Agra 1,305 615 13. Medical School, Amritsar 538 976 14. Robertson Medical School, Nagpur 920 857 15. Darbhanga Medical School, Laheriaserai 638 654 16. Berry White Medical School, Dibrugarh 739 959 17. Orissa Medical School, Cuttack 1,088 845 18. Medical School, Hyderabad (Sind) 1,044 755 Non-Government. 19. Missionary Medical School for Women, Vellore 2,057 514 20. Miraj Christian Medical School, Miraj 3,679 403 21. National Medical College, Bombay 256 799 22. Bankura Sammilani Medical School, Bankura 275 364 23. Calcutta Medical School, Calcutta 458 915 24. National Medical Institute, Calcutta 403 621 25. Women's Christian Medical College, Ludhiana 1,620 798 26. Ludhiana Medical School for Men, Ludhiana 593 650 27. King Edward Hospital Medical School, Indore 588 876 N. B.153 MEDICAL SCHOOLS. TABLE I. Hostel accommodation provided for students. Category. Number of students. Hoste accommo- dation provided for. Ratio of columns 2 and 3. Average cost* per student per month. 1 2 3 4 5 Rs. A. Government 4,650 2,064 44.4% 14 4 Non-Government 1,842 743 40.3% 17 8 * This includes hostel rent and messing charges. 3. MILITARY MEDICAL STUDENTS. (Indian Medical Department.) The Indian Medical Department, a Subordinate Medical Service, con- sists of the Assistant Surgeon and the Sub-Assistant Surgeon Branches. 2. The Assistant Surgeon Branch is for service with British troops only. It has been in existence since the early years of the 19th Century. The total strength has varied from year to year being 604 in 1928, 823 in 1933 and 484 in 1938. 3. In order to provide for war reserve, a portion of this personnel is seconded for civil employ. They are, however, liable to reversion to military duty at any time. Whilst as many as 224 military Assistant Surgeons were in civil employ in 1914, there were only 107 in civil employ in pro- vinces and under the Departments of the Government of India in 1937. The decrease in recent years is noteworthy and is attributable to the development and expansion of provincial medical services. 4. Recruitment to this Branch which is restricted to Europeans, Domiciled Europeans and Anglo-Indians was made until 1920 by a com- petitive examination; later between 1921 and 1933 it was made by selection. Since 1934, however, it has been made by interview by a Selection Com- mittee. No candidate who has not passed the Intermediate Science exami- nation of a recognised Indian University or its equivalent is now accepted for admission to Medical Colleges. Candidates while under training in the Medical Colleges receive a Scholarship of Rs. 60 p.m. and the Gov- ernment of India pays a capitation fee to the Provincial Governments to cover the cost of their education. Those admitted to the Medical Colleges are required to undergo the Course prescribed for the M.B.B.S. Degree of the Universities of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay. 5. These medical men, who in the early stages of the evolution of the Department were called as "Apothecaries", are now termed as "Assistant Surgeons".
154 6. The Sub-Assistant Surgeon Branch of the I.M.D., created as early as 1822 under the designation of "Hospital Assistants", is composed entirely of Indians, and its members are employed to assist I.M.S. officers in the medical care of Indian troops. Of a total strength of about 698, 96 were in civil employ in 1935, 87 in 1936 and 89 in 1937. The last number included 9 employed on Railways, 6 under the North West Frontier Province, 13 on foreign service (under the Indian Research Fund Association, Nyasaland Protectorate, Burma, etc.), and the rest under the Central Government. There are 61 Subadars, 2 Subadar-Majors and 7 Honorary Indian Commissioned Officers in His Majesty's Indian Land Forces. 7. Upto 1931 admission to Government Medical Schools was made by the Principals of those institutions and the candidates thus selected received a Scholarship of Rs. 12 p. m. and free training, while the Government of India paid a capitation fee to the Local Governments concerned for their medical education. In 1932 this system was discontinued. 8. Till recently, recruitment to the permanent cadre of Sub-Assistant Surgeons was restricted to those medical students who had been educated at Government expense but had not been admitted to the service under the retrenchment scheme of 1932 and from the Sub-Assistant Surgeons reserve. It has now been decided to resort to open market and recruit- ment will henceforth be made by a Selection Board. 4. MEDICAL EDUCATION OF WOMEN. It is a curious fact that in India medical education for women was embarked on before any other kind of professional education, and at a time when literacy among women, which is even now only 29 per mille,must have been only a fraction of one per cent. The reason for this phenomenon is not far to seek. It depended, in fact, on the customs relating to women which were then prevalent and which made it impossible for the majority of Indian women to receive medical aid at the hands of men. 2. Christian missionaries who went into the "zenanas" became aware of the amount of suffering endured by women on account of their seclusion and this led to Missionary Societies sending out women medical mission- aries in the attempt to relieve this suffering. The majority of the first medical women in India were missionaries, in fact a large proportion of the women who first studied medicine in the west, did so with the express object of becoming medical missionaries and helping their Indian sisters. The number of such workers was very small compared to the needs of the country and it was evident that if medical women were to provide medical aid for Indian women, these medical women must be largely Indian. As it was out of the question to send Indian women abroad in any numbers for study, a plan of education had to be devised in India. Some sixty years ago, the idea of forming a Medical School or College which would be staffed by women only, probably occurred to no one. Even if it had, the women to staff it, and a teaching hospital, would not have been avail- able. Hence other means of educating medical women had to be sought. Contributed by Dr. Ruth Young, M.B.E., W.M.S., Principal, Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi.
155 3. Indian men were already receiving medical education. But could women join with them? It would certainly not be easy and some of the men teachers, like those in England, were not at all enthusiastic about having women pupils. In the end however it was a man Surgeon General Balfour of Madras who succeeded in implementing the proposal. In 1872 he advocated medical education for women as he was of opinion that the needs of Indian women could not be met by men "for the next hundred years". He proposed either to institute a nurses' training at the Women's and Children's Hospital, or else to form a class at the Medical College. The Director of Public Instruction considered this move as "entirely pre- mature" and vetoed it. Surgeon General Balfour was not daunted however and renewed the proposal in 1874, this time being supported by Dr. H. C. Furnell, I.M.S., then Principal of the Medical College. Four students, who were either Europeans or Anglo-Indians were admitted to the Medical College. They studied for three years in what was then called the "Certi- ficate" class and all passed the final examination "with great credit". One of these students was Dame Scharlieb who afterwards took a full medical course in London and had a distinguished career, first in Madras and then in London. 4. In the north of India, where the need for medical aid for women was even greater than in Madras, but where the difficulties of providing it were correspondingly great, some private efforts were made to educate medical women in the decade 1870156 non-Christian and a further disadvantage lay in the fact that the School did not prepare for a University degree. New ideas were in the air, girls were entering Schools in larger numbers and wished to take up the study of medicine. There was talk of a Women's Medical Service for India, it must number Indian women among its members. Very few Indian girls went abroad for training and it was absurd to expect that they should. Therefore there were strong reasons for founding a College where women could study apart from men, be taught by their own sex and yet be prepared for University degrees. The Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi, was accordingly established in 1916. 6. Of late years the Medical Colleges at Lahore and Lucknow have admitted women students. In the King Edward Medical College, Lahore, ten women are now taken annually in the 1st Year Medical class. King George's Medical College, Lucknow, has begun definitely to encourage women students. The number of women studying at the Grant Medical College, Bombay, and the Medical College, Madras, is 91 and 89 respectively. In Calcutta the number is smaller. It would seem as if the facilities for higher medical education for women were now sufficient for the number of suitable candidates applying and the subsequent opportu- nities for work. This statement may, indeed, meet with an indignant pro- test from would-be students (and their parents) who have been refused admission to a Medical College. Neither the parent nor the candidate, however, is the best judge of what constitutes "suitability" and there is no doubt that many girls seek to embark on a medical career with motives other than the pursuit of medical science or the desire to relieve suffering. It has also to be remembered that there is a sharp contrast between the need of the country for medical aid and its ability to employ medical women. If too many women qualify in medicine, some are certain to swell the ranks of the unemployed, a very undesirable state of affairs, especially when sister professions such as nursing and health visiting are crying out for candi- dates. 7. With regard to the Sub-Assistant class of medical practitioners, small numbers are at present studying in all the mixed Schools, while the numbers in the B. J. Medical School, Poona, the Robertson Medical School, Nagpur and the Medical School, Amritsar, are moderately large. The greatest number of women students of the S. A. S. Class however are found in the four schools which teach, and are staffed by, women only. i.e., Agra, Ludhiana, Madras and Vellore. Here again the position is the same as noted above in connection with College education, there is a distinct danger that unemployment will follow the training of too many students. 5. MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA. The Medical Council of India was constituted under the Indian Medical Council Act, (No. XXVII of 1933) in order, as stated in the preamble, to establish a uniform minimum standard of higher qualifications in medi- cine for all provinces. The Council has not been entrusted with the mainte- nance of a register, registration remaining with the provincial medical councils, nor have any disciplinary powers over medical practitioners been conferred upon it.
157 2. The Council is composed off:158 institution in British India in order to obtain a recognised medical quali- fication are not such as to secure the knowledge and skill requisite for the efficient practice of medicine. The procedure is laid down whereby the Central Government may enquire into such representation and remove the qualification from the Schedule. In fulfilment of this duty the Council, between 1934 and 1936, required full information from all the British Indian Universities which grant medical qualifications and, by means of a specially appointed panel of inspectors, completed the inspection of all these medical institutions and their final examinations for the medical degrees. By October 1936 the Council had approved of the qualifications of Patna, Bombay, Lucknow, Madras, the Punjab, Calcutta and Rangoon Universities. In order to indicate the minimum requirements which it considered necessary for the securing of the requisite knowledge and skill for the practice of medicine, the Council immediately after its constitution, drew up, after consulting the Universities, a series of recommendations on pro- fessional education (pages 62159 and those of Calcutta from October 15th, 1936 (the date of the second inspection of the Carmichael Medical College by the Inspectors of the Council at which the Inspectors reported that the facilities for the teaching of students might be considered adequate). As Burma has now been separated from India the General Medical Council is in direct communica- tion with the Rangoon University. THE FIRST SCHEDULE. Recognised medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in British India. Medical Institution. Recognised medical qualification. Abbreviation for registration. University of Allaha- bad. Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery. M.B., B.S., All. University of Bombay Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery. L.M.S., Bom. Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery. M.B., B.S., Bom. Doctor of Medicine . . . M.D., Bom. Master of Surgery . . . M.S., Bom. University of Calcutta Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery . L. M.S., Cal. Bachelor of Medicine . . . M.B., Cal. Doctor of Medicine . . . M.D., Cal. Master of Surgery . . . M.S., Cal. Master of Obstetrics . . . M.O., Cal. University of Lucknow Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery. M.B., B.S., Lucknow. Doctor of Medicine . . . M.D., Lucknow. Master of Surgery . . . M.S., Lucknow. University of Madras Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery. L.M.S., Mad. Bachelor of Medicine and Master of Surgery. M.B., C.M., Mad. Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery. M.B., B.S., Mad. Doctor of Medicine . . . M.D., Mad. Master of Surgery . . . M.S., Mad. Punjab University Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery. L.M.S., Pun. Bachelor of Medicine . . . M.B., Pun. Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery. M.B., B.S., Pun. Doctor of Medicine . . . M.D., Pun. Master of Surgery . . . M.S., Pun. University of Patna Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery. M.B., B.S., Patna. Doctor of Medicine . . . M.D., Patna. Master of Surgery . . . M.S., Patna.
160 THE SECOND SCHEDULE. Recognised medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside British India. Country. Qualifications. UNITED KINGDOM Registrable qualifications admitting primarily to the Medical Register granted by licensing bodies in the United Kingdom, as shown in Table (F) set out in the Medical Register printed and published from time to time under the direction of the General Council of Medical Education and Registration of the United Kingdom in pursuance of the Medical Acts, 1858 and 1886. Registrable qualifications. Other countries. Title. Nature of qua- lifications as stated on diplomas. Abbreviations. AUSTRALIA161 Other countries. Registrable qualifications. Abbreviations. Title. Nature of qua- lifications as stated on diplo- mas. CANADA162 Other countries. Registrable qualifications. Title. Nature of qualifications as stated on diplomas. Abbreviations NEW ZEALAND163 and periodical publication of the register of such practitioners. The func- tions of the Medical Councils include, besides the maintenance of a register of qualified medical practitioners, the supervision of medical education, inspection of examinations, exercise of disciplinary control over medical practitioners and that of advising the Local Government in regard to the recognition of the various medical qualifications. Composition of Councils. Name of Province. Nominated President. Nominated Members. Elected Members. Total strength of the Council. Remarks. 1. Madras . . . 1 7 7 15 1 Vice-President to be elected from among members. 2. Bombay . . . 1 6* 6 13 3. Bengal . . . 1 7 7 15 4. United Pro- vinces. 1 5 9 15 5. Punjab . . . 1 8164 defect in character or infamous conduct in any professional respect, 5. insolvency or insanity declared by a competent court, 6. expiry of tenure. The Medical Council have the power to appoint a Registrar, some with and others without the previous sanction of the Local Government. The Registrar acts as Secretary and in certain provinces also as Treasurer of the Council. The Councils have also the power to appoint such other officers, clerks and servants as they may consider necessary. Every officer, clerk or servant of the Council is deemed to be, a public servant within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. Persons eligible for Registration.165 Registration.166 Complaint under the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916.167 Penal Clause.168 6. The M.B., B.S., degrees and the L.M.P. diplomas granted by the Mysore University. 7. The M.B., B.S., and L.M.S. degrees granted by the Andhra Uni- versity. 8. The diplomas or certificates granted by the King Edward Hospital Medical School, Indore. N. B.169 CHAPTER VI. Nursing in India. HISTORICAL. 1. Only a few scattered records of the nursing profession in India are available so that the history is not easy to investigate, but although the science and art of nursing has not reached the stage of deve- lopment as in most other countries, it is interesting to note that from authentic evidence it is certain that provision was made for the sick and attendants for them were employed, long before the Christian era. These attendants were placed under the direction of skilled physicians and surgeons, amongst whom Charaka and Susruta were the most advanced of their time. Susruta is said to have lived 14 centuries B. C. and Charaka about 320 B. C. Massage was one of the old practices in use as a health measure, and there were women practitioners of massage for attending on the females and men practitioners for men. The ancient Hindus believed more in the prevention than in the cure of disease, which belief is again in the 20th century gaining ground steadily. The books of the Ayur-Veda, believed to be the legacy of Brahma himself, are in 8 parts and cover the whole field of medical science with the inclusion also of nursing treatment. There are more details of nursing in the old Indian records than in those of any other country in the world. 2. The following reference to the nurse and to the patients are to be found in Lesson IX of Charaka Samhita:170 3. From the above it is obvious that even in the dim distant ages, a nursing attendant was a person from whom much was expected and it is difficult to understand how in later years the profession came to be thought one only for women of low repute. The most advanced era. of Hindu medicine was from 250 B.C. to 750 A.D. but after that there was deterioration and there is from that time onward a tremendous gap, during which years nothing of note happened. There does not appear to be any recorded explanation of how the great Hindu civilization met with the failure of its medical system, but the fact remains that between 800 B. C. and 1000 A. D. India could hold her own with other countries- in the practice of healing. Public hospitals were abolished from 1000 A.D., and the next mention of their establishment occurs in connection with the needs of the British army in India. The founding of the Madras General Hospital is an example. On November 10, 1664, the Council of Fort St. George, wrote to the Agent, Sir Edward Winter: "Fresh soldiers which came forth this year taking up their habitation in the bleak. wind in the hall, fell sick. Four of them have died and ten remain at this time very sick. Soe rather than see Englishmen dropp away like. doggs in that manner for want of Christian charity towards them, we have thought it very convenient that they might have an house on pur- pose for them, and people appointed to look after them, and see that nothing comes into them, neither of meat nor drinke, except what the. Doctor alloweth." 4. We do not know anything more of the capabilities of those persons. appointed as attendants, but the fact that they were carrying out the Doctors' orders places them in the category of "Nurses". 5. It is probable that similar provision for the care of sick soldiers took place in other provinces of India but no facts are known. There is again a gap of a large number of years until the name of Florence. Nightingale became known all the world over for her reforms in army nursing during the Crimean War in 1854. Here it was that Florence Nightingale, known amongst the men of the British armies in. Turkey as "The Lady of the Lamp", laid the foundation of modern organised nursing, as we know it today, for the benefit of the whole world. The Crimean War has great significance for the people of India since follow- ing closely upon it came the Indian Mutiny. Florence Nightingale never visited India but during the Mutiny though broken down in health, her thoughts turned to the needs of the British soldiers and she worked out reforms which were the means of reducing the mortality rate amongst the troops from 69 per 1000 to 5 per 1000. The Royal Commission on Sanitation in India appointed by Lord Stanley in 1859 was the result of :Florence Nightingale's insistence and the bulk of the Report was her own work. 6. In 1854 a school for the training of midwives was established at the Lying-in-Hospital, Madras, which formed the nucleus of the training school established later in the Madras Government General Hospital. The earlier scheme for training provided that candidates who failed to secure a diploma in midwifery could be given a sick nursing certificate. This system proved unsatisfactory and was abandoned in 1871 when the Govern- ment of Madras sanctioned a scheme for the training of 6 nurses in the Madras General Hospital. Liberal inducements were held out to trained
171 midwives to join the Nurses Training Class as there was dearth of sick nurses and super-abundance of midwives. 7. The Hospital Nurses Institution of Calcutta was founded in 1859 and the nucleus was 2 nurses, who commenced work in the wards of the Calcutta Medical College Hospital. In a year's time the staff was increased in order to supply nurses to the Presidency General Hospital and later to other hospitals and private houses. The nurses employed and trained were Europeans and Anglo-Indians, and mission hospitals were the first to start the training of Indian nurses. The women responsible for the carrying out of this training of Indian girls came out ready trained from their own countries. 8. In 1885 Lady Dufferin, the wife of the newly appointed Governor- General of India, was requested by Queen Victoria before leaving England to do what she could on arrival to provide a means of supplying medical aid to the women of this land, and in order to carry out the Queen's wish, the "Countess of Dufferin's Fund" was inaugurated and subscribed to liberally by the people for so worthy an object. This was the first national effort for the establishment of medical relief for the women of India and the earliest training school for nurses and midwives financed by the Countess of Dufferin's Fund was begun at the Cama Hospital, Bombay. At the present time a very large amount of valuable help is given by this Fund to Women's and Children's hospitals in all parts of India. 9. About the same time, the Sisters of All Saints, an Anglican Order, took over the nursing at the European General Hospital, Bombay, and a year later, at St. George's Hospital, the intention of the authorities being the foundation of nurse training schools to supply the other hospitals as well as their own with European and Anglo-Indian trained nurses. The period of training given was at first one year, later increased to 18 months and further extended in 1905 to 3 years. 10. In the same year the Association of Hospital Matrons, now known as the Trained Nurses Association of India, was inaugurated by five European Matrons resident in different parts of India, with the object of raising the standard and of laying down a code of rules for the guidance of nurses in training and afterwards. As time went on nurses' training schools increased in number and were opened in all parts of the country. At the present time there is, generally speaking, a fair amount of hospital accommodation and nursing attention in the large cities but still a great shortage in the outlying districts and villages. 11. Dearth of Nurses.172 nursing. This is now slowly but surely being broken down and Hindu girls of good education are offering themselves for training, but the number of Mohammedan candidates is still almost negligible. In the nurse training schools under the Madras Government the number of Indian pupil nurses is almost 50 per cent. at the present time. 12. The want of adequate facilities for the training of nurses is one of the discouraging factors, yet even where the facilities exist, the best type of woman is still lacking. Other factors for the shortage may be: 1. That in only a few hospitals is there sufficient teaching staff. 2. The bad housing accommodation provided in some institutions. 3. The long hours of duty as compared with other spheres of work. 4. The lack of recreational facilities. 5. The overcrowding of wards with patients, leading to overwork and overstrain of the nurses. 6. The present non-recognition of nursing as a profession by the Central and Provincial Governments. There has been a tendency in the past to exploit the nurse probationer as an essential hospital worker at the expense of her education while in many hospitals reasonable accommodation, comforts and recreational facilities are still lacking. 13. It has recently been said in Europe that the "Nurses are the spinal cord of the hospital". Would that it were so in India; alas! it is not. However, during the last ten years, much improvement in nursing has been carried out. Yet very much more remains to be done before India can hope to rank her nurses alongside those of other countries of the world. 14. Advancement of Nursing.173 2. STATUS OF NURSES. The question of the improvement of the status of matrons in particular and the nursing service in general has been engaging attention for some time. As their pay compares favourably with that of provincial service medical officers and they perform duties of a technical nature requiring special qualifications, thus conforming to two of the main requirements prescribed by the Government of India for the conferment of a gazetted rank, sug- gestions have been made that matrons working at the larger hospitals and drawing emoluments at a rate of not less than Rs. 200 p.m. should be classed as Gazetted Officers. In provinces where strong Provincial Nurs- ing Councils exist arrangements obtain for annual and biennial inspections of hospitals by Committees with a majority of matrons. This is a useful idea and might with advantage be followed in other provinces as it is likely to obviate administrative difficulties. 2. The Council of Medical Women in India consider that action on the following lines will go a long way towards improving the status of the nursing profession:174 3. REGISTRATION OF NURSES. (i) Principal provisions of the Provincial Nurses and Midwives Registration Acts. The Madras Nurses and Midwives Act was passed in 1926 and regis- tration commenced from February 14th, 1928, the date of its coming into force. In 1936, an amendment was passed entitling the following associa- tions to have a seat on the Council:175 (ii) Composition of Councils. The Acts provide for the constitution of Nurses and Midwives Councils in the provinces. The composition of the councils is shown in the table below. The term of office of members other than ex-officio members is 3 years in the case of Madras, Bengal, United Provinces, Punjab and Bihar, while Bombay and Central Provinces provide that members of the Councils other than ex-officio members shall hold office for a period of 5 years, or such less period as Government may prescribe in this behalf. Table showing composition of Nurses and Midwives Councils. Province. Nominated President. Nominated Members. Elected Members. Total. Medical Person- nel. Matrons, Nurses, etc. Others. Medical Person- nel. Nurses, Midwives. etc. Others. Madras . . . Surgeon General 5 . . . 2 . . . 7 . . . 14 Bombay . . . Do. . . . 6 4 . . . 2 8 . . . 21 Bengal . . . To be appointed by the Local Government. 5 4 2 2 3 . . . 17 United Pro- vinces. I. G. C. H. 5 3 1 2 4 2 18 Punjab . . . Do.. . . 5 1 13 . . . 3 . . . 23 Central Pro- vinces. Do. . . . 9 3 2 . . . . . . . . . 15 Bihar. .. Do. . . . 7 2 3 . . . 2 . . . 15 The figures for 'Nominated Members' include 'ex-officio' members. (iii) Appointment of Registrars. The Councils have the power to appoint a Registrar, some with and others without the previous sanction of the Local Government. The Registrar acts as Secretary to the Council and in some cases as Treasurer as well. The Acts do not lay down any specific qualifications for the Registrar, but nurses themselves consider that the Registrar should be a fully qualified and experienced nurse and midwife. The Bengal Nurses and Midwives Council was the first to appoint a Nurse-Registrar and the Punjab Nurses and Midwives Council has consented to a similar measure, but the post has not yet been filled. The Madras Nurses and Midwives Council is not opposed to a Nurse Registrar but the financial position does not allow such an appointment to be made. (iv) Constitution of Registers. All Nurses and Midwives Councils are required to maintain a register of Nurses, Midwives, Health Visitors, etc., and from time to time revise the register and publish it in the prescribed manner.
176 These registers are divided into several parts as indicated below:177 Bengal and United Provinces178 Statement showing Nurses, Midwives and Dhais employed in Hospitals etc., (1936.) Urban areas. Rural areas. Grand Total. State Public. State Special. Local and Munici- pal Funds. Private Aided. Private Non-Aided. Railways. Total. State Public. State Special. Local and Munici- pal Funds. Private Aided. Private Non-Aided. Railways. Total. Men. Women. Men. Women. Men Women. MADRAS179 ASSAM180 4. The following are the numbers of nurses employed in Missionary Institutions. Nurses181 4. TRAINING AND EXAMINATION. In practically all the nurses' training schools in British India the three years' period of training for nurses has been adopted and most hospitals work very closely on the syllabus laid down by the General Nursing Council of England and Wales. This is recognised as being a very com- prehensive one and is desirable for provinces having in view reciprocal registration, for their nurses, with the General Nursing Council. Where this syllabus is adopted there are two examinations. The Preliminary one can be taken at any time after the completion of one year's training, but is usually taken at the end of 18 months and the Final one on completion of three years' training. The examinations are conducted by182 5. CONDITIONS FOR APPROVED TRAINING INSTITUTIONS FOR NURSES AND MIDWIVES IN THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. The rules of the Bombay Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Council on this subject are so comprehensive and precise that no apology is needed for giving a brief summary of them here. General conditions.183 6. SALARIES OF NURSES IN VARIOUS PROVINCES. There is no uniform standard of salaries and allowances throughout India at present. Each provincial Government has its own scale; to some extent the variation is due to the different cost of living but not com- pletely so. The salaries paid in the south are low as compared with Delhi, Bengal and the Central Provinces, and this leads to a constant migration of many of the best nurses. It needs to be remembered that the work of a nurse is particularly arduous, requires several years of study, entails both day and night duty and the non-enjoyment of holidays as in other services. The stipends of pupil nurses could in some cases be lowered but the fully qualified nurses who are expected to take responsibilities in full should be well paid.
184 CHAPTER VII. Maternity. A general review of the maternity service in India reveals the vast magnitude of the problem. It is doubtful if it is generally realised that even now the great majority of confinements in India are conducted by indigenous dais or midwives. For ages the dai had been the genius presiding over childbirth and her sway until recent years was undisputed. The profession is hereditary; it passes from mother to daughter. These women are, generally speaking, low in the social scale, e.g., in Madras and Bombay they belong to the "barber" caste while in North India Mohammedan women of the lower classes practise the art. They have no scientific knowledge of the mechanism of labour or of the elementary principles asepsis. In any difficulty their only remedy is force, with what disastrous consequences may be imagined. Under these conditions is it any wonder the maternal deaths in India arising out of pregnancy in. 1936 numbered over 160,000? 2. The tragedy is that probably 80 per cent. of those deaths were preventable. During the recent inquiry into maternal mortality in Calcutta, Dr. Neal laid down lower standards and, as judged by them, the proportion of preventable cases in her series of 430 cases was as high as 96.3 per cent. 3. It must also be stressed that along with this wastage of life a very serious wastage of health takes place. In the annual report of the Public Health Commissioner with the Government of India for 1935 it was stated that "the percentage of women disabled as a result of preg- nancy and labour may perhaps be taken as not less than 30 per cent. and in a country where nearly ten million births are registered annually, the percentage of women temporarily or permanently incapacitated must be very large". On this estimate about 3 million women are disabled tem- porarily or permanently every year. To the physical disabilities must also be added the loss of happiness in the home life which must result from this heavy mortality and morbidity. 4. There is a great difference between the conditions existing in Western countries and in India and it is only in large cities like Madras, Bombay, Delhi and Calcutta that serious efforts have been made to establish a connected chain of agencies concerned in maternal and infant welfare. In small towns and in a large proportion of villages, the old order still prevails. 5. Owing to lack of education in the public it is also clear the maximum benefit from the services in existence is not derived. Further the best midwifery schemes devised will be ineffective until there is a general improvement in the general health and resistance of the people. Little improvement in the mortality rate can be hoped for until the public are better educated, the economic conditions of the people are improved and the untrained and meddlesome indigenous dai is replaced by the This Chapter is based on notes supplied by Dr. C. L. Houlton, Chief Medical Officer, Women's Medical Service.
185 trained midwife. It is the right of every woman to have skilled atten- dance during pregnancy, labour and the puerperium. 6. The present review of the midwifery services in the different pro- vinces of India reveals a very unsatisfactory state of affairs, but one should not be unduly pessimistic, for it must be remembered it is only within the last 20 years that comprehensive schemes for the care of the expectant, parturient and nursing woman have been established in Europe. In India poverty, ignorance and illiteracy are wellnigh insuperable factors to be overcome and the task is gigantic but a start has been made and in practically all the provinces attempts are being made to meet this national problem. 7. In Madras the object aimed at consistently has been to replace the indigenous dai by means of a superior class of midwife and this Presi- dency was the first to pass an Act for the registration of nurses and midwives which was intended to eliminate the untrained dai. The Madras Presidency is educationally the most advanced in India and "purdah" hardly exists, women go to hospital freely for their confinements and many educated girls have taken up nursing as a profession, so that the supply of trained midwives is much greater in Madras than in North India. In 1931 a special section of maternity and child welfare was set up in the Department of Public Health and a medical woman was appointed as Assistant Directress of Public Health. Local authorities administer their own services under the guidance of the Director of Public Health and under the control of local Health Officers assisted by specially trained women medical officers. In 1936 there were 140 centres under the various local bodies (excluding Madras city) and a cadre of 32 medical women, 27 health visitors and 307 midwives. In the Madras Presidency there are also exceptionally good facilities for institutional treatment. There are 1,168 beds available for urban and 389 for rural areas. The large hospitals have well run antenatal clinics attached to them. 8. Bombay.186 Fund, there is a domiciliary service under the United Provinces Branch of the Indian Red Cross Society. A medical woman is in charge of the Maternity Section and works under the control of the Director of Public Health. The maternity centres are under the management of local Red. Cross Committees, but are inspected regularly by the Director of the Maternity Section. Indigeneous dais are trained at these Centres and do most of the maternity work in the Province. This work is supported patly by a grant from the Local Government and partly by the Victoria Memorial Scholarship Fund and the Indian Red Cross Society. An act for the registration of health visitors, nurses and midwives has recently been passed. 10. Bengal has no organised maternity and child welfare scheme in connection with the Public Health Department. The Local Government assists voluntary bodies by giving (a) grants for the training of dais and (b) grants for propaganda. In 1934 the Bengal Nurses' Act was passed for the registration of health visitors and midwives, but this Act also ignores the dais and has no penal clauses for malpractice. Maternity Service.187 were responsible for 3,494 cases. There is no control or supervision of the dais after training and they are invariably found to revert sooner or later to their old superstitions and time-worn customs. Medical women are in charge of the Welfare centres in both Old and New Delhi. The rural areas have practically no maternity service. 13. In the Central Provinces and Berar there is a Government Health School in charge of a medical woman, who is also Directress of the Maternity and Child Welfare Centres which are managed by the Indian Red Cross Society. The institutional midwifery service is very meagre even in the large towns, but there are a few fairly good hospitals for women under the Countess of Dufferin's Fund. 14. In the North-West Frontier Province there are two centres for the training of dais-one at Peshawar and the other at Dera Ismail Khan188 this state of affairs is changed in the future and more midwifery is under- taken by the general practitioner, the results may be serious, as the average male practitioner's knowledge of midwifery is rather limited. This is due to the fact that apart from the colleges and two or three medical schools, the training of medical students in obstetrics is poor, owing to the great difficulty that is experienced in obtaining a sufficient number of confinement cases in the teaching hospitals for the satisfactory training of male students. Also post-graduate course for general practi- tioners are rare, whilst facilities for specialist courses in obstetrics exist only in the cities of Madras, Calcutta and Bombay. Apart from the Medical School for Women at Ludhiana there are no facilities for the training of medical students in domiciliary midwifery. 2. Midwives.189 Dr. Mudalyiar's "Report on an investigation into the causes of Maternal Mortality in Madras" was published in 1932. 2. At the Annual Conference of Research Workers in India held in 1935 proposals for the establishment of an Advisory Committee on Maternal Mortality and Morbidity were adopted. The first statistical survey under the auspices of the Indian Research Fund Association was carried out in Calcutta by Dr. M. I. Neal during 1936-37 and the report will shortly be ready for publication. Similar surveys are now in progress in Bombay under the direction of Dr.J. Jhirad and in a rural area in Bihar. These surveys are expected not only to provide data for further research on the more important specific causes of deaths, but also, data from which conclusions can be drawn and recommendations made for the improvement and expansion of existing midwifery services. 3. Anaemias associated with childbearing are second only to sepsis as a cause of maternal mortality and morbidity and it is not surprising that the major part of other researches in this field during the past 3 years has been concerned with the types, causes and treatment of anaemias of pregnancy. 4. The following are the more recently published papers:190 6. Other recently published papers are:191 of opinion that institutional maternity service would be out of place in rural areas for a long time to come, and the only remedy at present is to supply more trained midwives suitable to the local conditions and of inferior qualifications than those their sisters in large cities. This can be achieved by having two separate courses of training for midwives, one for Large cities in urban areas and the other for rural areas. This question is before the Nursing Council and I trust the Council will see its way at an early date to institute two separate courses of training for midwives to supply the rural areas more trained midwives. The first thing Govern- ment should do is to have a compulsory registration of all persons practis- ing midwifery as midwife or dai, take up on the register the practising dais by giving them elementary practical training for at least six months, subject them to an examination (practical only) and, if found successful, put them on the register; the register should be kept open for at least five years, if not ten, for these practising dais. The Lady Wilson Village Maternity Association, the Bombay Presidency Baby and Health Week Association, and the Bombay Mofussil Maternity Child Welfare and Health Council, would be of great help to achieve the object, whereby a system of perpetuating the indigenous dais would be done, away with." Comparative Statement of births registered and those confined in the Maternity Institutions in the City of Bombay from the year 1929 to 1937. Year. Beds. Total births regis- tered. Number of confinements in Maternity Institutions. Percentage of women confined in Maternity Institutions to total births. 1929 813 24,220 Excluding still births. 14,245 59.1 Excluding still births. 1930 824 25,329 16,329 63.8 1931 871 27,204 18,237 67.0 1932 993 30.914 Including still births. 19,633 63.1 Including still births. 1933 1,041 33,264 23,487 70.60 1934 1,073 36,089 24,635 68.3 1935 1,133 36,753 25,433 69.2 1936 1,190 38,334 27,187 70.9 1937 1,308 37,795 27,758 73.4
192 CHAPTER VIII. Medical Research in India. Organized medical research in India may be said to date from 1894 when the Indian Medical Congress submitted resolutions to Government urging the establishment and endowment of a research institute. Prior to that date medical officers working on their own initiative and with limited laboratory resources had from time to time made important contri- butions to the knowledge of tropical diseases. Many of their studies are classical and amongst them may be cited those of Lewis on trypanosomes and filaria, Vandyke Carter on spirilla, leprosy and mycetoma, Macnamara on cholera and Fayrer on snakes and snake venoms. Officers were occasionally deputed in earlier years to study special problems, for example, D. D. Cunningham and Timothy Lewis in 1869 on public health problems such as cholera and malaria. In 1889 the Government of India extended this practice of deputing officers in connection with field inquiries on the causation and prevention of disease. Giles for example was deputed to investigate kala-azar and beri-beri, and then cholera and malaria. This practice was continued and amongst those selected for special work was W. M. Haffkine who in 1896 studied the subject of prophylactic inoculation against cholera in Bengal. Haffkine was engaged on this work when plague first broke out in Bombay and he was amongst those sent to investigate its causation and prevention. He specially took up the subject of the preparation of an anti-plague vaccine and worked at first in the temporary laboratory accommodation which was provided for him, but in 1899 the Old Government House, Parel, was taken over as the Plague Research Laboratory and here along with other workers, who were attached to the Laboratory, he continued his work. 2. The outbreak of plague drew fresh attention to the necessity for effective provision for medical research and proposals were submitted in 1899 for a central research laboratory and for local laboratories in each province. Delays arose in acceptance of the scheme but in the meantime additional officers were deputed to the Plague Research Laboratory for further investigations on plague and research there on other subjects had also developed. These workers included Bannerman, Lamb and Liston whose subsequent work is well-known. At the same time Stephens, Christophers and James had been deputed on special studies on Malaria following the work of Ronald Ross who in 1897 had made his classical discoveries and who had also been placed on special duty by the Govern- ment of India to continue his self-appointed task. Although a number of officers were at this period engaged in whole-time research work, the laboratory at Parel, which continues at the present day under the name of the Haffkine Institute, was the only permanent laboratory available for their use and the urgency for suitable centres and accommodation was apparent. 3. Prior to the development of the scheme for Central and Provincial Laboratories a scheme for the provision of Pasteur treatment in India, Contributed by Colonel J. Taylor, C.I.E., D.S.O., V.H.S., I.M.S.
193 which had been under consideration for some years, came to fruition and the first Pasteur Institute was established at Kasauli in the Simla Hills in 1900 with Semple as its first Director. This Institute also served as a research centre on general subjects and much effective work has been done there. Three years later the King Institute was established at Guindy, Madras, for the manufacture of calf lymph and for general bacteriological work and provided a centre at which facilities for research were available. The central laboratory was opened at Kasauli in 1906 as the Central Research Institute, Semple from the Pasteur Institute in the same station being its first Director also. The laboratory organiza- tion was extended in succeeding years by the creation of the Pasteur Institute, Coonoor, in 1907, the Pasteur Institute, Rangoon, in 1915 and the Pasteur Institute, Shillong, in 1917. 4. The question of staffing the earlier Institutes had to be considered and the small group of research workers who had been deputed for special studies could first be drawn upon for the purpose. These officers were incorporated in a cadre called the 'Bacteriological Department' which was formed by the Government of India in 1905 for permanent employment in medical research and allied duties. This department at first consisted of 13 officers only, these being employed in the Laboratories and Pasteur Institutes as they were formed or on field research work under the Government of India. 5. The increasing amount of routine work thrown on the officers of the Bacteriological Department (later called the Medical Research Depart- ment who were appointed as Directors and Assistant Directors of the Institutes, owing to the extent to which manufacture of vaccines, sera and other biological products had to be taken up and also to the demand for assistance in routine laboratory diagnosis, resulted in these officers becoming immobilised and not sufficiently available for field work or for employment on whole-time research on important subjects which demanded investigation. This made it necessary to extend the cadre further and for this purpose the Government of India increased it by 15 officers in 1914, 2 more being added in 1915 to allow for Directors of the new Institutes in Rangoon and Shillong. 6. Unfortunately with the outbreak of War in 1914 the scheme for extended staff and extended activities could not be brought into effective practice and the War brought recruiting and research largely to a stand- still for a period of six years. Research again became active after the War and while trained workers were difficult to obtain and there had been a serious hiatus in the recruiting for the Medical Research Department, the effect of which is still felt, it was possible gradually to enlarge research activities and again build up the cadre. 7. In the post-War period two new important agencies for medical research were developed. The necessity for a School of Tropical Medicine in India had long been realised and in 1920 the School was established at Calcutta largely through the efforts and enthusiasm of Leonard Rogers. The School was intended to provide training for a diploma in Tropical M
194 Medicine and it was considered that it would also form a centre for training future medical research workers and for direct research under the professors of the different subjects who would be appointed. Amongst these were Acton and Knowles from the Medical Research Department who took up the duties of professors of Pathology and Protozoology respectively and whose subsequent work on these subjects is outstanding. The School conducts research which is financed partly from its own funds and partly from those of the Indian Research Fund Association. The importance of the School as a research centre and a centre for training workers was recognised by the Indian Research Fund Association agreeing to meet the pay of two professors for a period of years. 8. The other important centre subsequently developed was the All- India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health which was opened in 1932. At this centre also research has been provided for and has been specially active on the subjects of nutrition, malaria and cholera. 2. MEDICAL RESEARCH DEPARTMENT. The Medical Research Department is open to both I. M. S. and non-I. M. S. medical officers. The cadre consists of 30 posts, 13 of which are specified and 17 non-specified, although 4 of the latter are at present in abeyance. Of the 26 effective appointments, 12* are reserved for I. M. S. officers in India and 1 in Burma. Out of the remaining 13, 2 appointments namely those of Directors, King Institute, Guindy, Madras, and Pasteur Institute, Shillong, are also reserved for. I. M. S, officers who were in civil employment on the 10th May 1928. The rest of the appointments, which are mentioned below, are open to both I. M. S. and non-I. M. S. officers:195 3. INDIAN RESEARCH FUND ASSOCIATION. An important milestone in medical research in India was the creation of the Indian Research Fund Association by the Governments of India in 1911. The cost of maintenance of the Central and Provincial Labo- ratories at the Pasteur Institutes had been met by the Central and Local Governments concerned or by the Pasteur Institute Association and researches had been conducted at these centres on their own resources or from special grants. The cost of the extended cadre of officers of the Medical Research Department, consisting of those officers not filling special specified appointments and of the research work conducted by them both at existing laboratories and at other centres for which provision. had not been made, had to be met. The formation of the Association provided a means for doing this under an elastic method of control. 2. The Government of India gave an annual grant of Rupees five lakhs to the Association and an additional sum to meet the pay of officers not filling specified appointments who would be available for whole-time research work. The Indian Research Fund Association was constituted as a Local Fund administered by the Government of India. It is now registered under the Registration of Societies Act (XXI) of 1860 with the status of a Local Fund not administered by the Government of India. 3. The affairs of the Association are managed by a Governing Body which has the following constitution:196 Secretary.197 Statement showing the annual grants from the Government of India to, invested funds and interests thereon and annual budget grants of, the Indian Research Fund Association for the past twelve years. Year. Annual grants from the Govern- ment of India. Invested funds. (Face value). Interest on invested funds. Annual Budget grants. Remarks. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1926-27 6,75,000 52,30,700 (on 1-4-26) 2,11,030 8,34,416 1927-28 6,75,000 52,30,700 (on 1-4-27) 2,11,030 12,12,654 1928-29 7,50,000 52,30,700 (on. 1-4-28) 2,11,030 12,66,722 1929-30 7,50,000 52,30,700 (on 16-3-29) 2,11,030 10,99,963 1930-31 7,50,000 52,30,700 (on 26-3-30) 2,13,692 11,01,800 Since 3rd February 1937, Rs. 2,00,000 have been with- drawn and Rs. 1,50,000 are to be with draw n during the course of the current fin- ancial year. 1931-32 7,50,000 52,30,700 (on 22-3-31) 2,10,641 11,94,770 1932-33 1,50,000 52,30,700 (on 5-3-32) 2,30,042 8,45,460 1933-34 1,50,000 52,01,400(on1-3-33) 1,85,375 8,65,384 1934-35 1,50,000 47,46,700 (on 1-3-34) 1,42,115 8,49,759 1935-36 1,50,000 44,13,500 (on 22-1-35) 1,90,194 8,05,244 1936-37 1,50,000 40,13,500 (on 27-1-36) 1,42,000 7,74,145 1937-38 1,50,000 36,13,500 (on 3-2-37) 1,30,000 7,25,069 9. The Indian Research Fund Association maintains two large organi- zations of a semi-permanent nature, viz., the Malaria Survey of India (now called the Malaria Institute of India) and the Nutrition Research Laboratories at Coonoor. The major importance of these subjects is considered to justify a considerable expenditure on them and the retention over a prolonged period of specially trained and experienced staff for them. A large Commission on Kala-azar was maintained during the period when this disease was seriously epidemic and research on Plague, Cholera, Leprosy and similar subjects has been heavily financed by the Association. 10. The Scientific Advisory Board appoints Advisory Committees to assist them in regard to most of the major subjects. Such Committees have been formed for Malaria, Nutrition, Cholera, Plague, Leprosy, Rabies and Tuberculosis. All work on these subjects is reviewed by the Advisory Committees and recommendations made as to future work.
198 11. The majority of the Inquiries under the Indian Research Fund Association are conducted at the Central and Provincial Laboratories, the School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta, and the All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta, or at the Laboratories of the Malaria Institute or Nutrition Inquiry under the Association. Field inquiries are conducted from these centres. 12. Grants have also been given for Inquiries conducted at Medical Colleges and may be given at any suitable centre. 13. The Indian Research Fund Association maintains a library which is housed at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, the books and journals being available for issue on loan to workers under the Association. Stores are also maintained at the same centre from which equipment may be lent to Inquiries. 4. THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH AND INDIAN MEDICAL RESEARCH MEMOIRS. The Indian Journal of Medical Research which is the official journal of the Indian Research Fund Association has been published continuously since July 1913. Four quarterly numbers are published annually approxi- mating to 300 pages each. The Journal is edited by the Director. Central Research Institute, Kasauli, with the assistance of an Editorial Committee. Publication is not confined to workers under the Indian Research Fund Association or to members of the Medical Research Department but its pages are freely open to all contributors of articles of medical research nature dealing with work done in India which are considered to be of a suitable standard. The Journal has taken its place as one of recognized scientific value and its pages form a record of medical research in India during the last 25 years. Material received for publication which consists of more extended con- tributions on special subjects which are too large for publication as articles in the Indian Journal of Medical Research is occasionally produced in the form of separate Memoirs. This Indian Medical Research Memoir series, of which 29 volumes have been published, contains many of permanent value. 5. SUMMARY OF RESEARCH WORK CARRIED OUT ON SPECIAL SUBJECTS. The field over which medical research has extended in India is a very large one and it would be difficult in a review such as this to summarise all lines of work. An outline of the work on special major subjects is contain- ed in the notes given below. * MALARIA. Malaria is believed to have been endemic in India from very early times. It is generally accepted that this disease constitutes the major health and * Contributed by Major H. W. Mulligan, M.D., I.M.S.
199 social problem in India and it is not surprising, therefore, that it should have received a large measure of attention from medical research workers in this country. 2. The modern history of malaria research in India may be said to have commenced at the close of last century with the classical investigations of the late Sir Ronald Ross which culminated in the incrimination of the mosquito as the carrier of malaria. Even before this, however, important researches were carried out in India and among these two investigations are worthy of special mention. As long ago as 1845 Surgeon-Major Dempster introduced the spleen rate as a measure of malarial endemicity and used it to map out the incidence of malaria in villages in the Punjab lying along the course of the old Jumna Canal. Workers in India also took a very prominent part in the early botanical and other work connected with the introduction and cultivation of cinchona, and with the manufacture of cinchona preparations in medicinal form. "Cinchona febrifuge" was the first preparation to be produced on a large scale. A great advance in Malaria therapy was made in 1887 when a new method of manufacturing pure quinine sulphate was discovered at the Government's Sikkim planta- tion. This resulted in a great reduction in the cost of quinine production all over the world. 3. Ross's discovery of the mosquito as the carrier of malaria is so well known that it is superfluous to refer to it in detail. The ready acceptance of his findings was quickly followed by the enthusiastic investigation of malaria and other tropical diseases in many parts of the world. In 1900, the Malaria Commission of the Royal Society visited India and commenced an intensive investigation of the malaria problem in the light of Ross's dis- covery. Profiting by their previous experience in Africa the members of this Commission which included Stephens, Christophers, and Daniels, in- troduced a knowledge of the technique of malaria investigation which was made readily available to all who were desirous of entering this new field of research. 4. The systematic investigation of mosquitoes received much attention and the researches of Giles on mosquitoes generally, and of James and Liston on the Indian anophelines were prominent among the pioneer in- vestigations in this field in the world. These researches also included studies on the differentiation of anophelines in both their adult and larval stages and on the bionomics of the different species. Investigation of the efficacy of the different species of anophelines as carriers of malaria led eventually to the enunciation by Christophers of the principle of "species sanitation". This school of pioneer workers in India included, in addition to those already mentioned, Adie, Coghill, Donovan, Patton, Turkhud and others. 5. In 1908, the epidemiology of malaria in India began to receive atten- tion. The investigations of Christophers and Bentley in the Bengal Duars, of Bentley in Bombay City, and of Christophers in the Punjab following the great malaria epidemic of 1908, were of particular importance. It became apparent from these studies that the causative factors in the pro- duction of malaria were very diverse, and that the possibilities for control-
200 ling Malaria were very varied. The recognition of these facts led to an Imperial Malaria Conference being held in 1909, and at this and subsequent meetings the foundations of an organisation for the study and prevention of malaria in India were laid. With the formation of a Central Malarial Committee to suggest the lines on which further investigation was most urgently required and with the appointment of a Malaria Committee and a specially trained malaria research officer in almost every province in India, malaria research received a great impetus all over the country. A Central Malaria Bureau was constituted at the same time from which advice on all aspects of malaria could be obtained. A malaria journal known as Paludism was also published. As the result of the investigations of such special malaria officers as Adie, Bentley, Christophers, Fry, Gill, Graham, Hodgson, Horne, Ross, Perry and others the real nature of the malaria problem in India began to be realised for the first time. Unfortu- nately this phase of intense activity in malaria investigation in India was interrupted by the outbreak of the Great War in 1914. 6. The cessation of hostilities saw a revival of interest in malaria work in India which, at first, was chiefly restricted to the activities of the Central Malaria Bureau where attention was directed mainly to the inves- tigation of certain basic problems. Within a few years, however, a number of special enquiries was sponsored by the Indian Research Fund Association among which may be mentioned the "Culicidae Enquiry" under Barraud, the "Anopheline Larval Enquiry" under Puri and the "Qunine and Malaria Enquiry" under Sinton. The latter was later associated with the Malaria Treatment Centre at Kasauli where for many years important researches were conducted on the therapeutic efficacy of quinine and other drugs, par- ticularly in regard to the prevention of relapses. 7. Realisation of the need for an efficient central malaria organisation in India resulted in the inauguration, in 1926, of a central organisation (now known as the Malaria Institute of India) under the Indian Research Fund Association. The major functions of this organisation have been to act as a bureau for information and advice on malaria, to conduct researches into all branches of malariology, to co-ordinate and prepare for publication the results of these researches in a form suitable for their practical application by executive health workers, to conduct advanced courses of instruction in malariology for medical post-graduates, to maintain an up-to-date reference library on all aspects of malariology, to maintain representative mosquito collections both from India and abroad, and to undertake the investigation of special malaria problems such as have been carried out in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Andaman Islands, Quetta, Sind and other parts of India. The wide field of investigation which has been covered by the workers of the Malaria Survey of India is indicated by the numerous and diverse pub- lications which have emanated from it and which have appeared chiefly in the "Records of the Malaria Survey of India", a journal devoted to mala- ria which is edited by the Director of the Malaria Institute of India. The work of the Survey during the past 10 years is closely associated with the names of Sinton, Covell, Mulligan, Barraud, Puri, Macdonald, Bruce- Mayne, Hicks, Baily, Majid, Kehar and others. A notable change in the
201 activities of the Survey was introduced in 1936 when the Director was, appointed Officer-in-charge, Antimalaria Operations, Delhi, where an ex- tensive anti-malaria campaign has recently been inaugurated. 8. Apart from the activities of the Malaria Institute of India a great deal of research work on malaria has been carried out in the provinces within recent years. Some of the provinces maintain their own special malaria officers. These and other workers have carried out researches on malaria which have added greatly to our knowledge of the epidemiology and other aspects of the disease. Among these may be mentioned the re- searches of Ramsay, of Manson, and of Rice in relation to the control of malaria in Assam; of Senior White in the prevention of malaria over the ramifications of the Bengal-Nagpur Railway; of Gill on the genesis of epi- demics in the Punjab; of Clyde, Bannerjee and others in the United Pro- vinces; of Manifold, Richmond and other army medical officers in canton- ments in India; of Bentley on malaria and agriculture in Bengal; of Acton and Knowles in Calcutta; of Feegrade in Burma; of Krishnan, Rao and others in Madras; of Iyengar in Travancore; and of many other workers too numerous to mention individually. Important researches have also been conducted in India by, or with the assistance of the International Health Division of the Rockefeller Foundation as for example, those of Sweet and his co-workers in Mysore, and of Russell in Madras. 9. India has indeed an enviable record of accomplishment in the field of Malaria investigation but much remains to be done. The realisation of the. social and economic importance of this disease to the masses of India has aroused interest in the control of rural malaria. Cheap and effective methods of control must be devised and this will only be possible, in the writer's opinion, when a much fuller knowledge of the bionomics of the various anopheline vectors has been obtained. CHOLERA As India is the main endemic home of cholera and the country has been for centuries swept at intervals by epidemic outbreaks on a very large scale this disease has naturally been the subject of much study. Prior to the discovery of the comma bacillus by Koch in 1884 the work on the subject consisted chiefly of epidemiological and clinical observations. The extensive writings of Corbyn, Twining, Johnson, Morehead, Macnamara and others during the nineteenth century form a record of great historical interest but in the absence of a knowledge of the true aetiology of the disease the earlier writers were naturally handicapped in their investigation on causation and spread. Subsequent to Koch's discovery Macnamara studied cholera in the light of the bacteriological facts revealed. 2. During the phase of further development in knowledge of bacterio- logy the outstanding contributions to the study of Vibrio cholerae and allied vibrios was the work of Greig in India which formed the subject of numerous publications during the years 1913 to 1918. Greig studied all aspects of the bacteriology and pathology of the subject and also the bac- teriology in relation to the carrier. The epidemiology of cholera in India was subsequently studied by Russel and Sundararajan whose publications Contributed by Col. J. Taylor, C.I.E., D.S.O.,V.H.S., I.M.S
202 in the form of papers and memoirs during the years 1925 to 1928 form a very complete record of the conditions in India with a careful statistical analysis which brought out many important points. Roger's work on the forecasting of cholera epidemics was also produced at this period. Other epidemiological studies were made by Saranjam Khan in the United Pro- vinces and by Gill and Lal in the Punjab in the years from 1928 to 1930. 3. During the years 1920 to 1927 the carrier problem and the bacterio- logy in relation to it was investigated on a large scale by Tomb and Maitra and B. B. Brahmachari also contributed to this subject. 4. A new line of investigation on cholera was developed when d'Herelle visited India in 1928 and took up the subject of the bacteriophage in rela- tion to the disease. His work including that in collaboration with Malone was followed by very extensive investigations on the subject by Morison and also by Asheshov and his colleagues over a prolonged period of years. All aspects of the bacteriophage in relation to the vibrio were studied and trials were carried out on the value of bacteriophage in the treatment of cholera. Field trials of the prophylactic value of bacteriophage were also conducted on a very large scale. 5. The subject of prophylactic inoculation against cholera has been spe- cially studied by numerous workers203 India and it has been established that sera prepared by their Use form reli- able standard reagents for the diagnosis of v. cholerae. The work in India including the studies which have been made on vibrios other than those of O group No.I shows the necessity of separately determining the O aggluti- nation of vibrios and indicates that the H + O sera formerly used will not give reliable information as to the nature of a strain. Many vibrios from sources in which cholera infection can be excluded are found to be H agglu- tinators No vibrios of any one serological type other than O group No: I have been found to be responsible for any group of cholera cases and the inagglutinable vibrios, other than those of the rough variant of O group I. often isolated from. cases of clinical cholera are found to be of a very large number of different serological types. Similar vibrios have been isolated from healthy persons and external sources in widely scattered areas and where their cholera origin appears to be extremely unlikely. 7. It has also been shown that by the use of suitable methods vibrios can be isolated from practically all open water sources in India, the possible origin of vibrios isolated from human sources both in health and disease being indicated by the finding. 8. This work has cleared the ground to a very considerable extent and should facilitate the extension of the investigations to the field study of outstanding points in epidemiology which will be entered into. PLAGUE. Plague had been absent from India for two centuries when infection was introduced from China to Bombay in 1896. The existence of plague was acknowledged only reluctantly but the disease soon gained a hold and be- came severely epidemic. Within a few years it had spread over most of peninsular India causing a very high mortality. Apart from the fact that the Bacillus pestis, which had been described by Yersin in Hong Kong in 1894, was the causative organism practically nothing was known about the methods of spread of the disease and the preventive measures at first applied were based on the supposition of transmission from man to man. Owing to the particular facts of the epidemiology of the disease later ascertained, the measures adopted against the disease were completely ineffective. 2. On the outbreak of plague British, German and Russian Commissions visited India to enquire into the disease. They did this by taking volumi- nous evidence and carrying out some minor laboratory investigations. These Commissions did not elicit any of the essential factors in the epide- miology of plague. 3. A few workers, including Liston and Lamb who had been deputed by the Government of India had been investigating the disease in Bombay. A working commission called the Plague Research Commission was formed in Bombay in 1905, experienced bacteriologists including Martin, Rowland and Petrie coming out to India and joining the other workers there. This Commission worked under an Advisory Committee constituted in India and including representatives of the Royal Society, the Lister Institute and the India Office Contributed by Lt.Col. W. J. Webster, M.C., M.D., I.M.S.
204 4. The Commission continued to work up to 1913 and their studies have formed the basis for our exact knowledge of the epidemiology of bubonic plague. The particular organisation adopted proved a most effective one and the Commission is regarded as a model for such investigations. 5. The association of rat and human plague had been recognised even from biblical times but the dependence of human outbreaks on rat epizoo- tics and the exact relationship between the two had not been determined. Gautier and Raybaud and in India, Hankin, had suggested the possibility of insect transmission from rat to man but it was not until the Plague Re- search Commission was formed that this was proved and the factors con- cerned demonstrated. The credit for proving the flea transmission of plague must be largely attributed to Liston. The detailed studies of the Commission have shown the essential facts on which plague preventive measures can be based. The voluminous reports of the Commission in the Journal of Hygiene from 1906 to 1917 provide a wealth of information on every aspect of the disease. 6. In subsequent work carried out by different observers the existence of a flea-species factor influencing the epidemiology of the disease in different areas was shown. Along with the work on the methods of trans- mission of plague, and in fact preceding it, was that of Haffkine on a prophylactic vaccine. This was one of the first vaccine to be used on it very large scale for the prophylaxis of a human disease. An account of the vaccine and its development has been recorded in Indian Medical Research Memoir No. 27. This vaccine with certain modifications is still in use in India and is relied upon as a major preventive measure. 7. Recent research on plague.205 in human cases of plague with encouraging results. With the diminution of the incidence of plague in India and the difficulty of obtaining sufficient numbers of cases under hospital conditions it has not been possible to obtain trials on the scale necessary to obtain full statistical evidence of the value of the serum. (c) Epidemiological studies.206 had died in 1900. Later in the same year Donovan (1903) independently found it in the spleen of living cases. In 1904 and 1905 Christophers wrote his classical descriptions of the pathology of kala-azar and in the same year the parasite was recorded by Castellani from Ceylon and Bentley from Assam, the latter observation establishing it as the cause of the dreaded kala-azar of that province. The next big step in the study of the disease was Rogers' demonstration (1904) by culture that the parasite was a flagellate. This was followed in 1907 by Patton's discovery that the parasite assumes the flagellate form in the bed-bug, indicating an insect as the probable vector and, in 1912, his clear account of the development of the various forms of the parasite in the bed bug. Mackie (1913), working in Assam was the first worker to suggest the genus Phlebotomus as worthy of study in connection with the transmission problem. In 1915, the tartar emetic treatment of kala-azar, first used in Europe by Cristina and Caronia was introduced into Indian practice by Rogers and was the only treat- ment tried, up to that time, which was of specific benefit. Between this date and 1921, the efficacy of treatment with the inorganic salts of anti- mony was fully established by the work of Rogers, Muir, Knowles and others. 4. The first of the serum tests for the diagnosis of kala-azar was Brahmachari's globulin precipitation test, described in 1917. In 1921 Spackman introduced for kala-azar a modification of the formal-gel test of Gatè and Papacosta, first used in syphilis. The test was further popularised by Napier. The modern treatment of kala-azar may be said to have commenced in 1922, with the introduction by Brahmachari of urea stibamine but it was the work of Shortt and Sen (1923) which established its use and opened the field of treatment by this and other organic preparations of antimony, such as Bayer 471 which was subse- quently used by Napier. 5. In 1922 Brahmachari gave the first description of dermal leishmanoid and Shortt and Brahmachari (1923) gave the first description of its pathology. Fuller studies, clinical and pathological, were later made by Acton and Napier. Shortt (1923) demonstrated for the first time the presence of L. donovani in the urine of cases of kala-azar. In 1924 P. argentipes first assumed importance in connection with transmis- sion and the sequence of events was as follows. Mackie (1915), in Assam, among other insects, undoubtedly dissected P. argentipes although he did not identify the insect by name. Shortt (1924) was the first specifically to record P. argentipes in connection with kala-azar in Assam and dis- sected several specimens obtained in kala-azar houses and containing mammalian blood. Knowles, Napier and Smith (1924) finally focussed attention on P. argentipes by showing that L. donovani flagellated in its gut and state that they were led to study this insect by a private com- munication from Sinton in 1922 pointing out the correlation in the dis- tribution of kala-azar and P. argentipes. Just prior to this announce- ment an important landmark in research on kala-azar was the formation in 1924 of the kala-azar commission, the personnel consisting of Lieut.- Col. S. R. Christophers, I.M.S as Director, and Major H. E. Shortt, I.M.S., and Captain P. J. Barraud as protozoologist and entomologist
207 respectively. At the same time an ancillary enquiry was constituted in Calcutta consisting of Lieut-Col. R. Knowles, I.M.S., Dr.L.E. Napier and members of the staff of the School of Tropical. Medicine, Calcutta. The Kala-azar Commission (1925) quickly confirmed the flagellation of L. donovani in P. arg cntipes. In 1926, Napier published several papers on the various pentavalent compounds of antimony which were introduced after the success of urea stibamine in the treatment of kala-azar. In 1926, the first memoir on kala-azar was published record- ing the work of the Commission to date as well as some work outside the Commission. The most important previously unpublished papers in this memoir were as follows: "The Morphology and Life Cycle of the Parasite of Indian Kala-azar in Culture" by Christophers, Shortt & Barraud, "The Anatomy of the Sandfly Phlebotomus argentipes, Ann. & Brun. (Diptera) I. The Head and Mouth Parts of the Imago" by Christophers, Shortt and Barraud, "Note on a Massive Infection of the Pharynx of Phlebotomus argentipes with H erpetomonas donovani" by Shortt, Barraud and Craighead and "An Epidemiological consideration of the transmission of Kala-azar in India" by Napier. In the same year, owing to the recall of Lieut.-Col. Christophers to other duties, the Kala-azar Commission was reconstituted with Lieut.-Col. H. E. Shortt,. I.M.S., as Director and Capts. P. J. Barraud and A. C. Craighead as members. Dr. O. A. Smith and Dr. K.V. Krishnan also joined the Commission at a later date. Shortt, Barraud and Craighead (1926) described for the first time a massive infection of the pharynx of P. argentipes with L. donovani and in the same year these workers dis- covered and published the technique for giving sandflies second and subse- quent feeds. This important finding removed the difficulty primarily en- countered in carrying out transmission experiments with sandflies. 6. The next important paper was an account of the "Life-history and morphology of Leishmania donovani in the sandfly, phlebotomus argen- tipes by Shortt, Barraud and Craighead (1926). This gave the first account of the full life history of the parasite of kala-azar in its insect host. The same workers later in the year described a massive infection of the buccal cavity of P. argentipes with L. donovani and, at the same time, recorded the first finding in nature of P. argentipes infected with L. donovani. In 1927, they recorded the infection of a mouse by the inoculation of the gut contents of infected sandflies thereby proving the infectivity of the forms of L. donovani in these insects. 7. Lloyd and Paul (1928) in an important paper described the serum changes in kala-azar and showed that there was a groat increase in the total serum globulin, and the euglobulin fraction and an absolute decrease in the serum albumin so that the globulin-albumin ratio is greatly raised. Shortt, D'Silva and Swaminath (1928) showed that the forms of L. donovani found in dermal leishmanoid underwent the same development in P. argentipes as forms from the peripheral blood in ordinary cases of kala-azar. Shortt, Craighead, Smith and Swaminath (1928) proved that hamsters could be infected with L. donovani by both the oral and con- junctival routes and the same workers later (1929) showed that infection
208 was the regular consequence of giving infective material by the oral route They also described (1928) their first series of negative transmis- sion experiments using human volunteers which were subjected to very numerous bites by infected P. argentipes. In the same year Shortt, Smith, D'Silva and Swaminath recorded the definite presence of L. denovani in the faeces of kola-azar cases. In 1930, Shortt, Craighead, Smith and Swaminath described the infection of two hamsters, kept in close contact with other hamsters infected with kala-azar, and, in the Same year these, authors described their second series of negative trans- mission experiments with human volunteers. 8. Shortt, Smith, Swarninath and Krishnan (1931) reported the first successful transmissions of kala-azar to a hamster by the bite of P. argentipes, a finding subsequently confirmed by Napier, Smith and Krishnan (1933). In 1932 appeared the second kala-azar memoir, record- ing the work of the Kala-azar Commission subsequent to the publishing of the first memoir. Shortt and Swarninath (1935) recorded the finding of L. donovani in the nasal mucus of cases of Indian kala-azar and (1937) established the infectivity of these by infecting a hamster by intra- peritoneal inoculation. LEPROSY. Until about the year 1920 there was no organised leprosy research in India. In previous years from time to time observations on leprosy had been made and published by various doctors who, among various other duties, found time to take an interest in leprosy, but the clinical material available was poor, consisting chiefly of advanced cases in leper asylums and there were no doctors engaged wholly on studying leprosy. In some laboratories attempts to culture the bacillus of leprosy had been made, but the results were very conflicting and inconclusive. 2. The impetus to organised leprosy research came through Sir Leonard Rogers in Calcutta. He had for a number of years been experimenting in the treatment of leprosy with various preparations of chaulmoogra oil. Promising results of treatment had been reported in Hawaii and Philip- pine Islands, and Rogers' result also were very promising. 3. Rogers was instrumental in establishing a Leprosy Research De- partment in the School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta, and also in founding the British Empire Relief Association, with its Indian Council endowed by funds raised by an appeal made by Lord Reading as Viceroy. These two organisations have been greatly aided with grants for research from the Indian Research Fund Association. 4. The earlier phases of research work undertaken by Rogers and later by Muir, aimed chiefly at determining the value of various forms of treat- ment chiefly with preparations made from chaulmoogra oil and this involv- ed goods deal of research in Chemistry. Good results were sometimes obtained but it soon became clear that treatment had grave limitations. Contributed by Dr. John Lowe, M.B., Ch. B. (Birm.).
209 Research was then undertaken on much wider basis including epidemiolo- gical, clinical, pathological, bacteriological studies. 5. The results of treatment work attracted large numbers of cases of leprosy in the earlier phases, and thus greatly facilitated a clinical study of the disease. It was found that the milder forms of leprosy of the "neural" and "neuro-macular" types were very much more common than had previously been imagined, and it was also found by observation of such cases over a number of years that in many of them the disease was self- limiting, the signs of the disease remaining quiescent or inactive for years or permanently. Most of these cases showed no bacilli and are therefore considered not to be infectious. It became obvious that text book descriptions of leprosy as being highly infectious, always progressive and ultimately fatal were not true of most cases. of leprosy in India. 6. These clinical findings were verified by studies of the incidence of leprosy in various parts of India by means of sample leprosy surveys. These surveys showed that while leprosy was many times more common in India than had ever previously been realised, between one half and two thirds of the cases were of the relatively mild type, and many of them were of little importance from the public health stand point. 7. These clinical observations carried on systematically over a long period of years and correlated with pathological and bacteriological findings, have given us a better insight into the nature of the disease and have greatly improved our knowledge of diagnosis and prognosis. We are thus enabled to diagnose the disease at a much earlier stage, to recognise a number of previously unrecognised manifestations of the disease, and to form an opinion in many cases of leprosy regarding the seriousness or otherwise of the infection and regarding the probability of the disease increasing. We can express an opinion as to whether treatment is likely to be of value or not and whether a case is infectious or likely to become infectious. 8. Epidemiological studies have already been mentioned. When first instituted and for a number of years afterwards the work was chiefly of an extensive nature, information being collected of the incidence and the forms of leprosy in large areas in a short time. More recently the need for intensive work in limited areas has become apparent and this is now being attempted with the object of studying every factor which may contribute to the cause and to the spread of leprosy. 9. As one result of the clinical, epidemiological and immunological work, it has become increasingly clear that immunity to leprosy is com- monly found in adult life, but in infancy and adolescence immunity is low and exposure to infection is commonly followed by the development of the disease often in its severer forms. The problem of the control of leprosy appears to be very largely the problem of prevention and in- fection of young children. There are three ways of attempting this. The first is the removal of the children of infectious parents from their homes to institutions immediately after birth; the second is the removal of parents to institutions, and the separation of the parents from each other, some other provision being made for the children. The third is the N
210 sterilization of infectious cases of leprosy so that no children may be born to them. None of these three measures is practicable on a large scale in India at the present time. 10. So far we have dealt chiefly with the results of leprosy research in the clinic and in the field. We will now mention one of the most difficult and puzzling fields of medical research, namely, laboratory research in leprosy. It is extremely doubtful if the lepra bacillus has yet been cul- tured artificially or whether an animal susceptible to leprosy has yet been found. One of the chief pieces of leprosy laboratory research done in Calcutta during the last fifteen years has been to attempt to apply to the problem of the culture of the leprosy bacillus the more recent advances in knowledge and technique of bacteriology. A tremendous amount of work of this kind has been done with negative or inconclusive results. From time to time encouraging results are obtained, but attempts at verification and extension of the experiment fail. This line of work is still being energetically pursued. 11. Animal experiments in human leprosy have been confined to at- tempts to discover an animal susceptible to leprosy or to find some way of rendering susceptible to leprosy, animals which are naturally immune. These attempts have not been successful. 12. A considerable amount of work has been done in studying rat leprosy, a disease analogous to but separate from human leprosy, and much knowledge has been gained but it is uncertain how far findings made regarding rat leprosy and its organism are applicable to human leprosy. The organism of rat leprosy has not yet been cultured. 13. This is a very brief outline of the lines of leprosy research which have been followed in India during the last twenty years or so. Most of the work has been done in connection with the School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta, or in connection with the Indian Council of British Empire Leprosy Relief Association, with grants from the Indian Research Fund Association, but valuable work has been done by the workers in other centres which cannot be enumerated here. The work was initiated by Sir Leonard Rogers, who was later succeeded by Dr. Ernest Muir, who retired a few years ago and whose work is now carried on by Dr. John Lowe. 14. The results of this work have been widespread. There is a greatly increased interest in leprosy taken by the medical profession and by the general public. Many leprosy institutions have been changed from asylums for the disabled or dying leper to leprosy hospitals for the study and treatment of leprosy in all its stages. There are now hundreds of leprosy clinics for the diagnosis and treatment of leprosy. The leprosy problem in India is however very vast; it is to a considerable extent a social and economic problem, and it cannot be said that the problem is being ade- quately attacked, nor even that it is yet clear what are the best lines of attack. Much more study of leprosy in India is needed.
211 RABIES AND ANTI-RABIC TREATMENT. Since the Pasteur Institute, Kasauli, was first opened in 1900 research on rabies and prophylactic inoculation has been continuously carried out there. Other centres opened at a later period have also carried out investi- gations on varying scales. Semple, the first Director of the Institute in Kasauli, was responsible for the introduction in 1911 of a vaccine of different type from the Pasteur dried cord method which had been used up to that time. His experimental studies on anti-rabic inoculation led to the intro- duction of a dead carbolized vaccine the use of which reduced to a very large extent the risk of accidents which had occurred when the vaccine containing live virus was employed. After an extended period of study of the results of the use of the carbolized vaccine and on the basis of extensive experimental observations Harvey and Acton were able to show that the new vaccine gave at least as good or even better protection than the original Pasteur type under Indian conditions. The introduction of carbolized vaccine made possible the preparation of anti-rabic vaccine in plains stations and also the decentralization of treatment to out-centres where patients could receive treatment with the vaccine sent out from the Institute where it was manufactured. 2. At the International Conference on Rabies held at Paris in 1927 a general acceptance of the value of treatment with vaccines in which the virus was killed with carbolic acid was obtained, and the carbolized vaccine which had, on a large scale, been first employed in India, had already been adopted in certain other countries. There has since been a further extension of the use of Semple's method or modification of it and carbolized vaccines are now used to a greater extent than other types. 3. When the Pasteur Institute was first established at Kasauli about 400 cases were treated in a year in India. The number, from different centres now reaches about 40,000 and treatment on this scale is only possible by the use of methods based on researches at Kasauli and other centres. 4. Research on the pathology of rabies, accidents of treatment and other points have been carried out extensively in the Institutes in India, pro- minent workers on the subject besides those already mentioned being McKendrick and Cornwall. 5. A recent phase of work was that initiated by Cunningham in 1927 and carried on by his successors at Kasauli on the relative value of different methods of treatment. High value had been claimed for the other methods of Alivisatos and Hempt, but it was found that when an equivalent total of fixed virus brain substance was used carbolized vaccine was equally efficacious. It was also ascertained that the Paris strain of fixed virus was of higher value than others. On the basis of these observations anti-rabic inoculation is now carried out by means of courses of a dosage and duration fixed in relation to the risks which are assessed for each case. Contributed by Colonel J. Taylor, C.I.E., D.S.O., V.H.S., I.M.S. N 2
212 6. For a number of years studies have been in progress on the value of anti-rabic serum and of various methods of treatment in which com- bined treatment with serum and vaccine and with combination of living and dead virus is employed. The progress in this work has been reported from time to time and the work is still continuing. NUTRITION RESEARCH. A detailed study of medical literature during the last hundred years in India would without doubt reveal many references to diet as a possible factor in the causation of disease. Systematic nutrition research is, however, a development of the last 25 years. The earliest important work dealing specifically with the problems of nutrition in India was that of D. McCay, whose book "The Protein Element in Nutrition" was pub- lished in 1912 when McCay was professor of Physiology in the Medical College, Calcutta. The theme of this work is that the remarkable varia- tion in the physical development of different Indian peoples can be explained in terms of diet; specifically, in terms of protein content. McCay argued that the physique of the Bengali was inferior to that of the Punjabi because the former lived largely on rice, a cereal with a low protein content, while the latter, consuming wheat and milk, had a much higher protein intake. McCay's work was written before the importance of vitamins and minerals in nutrition was understood, and unquestionably he laid undue emphasis on the protein factor. Nevertheless "The Protein Element in Nutrition", the first work to draw attention to the relation between diet and physique, may well be considered one of the classics of nutritional science. A few years earlier Braddon in Malaya made a masterly analysis of the epidemiology of beriberi, demonstrating the re- lation of the disease to the state of milling of rice. Braddon's work, like McCay's, was based on an assumption which later research has shown to be untenable and has been largely overlooked and forgotten. Neither has received the recognition which his work deserved. 2. The active development of nutrition research in India in the post-war period was due to R. McCarrison, to whom belongs the credit of having outlined the problem and demonstrated its importance. McCarrison's work in the field of nutrition began with "The Goitre and Cretinism In- quiry" in Kasauli in 1913 and 1914. The effect of faulty food on the thyroid gland was the main subject of the investigation. After the war, McCarrison resumed his work in Coonoor, now extending the range of his investigations to cover the pathological changes caused by defective diet in most of the organs of the body. Nutrition research in Coonoor at this period was officially designated the "Beriberi Inquiry". The "Beriberi Inquiry" con- tinued until January 1920, when McCarrison was invalided home. He resumed work in Oxford in 1921 and 1922, and in 1922 returned to Coonoor, to undertake the "Deficiency Diseases Inquiry." This Inquiry continued at the Pasteur Institute, Coonoor, until November, 1923, when it was "axed" on the recommendation of the Inchcape Committee, and its equip- ment and personnel dispersed. In 1925 the Coonoor Unit was re-estab- lished, this time to be known as Nutrition Research, a title it still retains. Contributed by Dr. W. R. Aykroyd, M.D.
213 From 1925 until the present time its history has been one of steady enlargement and progress and its personnel now includes some 15 research workers, about half of whom are medically trained, the remainder being chemists, bio-chemists, etc. The Nutrition Research Laboratories are now perhaps one of the largest institutions in the world devoted solely to research in this particular field. The present director is Dr. W. R. Aykroyd, who took charge when Sir Robert McCarrison retired in 1935. 3. The All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health in Calcutta includes a Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition under a full time professor (H. E. C. Wilson), and this department is an active centre of nutrition research. Research is being carried out at a number of univer- sity laboratories throughout the country, and in institutions such as the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, and the Indian Institute for Medical Research, Calcutta. A glance at recent numbers of the Indian Journal of Medical Research will show the great attention which is being given to nutrition research in India. 4. It is impossible to summarise in a few paragraphs the advance in knowledge of nutrition which has been achieved. Considerable attention has been given to the study of the nutritive value of foodstuffs and tables are now available giving data about the content of most common foods in calories, protein, fat, carbohydrate, calcium, phosphorus, iron and a number of vitamins. It may be claimed that with regard to knowledge of food values, India is now by no means behind other Eastern countries. Dietary surveys have been carried out in various parts of the country, and the state of nutrition of children extensively studied. Methods of improving ordinary Indian diets are being investigated by controlled human experiments; important information has been obtained by this means. 5. The study of diseases related to nutrition has progressed, keratc- malacia, stomatitis and epidemic dropsy being among those investigated. It seems probable that a solution of the problem of epidemic dropsy will soon be found. 6. Attempts are being made to give practical effect to knowledge obtain- ed by scientific research. These include the issue of suitable bulletins, posters and press notes, and the education of health officers. Nutrition research workers in India may legitimately hope that genuine improvement in public health will result from their efforts. GENERAL PROTOZOOLOGY. The research work on protozoology including comparative protozoology which has been done in India is indicated in the following summary:214 of the genus Hepatozoon to be described. In the same year Christophers (1905) described another species, H. gerbilli and worked out its life-cycle in the rat louse Haematopinus sp. He also (1905) worked out the life- cycle of H. canis in the dog and (1907) the sexual cycle in the dog tick R. sanguineus. Acton and Knowles (1914) published a Study of Haemoproteus columbae. Mackie (1914) described a flagellate infection of sandflies under the name of Herpetomonas phlebotomi and a plasmodial parasite of the flying fox which he named plasmodium pteropi. Chatterjee (1914) in cultures of tank water obtained a bodo-like flagellate on which he tried the effect of various chemicals and (1915) he showed that Trichomonas hominis var. pentatrichomonas occurred in India. Adie (1915) described the sporogony of H. columbae in Lynchia maura, traced the development of the protozoon to the sporozoit stage in the salivary glands and produced infection in apparently "clean" pigeons by the bite of the fly. Chatterjee (1917) described various flagellates as the cause of dysentery. 3. Shortt (1917) described two haemogregarines of cold blooded vertebrates to one of which he gave the name of Haemogregarina nucleobisecans. In both, schizogony in the internal organs is described. Knowles and Cole (1917) published a study of entamoebic cysts and Cragg (1917) gave a list of the protozoal infections found in the stools of troops from Mesopotamia, while the same author (1919) made a detailed study of Entamoeba coli. Boulenger (1919) recorded the various protozoa occurring in troops in Mesopotamia and Hughes (1919) identified the parasite responsible for three cases of sleeping sickness among troops in East Africa as Trypanosoma rhodesiense. Patton et al (1921) in eight papers recorded morphological and other studies on flagellates of the genera Herpetomonas, Crithidia and Rhynchoidomonas. Shortt (1922) reviewed the position of the genus Haemocystidium which he sank as synonymous with Haemoproteus and gave a description of two new species, H. phyllodactyli and H. grahami. He also (1922) described two new haemogregarines, H. procteri and H. percomsi, from Persian lizards. Chatterjee (1922) gave an account of an 8-flagellate organism from the stools of a case of acute dysentery. Shortt (1923) recorded observations on the life-cycle of H. ctenocephali and its reactions to different environ- ments and (1923) described a new method of obtaining a ripened haematoxylin stain for protozoological work, ready for immediate use. Knowles, Napier and Gupta (1923) studied the pH of stools in protozoal infections and found that they were on the acid side in E. histolytica infections and on the alkaline side in flagellate infections. Shortt (1923) published an important paper on the pathogenicity of insect flagellates to vertebrates with special reference to H. ctenocephali which completely traversed the work of Fantham and Porter, Franchini and Laveran on this subject. Knowles and Gupta (1924) described a species of Bodo from human saliva. Shortt and Swaminath (1924) gave an account of Nosema adiei in the bed bug, a parasite once mistaken for forms of Leishmania donovani in the salivery glands of this insect. Gupta (1926) described Pentatrichomonas ardin delteili as the common species, occurring in Calcutta and suggests that it has a tropical distribution
215 while Trichomonas sensu strictu has a temperate zone habitat. Shortt (1927) described a method of cytoplasmic counterstaining with special application to protozoological technique. Rau (1926) showed the susceptibility of the jackal to B. canis and (1927) described the stages of B. gibsoni in dogs while he did some inconclusive transmission experi- ments with ticks of the genus Haemaphysalis bispinosa. Vasudevan (1927) reported a human case of sarcosporidiosis in Madras while Gupta (1927) reported a Trichomonas with four free flagella from a colubrine snake. Shortt and Swaminath (1927) described the cornplete life-cycle of a new species of gregarine, which they named Monocystis mackiei, parasitic in the gut of the sandfly Phlebotomus argentipes. Knowles and Gupta (1928) studied infections of T. evansi in various laboratory animals and the effects on them of subtotal thyroidectomy. Shortt and Swaminath (1928) described three species of Trypanosomidae viz., L. hemidactyli, T. hemidactyli and T. conorhini. Knowles (1928) published "An Introduction to Medical Protozoology" which has served as an excellent text book in the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine. Knowles and Gupta (1928) noted the occurrence of a Tricercomonas of the pig and a Trichomonas of the porcupine and (1930) an Entamoeba and a flagellate, Trimitus trionyci, of the Indian river turtle. They also (1931) described two species of Mastigophora from a bull, Embadomonas ruminantium and Trichomanas ruminantium. Chopra and Chowhan (1931-1932) des- cribed the action of cobra and Russell's viper venoms on protozoal organisms. Shortt and Swaminath (1931) gave an account of the com- plete life history in its insect and vertebrate hosts of T. phlebotomi which occurs in Hemidactylus frenstus while the vector is P. minutes var. shortti. They show that infection of the vertebrate occurs via the oral route while the development in the insect is by a process not previously described. Knowles and Gupta (1934) record the common occurrence of lsospora infection in Indian cats and publish observations on Balantidium coli and E. histolytica infection of macaques. They also (1935) record three species of Eimeria one of Isospora and one of Entamoeba from Indian lizards. The latter is given the name of E. flaviviridis. Shortt (1936) has given a very detailed account of the life-history of B. canis in the dog tick R. sanguineus in which the gaps left unfilled in Christophers' description of thirty years before have been completely filled in. He also made a very detailed cytological study of the various stages in the life- cycle. Gupta (1936) studied the Trichomonas flagellates of the vagina and caecum of cows and described a 24-nucleate cyst of E. coli of the monkey. Knowles and Gupta (1936) record the protozoal parasites found in Silenus monkeys. Swaminath and Shortt (1937) have proved by several transmission experiments that the jackal tick H. bispinosa is the vector of B. gibsoni. MEDICAL ENTOMOLOGY. Research in Medical Entomology in India dates practically from the time when Late Lt.-Col Ross discovered the developmental stages of malaria parasite in the gut of a mosquito. By 1900 Anopheline mosquitoes as Contributed by Dr. I. M. Puri, M. Sc. (Punj.), Ph. D. (Cantab.).
216 vectors of human malaria had been conclusively implicated and had attracted the attention of a number of workers, like Austin, Theobald and Giles in England and James and Liston in India. The latter two took up the study of Anopheline mosquitoes in India and wrote their classic book in 1904, dealing with the Indian Anophelines recorded up to that time. This was the first book of its kind giving systematic descriptions of the different species of all the Indian Anopheline mosquitoes, both adults and larvae. Theobald and Giles described some of the Indian species in their well known treatises dealing with the Culicidae of the world. 2. Since his first visit to India in 1901, Christophers has played a very important part in the study of the Indian Anopheline mosquitoes. From the commencement of his service in India he took up the study of the life-history, bionomics and anatomy of the different species of Anopheline mosquitoes and for nearly thirty years he carried out exhaustive research on varied problems connected with them. He published a number of memoirs dealing with the structure and systematic position of these insects and contributed a large number of papers on this subject first to "Paludism" and subsequently to the Indian journal of Medical Research. Towards the end of his service in India he published the first part of the Culicidae volume of the "Fauna of British India", which will remain as a reference book for the Indian Anopheline mosquitoes for many years to come. He also worked on the anatomy and histology of ticks and early in his career in India published three memoirs dealing with them. 3. Besides his own work he was instrumental in starting a taxonomic study of the Culicine mosquitoes of India by Capt. P. J. Barraud, who made a complete revision of the Indian Culicines, describing a number of new species. Capt. Barraud finally wrote the second part of the Culicidae volume of the "Fauna of British India". 4. At the suggestion of Col. S. R. Christophers an inquiry on the larvae of the Indian Anopheline mosquitoes was started under Dr. Puri, who made a thorough study of the larvae of all the species occurring in India, publishing the result of his researches in the form of a memoir dealing with the inter-relationship and the structure of all the species of Anopheline mosquitoes occurring in India. 5. A number of workers, like Senior White, Strickland and Iyengar, have also been engaged in research on the bionomics and structure of the Indian Anophelines in Bengal, making an intensive study of Eastern species. They have all made very valuable contributions to our knowledge of these insects. 6. Side by side with malaria the transmission of a number of other tropical diseases had been attracting the attention of other workers in India. Though very little taxonomic work has been done on fleas in India, experiments on the transmission of plague by different species of fleas have been conducted at Bombay by various workers like Liston, Lamb, Kundhart, Taylor and Chitre, who have contributed a number of interesting papers on the subject.
217 7. In order to establish the mode of transmission of Kala-azar, Patton carried out a number of experiments at Guindy by feeding lice and bed- bugs on cases infected with this disease. As a result of his experiments he wrote "Scientific Memoirs" on the development of Leishmania in the bedbug. He also carried out a systematic study of the Genus Musca describing a number of new species and undertook a complete revision of this genus. He and Major Cragg carried out extensive researches on the anatomy and habits of the blood-sucking Diptera and other insects. In 1913, they wrote their book on Medical Entomology, which was the first book of its kind to be published in India. Major Cragg carried out very interesting investigations and published a number of valuable papers on the anatomy and bionomics of blood-sucking flies and of Cimex lectularius and his untimely death has been a great loss to medical entomology. 8. Mr. Howlett (the Imperial Entomologist) started a systematic study of the biting flies of India in 1906 and published a preliminary account of them in 1907. Unfortunately his untimely death ended this work before its completion. 9. Brunetti, while working at the Indian Museum, Calcutta, published a catalogue of biting and other Diptera in 1911 and described a number of new species of biting flies in India about the same time. The latter, in collaboration with Col. Patton took up the study of the family Muscidae and has published a number of useful papers on this subject. 10. In order to find out the vector of Kala-azar, Awati made a survey of the biting insects of Assam in 1916, and published the results thereof in the Indian Journal of Medical Research. He also published a number of papers dealing with the bionomics of the "housefly". 11. The Kala-azar Commission, first under Col. S. R. Christophers and later under Lt.-Col. H. E. Shortt, carried out exhaustive researches on the transmission of this disease in Assam and published a large num- ber of papers some of them dealing with the bionomics and anatomy of P. argentipes. 12. Sandflies, as probable vectors of Kala-azar and of Oriental sore came into great prominence nearly twenty years ago, as a result of which, Lt.-Col. J. A. Sinton took up a taxonomic study of the Indian species of this genus. He published a number of papers dealing with these insects, describing a number of new species. 13. To supplement our knowledge of the biting flies of India, Puri took up the taxonomic study of the Indian Simuliidae along with their life history, and described a number of new species giving revised descrip- tions of those already described by previous writers. 14. Whereas a great deal of work on taxonomy and anatomy of different insects, connected with some human disease or the other, has been done in India, comparatively little research has been carried out on their bionomics in this country. During the last few years the lack of knowledge of the bionomics of the Indian blood-sucking and other insects, important to public health in India has been greatly felt all round. Consequently, a certain amount of work on the bionomics of mosquitoes has been carried out by various workers at the Ross Field Station for
218 Malaria at Karnal, at the School of Tropical Medicine at Calcutta and also al Bangalore but a great deal has yet to be done before a proper under- standing of the habits of the different important insects is achieved. HELMINTHOLOGICAL RESEARCH. Very little research on medical helminthology, except that done at the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, has been carried out in India in recent years and at this institution the primary object is to produce results of economic value. 2. One of the principal lines of research there is the continuous attempt that is being made to improve the treatment of intestinal helminthic infections especially that of hookworm. We have no facilities for the preparation of new drugs so have had to depend on other countries, and for some years a group of American workers have been employed on synthesising new compounds of possible anthelminthic value. It has always been the experience of workers in India that reliance cannot be placed on the figures of these workers in America regarding the curative effect of the new drugs when administered to Indians, so we try out these drugs ourselves. 3. Only two promising anthelminthics have been produced recently, these are tetrachlorethylene and hexylresorcinol. Thorough trial of these drugs in India has indicated that the former is probably the best drug we have for treating hookworm infection, when all points of view are taken into consideration. Hexylresorcinol was not found of much use and had the additional disadvantages of being expensive and needing rigid dietary precautions to be effective. 4. The discovery by officers of the R. A. M. C. in England, that British troops are infected in India with Cysticercus cellulosac, with relative frequency and that this often leads to incurable and fatal epilepsy from brain involvement, is a matter of great importance. A study of the literature on Taenia solium and C. cellulosac in regard to India left the impression that this condition was not common in this country so the relatively high rate of infection in British troops is hard to explain on existing information. Funds and staff were not available for an extensive survey but inquiries showed that infected pigs are relatively common in Calcutta slaughterhouses and in those of other places, especially in Southern India, but human infection is very rarely encountered either with the adult or larval worm. Tracing back through some infected pigs killed in Calcutta to the district of their origin and examination of a few pig breeders soon revealed one case of T. solium infection. This is all that could be done at the time but it indicates the probability that our knowledge of the extent of T. solium and C. collulosae infection in India is very deficient and, in view of its importance, more extended work should be carried out with the idea of introducing prophylaxis at the source. Contributed by Dr. P. A. Maplestone, D.S.O., D. Sc., M.B.B.S.
219 5. Various improvements in laboratory technique have been introduced such as culturing hookworm larvae under much more natural conditions than was done before, and a much better method of isolating ascaris eggs from soil was worked out. Both these procedures will be of value to anyone working on the epidemiology of these infections. 6. A considerable amount was formerly done on the distribution and pathology of filariasis and some contributions made to our knowledge of the subject. Filariasis research is being still carried on, the principal objective being the discovery of a curative drug. Many drugs including most of the new heavy metal preparations have been tried without success, but some advance has been made in the treatment of the secondary infections common in elephantiasis, by vaccines and some of the new complex benzene derivatives. During the course of surveys two new species of microfilariae have been found, one of these Mf. actoni is new to science and the other Mf. malayi originally reported from the Dutch East Indies has been found in several parts of India. The adults of these larvae have not yet been seen. 7. Guinea worm surveys have indicated that the distribution of infec- tion does not depend on the presence or absence of certain species of cyclops but rather on the limitation of water supply. The condition is prevalent where there are relatively few tanks in and around villages, and it is not seen where there are numerous tanks. It has also been found that if tank water reaches pH 8 or over, as it often does, cyclops will not live in it. 8. Work on the control of guinea worm has been successfully carried out in some villages in Mysore by the introduction of certain species of fish, which eat cyclops, into village tanks. Experimental work with guinea worm infection on dogs has also resulted in the finding of several adult male worms. This has never been done before and the worms will be described shortly. 9. In the course of the same research it has been found that a small proportion of the larvae differ from the majority by having a ventral spike-like process or second tail. The significance of these different larvae is not yet understood but it has been suggested the variations are sexual in character. 10. Human infection by migrating Gnathostoma spinigerum larvae or adults which is a fairly common condition in Siam and has been seen once or twice in China, Japan and Malaya, has been recently found four times in India. These are the first records of this worm as a human parasite in this country and as they have all been found in Bengal and all the specimens identified at one place, the Calcutta School, it is thought that the condition may be commoner than is realised. It is of some importance because the swelling caused by the worms in their migration through the tissues may involve vital organs and thus endanger life, though up to now no deaths have been reported.
220 *SNAKE VENOMS. A large amount of study on snake venoms and the treatment of snake bite has been carried out in India. The earlier of the important investiga- tions were those of Fayrer and Wall and D. D. Cunningham who studied the actions of the venoms of the principal poisonous snakes. Large contributions were made to the subject by Lamb in the earlier years of the present century his work being recorded in the Scientific Memoir Series No. 2. Subsequent work was carried out by Acton and Knowles between 1912 and 1914 and their observations on many points in- cluding treatment are accepted as authoritative. Antivenene is prepared at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, against the venoms of the Cobra and Russell's vipers and the methods of its preparation and con- centration are under continuous study. An inquiry on these venoms was in progress at the Institute from 1935 to 1936, and their various physio- logical actions, neurotoxic, haemorrhagic, coagulant and haemolytic, were studied in relation to venoms of snakes from different. countries. It was found that the haemorrhagins of all viper venoms tested were homologous and that in consequence when a particular viper venom. is low in neurotoxin and high in haemorrhagin content, the latter being mainly responsible for the symptoms produced a heterologous anti-viper venom serum will be of value. The studies on coagulant action of Russell's viper have resulted in the production of a stable solution for local haemostatic purposes. The chemical composition of the venom has also been determined by this Inquiry. 2. Studies on snake venoms have also been in progress at the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine and important contributions made to the knowledge of their properties and actions. 221 clinical research and many of the problems studied have a direct bearing on the practical aspects of diagnosis and treatment of disease. The results of these observations have been published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research, the Indian Medical Research Memoirs, Records of Malaria Survey and the Indian Medical Gazette from time to time. We will give here brief summary of the important problems on which research has been carried out. I. Researches on the pharmacology and toxicology of remedies of special importance to medical practice in India. One of the earliest researches undertaken in the Calcutta School was in connection with the pharmacology of the different alkaloids of the cinchona bark with a view to see whether some of these were as effective as quinine in the treatment of malaria. If the residual alkaloids after extraction of quinine could be used, the cost of treatment would be considerably reduced. A large amount of pharmacological and clinical work extending over several years was carried out on cinchonine, cinchonidine, quinine, quinidine, cupreine and hydrocupreines. The efficacy of the residual alkaloids was demonstrated and the advantages that might be gained by employing them in mass treatments were pointed out. Emetine has been used in the treatment of dysenteries by practitioners in India and its toxic manifestations 'were not appreciated. An investigation into the pharmacology and toxicology of emetine was carried out and it was shown that emetine had a selective toxic effect on the parenchyma of the heart muscle. If the dosage exceeds the optimum level, toxic symptoms especially referable to the heart supervene. Great caution- therefore is needed in its administration. In view of the importance of the antimony compounds in the treatment of kala-azar, investigations into the pharmacological action of the organic derivatives of antimony were undertaken. The pentavalent compounds depress the circulation and respiration but stimulate the reticulo-endothelial tissue of the spleen, liver and bone-marrow, resulting in increased leucocy­tosis and phagocytosis. Further a rhythmic contraction of the spleen is induced which squeezes out and disintegrates many cells laden with leishmania parasites. An interesting development of this work was the discovery of a Chopra Test for the diagnosis of kala-azar. This test is easily performed, is very sensitive and renders early diagnosis of kala-azar possible in 85 per cent. of the cases. It has been of great help in the differential diagnosis of malaria and kala-azar in some of the endemic areas. A large amount of work was done on the botanical, pharmacological, toxicological and therapeutic aspects of the Indian species of artemesia and ephedras. Excellent quality of santonin can be obtained from Indian arte­mesia growing in Kashmir. Indian ephedras grow in abundance in certain parts of the Himalayas and give good yield of the alkaloids. Although pseudo-ephedrine predominates in some species, others give good yield of ephedrine. It Was also shown that pseudo-ephedrine is pharmacologically as active as ephedrine in many respects, is less toxic and is even a better cardiac stimulant than ephedrine.
222 In connection with the helminthological enquiries at the School, con- siderable attention was paid to the pharmacological and toxicological pro- perties of a number of anthelmintics, chief amongst which were carbon tetrachloride, santonin and oil of chenopodium. Besides this a large volume of data based on laboratory, hospital and field work on various aspects of the anthelmintics problem was collected in the form of a book entitled "Anthelmintics in Medical and Veterinary Practice" by R. N. Chopra and Asa C. Chandler. II. Researches on the venoms of Indian snakes. Snake venom enjoyed a great reputation in India as a very potent remedy in cardiac failure and as a general stimulant. A study of the pharmacological action of snake venoms was therefore started in 1931, and had been continued since then. Venoms from Cobra, Russell's viper (Daboia) and Echis were studied. Contrary to popular belief, the venoms do not seem to possess any stimulant action on the heart. Cobra venom in an attenuated form, however, has been found useful in relieving pain in cancer and in exerting a beneficial influence in chorea, insanity and epi- lepsy. III. Researches on the physical properties of blood sera in health and disease. In order to explain many pharmacological and toxicological phenomena which arose in the course of other researches, work was undertaken to study carefully the physical and biochemical properties of blood sera in healthy individuals and in different pathological states. Much interesting and instructive data have been collected in this field and have thrown light on many hitherto unexplainable and obscure problems. In general, patho- logical sera show a high viscosity, low surface tension and diminished buffer action. The electrical properties also show significant changes from the normal ranges. In kala-azar, the serum proteins undergo marked changes and the viscosity rises much more than in any other disease like tuberculosis, syphilis, or leprosy. IV. Researches on Indian Indigenous drugs. An important research undertaken was the investigation on scientific lines, of the claims of the rich materia medica of the Ayurvedic and Unani systems of medicines, which was financed by the Indian Research Fund Association. During the last 12 years this inquiry has done a considerable amount of work which has not only received local appreciation but international re- cognition. The Departments of Pharmacology and Chemistry of the School are now considered an authority on all questions in connection with the chemistry, pharmacology and therapeutic uses of the Indian indigenous drugs. It will not be possible here to indicate the extensive work that has been done. Though no epoch making discoveries have been made, this inquiry has shown that only a very limited number of indigenous remedies deserve the reputation they have earned as cures and that quite a large
223 proportion of them are absolutely worthless and have probably crept in through tradition and folklore. On the other hand many of the pharma- copoeial drugs or allied species grown in India which could be used in the manufacture of pharmacopoeial preparations are in common use. The work done in this connection up to 1932 has been put up in a book entitled the "Indigenous Drugs of India" by R. N. Chopra. Further work will be in- cluded in the edition which is now due. V. Researches on drug addiction in India. That drug addition is a menace to the physical, mental and moral well- being of the individual and therefore of the whole nation is recognised today and the League of Nations have repeatedly made attempts to stop the use of habit forming drugs in all parts of the world. In India the pro- blem of drug addiction is perhaps more widespread than in many other parts of the world. This will be evident from the fact that whereas in other civi- lised countries, the drug addiction rate of the population is from 0.1 to 0.2 per cent., in India, in some areas the rate may be from 1 to 3 per cent. In 1926, an inquiry was started by the Indian Research Fund Association, and a large volume of work has been done both in the laboratory as well as in the field. The drugs of addiction so far studied include opium, alcohol, cannabis indica, cocaine, chloral hydrate, etc. In 1895, a Royal Com- mission of experts reported that moderate indulgence in opium eating in India led to no injurious effects. This conclusion has been definitely disproved now and there is no doubt that opium eating produces in Indians deleterious actions similar to those produced in Europeans. A treatment of opium habit by administration of lecithin by the mouth and intravenous injections of glucose proved successful in producing a cure rate in 70 per cent. in a series of 200 addicts. The field studies included extensive general surveys of the extent of different drug habits in various parts of India. Opium addiction is definitely decreasing but cocaine addiction which is of comparatively recent origin shows signs of increasing. The study of drug addiction in India has revealed many interesting facts which are of import- ance from medical and sociological points of view. VI. Chemotherapeutic studies on anti-malarial and anti-dysenteric remedies. The effectiveness of a number of natural and synthetic anti-malarial remedies was tested on Indian strains of malaria and in monkeys infected with a hemoprotozoon called Plasmodium knowlesi. The concentration attained by atebrin in the circulating blood at different intervals of time in relation to parasite count was worked out. A new and comparatively easy method for the estimation of atebrin in small quantities of blood was devised and it was shown that the highest concentration occurs between ½ hour to 2 after the injection. The number of parasites diminishes markedly during the period when the concentration of the drug in the blood is highest. The same relationship does not hold good in the case of quinine and therefore it is probable that the nature of action of these two anti- malarial remedies is different, one acting directly on the parasites whereas
224 the other (quinine) exerting its influence through some defence mechanisms of the body. Owing to its slow excretion atebrin appears to exert a more prolonged action than quinine. The treatment of chronic intestinal amoebiasis presents many difficul- ties in the tropics and none of the treatments recommended are satisfac- tory. Chemotherapeutic studies were conducted both in the laboratory as well as in the hospital with the alkaloids of Holarrhena antidysenterica (Kurchi), an organic arsenic derivative called carbarsone, yatren and other drugs. A preparation of the total alkaloids from H. antidysenterica called kurchi-bismuth-iodide and an organic compound of arsenic carbarsone gave encouraging results. VII. Biological standardisation of drugs on the Indian market. A large number of drugs on the market were biologically assayed in the department of pharmacology and were found not to possess the thera- peutic activity that they are alleged to have. The high atmospheric tem- perature, combined with a high degree of humidity, produces deterioration during storage. Those manufactured in India, including some of the potent compounds of arsenic and antimony, are subject to no control whatever by the State and consequently they vary a great deal in strength. In 1930, the Drug Inquiry Committee was appointed by the Government of India to go fully into the question of drug adulteration in India. This committee recommended the urgent need for the standardisation of drugs and for legis- lative measures to control the drug trade and industry. In the absence of any legislation the Indian market is glutted with products of inferior quality and this constitutes a serious menace to the public health. It is gratifying to note that as a result of the recommendations of this committee, the Government of India have taken steps to introduce a bill to control the import of adulterated drugs into India. A laboratory consisting of Bio- assay and Pharmaceutical sections has also been recently established under the direction of Brevet Colonel R. N. Chopra to analyse and assay the purity and potency of medicinal preparations in the Indian market. It is hoped that the provincial governments will now bring in legislation to control the manufacture of drugs on the lines recommended by the Drugs Enquiry Committee. CANCER. The extent to which Cancer prevails in India has been the subject of considerable speculation. Most writers on the subject have indulged in assertions based on little or no investigation and have tried to account for the supposed rarity of Cancer in India according to their pet theories. Mortality statistics in India except in Presidency towns are not based on proper death certificates. Even in Presidency towns the certification is often of a perfunctory and misleading nature. Death rate due to many infectious diseases, which have disappeared from most civilised countries, is still very high in India and expectation of life very low. The anemia Contributed by Dr. Vishwa Nath, M.D., B.S. (Punj.), F.R.C.P. (Ireland).
225 emaciation and cachexia characteristic alike of Cancer and many chronic infectious diseases and the acute infections, which are so often the imme- diate cause of death in cases of malignant disease, mask the true dimen- sions of Cancer mortality in India. To appreciate the size of the Cancer problem in India, an investigation was made under the auspices of the Indian Research Fund Association which utilised information available from the records of pathological units and in-patients departments of hos- pitals connected with medical schools and colleges throughout India and Burma. This survey covered records of 22,753 pathological Post Mortem examinations yielding 869 cases of malignant disease, which meant that one out of every 26 autopsis related to a cause of malignant disease. The proportion of Cancer to Sarcoma in this series was as 4.8:1. In every province the preponderating incidence of Cancer226 the oral cavity, the penis, skin or the gastro-intestinal tract, the factor of irritation seems to excel all other possible causes and brings the problem of this fell disease within the scope of Preventive Medicine. 7 The following papers published as the result of this survey will afford a detailed view of the information collected:227 to time and the Institute has been the centre for research on a variety of medical and public health problems. Bacteriology and immunology have always been the main subjects of study. Malaria on which much work was done in the earlier years was later taken over by the Malaria Survey of India (now called the Malaria Institute of India) accommodated in the same buildings but designated as a separate organization. Work on medical entomology has been done on a large scale but conduct of research in this line has varied with the inclination and experience of successive members of the staff of the Institute. 3. The manufacture of sera and vaccine has constituted an ever growing part of the routine work of the Institute and during the War years the Institute was almost entirely devoted to the preparation of T. A. B. and cholera vaccines and later on influenza vaccine for the use of the Army. Production on an unprecedented scale was necessary for the prophylactic inoculation of troops in India, Mesopotamia, Egypt, East Africa and else- where. The research activities of the Institute were largely in abeyance until 1920 but when resumed much valuable work was done on malaria, entomology, dysentery, cholera, relapsing fever and other subjects. 4. The Institute conducts research work on its own resources on pro- blems associated with the vaccine and other products issued and in addition houses inquiries financed by the Indian Research Fund Association which are carried out by its own staff or by attached workers. During the last five years an extensive basic investigation has been in progress in relation to cholera problems and a fruitful Inquiry ha recently been completed on the venoms of the principal Indian snakes. This latter work has been partly in relation to the properties of the antivenene prepared against the venoms of the Indian Cobra and Russell's viper, for which the Institute is the sole source of manufacture and supply in India. 5. The Institute fulfils also the functions of a Bacteriological Laboratory for the Central Government and carries out such routine work as may be required including the testing of disinfectants for the Stores Department and other procedures. It also acts as a bureau of information and advice on medical and public health problems and its extensive specialised library is made available for the use of accredited persons. 6. The Institute houses the Library and Stores of the Indian Research Fund Association. The Director is ex-officio Editor of the Indian Journal of Medical Research and the Indian Medical Research Memoirs which he conducts on behalf of the Indian Research Fund Association. 7. The Central Research Institute is administered by the Director- General, Indian Medical Service, for the Department of Education, Health and Lands of the Central Government. The Director of the Institute is usually the senior member of the Medical Research Department and the permanent staff includes three other officers of the same Department. Sir David Semple, the first Director, was followed in succession by Lt.-Col. W. F. Harvey and Colonel Sir Richard Christophers. The present Director is Colonel J. Taylor, I.M.S. O 2
228 (ii) THE SCHOOL OF TROPICAL MEDICINE, CALCUTTA. The School of Tropical Medicine is the only centre in India for post- graduate teaching in tropical diseases. The institution owes its existence to the efforts of Sir Leonard Rogers, whose work in connection with cholera, dysentery and other tropical diseases is so well known. The idea of estab- lishing a research centre for tropical medicine in Calcutta definitely formed itself in his mind in 1910 and after working indefatigably for nearly 10 years, he achieved his object. The foundation stone of the School was laid by Lord Carmichael, the then Governor of Bengal and the institute began to function from 1921. The School has attached to it a special research hospital for tropical diseases. This was built, equipped and endowed by public subscription at a cost of Rupees 3¼ lakhs and enables the workers at the School to carry on clinical research under strictly controlled condi- tions. This is one of the unique features of the institution and the facilities that it offers for research and investigation of obscure cases of disease are available in few other places. In the Out-patient Department attached to this Hospital patients are examined: and from among these, selection is made of those suitable for post-graduate teaching and research work. 2. The Endowment Fund which Sir Leonard Rogers raised has since 1921 frequently come to the rescue of research work at the School when official funds were not forthcoming and it stood at a sum of just over Rs. 9 lakhs. The Endowment Fund and the grants from the Indian Research Fund Association are the very core of the research activities of the School. 3. In addition to the Government of India, the Government of Bengal, the institution, with its all-India interests and importance, has received very considerable financial support from other sources, as the following figures will show. The capital cost of the whole scheme was as follows:229 HOSPITAL. Government of Bengal . . . . Rs. 1,28,051 =100 per cent. These figures show how very important is the financial aid received from the Indian Research Fund Association who receives very good value for the money so expended: if Simla and Kasauli are the "spiritual home" of that Association, a very large part of the valuable work which it carries out is done in Calcutta. 5. As indicated above the School serves the double purposes of post- graduate teaching and research work in Tropical diseases. Three classes are held annually, one from October to April, terminating in the examina- tion for the Diploma of Tropical Medicine (D.T.M.); one from July to October terminating in the examination for the Licentiate of Tropical Medi- cine (L.T.M.), and one in conjunction with the All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, lasting nine months and terminating in the examination for the Diploma of Public Health of the Calcutta University. Students in these classes come from all parts of India, and from many countries overseas such as Ceylon, Burma, America, China, Siam, Australia, New Guinea, Egypt and Kenya. The teaching staff consists of nineteen professors, assistant professors and lecturers. The following departments are in existence in the School:230 possible within the short space of a review to mention the various con- tributions made by the workers of this institute but only the salient features will be alluded to. 8. Malaria being one of the most important diseases in India con- siderable attention has been directed to various aspects of this problem. Valuable observations on the preventive aspect of the disease have been made in the Bengal Delta, the Dooars and Assam. Systematic investi- gations into the problem of malaria and its treatment with anti-malaria remedies have been carried out and the School has been responsible for the discovery of ape malaria in India and its employment in testing the efficacy of anti-malarial drugs. The researches carried out on the aetiology, diagnosis and treatment of Kala-azar have been particularly successful. The School has in a great measure been responsible for the introduction of pentavalent compounds of antimony and in reducing the incidence of this disease in certain districts of Bengal and Assam which were once the hot- beds of the disease, and have now been rendered healthy and habitable. Notable progress has been made in the treatment of dysenteries, hill diarrhoea and sprue in India. The study of cholera and investigations on its treatment with bacteriophage have met with very encouraging results. Extensive work has been carried out in connection with aetiology and treat- ment of leprosy. A complete hookworm survey of India and Burma has been carried out, and new methods of combating mass infections in the mill areas have been outlined. Filariasis has been studied from both preven- tive and curative view points with results which promise to have an im- portant bearing on the control of this widespread disease. Though it is not yet possible to bring about a cure in the true sense of the term, the secondary complications associated with the disease are now successfully treated. Very important work has also been done on the aetiology and treatment of epidemic dropsy lathyrism, diabetes, respiratory diseases and anaemias. Important observations have been recorded in connection with spirillar diseases. It has been shown that rat-bite fever is quite a common occurrence in Calcutta and leptospiral infections are also common in these rodent. The existence of Weils' disease in man has been definitely demonstrated by workers in the School. 9. A very important research programme which has far-reaching influ- ence on the scientific and economic aspects of Indian indigenous drugs consists in the investigation into the claims of the rich materia medica of the Ayurvedic and Unani systems of medicine on modern scientific lines. A large number of remedies of repute in the indigenous materia medica has been studied from the botanical, chemical, pharmacological, toxicolo- gical and clinical view points. The field for research in the domain of Indian indigenous drugs is a vast one and only the fringe of the problems has so far been touched. This work when completed will be of great importance from medical and agricultural points of view. An all-India Inquiry into the problems of drug addiction in India has also been carried out. The subject is of vital importance from the social, economic and health points of view and has received the recognition of the League of Nations. Another important work done is the initiation of a Biological Standardization Laboratory for the analysis of drugs on the Indian Market. Because there is no legislation in this country to prevent fraudulent manu- facturers from selling worthless drugs, the Indian market is literally flooded
231 with cheap and useless drugs. As Chairman of the Drugs Enquiry Com- mittee, Colonel Chopra made an all-India survey of the condition of drugs and made representations to the Government for taking immediate steps to prevent this menace to public health. It is hoped that the establish- ment of such a Drugs Control Laboratory by the Government of India will go a long way in preventing drug adulteration and spurious drug trade in India. 10. An exhaustive investigation into the aetiology and pathogenesis of various skin diseases was started by late Colonel Acton and is now being continued. Successful methods of treatment have been evolved for a number of skin conditions which previously resisted all treatment. The School is one of the most popular centres for treatment of skin diseases in Calcutta and patients come to attend the clinic from all parts of India. 11. Besides these, many other enquiries have been carried out and are still in progress. In 1934, an "Essay Review" was published, summarising the whole work of the School from 1920 to 1933. 12. The School is affiliated to Calcutta University but its D. T. M. and L. T. M. examinations are controlled by the Faculty of Tropical Medicine which has been set up under the Government of Bengal. (iii). ALL-INDIA INSTITUTE OF HYGIENE AND PUBLIC HEALTH, CALCUTTA. History.232 The building was completed in 1932 and opened on behalf of H. E. the Viceroy by His Excellency Sir John Anderson, Governor of Bengal. 2. Administrative and scientific control.233 greatly. Not only were all the available seats taken up but certain pro- visions had to be made for special reasons and many deserving candidates had to be refused admission. It now appears that in order to cope with the growing demand for admission it would be necessary, in the near future, to consider ways and means of substantially increasing the number of seats. While planning the original courses, due consideration had been given to include such subjects as were of special interest to India, it is felt that further changes will have to be made to adapt the courses of training to the actual needs of the rural population amongst whom the need for public health work is the greatest. It is hoped that a definite improvement in this direction will be made next year when a rural health unit has been organised in the vicinity of Calcutta. The number of admissions to the Diploma course in Maternity and Child Welfare is at present far from satisfactory. The enormous waste of life and suffering among mothers and infants in this country, most of which is preventable, calls for immediate and energetic action on the part of the various administrations. Lack of funds and scarcity of trained workers stand in their way. The course offered by the Institute is designed to produce highly trained officers who could organise and supervise pro- vincial schemes in maternity and child welfare. It would appear that the present pay and prospects for trained workers are not sufficiently attractive to induce women medical practitioners to give up the more remunerative general line for public health work. Scholarships for the students have been offered by the Red Cross Society, the Army, and by Dr. Balfour, but they are not always availed of. Perhaps better response may be expected if the provincial administrations were to send their officers for training with definite assurance of employment on attractive salaries. With regard to the special courses, the demand for training is satisfac- torily increasing. A scheme has been prepared for organising a special course in tuberculosis for which there appears to be considerable demand. In the meantime the Institute has been co-operating with the King George Thanksgiving (Anti-Tuberculosis) Fund in organising a special course on tuberculosis every year. 5. Research.234 clearly as possible the real endemic areas in Bengal and also the regions which are specially liable to extensive epidemics of the disease. Studies on the chemical structures of the vibrios and the relation of the structure to pathogenecity has formed another subject of extensive researches. Much light has been thrown on some of the obscure problems of cholera, but a great deal still remains to be done specially in regard to the basic differences between the endemic and non-endemic regions. The available methods for forecasting cholera epidemics have been scrutinised and a new method has been evolved which has given satisfactory results with regard to the Calcutta experience. (ii) Epidemic dropsy.235 (v) Nutrition.236 I. RESEARCHES. (a) Plague.237 a highly satisfactory operation for the removal of the adult female worm from the subcutaneous tissues and have enabled investigations to be carried out in selected villages in the Deccan with the object of destroying the water cyclops, a minute crustacean which harbours the infective stage of the guinea-worm. (d) Pharmacology.238 pathology of plague in experimental animals in addition to routine sections of pathological tissues for histological examination. V. SNAKE VENOM. The Institute maintains a large number of poisonous snakes from which venom is collected for the manufacture of anti-venomous sera and the process of venom extraction is counted as one of the principal attractions to the visitors. At present the animals from which venom is extracted are Cobras and Russell's Vipers, but it is hoped that in the near future other varieties of poisonous snakes will also be tackled and attempts made for the production of curative sera against their bite. The Institute maintains a large library with 150 current monthly and weekly journals and a collection of recent scientific publications and books to afford suitable assistance to the workers. Facilities have been afforded to private individuals for conducting research. (v) PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA, KASAULI. The Pasteur Institute of India, Kasauli, was founded in 1893 mostly with the aid of public subscriptions and incorporated as a charitable concern in 1901. The principal objects of the Institute were:239 starting the treatment of a patient at risk and this factor combined with the improvements made in the vaccine has resulted in a considerable diminution in the mortality rate from hydrophobia which has reached the low figure of 0.52 per cent of the treated cases. A vaccine is also prepared at this Institute for the treatment of animals which has rapidly grown in popularity. The number of animals inoculated during 1936 was well over 1300. 5. In addition to research on rabies the Institute is at present also con- ducting researches on Typhus Fever with funds provided by the Indian Research Fund Association. 6. The Institute is now run on a commercial basis and though small grants are contributed by the Government of India and certain local bodies and Indian States, the bulk of the income is derived from the sale of anti- rabic vaccine. (vi) PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF SOUTHERN INDIA, COONOOR. The establishment of the Pasteur institute of Southern India for the treatment of persons bitten by rabid animals was rendered possible by the allotment by His Excellency the Viceroy, (the late Lord Curzon), of one lakh of rupees out of the sum placed at his disposal by Mr. Henry Phipps of the United States of America. 2. The plans of the main building and out-houses were drawn by the Government Architect, the construction was begun in 1905, and completed in 1907. The Institute was opened for the reception of patients on April 1st, 1907. 3. The present site covers an area of 12.53 acres of land. The cost of the buildings to date has been about rupees 2½ lakhs of which one lakh was contributed by Mr. Henry Phipps, Rs. 83,000 by the Government of Madras and the balance was met from revenue. In addition to the main building which contains the laboratories and the inoculation and waiting rooms for patients, there are free quarters for the indigent patients, medical staff, clerks and servants and a limited number of houses for patients who can afford to pay a small rent. 4. Ample accommodation for animals has also been provided. An extension to the original building was constructed in 1921 at a cost of Rs. 27,000. The first floor forms a library which is equipped with 3,500 volumes of scientific and medical books and journals and the ground floor an up to date room for animals. Electric installation was put up in 1914. 5. The Institute is an Association registered under the Societies Regis- tration Act of 1860. The objects of the Society are:240 collateral line of research which may suggest itself in the course of experimental investigations; (4) to publish from time to time the results of any researches which may be of import to the medical world. 6. The general management of the Association is vested in a Central Committee consisting of 55 members, 25 ex-officio and 30 elected. 7. The Institute is maintained by grants from the Government, con- tributions from the Indian States, district boards, municipalities, canton- ments, railways, firms, and donations from the public. Since 1922, the main source of revenue has been the sale of anti-rabic vaccine to govern- ment, municipal, local fund, mission, railway and State hospitals in the Presidency and in the Indian States. 8. The total number of persons treated at the Institute and the centres from 1st April 1907 to 31st December 1936 was 1,36,097. Up to 1922, all persons bitten by rabid animals had to come to Coonoor for treatment. In the meantime, experiments carried out at the Institute had shown that carbolised antirabic vaccine did not suffer any appreciable loss of immuniz- ing power in the heat of the plains during the period allowed for its transit and use. It was, therefore, decided to establish centres for treatment with the vaccine prepared and sent out by the Institute. At present, there are 223 centres in the Presidency and in the Indian States. The present arrangements are that treatment at the Pasteur Institute is limited to persons from the Nilgiris District and to well-to-do persons from other districts who prefer to come to Coonoor for treatment at their own expense. All other persons should go to the nearest hospital in which a centre for treatment has been established. 9. Statistical figures, collected since 1922, serve to show that the results of treatment at the centres compare favourably with those obtained at the Institute. Since 1923, antirabic vaccine is being issued to Veterinary Surgeons in the Presidency and in the Indian States for the treatment of animals that had been bitten by or had come in contact with rabid animals. 10. In addition to specimens received for routine clinical and bacteriolo- gical examination, research work on rabies, malaria, kala-azar, filariasis and on entomological and other subjects has been carried out by workers at the Institute and the results have been published in the "Indian Journal of Medical Research". 11. Since 1918, accommodation has been given to the workers on nutritional research, financed by the Indian Research Fund Association. 12. The Pasteur Institute of Southern India has kept before it the need for intensive propaganda work in the rural areas of the Madras Presidency in order to acquaint the poorer classes with the importance of the prophy- lactic treatment which is available at the centres for those who come in contact with rabid or suspected rabid animals. 13. In March 1927, a sum of money was allocated for propaganda for the purpose of spreading information about rabies and making known to as large a number of the public as possible how and where persons bitten by rabid animals can obtain treatment. The Director of Public Health, Madras, undertook to have the work carried out by the propaganda section of his department. During 1927-28, there was a fair increase in the number of patients treated in the Presidency and this was attributed to the effective
241 propaganda carried out. In 1932, the Director of Public Health, Madras, undertook to have coloured posters prepared on the subject of rabies for distribution by means of the Health Department throughout the rural areas of the Presidency in which there are roughly 34,000 villages. Posters were distributed freely by the Health Staff during their tours, and lectures on rabies and antirabic treatment were also encouraged. In October 1936. at the request of the Government of Mysore, special propaganda work in connection with rabies was carried out for 16 days at the Mysore Dasara Exhibition which was visited by about 1,50,000 people from all over the Mysore State as well as from other parts of India. 14. A large number of persons bitten by rabid animals are seeking treat- ment now-a-days owing to the increased facilities provided by the multi- plication of treatment centres and owing also to the propaganda carried out by the Public Health Department of the Government of Madras in collaboration with the Pasteur Institute of Southern India. (vii) THE KING EDWARD VII MEMORIAL PASTEUR INSTITUTE AND MEDICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, SHILLONG. The King Edward VII Memorial Pasteur Institute and Medical Research Institute, Shillong, owes its inception to a proposal from the Assam Branch of the Indian Tea Association in 1906 to build an institute for antirabic treatment in Assam. In 1909 a committee was appointed to consider the site and plans for the proposed institute. In 1910 it was decided that part of the Eastern Bengal and Assam King Edward VII Memorial Fund should be devoted to the construction of the Institute provided it was also made a centre for teaching medical research and for study of local diseases. The foundation stone was laid by the Hon'ble Sir Archdale Earle, K.C.I.E., Chief Commissioner of Assam on the 4th November, 1915, and the Institute was opened on 5th January 1917. The Pasteur Institute now functions242 vaccines. Vaccine preparation was discontinued in 1922 but was resumed in 1928 with the manufacture of cholera and T. A. B. vaccines. Practically all the research work on Bacteriophage was carried out in this Institute and the manufacture of that serum is still an important item in its manufacturing activities. Medical Research.243 CHAPTER IX. Medico-legal Work and Imperial Serological Department. In this work Chemistry and Serology are exercised in the service of the law. It is undertaken by:244 MOSS). He also deals with tissues of the body other than blood for the determination of their origin. In his spare time he undertakes labora- tory examinations of blood for clinical purposes; runs a blood transfusion service for the hospitals in Calcutta; and teaches Serology and Immuno- logy to the various classes in the School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta, and in the All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta. 5. The Imperial Serologist receives exhibits from the Chemical Exami- ners and Chemical Analysers of British India and Burma. He also receives a small percentage of exhibits from large Indian States which employ Chemical Examiners of their own. In the summary of work given at the end of this account a small percentage of cases and articles analysed for the Indian States is included in the total for the Imperial Serologist. 6. Centralization of the determination of the origin of blood in the Imperial Serologist's laboratory serves two useful purposes: (1) it provides a double check on the mere presence of a bloodstain and (2) keeps the standard of medico-legal evidence, regarding its origin, uniform in criminal cases involving grave consequences. 7. The accompanying table summarises the medico-legal work done by the aforesaid seven officers. Not an inconsiderable amount of original work is also done by the officers engaged in medico-legal work.
245 Table showing summary of work done by Chemical Examiners, Chemical Analysers and the Imperial Serologist during 1936. Designation of Officers. Medico-legal investigations. Human poisoning. Animal poisoning. Stains. Miscellaneous. Total. General analysis and other work. Cases. Articles. Cases. Articles. Cases. Articles. Cases. Articles. Cases. Articles. Cases. Articles. 1. Chemical Exami- ner, Bengal, Calcutta. 984 1,769 118 170 1,242 3,547 3 298 2,347 5,784 .. 1,963 2. Chemical Exami- ner, U. P., Agra. 412 1,351 20 50 1,037 3,169 8 72 1,477 4,642 1,453 2,424 3. Chemical Exami- ner, Punjab, Lahore/Murree. 1,088 5,241 51 231 1,870 4,488 12 15 3,021 9,975 1,324 2,688 4. Chemical Exami- ner, Madras. 363 2,090 15 67 953 5,051 67 333 1,398 7,541 203 203 5. Chemical Analyser, Bombay. 655 1,688 41 231 533 2,398 26 99 1,255 4,416 .. 5,317 6. Chemical Analyser, Sind, Karachi. 100 346 .. .. 276 855 9 89 385 1,290 .. 643 Total for whole of India. 3,602 12,485 245 749 5,911* 19,508* 125 906 9,883 33,648 2,980 13,238 7. Imperial Serologist Calcutta. .. .. .. .... 4,747*** 15,062** .. .. .. .. 14,921246 CHAPTER X. Pharmacy and Drugs Control. 1. METHODS OF CONTROL. The report of the Drugs Enquiry Committee (1930-31) drew attention to the ineffectiveness of existing legislation to control the drug industry and to prevent the sale of impure, adulterated and misbranded pharmaceutical products. 2. Mere adulteration of drugs is not, by itself, prohibited throughout British India by any enactment. Apart from the commission of the offence of cheating, adulteration which renders the drug 'noxious' or `lessens the efficacy' or 'changes its operation' alone is controlled by the Indian Penal Code. Nor is the sale of a drug of insufficient strength or improper standard punishable otherwise than on the basis of misrepre- sentation and fraud. These expressions are vague and are of inconclusive import. The baneful results of adulteration or defective strength of drugs may be slow and gradual in making themselves evident. The non- existence of fixed standards or methods of analysis, the absence of any precise definition of adulteration, the difficulty of proof and the fact that intention or knowledge is of the essence of these offences, as well as of cheating, complicate the situation and render the provisions ineffective in actual practice. The offences are non-cognizable and no particular trained staff or well-equipped organization or machinery is entrusted with the special duty of keeping vigilant watch over cases of infringements of law and bringing the guilty to book. In penalizing false marks and false trade descriptions, the Indian Merchandise Marks Act and the Sea Customs Act merely touch the fringe of the problem of misbranding which is hydra- headed. Strict proof of difference in the nature or quality of the goods or the falsity of the description is often beset with impediments............ the provisions have, therefore, naturally remained practically inoperative. The Cantonments Act is also of limited scope and efficacy. Its provisions are equally vague and inadequate and are subject to similar infirmities as those of the Indian Penal Code. The Indian Sale of Goods Act, 1930, which is merely concerned with obligations of a civil nature and the other Acts already referred to are wholly inefficacious in securing foods and drugs of the opposite standard of strength, purity and quality. 3. A close study of the conclusions arrived at irresistibly points to the pressing need for immediate improvement of the situation in regard to the profession of pharmacy in India and to the manufacture, sale and import of drugs included in the British Pharmacopoeia as well as of those which are 'known and approved'. As described by some of the witnesses, the situation is chaotic in the extreme and calls for stringent measures to cope with it urgently. 4. The propriety of limiting freedom, in the interests of the public at large, by subjecting it to necessary control cannot be gainsaid. The claim for special and exceptional measures for strict control over the so called 'drugs of addiction' or habit-forming drugs as Indian hemp and
247 opium has been recognised. The International Opium Convention signed or ratified by every civilized nation in the world is directed against such drugs. The maintenance of the purity and strength of other drugs is a justifiable ground for grant of special protection. 5. Adulteration is generally the outcome of unhealthy competition to supply medicine at low prices. Under-strength in preparations labelled as poison is common, partly on account of the paucity of qualified chemists capable of testing them and partly on account of the desire to avoid untoward accidents. Such is the case with preparations like tinctures of nux vomica, digitalis and the liquid extracts of ergot and belladonna. The devices adopted are many, namely, (1) removal of the characteristic principle from essential oils (e.g., eugenol from oil of cloves, cineol from eucalyptus oil, santalol from sandalwood oil, menthol from oil of pepper- mint); flavouring of the terpene and sesquiterpene residues with such substances as benzaldehyde, cinnamic aldehyde, terpeneol, geraniol, and sale as essential oils; and mixture with mineral oils; (2) adulteration of expensive drugs such as cocaine, santonin, saccharine, quinine, caffeine, potassium iodide and thymol, with substances similar in appearance, e.g., cocaine with phenazone, aspirin, potassium nitrate, etc., santonin with boric acid; quinine with chalk, starch and other inert matter; potassium iodide with potassium bromide which is much cheaper; (3) use of inferior or damaged raw materials which are purchased at cheap rates; (4) use of preservatives permitting decrease in alcohol content, e.g., addition of carbolic acid, formaldehyde, salicylic acid (which are injurious in character); (5) importation of time-expired or stale drugs which are not saleable in the country of origin; (6) false and misleading labels as to quality and strength; and (7) adoption of fictitious names with the object of misleading the public. 6. As regard the profession of pharmacy, there are practically no restrictive laws of general application except certain perfunctory provisions in Municipal Acts of some of the Provinces relating to the registration and licensing of retail shops and the employment of compounders. 7. Biological products and organo-metallic compounds require special care in their manufacture as regards personnel and equipment, and their subsequent control by bio-chemical and biological assays. Equally great attention is required in regard to their import as they are peculiarly sus ceptible to defective conditions of transit and storage. (Paragraphs 2 to 7 above are quotations from the Report of the Drugs Enquiry Committee.) 8. In making a series of important recommendations the Committee stressed the need for immediate legislation to control the sale of drugs and the profession of Pharmacy, as well as for the establishment of a Central Laboratory, whose main functions would be to carry out research, to standardise methods of analysis and tests, and to undertake examina- tion of drugs sold in the market. Paragraphs 48, 204, 205, 207, 208 and 209 of the Drugs Enquiry Committee Report 1930.31 have been reproduced as Paras. 2 to 7 of this Chapter.
248 9. Since the publication of the report of the Committee the constitu- tional position in India has altered by the introduction of the Government of India Act, 1935. The responsibility for the control of the manufacture, storage and sale of drugs and medicines and for the education and registration of pharmacists and compounders now rests primarily with provincial Governments. Any effective steps to implement the recom- mendations of the Committee must therefore be taken by the provinces. 10. The Government of India in September 1937 introduced a Bill in the Legislative Assembly to regulate the import into British India of drugs and medicines. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill reads as follows:249 parts of India, and where necessary to hold standards, in connection with the following therapeutic substances which cannot adequately be tested by chemical means:250 4. Inspect licensed chemists' shops, manufacturing chemists, etc., by means of an inspecting staff of trained pharmacists whose reports should be dealt with by the Council and issued in the form of recommendations to the local authority con- cerned. The Pharmaceutical Council would be financed by251 Table showing particulars regarding Compounders. Province. Standard of Preliminary Education. Duration of Training. Place of Training. Examining Body. Scales of Pay. Rs. Madras . . . IV Form . . . 9 months . All City hospitals, District headquarters hospitals and hospitals in charge of Civil Surgeons. Secretary to the Commis- sioner for Government Examinations. 28252 Province. Standard of Preliminary Education. Duration of Training. Place of Training. Examining Body. Scales of Pay. Rs. Bihar . . . Matriculation or qualify- ing examination held previous to admission. 2 years. All Sadar and some other recognized hospitals, and Darbhanga Medical School Hospital, and Patna Medical College, Hospital. .. 20253 2. The Drugs Enquiry Committee recommended a comprehensive course of training which would provide a body of skilled pharmacists of equal standard to those who obtain the qualification of the Pharmaceuti- cal Society of Great Britain. The small rate of pay which obtains in all provinces would not justify a comprehensive course of three years' train- ing and neither would it appear that any reasonable increase of salary, to provide a highly skilled professional worker is possible with the limited available finances of India. Both Bengal and Madras have instituted advanced courses in Pharmacy, but they are not popular, mainly because the prospects for future remunerative employment are poor. 3. The probable solution would be to insist upon a reasonable standard of general education such as is guaranteed by passing the Matriculation examination of an Indian University, an adequate course of training, in- cluding apprenticeship of not more than 9254 Dec. 1932) suggests 20 grammes of quinine per case per year as a satis- factory basis of calculation. India's requirements would then be about seven times more than the estimate of the Public Health Commissioner or over four million pounds every year. Another report of the Health Organisation (C. H./Malaria/158, April, 1931) mentions that the world's consumption of quinine is approximately 600 tons per annum or 1,344,000 lbs., which is less than a third of the second estimate of India's require- ments. The actual consumption in India, according to the Public Health Commissioner, "has been remarkably steady at about 200,000 lbs. per annum, of which approximately 110,000 lbs. are imported and 90,000 lbs. are produced in India". Present consumption is therefore only a third of lower estimate of India's requirements and one-twentieth of the larger estimate. 3. India is largely dependant on foreign imports even for her present rate of consumption. Java produces quinine for the rest of the world and her potential supply is said to be about 1,400 tons or 3,136,000 lbs. "For many years past Java has produced approximately 97 per cent. of the total world supplies, India being responsible for about 2255 competition appears to be remote and, so long as the market price is largely controlled by foreign production, room for abuse of any system of free or cheap distribution will remain. 5. Lastly, a rigorous enforcement of law for the prevention of sale of adulterated quinine is essential. There is evidence to show that quinine pills placed on the market by certain firms contained little or no quinine and that, even in the case of certain post offices, the five-grain tablets sold to the public contained smaller quantities of the drug. The law requires strengthening and, what is more, an efficient organisation for enforcing the law has to be built up in the provinces. 6. In the foregoing paragraphs the problem has been presented in its barest outline. For a more detailed exposition of the subject reference may be made to Colonel A. J. H. Russell's paper, "Quinine Supplies in India", in the Records of the Malaria Survey of India, December, 1937. 7. In conclusion the position regarding quinine may be summed up in Colonel Russell's words, "The question of the provision of adequate treatment for the malarious sick in India is both wide and complex. It embraces such issues as the advisability of extending cinchona cultiva- tion, the most suitable species to be grown, the selection of areas suitable for their growth, economic repercussions arising from an extension pro- gramme, financial considerations, rights under the new constitution, organisation for the distribution of drugs and probably others that have not been mentioned. The question is one in which every province and State in India is intimately and gravely concerned". 4. MEDICAL STORES DEPARTMENT. There are four Medical Store Depots, located at Madras, Bombay, Calcutta and Lahore. They are administered by the Director-General, Indian Medical Service, on behalf of the Government of India, Defence Department. 2. These depots were originally established to ensure the supply of drugs, instruments and appliances, of uniform quality and pattern for the Army in India. In course of time their sphere of activity was extended and by a normal process of evolution civil medical institutions turned to them as the most reliable source of supply. 3. The Stores were, at first, only distributing centres. It was however discovered that some of the drugs could be more economically manufactured in India, than imported from abroad and in consequence Depots undertook to do pioneer work in manufacturing. The number of items manufactured gradually increased, especially during the War, and now there are at the Madras and Bombay Depots two modern and up-to- date factories, employing Indian labour capable of supplying all Govern- ment institutions in India with drugs and preparations of British Pharmacopoeia standard. At each of these factories there is employed a highly qualified advisory chemist, whose duties include the analytical examination of every preparation made in the Depot factory and all supplies received from outside to see that they are up to the prescribed
256 standard. They also examine all anaesthetics and drugs liable to deterio- ration immediately they are received from Europe and thereafter at frequent intervals. Further, as soon as it is found that a preparation of the required standard can be obtained in India at a rate not more than the cost of manufacture in the Depots, the manufacture of that particular item is discontinued and it is purchased locally. More than half the amount provided for purchase of stores is in this way spent on purchases made in India. Stores worth Rs. 11,52,131 were imported in 1936-37. while Stores worth Rs. 14,14,796 were purchased in India during the same period. There are many preparations made nowhere else in India. For example, in the Madras Depot are made the four preparations of Oleum Hydnocarpus, used in the modern treatment of leprosy, and it is believed that this is the only source in India from which these preparations can be procured at a reasonable rate. 4. It is not the policy of Government to compete with private enter- prise, neither is it the intention to make a profit from the Medical Stores Department although it is desirable that it should be as nearly self-sup- porting as possible. Private institutions are not encouraged to obtain their supplies from Medical Store Depots, but the experience of the past has proved that the Department was able to make good the deficiencies required for Civil purposes, and which were due to the failure or irregular supply of imported drugs. The Medical Store Depots therefore fulfil a useful and necessary func- tion, which may in time of crisis become vital.
257 CHAPTER XI. Medical and other Cognate Societies. 1. INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY. In August, 1914, when the Great War broke out, India found herself without a Red Cross organisation. The late Surgeon-General with the Government of India, Sir Pardey Lukis, devoted himself to the task of filling the gap. The St. John Ambulance Association was already doing good work in India, and Sir Pardey Lukis therefore grafted on to it a Red Cross Branch and so formed what was called the Indian Branch of the Joint War Committee (British Red Cross Society and St. John Ambulance Association). 2. Up to the end of 1917 this Committee largely depended upon funds provided by Great Britain to further its activities for the relief of the sick and the wounded of the Indian Army in India, Mesopotamia, Palestine and Egypt. At the end of 1917, the "Our Day" appeal for funds was made by Lord Chelmsford, in response to which over a crore of rupees were collected. This generous response enabled the Joint War Committee in India to be- come self-supporting, and when the Armistice was signed on November 11, 1919, a portion of the capital subscribed was still unspent. 3. The Indian Red Cross Society Act (Act XV of 1920) was therefore passed which set up an independent Indian Red Cross Society, and made provision for the administration of the surplus war funds by the Managing Body of the new Society. 4. Before leaving the subject of the Great War, a few details of the work done by the Indian Branch of the Joint War Committee may be of interest. Over 62 lakhs of rupees were spent in Mesopotamia alone on Red Cross stores and on transport. There was nothing the army called for which the Red Cross did not try to supply. When in Baghdad the electric cur- rent failed, the Red Cross supplied all hospitals with punkahs manipulated by small Arab boys. It also set up heatstroke stations which saved many lives in the heat wave of 1917. It provided ambulance transport for the wounded and before the end of 1916 there were 33 Red Cross launches on the rivers of Mesopotamia bringing down the wounded, in addition to many motor ambulances. In the Afghan Campaign of 1919 the Red Cross was again active and supplied comforts to all the frontier hospitals. Organisation and finance.258 enrolled in 11,360 school groups. Its headquarters are in New Delhi, housed in a spacious building donated by H. H. the Nawab of Junagadh. The Society has branches in every Province in India and in a number of Indian States, and these branches are again sub-divided into districts, so that there is a network of Red Cross centres all over India. At the end of 1936 there were 25 Provincial or State Branches, and 232 District and Sub- District Branches. 3. According to the provisions of Act XV of 1920, which established the Indian Red Cross Society, the Managing Body, after meeting expenses of management at the headquarters distributes all its income from invested funds among the Branches in the proportion in which the "Our Day" Fund was originally collected. The amount so distributed in 1936 was Rs. 2,19,600. Military Activities.259 7. Recently the Society was called upon to supply additional comforts to the sick and wounded of the Waziristan campaign (1936-37), and among the articles supplied have been lilo mattresses for stretchers, thermos bottles for cool drinks, anti-fly campaign materials and the usual hospital requi- sites. Child Welfare.260 which are in constant demand. Lantern slides on all the principal diseases are produced at headquarters and sold from the Red Cross Central Depot at New Delhi. This Depot also stocks a large amount of health literature such as posters, pamphlets and charts, and also literature on Red Cross organisation. 2. Many large cities in India organise an annual Health Week, often directly under the auspices of the Red Cross Society. Junior Red Cross groups also carry on health propaganda at rural fairs. Some Red Cross Branches (for instance, in Bombay Presidency) have organised travelling dispensaries which give medical relief to rural areas and also carry on health propaganda. The King George V Travelling Dispensary in Delhi Province was established by a grant from the Red Cross portion of the Silver Jubilee Fund. Junior Red Cross.261 which is spent annually on relieving distress caused by disasters. Pro- vincial Branches have also formed special "Relief Funds", and a portion of Red Cross income is annually devoted to this purpose. 2. Mention has already been made of the "Trained Nurses' Roll for Emergency or War", which supplies personnel for emergencies. These trained nurses are supplemented by the Ambulance and Nursing Divisions of the St. John Ambulance Brigade Overseas, whose members are trained in First Aid and Home Nursing. 3. Red Cross funds are used in time of disaster to supply nurses, hospi- tal supplies, clothing and even food if required. Some of the biggest emergencies with which the Society has had to deal were the Punjab Floods (1929) when funds to the extent of several lakhs were raised by the Punjab Red Cross for flood sufferers, Assam floods (1933), the Bihar earthquake (1934), the Quetta earthquake (1935) and the Bihta Train disaster (1937). 4. The reports of District Branches show that Red Cross assistance is frequently given in local emergencies due to famines, floods or epidemics, and all such help is much appreciated. Conclusion.262 service at the docks in Bombay, Karachi, Calcutta and Rangoon, by loading and unloading the sick to and from hospital ships and trains. Some mem- bers also rendered devoted service during the terrible influenza epidemic of 1918. 3. From 1911, since when proper records have been kept, the Indian Council has trained over 500,000 persons in the subjects mentioned above, the majority of whom have qualified in First Aid. In addition to students, who have been trained in large numbers, classes are organised among mili- tary and police forces, railway personnel, prison warders. miners and factory workers. 4. A large number of the railway staff in India has already been trained in First Aid and every year thousands of cases of injuries in the railway workshops are dealt with by those who hold First Aid certificates of the Association. The police force receives regular instruction in First Aid while under training at the Police Schools. Courses of instruction in Junior First Aid and Mackenzie School Course in First Aid, Hygiene and Sanitation are held in the boys' and girls' schools all over the country and numerous certi- ficates of proficiency have already been issued to those who have qualified for them. Valuable work is also being done in the Indian States, notably in Gwalior, Baroda and Mysore. The Criminal Tribes Settlements in the Punjab have also taken keen interest in First Aid training, and a large number of these people now possess First Aid and Home Nursing certifi- cates. Organisation and finance.263 Ambulance Stores Depot, New Delhi, which also stocks First Aid outfits, physiological diagrams, stretchers, splints, and bandages, etc. 2. Recently text-books on air raid precautions and anti-gas measures have been added to the stock as also demonstration respirators. It is pro- posed to start classes in air raid precautions. First aid Road Stations.264 The headquarters of the Districts now established are Lahore, Calcutta- Bombay, Madras, Bangalore, Lucknow and Nagpur besides one on the East Indian Railway. Eventually it is hoped to have a District in every Province of British India and in some of the important Indian States. Voluntary Aid Detachments.265 3. Medical tution was carried out by the Fund granting scholarships to young women willing to take up the profession of medicine, and by training nurses and midwives. 4. Medical Relief included the establishment under the superintendence of medical women of hospitals and dispensaries for the treatment of women and children; the opening of wards for women and children under female superintendence in existing hospitals and dispensaries and the provision of female medical officers for existing wards for women, as also the supply of trained nurses and midwives for women and children in hospital and private houses. 5. Apart from the above activities, the great achievement of the Asso- ciation was the manner in which it opened the eyes of the Indian public to the sufferings of their womenkind and showed them how they could organise and found a great national movement destined in time to bring relief to millions, and to draw into its working cadre hundreds of young Indian women who have given themselves freely to the service of their country as doctors, nurses and midwives. 6. Of the different provincial branches perhaps the one which showed it- self most active was that of the United Provinces. It built and equipped hospitals at Agra, Allahabad, Lucknow, Cawnpore and Benares, which were all placed under the charge of medical women of the first class. This Branch also employed an increasing number of women assistant and sub- assistant surgeons to take charge of smaller hospitals and of women's wards in Civil Hospitals. These were formed into a regular service, according to their grades and had definite rules for pay, promotion and leave. In addi- tion, the United Provinces Branch organised the Women's Medical School, Agra, in which it was generously assisted by the Central Committee. 7. The main activity of the Bengal Branch was the building and partial endowing of a Women's Hospital at Calcutta. 8. The Bombay Provincial Committee concentrated itself on organising and supporting a Nursing School at the Cama Hospital, Bombay. Later hospitals were opened at Shikarpur, Hyderabad, Karachi and Surat. 9. The Central Provinces Branch opened hospitals at Jubbulpore and Nagpur; the Berar branch at Amraoti, Akola, Shegaon and Yeotmal. 10. In Baluchistan hospitals were opened at Sibi, Quetta and Fort Sandeman; in Bihar at Gaya and Bhagalpur. The Dufferin Hospitals were usually organised by Local Committees which had collected funds locally and were assisted by grants from Provincial or Municipal Commit- tees. But the funds were generally too small to allow of sufficient staff or proper equipment and consequently most of the Dufferin Hospitals went through many vicissitudes and financial crises. The formation of the Women's Medical Service relieved the Local Committees of the task of providing salaries for their medical women and the money thus released was used in the improvement of the general staff and equipment of the hospitals.
266 11. The Jubilee of the Countess of Dufferin's Fund was celebrated in 1935 both in India and the United Kingdom. On that occasion Her Majesty Queen Mary sent the following message to the Marchioness of Willingdon, the then President of the Council:267 Director of the Maternity and Child Welfare Section of the All-India Insti- tute of Hygiene, Calcutta, but also by financing the whole of the Maternity and Child Welfare Section of the Institute including the Model Welfare Centre. 18. The money allotted to the Dufferin Fund from the Silver Jubilee Fund enabled the Committee to give substantial non-recurring grants for the improvement of the women's hospitals at Karachi, Vizagapatam, Allahabad, Shillong and Agra. Grants for much needed developments were also promised from this Fund to the Hospitals at Calcutta, Benares, Cawnpore, Akola, Amraoti, Nagpur and Jubbulpore. Plans were prepared for rebuilding on modern lines the Dufferin Hospital at Quetta which had been completely destroyed by the earthquake in 1935. A new hospital for women was opened at Shillong and was placed under the management of the Assam Branch of the Dufferin Fund. The Central Committee sanction- ed the appointment of a W. M. S. officer as Medical Superintendent of this hospital and gave generous grants towards its equipment and for building House Surgeon's quarters. 19. The plans for a new and up-to-date Dufferin Hospital at Calcutta to replace the old and obsolete one were completed. It is hoped that this new hospital when built, will form a Centre for a Post-graduate school for medical women and for Research Work. 20. During 1936 the Central Committee of the Dufferin Fund gave much consideration to schemes for improving the nursing service in Dufferin hos- pitals. It was fully realised that improvement can only be brought about by raising the status of the nursing profession by attracting to it a better class of girl and by offering her better conditions under which to live and train. With this object in view the Committee sanctioned grants to certain hospitals from the Silver Jubilee money to help them to build and furnish new quarters for nurses, to improve the teaching equipment in training schools for nurses, to employ better qualified sisters in training schools and to enable nurses trained in India to take administrative courses in certain large training schools for nurses. Only the fringe of this important problem has been touched so far, but it is hoped these small beginnings will develop into a big movement which will lead eventually to a nursing service in our Dufferin hospitals compar- able to those in advanced European countries. 21. There is great need in every direction for expansion in the work of the Association. There is practically no medical aid to women in the vast rural areas of India and many more hospitals and dispensaries for women are wanted in the towns and cities. Also the existing institutions ought to be modernised and brought up to present day standards both as regards equipment and staffing. There is enormous scope for the National Association for ministering to the physical welfare of the women of India, but the Dufferin Fund can do little unless more financial help is forthcoming either from the Government or from private philanthropic sources.
268 THE WOMEN'S MEDICAL SERVICE. The formation of the Women's Medical Service for India was the out- come of the following factors:269 in the Indian Red Cross office as Director of the Maternity and Child Welfare Bureau. The remainder of the members were employed as executive officers in charge of hospitals in various parts of India. 7. Indianisation of the Service is being carried out. At the end of 1936 the Cadre consisted of:270 and the misery of it so well known that the appeal far funds which followed the inauguration of the Indian Council evoked a generous measure of res- ponse from the princes and the people of India. A Capital Fund of Rs. 20,25,000 was created of which the annual income, viz., Rs. 1,22,000, was made available for furthering the objects of the Association. This income was reduced by Rs. 11,000 in 1932 owing to the conversion opera- tions of the Government Securities, but it has been made up by a generous donation of Rs. 3,13,000 received from the Indian Red Cross Society from its share of Their Majesties' Silver Jubilee Fund. 4. The Indian Council set to work against a combination of difficulties. The extent of leprosy was an unknown quantity, the knowledge of its incidence and endemicity imperfect, social conditions adverse and above all age-long superstition and prejudice formed a barrier which custom and ignorance stiffened from day to day. The programme of work was accordingly carefully planned so that the limited resources might be utilized to the best advantage. The first task was to create an atmosphere which would remove the apathy of the public towards the problem and stimulate interest in the new ideas about the disease which is no longer held to be beyond the physician's aid, but definitely within scientific control. To achieve this object a three-fold programme was adopted. It was decided that on the one hand research work must be intensified, and on the other people should be educated with regard to the main facts about the causation, prevention and treatment of leprosy and the means of obtaining the latest treatment of the disease. 5. The actual execution of this programme is apportioned between the headquarters and the provincial branches. Research, propaganda and training of doctors, which benefit the country as a whole, are in the charge of headquarters while the provincial branches are responsible for the pro- vision of treatment to lepers and other objects of purely local scope, for which purpose about 50 per cent. of the entire income of the Association is made available to them. This is supplemented by grants from local Governments and local bodies, etc. 6. Research work has been carried on at the School of Tropical Medicine Calcutta, in co-operation with the authorities of the School and the Indian Research Fund Association. It has cost the Association a total sum of Rs. 2,73,000 during the last twelve years to end of 1936. Propaganda has been carried on by the publication of a variety of pam- phlets, leaflets, posters, films and slides to educate the public to an appreciation of the true facts relating to leprosy. A quarterly journal "Leprosy in India" has been published to provide a medium for the exchange of ideas and experiences of the workers in the field of leprosy. A sum of about Rs. 89,000 has been spent on propaganda since the inception of the Association. Special courses of instruction in the diagnosis and treatment of leprosy have been held at Calcutta and Dichpali at which about 900 doctors from all over India and abroad have received instruction at a total cost of Rs. 78,000 to the Association. Until 1933 the travelling expenses of doctors attending these courses were paid by the Association, but now all such expenses are met by the doctors themselves or by those nominating them for the course. These specially trained doctors have in turn given
271 instruction to many doctors; and doctors with modern knowledge about the diagnosis and treatment of the leprosy are not now difficult to find in any province. 7. An extensive survey of selected areas was started by a special Survey Party in 1927 to find out the relative incidence of leprosy in different parts of India, the classes of people among whom it is most rife and the causes. which underlie the high incidence. This work cost the Association a sum of Rs. 87,300 and the Party was dissolved at the end of 1931 after it had collected valuable data on the subject. 8. The work of the provision of treatment of lepers is undertaken by the 17 Provincial and State Branches of the Association all of which are doing good work within the limits of their financial resources. A large number of patients is now seeking treatment at the treatment clinics numbering over 1,100, and every Branch reports the beneficial results obtained after a regular and sufficiently long course of treatment. Such remarks as patients "discharged", "cured", "non-infectious", "symptom free", "disease arrested", "apparently cured", "decidedly improved", etc., are becoming quite common and when it is remembered that thousands of lepers are now under proper treatment and that one "cured" or "improved" case brings within the purview of the treatment centres more than a hundred disheartened lepers may be considered a hopeful sign in the campaign for the eradication of leprosy from India. That the British Empire Leprosy Relief Association has been able to play a part in hearten- ing up a class of people suffering from age-long depression and distress encourages it to take an optimistic view of the future of the work before it. List of Provincial and State Branches of the British Empire Leprosy Relief Association (Indian Council). Approximate number of leprosy clinics. Number of Leper Hospitals. 1. Assam 202 8 2. Baluchistan . . . . . . 3. Bangalore 1 . . . 4. Bengal 200 5 5. Bihar 63 6 6. Bombay 38 12 7. Burma 12 4 8. Central India 22 1 9. Central Provinces 32 7 10. Hyderabad British Administered Areas 2 1 (Dichpali). 11. Madras 433 9 12. Mysore 6 1 13. North-West Frontier Province 2 . . . 14. Orissa 16 2 15. Punjab 80 6 16. Rajputana 7 . . . 17. United Provinces 3 15 18. Western India States Agency 5 1 Total 1,124 78
272 MEMBERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE LEPROSY RELIEF ASSOCIATION (INDIAN COUNCIL). 1. Colonel A. J. H. RUSSELL, C.B.E., K.H.S., I.M.S. (Chairman). 2. The Hon'ble Kunwar Sir JAGDISH PRASAD, C.S.I., C.I.E., O.B.E. 3. The Hon'ble Sir MUHAMMAD ZAFRULLAH KHAN, Bar.-at-Law. 4. Sir ERNEST BURDON, K.C.I.E., C.S.I., I.C.S. 5. Major-General E. W. C. BRADFIELD, C.I.E., O.B.E., K.H.S., I.M.S. 6. Major-General G. G. TABUTEAU, D.S.O., K.H.S., A.M.S. 7. Lieut.-Colonel H. H. ELLIOT, M.B.E., M.C., M.B., F.R.C.S., I.M.S. 8. The Hon'ble Khan Bahadur Dr. Sir NASARVANJI CHOKSY, C.I.E. M.D. 9. The Hon'ble Rai Bahadur L. RAMSARAN DAS, C.I.E. 10. Dr. R. D. DALAL, C.I.E., M.L.A. 11. Mr. A. H. BYRT. 12. Mr. U. N. SEN, C.B.E. 13. Mrs. TODD. 14. Mr. A. D. MILLER. 15. Dr. R. G. COCHRANE, M.D., M.R.C.P. 16. Dr. JOHN LOWE, M.B., Ch.B. 17. Mr. K. K. CHETTUR, (Honorary Treasurer). 18. Sardar Bahadur BALWANT SINGH PURI, O.B.E. (Honorary Secretary). 5. LADY MINTO'S INDIAN NURSING ASSOCIATION. The Lady Minto's Indian Nursing Association was founded in 1892 under the title of the "Up Country Nursing Association" primarily, though not exclusively, to provide Europeans with the skilled services of the Nurs- ing profession. In those days it was very difficult273 3. The financial liabilities of the Association are met from five sources:274 2. In 1920 Her Excellency Lady Willingdon formed a general nursing Association known as the South Indian Nursing Association. Her scheme was to establish a system of nursing throughout South India after the model of Lady Minto Indian Nursing Association; to supply properly train- ed private nurses and midwives, at a scale of fees which would just make the Association self-supporting. The two Associations were amalgamated in 1920, and since then have carried out useful work throughout the Madras Presidency. 3. No subsidy is received from the Madras Government but the Lady Minto Association pay annually a sum of Rs. 5,000, an agreed proportion of its Government grant. 7. INTERNATIONAL HEALTH DIVISION OF THE ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION IN INDIA. According to its rules the Rockefeller Foundation co-operates only with official bodies. In the field of public health it co-operates with govern- ments in the development of general public health activities and the study and control of certain diseases. The International Health Division of the Rockefeller Foundation began its co-operative work in India in the Madras Presidency in 1920 and in the beginning confined its activities to the treatment and prevention of hook- worm disease. It is generally recognized that hookworm disease is a suitable point of attack as it is easily treated with effective drugs and as its prevention automatically prevents all soil borne diseases including other intestinal parasites, enteric fever, dysentery and cholera. This work still continues as a routine activity of the public health department but the assistance rendered in the beginning by the International Health Division has long since been withdrawn. The Division does not contri- bute towards the maintenance of work but towards its inauguration in the early stages. When the work is established, financial assistance is gradu- ally withdrawn. The present co-operative work of the International Health Division is carried out in the States of Mysore and Travancore and in the Provinces of Madras, United Provinces and Delhi. These activities consist of: train- ing of medical officers by means of fellowships, special research in malaria, and assistance to demonstration health unit organizations amongst rural and semi-rural populations. 2. Fellowships.275 To further facilitate the training of officers, the Foundation assisted financially in establishing the All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health in Calcutta, but the maintenance and administration of the Insti- tute is carried on by the Government of India. Up to the end of 1936, sixty medical and scientific officers had been given fellowships. The candidates were proposed by the States of Mysore and Travancore and by the Provinces of Madras, Coorg, Assam, Bihar, Central Provinces, United Provinces, Delhi Province, the Punjab and by the Indian Research Fund Association, the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, the All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health and the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy. With a few exceptions all fellows have been Indians. 3. Research in Malaria.276 operate with governments, which are permanent establishments, and to assist them in developing men and methods to meet the enormous health problems with which the country is faced. 8. KING GEORGE THANKSGIVING (ANTI-TUBERCULOSIS) FUND. Tuberculosis control in India has developed slowly as compared with countries of the West and is still in its infancy. The creation of an All- India Organization for tuberculosis control as at present represented by the King George Thanksgiving Fund, was the result of a slow and gradual realisation of the increasing importance of tuberculosis as a killing and disabling disease. In 1927 Lord Irwin, Viceroy and Governor-General of India, realised the gravity of the problem and wished to form a central organisation on the model of the National Tuberculosis Association of Great Britain. The opportunity came in 1929 when the recovery of His Majesty the late King Emperor George V from a serious illness evoked very warm felicitations from his subjects throughout the Empire. In India they found loyal expression in the form of a Thanksgiving Fund for the alleviation and pre- vention of disease. The Fund amounted to over Rs. 9½ lakhs and His Excellency the Viceroy appointed a small Advisory Committee consisting of the Hon'ble Member for Education, Health and Lands Department, Director-General, Indian Medical Service, and the Public Health Commis- sioner with the Government of India, to advise him on the merits of the various schemes submitted to him for utilisation of the Fund. After fullest consideration the Committee recommended that an anti-tuberculosis scheme was the one that was most likely to be of real service to India. Their recommendation was adopted in consultation with official and no-official opinion in different provinces. 2. The administration of the Fund was handed over to the Indian Red Cross Society for anti-tuberculosis work in India. The work was entrusted to an ad hoc committee, who appointed an Organising Secretary as their technical and propaganda officer. Thus came into being a special anti- tuberculosis organisation now known as the King George Thanksgiving (Anti-Tuberculosis) Fund. 3. The Fund is the nucleus of anti-tuberculosis campaign and represents the national effort for fight against tuberculosis. The Director-General, Indian Medical Service, is the Chairman and is assisted by a Committee of 12 members, both official and non-official including ladies. All its activities are conducted on the interest of the Fund (Rs. 53,000 a year). The income being limited, it is devoted at present entirely to prevention and educational measures. The following is a review of the main activities. Provincial and State Branches.277 Propaganda and Publicity.278 Anti-Tuberculosis Conferences.279 (10) Suitably furnished Nurses' Quarters should be provided, with adequate sanitary accommodation, and messing arrangements, in charge of a Home-Sister or other competent management. (11) No nurse should be expected to work more than a 60 hour week. (12) The Sister Tutor system should be encouraged. Every Train- ing School, with over 150 beds should aim at employing a Sister Tutor and more Preliminary Training Schools should be founded. A minimum standard of education should be established for proba- tioners on entry. There should be adequate facilities for the theoretical and practical side of the nurse's training. There should also be adequate nursing Representation on the Examining Boards. (13) There should be facilities for recreation when the nurses are off duty. (14) It is inadvisable that married women should be allowed to retain their posts in hospital. (15) The definition of a trained nurse shall be as stated in the bye- laws of the Trained Nurses' Association of India. "A Trained NurseThe following formula was forwarded to provincial Administrative Medical Officers for working out "Average cost per in-patient per month" in the case of hospitals and dispensaries included in Appendix I. "Divide the total expenditure of the hospital of each category for 1937 by the daily average number of in-patients during that year and then divide the result by twelve.". It has been found impossible to calculate the average cost according to the formula given above in all cases; the figures in the column relating to average cost are, therefore, not comparable.
281 APPENDIX I. STATISTICS REGARDING HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES IN BRITISH INDIA. S
282 Province283 (Others.) Government Hospital, Tiru- vannamalai. G General 30 35.44 319.98 1 5 11 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Scudder Memorial Hospital, Ranipet. MN ,, 110 60.19 73.20 52 13 0 3 .. 1 .. 4 24 4 4 6 Mission Hospital, Sholinghur MN ,, 39 15.00 66.70 1 12 0 1 .. .. .. 4 .. .. .. 1 Mission Ashram Hospital, Tiruppattur. MN ,, 65 65.00 70.00 .. .. 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. 12 SOUTH ARCOT DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Cuddalore. G ,, 108 138.74 247.64 25 2 5 5 2 .. .. 6 .. 2 3 .. (Others.) Government Hospital, Chidam- baram. G ,, 22 45.39 285.56 25 7 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Mission Hospital, Vadathra- salur. MN ,, 173 159.00 39.00 6 10 5 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mission Hospital, Tirukkoyilur MN ,, 64 6.00 117.00 408 3 1 3 .. .. 2 7 .. .. .. .. BELLARY DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Bellary. G ,, 96 100.24 61.57 1 12 4 3 1 .. .. 6 .. .. .. .. Government Women and Children Hospital, Bellary. G Women 20 21.35 27.10 1 3 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. (Others.) Nil s 2
284 Province285 (Others.) Government Hospital, Tiru- pati. G ,, 31 37.14 193.06 39 8 0 2 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Government Hospital, Ma- danapalle. G ,, 28 32.37 186.89 40 6 4 2 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. American Evangelical Lutherin Mission Hospital, Renigunta. MN ,, 34 29.70 25.00 74 0 0 5 .. 1 .. 4 .. 4 .. 4 Wesleyam Mission Hospital, Nagari. MN ,, 32 30.00 84.15 15 7 5 1 .. .. .. .. 3 3 .. 1 Mary Lott Lyles Hospital, Madanapalle. MN Women 80 46.00 89.10 21 0 0 4 .. 1 1 7 10 .. .. .. COIMBATORE DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Coimbatore. G General 193 301.10 680.67 29 0 8 6 9 .. 1 9 4 2 7 .. Police Hospital, Coimbatore G Men 36 12.40 19.04 38 1 8 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Government Hospital286 Province287 WEST GODAVARI DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Ellore. G ,, 50 65.30 475.88 36 0 0 4 1 .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. (Others.) Government HospitalCategories289 Lady Goschen Hospital, Man- galore. (Others.) G Women 60 97-25 260.85 2920 2 1 .. .. 3 .. 2 9 .. Government Hospital, Udipi. G General 30 44.07 227.48 31107 2 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Government Hospital, Puttur. G " 20 19.00 116.91 5285 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. KISTNA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Masulipatam. G General 109 179.01 238.33 1808 5 .. .. .. 7 .. 2 .. .. (Others.) Government Hospital, Bez- wada. G " 53 51.93 244.15 40110 3 .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. Mission Hospital, Vuyyur. MN Women 50 37.00 37.00 12000 2 .. 1 .. 4 .. 1 .. .. Mission Hospital, Nuzvid. MN General 45 26.00 20.00 9000 2 .. 1 1 2 16 .. .. .. KURNOOL DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Kurnool. G " 100 109.18 163.70 31121 5 1 .. .. 6 .. 1 .. .. St. Teresa Hospital, Kurnool MN Women 40 40.00 150.00 .. 1 .. .. 6 6 3 9 3 ..
290 TABLE I291 (Others.) Government Hospital, Periya- kulam. G General 34 41.82 76.08 37 12 9 2 1 .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. Government Hospital, Dindi- gul. G " 20 31.57 123.76 45 9 7 2 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. MALABAR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Calicut. G Men 177 192.53 598.59 9 13 6 6 7 .. 1 3 14 .. .. .. Government Women and Children Hospital, Calicut. G Women 114 168.45 224.20 31 2 3 3 2 .. .. 7 .. 2 7 .. (Others.) Government Hospital, Cannanore. G General 62 78.78 221.90 34 5 2 3 1 .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. Government Hospital, Palghat. G " 73 109.67 207.28 28 8 2 3 2 .. .. 3 .. 1 .. .. Government Hospital, Ponnani. G " 26 37.34 225.02 39 0 0 2 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Government Hospital, Manjeri. G " 42 66.76 241.77 26 13 1 2 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Government Police Hospital, Malapuram. G Men 36 13.19 19.06 77 9 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Local Fund Hospital, Chow- ghat. DB General 28 18.54 121.65 1 1 6 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Local Fund Hospital, Perin- talamanna. DB " 22 23.78 129.32 42 0 0 1 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. ..
292 TABLE I293 THE NILGIRIS DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Governmet Headquarters Hospital, Ootacamund. G General 102 93.51 172.02 2 9 2 4 4 .. 1 7 .. 1 .. .. Lawrence Memorial School Hospital, Lovedale. P " 67 9.40 71.94 .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others). Government Lawley Hospital, Coonoor. G " 54 92.98 173.37 2 2 3 4 .. .. .. 4 .. 1 6 .. Government Hospital, Gudalur. G " 32 27.11 38.05 1 6 0 2 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. RAMNAD DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Ramnad. G General 37 62.34 235.74 30 10 6 3 .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. St. Martins Hospital, Ramnad MN Women 80 50.30 78.90 19 8 0 3 .. .. 1 4 13 .. 7 .. (Others.) Swedish Mission Hospital, Tirupattur. MN General 110 100.07 164.7 39 0 0 6 .. 1 2 5 20 .. .. 3 Women and Children Hos- pital, Kanadu-Kathan. DB Women 32 30.33 50.17 10 10 3 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. ..
294 TABLE I295 (Others.) Government Hospital, Nega- patam. G " 84 87.37 312.69 1 0 6 4 .. .. .. 3 .. 2 .. .. Government Hospital, Kumbakonam. G " 92 93.25 169.13 30 13 9 4 1 .. .. 3 .. 1 .. .. Government Hospital, Mayavaram. G " 24 27.19 229.18 48 5 4 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Government Hospital, Mannargudi. G " 42 53.00 230.82 31 14 9 2 1 .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. St. Ann's Women and Children Hospital, Kumbakonam. MN Women 65 76.33 110.92 22 2 0 2 .. 1 2 .. .. 5 .. .. TINNEVELLY DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Palamcottah. G General 68 90.20 283.26 34 11 0 4 4 .. .. 4 .. .. .. .. (Others.) Government Women and Children Hospital, Van- narpet. G Women 43 45.28 113.82 35 6 10 2 .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. Government Hospital, Tuti- corin. G General 50 57.22 469.16 57 12 9 4 2 .. .. 3 .. 2 .. .. St. Lukes Hospital, Nazareth MN " 36 30.19 75.84 1 8 0 2 .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. 1 Society for Preaching Gospel Immanual Hospital, Idayangudi. MN " 25 6.02 65.73 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. ..
296 TABLE I297 Victoria Hospital for Women and Children, Vizaga- patam. P Women 66 28.61 22.53 3 0 0 4 .. 1 1 3 5 .. .. .. (Others.) Maharaja's Hospital, Viziana- garam. P General 34 33.9 604.04 2 8 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Maharani's Gosha Hospital, Vizianagaram. P Women 20 10.65 153.26 3 4 6 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. MADRAS DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government General Hospi- tal, Madras. G General 678 775.70 1,368.54 75 13 0 27 57 1 12 42 115 .. .. 2 Government Rayapuram Hospital, Madras. G " 354 534.65 1,114.72 44 5 0 18 16 1 1 17 41 .. .. 1 Government Royapettah Hospital, Madras. G " 100 132.70 605.73 53 15 8 5 12 1 .. 9 .. .. .. .. Victoria Caste and Gosha Hospital, Madras. G Women 172 239.40 309.60 58 4 8 7 .. 1 2 17 30 .. 14 .. Government Hospital for Women and Children, Madras. G " 265 283.39 204.84 82 2 6 11 21 1 4 27 62 3 47 .. Kalyani Hospital, Mylapore, Madras. MN " 112 84.00 66.00 34 9 9 4 1 1 1 9 10 11 4 .. T Christina Rainy Hospital, Tandairpet, Madras. MN " 106 102.00 70.00 20 0 0 4 .. 1 1 12 27 6 6 ..
298 TABLE II. Province299 SOUTH ARCOT DISTRICT. Government 3 General 48 63.12 490.00 1 12 9 6 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. District Board 2 " 32 26.35 368.41 1 3 5 3 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Private 1 " 6 0.21 37.00 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Missionary 1 " 12 19.00 60.00 11 12 0 2 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 2 BELLARY DISTRICT. Government 3 General 34 39.02 278.05 2 1 4 4 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Government 1 Women 12 11.50 41.98 1 1 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 2 General 18 9.90 79.48 2 15 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. CHINGLEPUT DISTRICT. Government 2 General 16 0.96 29.14 1 6 11 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. CHITTOOR DISTRICT. Government 2 General 22 9.35 274.83 115 2 8 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. District Board 1 " 6 3.25 76.81 108 10 10 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. COIMBATORE DISTRICT. Government 4 General 64 75.69 870.29 53 11 8 8 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Municipal 1 " 10 12.16 272.92 79 11 4 2 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 5 " 30 27.38 686.08 105 13 3 5 1 .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. T 2
300 TABLE II301 GUNTUR DISTRICT. Government 2 " 22 20.70 721.30 193 0 0 4 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. District Board 3 " 18 12.30 558.00 319 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. SOUTH KANARA DISTRICT. Government 2 " 19 27.94 274.83 60 1 7 2 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. District Board 9 " 50 35.75 1,424.29 257 10 11 9 2 .. .. .. .. 9 .. .. KISTNA DISTRICT. Government 3 " 22 27.96 641.21 92 15 10 7 1 .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. District Board 4 " 27 22.90 619.17 86 0 5 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. Missionary 1 " 16 9.00 39.00 18 0 0 2 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. Missionary 2 Women 31 42.00 44.00 18 9 5 3 .. .. 2 .. .. 1 .. .. KURNOOL DISTRICT. Government 3 General 16 17.52 287.88 194 7 10 3 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. District Board 5 " 15 3.39 486.25 44 3 0 5 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. Missionary 1 " 14 8.00 837.00 85 4 0 2 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 MADURA DISTRICT. Government 4 General 48 59.56 225.90 50 5 6 4 1 .. .. 1 .. 4 .. .. Municipal 5 " 64 43.36 183.53 48 0 9 5 .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. District Board 3 " 20 20.28 187.31 69 2 7 3 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. Private 1 " 11 8.41 30.58 10 6 8 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 " 15 2.30 25.12 105 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
302 TABLE II303 Municipal 1 Women 10 4.07 90.63 74 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 1 General 4 4.77 164.05 46 2 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 1 Women 7 5.09 224.89 23 9 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Private 2 General 29 10.12 78.50 48 9 7 2 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. SALEM DISTRICT. Government 6 General 64 44.63 1,024.35 214 13 0 9 .. .. .. .. .. 6 .. .. District Board 9 " 52 22.27 1,003.77 345 8 1 9 .. .. .. .. .. 10 .. .. TANJORE DISTRICT. Government 2 General 26 26.63 257.74 117 9 3 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. District Board 5 " 48 25.87 526.29 194 12 0 5 .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. TINNEVELLY DISTRICT. Government 2 General 20 9.53 283.28 114 5 6 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Municipal 1 " 12 4.84 186.08 204 9 8 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. District Board 4 " 38 28.97 496.41 211 1 0 5 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. Missionary 4 " 27 3.48 225.45 24 1 9 4 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. TRICHINOPOLY DISTRICT. Government 1 General 8 6.13 110.46 87 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 4 " 16 2.96 406.54 531 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. Missionary 8 " .. 0.30 20.00 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. ..
304 TABLE II305 Province306 TABLE III307 Municipal 3 " 988.24 593 15 0 5 3 .. 1 .. District Board 15 " 1,097.50 282 13 5 15 .. .. 13 .. CUDDAPAH DISTRICT. Government 1 " 89.29 360 0 0 1 .. .. 1 .. Municipal 1 " 291.24 198 0 0 1 .. .. 1 .. District Board 7 " 127.77 259 0 0 7 .. .. 7 .. Private 11 " 48.57 95 0 0 11 .. .. 6 .. EAST GODAVARI DISTRICT. Government 3 " 113.25 317 0 0 3 .. .. 1 .. Municipal 2 " 434.04 376 0 0 2 .. .. 1 .. District Board 58 " 5,111.36 160 0 0 58 .. .. 35 .. Private 2 " 137.30 209 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 " 106.12 291 0 0 1 .. .. 1 .. WEST GODAVARI DISTRICT. Government 1 " 150.26 441 0 0 1 .. .. 1 .. District Board 26 " 505.23 190 5 9 26 .. .. 12 .. Private 1 " 24.22 149 6 8 1 .. .. .. .. GUNTUR DISTRICT. Government 1 " 103.50 427 0 0 1 .. .. 1 .. Municipal 1 Women 110.80 270 0 0 1 .. .. 1 ..
308 TABLE III309 KURNOOL DISTRICT. Government 1 " 29.96 381 0 0 1 .. .. 1 .. Municipal 2 " 400.59 592 0 0 2 .. .. 1 .. District Board 11 " 1,003.09 2,167 7 0 11 .. .. 2 .. Private 11 " 451.76 721 15 0 11 .. .. 1 .. Missionary 2 " 65.00 150 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. MADURA DISTRICT. Government 1 " 4.43 232 2 11 1 .. .. .. .. Municipal 6 " 285.98 321 14 2 6 .. .. 5 .. District Board 29 " 902.29 202 11 4 30 .. .. 25 .. Private 1 " 53.49 579 11 8 .. .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 " 0.90 46 7 3 .. .. .. .. MALABAR DISTRICT. Municipal 7 " 1,239.13 1,969 0 0 5 2 .. 4 .. District Board 34 " 1,621.26 4,680 1 2 34 .. .. 26 .. Private 3 " 76.37 716 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. NELLORE DISTRICT. District Board 19 " 1,212.33 4,026 1 8 19 .. .. 16 ..
310 Province311 Private 1 " 35.00 175 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 " 26.00 281 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. TANJORE DISTRICT. Municipal 4 " 929.76 1,702 1 7 4 .. .. 1 .. District Board 65 " 3,676.61 10,889 5 7 65 .. .. 50 .. TINNEVELLY DISTRICT. Municipal 4 " 487.79 1,218 0 0 4 .. .. 2 .. District Board 42 " 2,504.00 6,644 0 0 43 .. .. 26 .. Private 2 " 122.47 308 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. Missionary 2 " 46.00 217 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. TRICHINOPOLY DISTRICT. Municipal 4 " 1,333.00 529 0 0 6 .. .. .. .. District Board 34 " 719.00 204 0 0 34 .. .. 20 .. VIZAGAPATAM DISTRICT. Government 7 " 369.37 343 1 10 7 .. .. 3 .. Municipal 4 " 748.43 328 8 7 4 .. .. 1 .. District Board 46 " 2,487.32 132 5 2 46 .. .. 15 .. Private 1 " 65.00 200 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. MADRAS DISTRICT. Municipal 16 " 291.90 510 7 8 16 .. .. 16 32
312 TABLE IV. Province313 Leper Asylum, Vadathorasalur MN " 173 156.65 39.00 7 3 3 1 .. .. .. 1 Local Fund Hospital314 Categories315 Brahmadesam DB ,, .. .. 3.25 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Avalurpet DB ,, .. .. 8.14 .. 1 .. .. .. .. BELLARY DISTRICT. Wellesley Sanatorium, Jail, Bellary. G Tuber- culosis. 160 65.80 .. 20 15 0 2 .. .. .. .. Headquarters Hospital, Bellary G ,, .. .. 5.42 .. .. No separate staff. X-Ray & Raidum. .. 2.35 1.26 .. 1 .. .. .. .. CHINGLEPUT DISTRICT. Headquarters Hospital, Chingle- put. G Leprosy .. .. 0.43 .. 4 .. .. .. 2 Government Hospital, Conjee- varam. G ,, .. .. 118.53 .. 3 .. .. .. 2 Government Dispensary316 Categories317 CHITTOOR DISTRICT. Government Hospitals (5) G Venereal Diseases. .. .. 25.60 Leprosy .. .. 85.4 The various clinics attached to the existing hospitals have no special staff sanctioned to them, and no separate account is main- tained for them. Local Fund Hospitals (12) DB ,, .. .. 130.8 Mission Hospital MN ,, .. .. 7.5 W. M. Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Madanapalle. MN Tuber- culosis. 236 230.10 .. 55 0 0 5 .. 1 1 11 COIMBATORE DISTRICT. Headquarters Hospital, Coim- batore. G Ophthal- mic. 20 50 125 .. 1 1 .. Venereal diseases. 19 20 35 .. .. 1 .. Ear, Nose & Throat. .. 4 45 .. .. 1 .. Dentistry .. 1 16 .. .. 1 .. 1 13 Tuber- culosis. 20 20 15 .. .. 1 .. Leprosy .. .. 30 .. 1 .. .. Infectious diseases 4 3 1 .. .. .. .. CUDDAPAH DISTRICT. Ohio Luthern Mission Leper Asylum, Kodur. MN Leprosy 45 47 12 5 6 5 1 .. .. .. ..
318 Categories319 Headquarters Hospital, Guntur G Ear, Nose & Throat. 8 0.06 12.7 .. .. 1 .. .. . Dentistry .. 0.01 2.26 .. .. .. .. .. .. Tuber- culosis. 12 0.58 1.22 .. .. .. .. .. .. Leprosy .. .. 0.28 .. .. .. .. .. .. Government Hospital320 Categories321 KISTNA DISTRICT. Headquarters Hospital, Masuli- patam. G Ophthal- mic. .. 1.76 6.48 Venereal diseases. 10 27.88 2.63 Ear, Nose & Throat. .. 0.86 6.25 Dentistry .. 0.55 2.43 .. 5 .. .. .. 7 Tuber- culosis. 10 13.01 0.74 Leprosy .. .. 0.16 Infectious diseases. 6 0.67 3.52 MADURA DISTRICT. Headquarters Hospital, Madura G Ophthal- mic. 20 35.41 172.88 .. 1 1 part-time. .. .. 3 Venereal 18 .. 95.75 .. .. 2 .. .. 1 Ear, Nose & Throat. .. .. 65.55 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Dentistry .. .. 19.16 .. .. 1 part-time. .. .. .. Tuber- culosis. 4 .. .. .. 1 part-time. .. .. .. 1 part-time. Leprosy .. .. 167.00 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Infectious diseases. 25 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. Mental There is accommodation for 2 civil lunatics for observation. No separate statistics. X-Ray & Radium. .. .. .. .. 1 X-Ray is attached to the Hospital. No separate statistics available.
322 Categories323 Tirupparangumdram Dis- pensary. DB 324 Categories325 Local Fund Dispensary326 Categories327 Venereal .. 6.29 18.66 34 11 0 .. 1 .. .. .. Ear, Nose & Throat. .. 0.17 9.64 34 11 0 .. 1 .. .. .. Leprosy .. .. 21.80 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Government Hospital328 Categories329 Government Hospital330 Province331 MADRAS DISTRICT. Government General Hospital, Madras. G Venereal 34 46.70 158.91 75 13 0 4 5 1 3 8 Ear, Nose & Throat. 27 19.20 175.12 75 13 0 2 3 .. .. 2 Dentistry .. .. 76.32 .. 1 2 .. .. 1 Tuber- culosis. 21 24.03 3.40 75 13 0 11 15 1 3 2 Leprosy 6 3.50 175.20 75 13 0 1 2 .. .. 3 Infectious diseases. 20 8.35 12.75 75 13 0 26 26 .. .. 3 X-Ray & Radium. 47 28.6 .. 75 13 0 26 26 .. .. 3 Barnard Institute of Radio- logy, Madras. G ,, .. .. 318.05 1 5 3 8 .. .. .. 6 Victoria Caste and Gosha Hos- pital, Madras. G Ophthal- mic.. .. 0.03 9.07 2 1 0 Venereal .. 0.35 2.4 2 1 0 Ear, Nose & Throat. .. 0.39 5.2 2 1 0 6 1 1 2 17 Dentistry .. 0.005 1.14 2 1 0 Leprosy .. .. 0.18 .. Infectious diseases. .. 0.04 0.05 2 1 0 Government Ophthalmic Hospital, Madras. G Ophthal- mic. 170 289.19 352.72 33 15 0 13 1 1 1 7 Government Hospital for Women and Children, Mad- ras. G Venereal 4 5.64 7.43 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Leprosy .. .. 0.56 .. .. .. .. .. .. X2
332 Province333 Province334 Province335 Bomanjee Dinshaw Petit Parsee General Hospital. P '' 208 99.0 7.0 110 0 0 6 16 1 10 2 20 2 .. .. Adams Wylie Memorial Hos- pital and Bai Motlibai Wadia Out-door Dispen- sary. P '' 69 47.0 75.0 35 7 0 1 2 1 .. .. 3 .. .. .. Parsee Lying-in Hospital P Women 50 30.0 .. 120 0 0 1 5 1 .. .. 5 3 .. .. Bombay Presidency Infant Welfare Society's Maternity Home, Delisle Road. P '' 32 25.0 47.0 43 2 0 1 2 .. 2 1 .. .. 4 .. Bombay Presidency Infant Welfare Society's Maternity Home, Worli. P '' 32 22.0 20.0 47 8 0 1 2 .. 2 1 .. .. 5 .. BOMBAY SUBURBAN DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Nil. (Others.) Sir C. J. R. Dispensary and the K. B. Bhabha Hospital, Bandra. MP General 30 24.0 93.1 68 0 0 1 1 .. 1 2 .. .. 9 .. THANA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Vithal Sayana Civil Hospital, Thana. G General 50 40.2 89.5 55 8 0 3 .. .. 1 1 4 .. .. .. (Others.) Dahann Mission Hospital . MN '' 30 27.0 65.0 23 0 0 1 .. .. 1 2 5 2 3 1
336 Province337 KARWAR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Karwar G ,, 39 33.4 141.3 58 12 0 4 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 .. .. POONA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sir David Sassoon and Jacob Sassoon Hospitals, Poona. G ,, 300 261.9 195.4 80 3 0 15 11 1 14 6 51 .. 9 .. King Edward Memorial Hos- pital, Poona. P Women 40 40.6 96.1 37 8 0 2 1 1 .. 2 .. 2 15 .. St. Margarett Mission Hos- pital, Poona. MN ,, 105 95.0 50.0 35 0 0 3 .. 1 3 5 19 2 6 .. N. M. Wadia Mission Hos- pital, Poona. MN General 100 72.0 26 29 12 0 1 .. 1 .. 2 6 2 .. 3 St. John's Mission Hospital, Poona (Panch Haud), MN ,, 40 38.1 52 24 2 0 1 1 1 1 2 3 6 .. .. (Others.) Dr. Sirdesai's Talegaon General Hospital, Talegaon (Dabhade). P ,, 44 22.0 28.0 0 14 0 1 10 .. .. 1 1 .. .. 4 (excluding diet). Ashwood Memorial Hospital, Dhond. M ,, 20 10.5 55.0 73 8 0 2 .. 1 .. 2 .. 1 .. 1 Ramabai Mukti Mission Hos- pital, Kedgaon. MN ,, 50 3.0 3.0 0 3 0 Not given 1 1 5 1 .. .. (excluding diet).
338 Province339 Canada Mission Hospital, Nasik. MN ,, 74 57.0 36.0 Not known 3 .. 1 4 2 21 .. 4 .. Cantonment General Hos- pital, Nasik. P 340 Province341 DHARWAR DISTRICT. (At Head-quarters.) Civil Hospital, Dharwar G ,, 56 43.7 130.6 93 9 0 4 5 .. .. 3 .. 2 2 .. (Others.) Maternity Hospital, Gadag MP Women 20 15.8 89.6 44 5 0 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 3 .. .. Municipal Hospital, Gadag MP General 24 10.8 112.8 69 0 0 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Chitguppi Hospital, Hubli MP ,, 41 53.7 156.3 37 4 0 2 .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. Co-operative Hospital, Hubli P ,, 24 16.0 128.0 51 14 0 1 5 .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. Indian Christian Mission Hospital, Haveri. MN ,, 20 15.5 41.5 3 3 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Basel Mission Hospital, Gadag, Betgeri Hospital, Gadag. MN ,, 100 85.0 163.0 36 0 0 3 .. .. 3 3 14 1 .. 4 BIJAPUR DISTRICT. (At Head-quarters.) Civil Hospital, Bijapur G General 64 60.6 170.3 39 10 0 5 1 .. .. 2 .. 3 .. .. SURAT DISTRICT. (At Head-quarters.) Civil Hospital, Surat G ,, 52 45.8 134.1 51 9 0 3 4 1 .. 1 .. 2 .. .. R. D. Tarachand Parsi Hos- pital, Surat. P ,, 25 27.0 106.0 136 8 0 2 .. 1 1 .. .. 2 3 ..
342 Province343 (Others.) New General Hospital, Anand P ,, 30 1.0 15.0 30 0 0 1 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 .. 2 Emery Hospital, Anand MN ,, 100 140.0 130.0 2 6 0 3 .. 1 2 4 7 .. .. 10 Irish Mission General Hos- pital, Anand. MN ,, 70 31.0 55.0 83 0 0 2 .. 1 .. 8 .. 8 .. 7 American Methodist Mission Hospital, Nadiad. M 344 Province345 Province346 Province347 AHMEDNAGAR DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 14 1.3 106.0 354 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 10 ,, 45 6.3 526.0 219 10 0 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. NASIK DISTRICT. Government 1 ,, 4 0.1 10.2 2,412 15 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 6 ,, 37 11.0 492.0 276 10 0 6 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 .. .. District Board 8 ,, 30 5.7 525.3 770 0 0 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 Women 15 0.6 .. 1 6 0 .. 2 1 1 .. 2 1 2 .. WEST KHANDESH DISTRICT. Government 1 General 2 0.3 10.2 529 5 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 5 ,, 32 5.2 502.1 396 12 0 5 .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. District Board 4 ,, 18 2.0 225.1 226 4 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 Women 18 13.0 38.0 2 4 0 2 .. .. .. 4 .. .. .. .. EAST KHANDESH DISTRICT. Municipal 9 General 63 22.8 1047.1 1,143 1 0 9 .. .. .. 5 .. 3 .. .. District Board 5 ,, 29 9.7 554.3 714 4 0 5 .. .. .. 3 .. 2 .. .. SATARA DISTRICT. Government 1 ,, 18 2.8 33.5 672 0 0 2 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Municipal 7 ,, 34 17.3 483.2 179 13 0 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. District Board 6 ,, 23 4.9 305.8 461 15 0 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Missionary 2 ,, 22 6.5 60.1 136 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
348 Province349 BIJAPUR DISTRICT. Municipal 4 General 21 11.0 367.7 109 10 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. District Board 8 ,, 45 10.4 338.3 236 4 0 8 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. SURAT DISTRICT. Government 2 ,, 6 1.2 150.4 Not stated 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 3 ,, 24 12.9 517.7 363 0 0 4 .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. District Board 10 ,, 54 5.9 740.5 499 8 0 10 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Private 2 ,, 15 4.2 223.7 821 0 0 2 3 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. KAIRA DISTRICT. Municipal 7 ,, 63 23.0 762.7 176 9 0 8 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. District Board 1 ,, 8 0.7 63.2 224 1 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BROACH AND PANCH MAHALS DISTRICTS. Municipal 3 ,, 7 7.0 173.0 Not given 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 10 ,, 36 14.7 510.3 99 15 0 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. AHMEDABAD DISTRICT. Government 2 ,, 24 4.8 159.5 264 13 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Municipal 8 (7) General and (1) Women 66 28.8 711.0 308 13 0 8 .. .. .. 1 .. 3 .. .. District Board 2 General 12 0.9 41.6 306 0 0 2 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. Private 1 ,, 5 3.0 4.0 Not given 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Missionary 1 ,, 4 2.0 150.0 Do. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
350 TABLE III. Province351 KARWAR DISTRICT. Government 1 ,, 27.0 129 8 0 1 .. .. .. .. POONA DISTRICT. Government 2 ,, 130.2 215 6 0 2 .. 1 .. .. Municipal 9 ,, 961.9 233 0 0 9 .. .. 2 .. AHMEDNAGAR DISTRICT. District Board 2 ,, 128.0 253 4 0 2 .. .. .. .. Missionary 6 ,, 107.0 162 0 0 6 .. 5 .. .. NASIK DISTRICT. Government 1 ,, 110.0 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Private 2 ,, 137.5 143 8 0 2 .. .. 1 .. WEST KHANDESH DISTRICT. Municipal 1 ,, 282.2 440 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. EAST KHANDESH DISTRICT. Government 2 ,, 144.8 120 1 0 2 .. .. .. .. District Board 2 ,, 268.3 243 10 0 2 .. .. 1 .. SATARA DISTRICT. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
352 TABLE III353 BIJAPUR DISTRICT. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil SURAT DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 225.5 276 13 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 2 ,, 95.2 251 8 0 2 .. .. .. .. (1) Men Private 9 (1) Women 1,710.0 507 6 0 7 3 .. .. .. (7) General KAIRA DISTRICT. District Board 4 General 194.8 227 8 0 4 .. 3 .. .. BROACH AND PANCH MAHALS DISTRICTS. (4) General Municipal 5 and 175.0 126 13 0 5 .. .. 1 .. (1) Women. District Board 2 General 102.1 185 12 0 2 .. .. .. .. AHMEDABAD DISTRICT. Municipal 12 ,, 1,046.5 392 10 0 14 .. .. 11 1 (8) General 1,017.6 391 14 0 10 .. 1 1 3 Private 9 (1) Women Missionary 1 General 43.0 Not given 1 .. .. .. ..
354 Categories355 BOMBAY SUBURBAN DISTRICT. E. F. Albless Leper Home, Trombay. P Leprosy 62 35.0 .. 14 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. THANA DISTRICT. Mental Hospital, Naupada, Thana. G Mental 318 419.3 .. 20 10 0 3 1 1 .. 1 KOLABA DISTRICT. Leper Hospital, Pui MN Leprosy 58 68.3 .. 7 15 0 .. .. .. .. .. Leper Hospital, Poladpur MN 356 Categories357 Lady Polworth Home, Nasik. MN '' 22 21.9 .. 7 9 0 1 .. .. .. 1 WEST KHANDESH DISTRICT. No Special Clinics or Hospitals. EAST KHANDESH DISTRICT. Free Eye Hospital, Chalisgaon P Ophthal- mic. 25 19.0 160.0 111 12 0 3 .. .. .. .. SATARA DISTRICT. Sir William Wanless Tubercu- losis Sanatorium, Miraj. MN Tuber- culosis. 154 146.0 .. 48 0 0 5 .. .. 1 10 Bel-Air Sanatorium, Panchgani P '' 135 114.0 .. Not available 4 .. 1 .. 10 SHOLAPUR DISTRICT. Sakharam Nemchand Eye Hos- pital and Dispensary, Shola- pur. P Ophthal- mic. 20 10 60 Not available 1 5 .. .. 3 Sholapur Leper Hospital. MN Leprosy 75 65 .. 10 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. BELGAUM DISTRICT. Belgaum Leper Hospital. MN Leprosy 40 42.5 .. 7 8 0 .. 1 .. .. .. DHARWAR DISTRICT. Ophthalmic Clinic, I. W. A. S. Hospital, Hubli. P Ophthal- mic. .. .. 20 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Mental Hospital, Dharwar. G Mental 171 205.5 .. 13 5 0 3 .. .. .. ..
358 Categories359 BROACH AND PANCH MAHALS DISTRICTS. No Special Clinics or Hospitals. AHMEDABAD DISTRICT.; Parvatibai Eye Hospital, Ahmedabad. P Ophthal- mic. 50 37.0 150.0 24 11 0 2 1 .. .. .. Charitable Eye Hospital, Char Rasta, Ahmedabad. P '' 20 15.0 50.0 22 2 0 1 3 .. .. 1 Eye Hospital Ellis Bridge, Ahmedabad. MN ,, 20 11.0 10.0 27 3 0 2 .. .. .. 1 Dr. Anklesaria's Eye Hospital, Ahmedabad. P '' 40 15.0 .. 11 4 0 3 .. .. .. .. Talwalkar Sanatorium, Ahmedabad. P Tuber- culosis. 12 3 .. 30 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. Kagrapeth Leper Hospital, Ahmedabad. G Leprosy 95 98.2 0.1 10 8 0 1 .. .. .. .. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Kaukaria. MP Infectious diseases, 30 0.4 .. 9 8 0 No permanent staff. Medical Officers are deputed when there are cases in the hospital. Parvatibai Home for incurables P '' 22 Not available .. 1 .. .. .. Mental Hospital, Ahmedabad G Mental 167 282.7 .. 14 1 0 3 .. .. .. 1 Note.360 Categories361 Carmichael Medical College Hospital, Belgachia. P '' 448 338.38 489.07 70 0 0 11 44 1 .. 86 .. .. .. .. Lady Dufferin Victoria Hos- pital. P Women 136 108.43 71.24 67 0 0 6 .. 1 8 2 30 14 .. .. Police Hospital, Calcutta G Men 260 99.8 4.50 .. 10 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Rai Bhagabandas Bagala Bahadur Marwari Hindu Hospital. P General 50 .. .. .. 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Chetla Maternity Home MP Women 40 33.00 20.50 46 0 0 1 .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. Baldeodas Maternity Home MP '' 35 44.80 72.40 56 0 0 1 .. .. .. 5 .. .. .. .. Kidderpore Maternity Home MP '' 24 33.14 64.30 49 0 0 1 .. .. .. 4 .. .. .. .. Maniktola Maternity Home MP '' 20 2.84 Nil. 435 0 0 1 .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. BURDWAN DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Fraser Hospital P General 150 111.96 173.02 23 0 0 12 3 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 3 Police Hospital G Men 44 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) L. M. Hospital, Asansol MP General 26 20.19 36.06 39 0 0 1 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. U. F. C. Mission Hospital, Kalna. MN '' 76 55.41 65.28 32 0 0 3 .. .. 2 3 8 .. .. .. BIRBHUM DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadar Hospital, Suri MP General 34 11.36 61.11 43 0 0 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Police Hospital, Suri G Men 20 6.41 5.62 14 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil.
362 Categories363 (Others.) Contai Hospital P General 25 11.55 97.67 40 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 HOOGHLY DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Imambara Sadar Hospital P General 88 67.27 93.61 46 0 0 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Hooghly G Men 88 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Uttarpara Hospital G General 20 10.29 72.35 69 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Serampore Welsh Hospital MP ,, 85 43.45 75.07 32 0 0 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Bhadreswar Jute Mills Hos- pital. P ,, 54 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. HOWRAH DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) General Hospital, Howrah P General 199 161.83 288.10 59 0 0 13 20 1 5 18 5 .. .. .. Police Hospital, Howrah G Men 104 73.8 7.4 31 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24-PARGANAS DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Police Hospital, Alipore G Men 64 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Shambunath Pandit Hospital G General 106 120.91 288.19 60 0 0 6 7 1 2 5 20 .. .. .. Z 2
364 Categories365 Police Hospital, Krishnagar G Men 46 28.36 4.53 11 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 (Others.) Ratanpur Mission Hospital MN Women 68 60 85.73 17 0 0 2 .. 1 .. 4 8 3 .. .. Ranaghat C. M. S. Mission Hospital. MN General 114 100 193.42 37 0 0 2 .. .. 3 4 11 .. .. 10 Krishnagar C. E. Z. Mission Hospital. MN Women 55 55 10.11 30 0 0 2 .. 1 .. 6 10 .. 2 3 MURSHIDABAD DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Berhampore Sadar Hospital MP General 107 101.56 199.20 36 0 0 3 7 1 .. 3 .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Berhampore. G Men 34 17.12 7.3 42 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Kandi Hospital P General 28 14.71 88.67 35 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. JESSORE DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadar Hospital, Jessore MP General 30 28.81 68.68 30 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Police Hospital, Jessore G Men 52 14.95 8.17 38 0 0 1 .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. KHULNA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Woodburn Sadar Hospital, Khulna. MP General 49 27.53 67.03 53 0 0 1 4 .. .. .. .. 1 1 3 Police Hospital, Khulna G Men 32 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
366 Categories367 MYMENSINGH DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) S. K. Hospital, Mymensigh MP General 124 105.71 151.45 33 0 0 7 10 1 .. 4 7 .. .. .. Police Hospital, Mymensingh G Men 42 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Tangail Hospital MP General 22 9.60 99.91 48 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Netrokona Hospital P 368 Province369 (Others.) Brahmanbaria Hospital MP 370 Province371 RANGPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Rangpur Sadar Hospital MP General 59 39.51 90.73 31 0 0 6 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Rangpur G Men 31 13.79 8.35 32 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil BOGRA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadar Hospital, Bogra MP General 22 14.31 81.24 30 0 0 3 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Bogra G Men 20 8.03 4.39 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil PABNA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Pabna Sadar Hospital MP General 30 27.95 104.35 43 0 0 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Serajganj Victoria Hospital MP 372 Province373 Province374 Province375 District Board 2 ,, 24 18.95 122.07 41 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Private (Non-aided) 4 ,, 42 4.99 218.84 210 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. HOWRAH DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 8 0.49 16.80 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 2 General 21 11.35 57.84 173 0 0 2 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 3 District Board 4 ,, 18 2.67 182.95 409 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Private (Aided) 1 ,, 12 5.84 70.76 53 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24-PARGANAS DISTRICT. Government 2 General 26 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 4 ,, 21 6.65 242.80 377 0 0 6 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Private (Aided) 1 ,, 19 16.57 98.30 59 0 0 2 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. NADIA DISTRICT. Municipal 5 General 48 30.25 375.90 52 0 0 5 .. .. .. 1 .. 5 .. .. District Board 2 ,, 12 5.47 129.53 92 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. MURSHIDABAD DISTRICT. Municipal 4 General 35 13.79 249.18 63 0 0 5 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. JESSORE DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 2 0.45 44.19 351 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 4 ,, 42 15.35 285.66 93 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. Private (Non-aided) 1 ,, 5 0.03 17.81 5,852 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
376 Province377 Private (Non-aided) 1 ,, 15 13.86 166.05 41 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. FARIDPUR DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 17 6.97 94.03 49 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 1 ,, 18 4.34 37.02 66 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Private (Aided) 1 ,, 16 6.85 50.56 41 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BAKARGANJ DISTRICT. District Board 1 General 10 7.98 64.12 58 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. CHITTAGONG DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 15 5.71 31.37 68 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 1 ,, 12 0.005 67.06 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. TIPPERAH DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 16 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 1 Women 4 1.90 63.59 111 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. NOAKHALI DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 12 6.01 4.14 49 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 2 General 16 12.80 161.17 246 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. ..
378 TABLE II379 RANGPUR DISTRICT. District Board 3 General 32 12.54 165.59 92 0 0 7 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. BOGRA DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 4 0.44 61.27 343 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. PABNA DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 14 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. MALDA DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 8 0.79 83.49 618 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. DARJEELING DISTRICT. Government (Class I) 1 General 11 4.14 24.70 49 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Government (Class II) 1 Men 10 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 1 General 14 13.08 37.60 44 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 1 ,, 13 4.79 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 4 .. .. .. ..
380 TABLE III. Province381 District Board. (Village) 5 ,, 215.37 93 0 0 5 .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 1 ,, 25.05 114 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 2 ,, .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. Union Board 17 ,, 499.28 71 0 0 17 .. .. .. .. BANKURA DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 33.78 99 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 8 ,, 486.86 159 0 0 8 .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 1 ,, 52.74 195 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 2 ,, .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. Union Board 5 ,, 141.67 167 0 0 5 .. .. .. .. MIDNAPORE DISTRICT. Government 1 General .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Municipal 4 ,, 309.38 145 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. District Board 29 ,, 1,940.83 211 0 0 29 .. .. 1 .. Private (Aided) 2 ,, 52.90 81 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 7 ,, .. .. 7 .. .. .. .. HOOGHLY DISTRICT. Municipal 4 General 136.64 160 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. District Board 13 ,, 932.34 196 0 0 14 .. 1 .. .. District Board. (Village) 1 ,, 70.87 151 0 0 1 .. .. .. ..
382 TABLE III383 Private (Aided) 1 ,, 43.22 140 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 4 ,, .. .. 4 .. .. .. .. NADIA DISTRACT. Municipal 3 General 98.19 107 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. District Board 30 ,, 1,673.10 164 0 0 31 .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 4 ,, 122.97 99 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 6 ,, .. .. 6 .. .. .. .. Missionary 2 ,, .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 Women .. .. 1 .. 3 .. .. Union Board 16 General 639.35 92 0 0 16 .. .. .. .. MURSHIDABAD DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 47.05 .. 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 10 ,, 644.85 175 0 0 10 .. .. .. .. District Board. (Village) 1 ,, 46.07 70 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 8 ,, .. .. 8 .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 ,, .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Union Board 17 ,, 709.33 180 0 0 17 .. .. .. .. JESSORE DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 46.51 130 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 11 ,, 485.67 138 0 0 12 .. .. .. ..
384 TABLE III385 Municipal 2 ,, 159.03 194 0 0 2 .. .. 1 .. District Board 27 ,, 2,309.08 171 0 0 27 .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 5 ,, 212.08 86 0 0 5 .. .. 1 .. Private (Non-aided) 8 ,, .. .. 8 .. .. .. .. Union Board 11 ,, 401.78 112 0 0 4 .. ... .. .. MYMENSINGH DISTRICT. District Board 55 General 2,508.78 182 0 0 55 .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 2 ,, 33.37 54 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 16 ,, .. .. 16 .. .. .. .. Union Board 46 ,, 1,246.07 57 0 0 46 .. .. .. .. FARIDPUR DISTRICT. District Board 21 General 544.70 122 0 0 21 .. .. .. .. District Board. (Village) 21 ,, 513.65 77 0 0 21 .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 12 ,, 343.51 77 0 0 12 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 1 ,, .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Union Board 7 ,, 136.69 90 0 0 7 .. .. .. .. BAKARGANJ DISTRICT. Municipal 2 General 168.34 183 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. District Board 32 ,, 2,407.78 194 0 0 32 .. .. 1 ..
386 TABLE III387 Missionary 1 " .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Union Board 15 " 471.33 103 0 0 15 .. .. .. .. NOAKHALI DISTRICT. District Board 17 General 973.54 138 0 0 17 .. .. .. .. District Board.(Village) 7 " 203.04 67 0 0 7 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 1 " .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. RAJSHARI DISTRICT. District Board 24 General 509.84 135 0 0 24 .. .. .. .. District Board.( Village) 3 " 47.81 104 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 18 " .. .. 18 .. .. .. .. Union Board 8 " 162.49 33 0 0 8 .. .. .. .. DINAJPUR DISTRICT. District Board 30 General 1,824.17 188 0 0 30 .. .. .. .. District Board.(Village) 1 " 44.45 142 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 11 " 547.11 121 0 0 11 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 5 " .. .. 5 .. .. .. .. Union Board 2 " 45.61 130 0 0 2 .. .. .. ..
388 TABLE III389 Private (Aided) 2 " 80.52 144 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 1 " .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Union Board 10 " 376.57 98 0 0 10 .. .. .. .. PABNA DISTRICT. District Board 13 General 723.00 174 0 0 13 .. .. 1 .. Private (Aided) 8 " 278.38 112 0 0 8 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 1 " .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Union Board 15 " 651.86 218 0 0 15 .. .. .. .. MALDAH DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 32.66 92 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 9 " 288.06 197 0 0 9 .. .. .. .. District Board. (Village) 2 " 61.81 98 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. Private (Aided) 3 " 201.07 128 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 5 " .. .. 5 .. .. .. .. Union Board 8 " 251.83 105 0 0 8 .. .. .. .. DARJEELING DISTRICT. Government (Class I) 3 General 118.00 227 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. Government (Class II) 3 " .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 24.85 110 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. Private (Non-aided) 2 " .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. Missionary 2 " .. .. 2 .. .. .. ..
390 TABLE IV. Province391 Albert Victor Leper Asylum, Gobra. P Leprosy Information not available. Bengal Cancer Institute, Calcutta. P X-Ray & Radium. Information not available. BURDWAN DISTRICT. Raniganj Leper Asylum. MN Leprosy 168 155 304 9 0 0 1 .. .. .. 7 BANKURA DISTRICT. Bankura Leper Home. MN Leprosy 236 260 .. 6 0 0 1 1 .. .. .. HOWRAH DISTRICT. Howrah General Hospital. P Tubercu- losis. .. 20 .. .. 2 2 .. .. 3 Salkia Infectious Diseases Hospital. MP Infectious diseases. 18 9.57 Nil 104 0 0 1 .. .. .. 1 DARJEELING DISTRICT. S. B. Dey Sanatorium and Hospital. P Tubercu- losis. 24 4 .. 165 0 0 1 3 .. .. 1 Lewis Jubilee Sanatorium Hospital. P " 258 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
392 TABLE I. Province393 Dufferin Hospital, Allahabad P Women 78 47.62 76.56 2 8 0 3 .. .. 2 5 .. .. 11 .. (Others.) Nil. ALIGARH DISTRICT. (At Headquarters). Sadr Hospital, Aligarh. DB General 126 70.78 205.68 16 6 0 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Aligarh. G Men 44 10.74 12.15 10 5 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Dufferin Hospital, Aligarh. P Women 35 26.82 60.11 39 15 0 2 .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. (Others.) Hathras Dispensary. MP General 28 8.62 140.40 0 6 10 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. AZAMGARH DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Azamgarh. DB General 36 33.23 228.32 33 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mission Hospital, Azamgarh. MN " 40 38 30 30 0 0 3 .. 1 .. 1 7 .. .. .. Police Hospital, Azamgarh G Men 24 8.32 3.11 0 9 9 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others). Nil. ALMORA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Almora. DB General 28 15.04 121.05 56 5 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others). Nil. 2B
394 TABLE I395 BENARES DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) K. E. VII Hospital, Benares DB General 89 70.55 268.65 30 15 11 3 9 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 6 Police Hospital, Benares. G Men 60 10.15 10.81 6 11 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Bhelupur Hospital DB General 30 5.99 163.04 85 1 9 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BIJNOR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Bijnor DB General 40 21.94 197.70 42 5 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. BULANDSHAHR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) P. W. Hospital, Bulandshahr DB General 58 32.90 169.01 36 1 5 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. L. H. Zenana Hospital, Bulandshahr. P Women 24 1.67 69.2 132 10 9 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Khurja Dispensary DB General 22 7.34 115.51 37 14 7 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Sikandrabad Dispensary DB " 24 12.56 125.54 24 14 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BALLIA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Ballia DB General 40 25.45 106.17 29 15 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. 2B2
396 TABLE I397 BAHRAICH DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Bahraich. DB General 48 22.78 170.31 47 3 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Dufferin Hospital, Bahraich P Women 22 12.09 83.19 39 10 8 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. BARABANKI DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Barabanki. DB General 35 28.97 196.98 34 7 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Grigg Female Hospital, Bara- banki. P Women 27 15.56 68.53 30 7 3 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. (Others.) Nil. CAWNPORE DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Ursula Horsman and Prince of Wales Hospital, Cawn- pore. G General 116 94.27 664.55 40 2 8 3 5 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Cawnpore. G Men 50 19.80 7.92 7 11 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Dufferin Hospital, Cawnpore P Women 52 50.95 73.06 37 10 11 3 .. 1 1 5 .. 2 4 .. (Others.) Nil. DEHRADUN DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Dehradun. DB General 24 24.49 140.54 44 14 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
398 TABLE I399 ETAWAH DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Etawah DB General 50 36.93 346.55 27 4 8 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Etawah G Men 24 7.37 11.69 50 14 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. FARUKHABAD DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Fatehgarh DB General 47 32.92 160.19 29 11 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Civil Hospital, Farukhabad. MP 400 TABLE I401 Police Hospital, Ghazipur. G Men 20 5.67 2.15 15 6 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. GORAKHPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Gorakhpur. DB General 83 84.68 312.12 39 12 6 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9 Police Hospital, Gorakhpur. G Men 46 17.67 7.77 6 6 9 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Dufferin Hospital, Gorakhpur P Women 52 34.37 78.33 48 12 9 2 .. 1 .. 4 .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. GONDA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Gonda. DB General 27 32.76 290.14 41 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Memorial Hospital, Balram- pore. P ,, 20 22.19 284.75 51 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 GARHWAL DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) (Others.) Nil. Srinagar Dispensary G General 20 6.22 43.44 110 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Chamoli Dispensary G ,, 21 4.71 28.00 123 9 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
402 TABLE I403 Police Hospital, Orai G Men 25 6.91 8.11 21 5 7 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. JHANSI DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Jhansi DB General 48 30.39 290.36 40 12 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Jhansi G Men 27 13.75 13.70 8 7 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Acharman Hoyat Memorial Hospital, Jhansi. MN General 50 33 28.5 69 0 0 3 .. 1 1 4 12 .. 5 .. (Others.) The Grant Zenana Hospital, Lalitpur. MN Women 63 47 175 13 8 0 .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. .. .. Mauranipur Dispensary DB General 26 12.10 119.51 41 7 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. JAUNPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Jaunpur DB General 48 34.71 141.56 2 6 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. LAKHIMPUR-KHERI DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Kheri DB General 43 33.68 215.57 24 12 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Dufferin Hospital, Kheri P Women 22 3.35 34.58 93 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil.
404 TABLE I405 MEERUT DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) L. P. Hospital, Meerut DB General 81 73.96 269.65 25 1 11 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Meerut G Men 44 8.91 9.42 2 3 7 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Dufferin Hospital, Meerut P Women 44 27.44 154.56 45 6 7 2 .. .. .. 4 2 1 .. .. (Others.) Nil. MIRZAPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Mirzapur DB General 50 32.65 192.79 34 2 8 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Mirzapur G Men 20 4.90 6.23 72 0 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Kachwa Mission Hospital MN General 85 40 48 76 7 4 3 .. 1 2 3 18 5 .. 9 (Others.) Nil. MORADABAD DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Moradabad DB General 72 53.62 239.64 30 15 10 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Victoria Zenana Hospital, Moradabad. P Women 25 29.23 65.15 12 14 8 1 .. .. .. 2 1 1 .. .. Police Hospital, Moradabad. G Men 35 14.33 45.34 25 9 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. The Salvation Army Thomas Emery Hospital, Moradabad. MN General 47 40 62 3 14 0 2 .. .. 3 5 .. .. .. 3 (Others.) Lukes Hospital, Umedpur. MN 406 TABLE I407 NAINITAL DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Ramsay Hospital, Nainital P General 33 8.84 2.06 774 7 0 1 .. 1 5 5 8 .. .. .. Crosthwaite Hospital, Naini- tal. MP 408 TABLE I409 Dufferin Hospital, Shahjahan- pur. P Women 26 11.07 89.65 7 2 0 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. (Others.) Tilher Dispensary DB General 34 35.72 210.79 7 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SITAPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Sitapur. DB General 45 2.65 97.10 302 13 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Dufferin Hospital, Sitapur P Women 28 1.68 26.82 418 4 0 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. (Others.) Khairabad Dispensary DB General 41 6.50 96.93 87 5 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SULTANPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Sultanpur DB General 24 16.43 196.88 58 9 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. UNAO DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Sadr Hospital, Unao DB General 30 24.08 227.32 34 10 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Police Hospital, Unao G Men 22 10.52 10.91. 48 5 9 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. 2c
410 TABLE II. Province411 Private 2 412 TABLE II413 Municipal 1 " 8 9.48 31.71 118 3 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 7 " 22 9.44 350.11 2,600 15 2 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. DEHRA DUN DISTRICT. Government 3 2 General 21 0.88 49.23 566 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Men Municipal 3 2 General 26 4.92 12.82 123 8 11 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Women District Board 3 2 General 23 16.01 119.58 59 2 9 3 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 Women Private 2 General 22 9.59 103.54 218 10 2 1 .. 1 .. 4 2 .. .. .. ETAH DISTRICT. District Board 7 General 47 24.44 593.13 64 9 0 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 8 .. 90.8 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ETAWAH DISTRICT. District Board 8 General 53 39.47 711.14 40 8 1 9 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. FARRUKHABAD DISTRICT. District Board 7 General 70 42.36 754.77 38 13 1 7 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Private 2 " 16 8.50 206.12 97 2 4 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
414 TABLE II415 GORAKHPUR DISTRICT. Government 1 General 2 0.07 115.99 4,229 3 8 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 12 " 83 38.31 1626.04 129 6 6 12 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. GONDA DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 13 7.64 6.22 22 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 7 General 58 4.58 124.00 97 0 0 7 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Private 6 " 35 3.37 59.04 141 0 0 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. GARHWAL DISTRICT. Government 5 General 49 2.2 15.3 186 4 11 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 9 " 59 2.15 37.33 168 8 11 9 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. HAMIRPUR DISTRICT. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. HARDOI DISTRICT. District Board 8 General 81 36.28 816.91 636 8 1 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. JALAUN DISTRICT. District Board 4 General 40 21.76 485.47 49 14 9 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. JHANSI DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 4 4.84 7.29 0 12 4 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 5 General 39 16.31 468.10 94 11 4 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private Women 4 1.80 116.98 136 15 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
416 TABLE II417 MIRZAPUR DISTRICT. District Board 5 General 44 1.09 454.67 1,260 6 4 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 women 15 1.09 43.90 300 8 7 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. MORADABAD DISTRICT. District Board 11 General 74 37.49 1,078.12 342 10 10 11 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. MUZAFFARNAGAR DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 14 0.54 6.41 219 14 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 8 General 73 31.53 714.26 7 10 0 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. MUTTRA DISTRICT. Government 1 General 1 0.14 22.3 0 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 8 " 57 29.01 524.24 207 10 6 8 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. MAINPURI DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 16 8.41 7.07 14 12 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 6 General 29 2.79 278.98 8,119 6 0 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. NAINITAL DISTRICT. Government 2 General 14 3.57 22.94 44 3 6 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 2 women 21 2.94 20.99 2,614 2 0 2 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 6 1 women 44 2.04 40.92 439 11 6 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 General
TABLE IISAHARANPUR DISTRICT. Government 2 General 6 0.141 111.58 2,719 1 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Men 2 0.002 33.83 20 5 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 Women 6 7.54 47.46 39 15 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 6 General 27 17.86 787.69 940 10 11 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 Women 15 12.28 61.66 58 2 3 1 .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. SHAHJAHANPUR DISTRICT. District Board. 4 General 29 5.07 118.79 12 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SITAPUR DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 18 0.71 8.15 144 12 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 9 General 61 2.88 448.96 768 2 0 9 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 4 " 18 0.99 110.38 686 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SULTANPUR DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 15 3.31 5.14 25 12 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 4 General 22 1.93 65.66 758 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 Women 14 6.21 60.81 40 6 10 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. UNAO DISTRICT. District Board 5 General 22 2.39 113.31 139 9 6 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 2 Women 22 6.55 44.24 167 9 11 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 419
TABLE III ProvinceALMORA DISTRICT. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BANDA DISTRICT. Private 1 General 7.18 289 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. BAREILLY DISTRICT. District Board 1 " 333.60 356 7 4 1 .. .. .. .. BENARES DISTRICT. District Board 1 " 127.51 335 12 11 1 .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 40 127 12 0 .. 1 .. .. .. BIJNOR DISTRICT. Private 5 " 432.94 141 2 0 3 1 .. .. .. 1 (Part time). BULANDSHAHR DISTRICT. Private 1 " 43.41 180 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. BALLIA DISTRICT. District Board 1 " 79.55 234 2 0 1 .. .. .. .. BUDAUN DISTRICT. District Board 2 " 148.02 172 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. 421
TABLE IIIDEHRA DUN DISTRICT. Government 2 " 63.49 375 11 8 2 .. .. .. .. Municipal 2 " 32.59 307 9 4 2 .. .. .. .. District Board 4 " 78.73 155 9 8 2 .. .. .. .. ETAH DISTRICT. Municipal 1 Women 64.14 167 12 0 1 .. .. .. .. Private 1 General 10.44 48 8 0 .. .. .. .. .. ETAWAH DISTRACT. District Board 1 " 49.21 171 11 0 1 .. .. .. .. FARRUKHABAD DISTRICT. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. FATEHPUR DISTRICT. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. FYZABAD DISTRICT. District Board 1 Women 20.43 125 0 0 1 .. 1 .. .. GHAZIPUR DISTRICT. Government 1 General 51.35 255 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. 423
TABLE IIIJHANSI DISTRICT. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. JAUNPUR DISTRICT. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. LAKHIMPUR KHERI DISTRICT. District Board . . . . 3 General 249.52 609 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. LUCKNOW DISTRICT. District Board . . . . 7 " 771.83 244 6 8 7 .. .. .. .. Missionary . . . . 1 " 468.49 601 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. MEERUT DISTRICT. Municipal . . . . . 1 " 86.42 325 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board . . . . 2 " 101.46 205 15 3 2 .. .. .. .. Private . . . . . 3 " 140.07 197 11 7 3 .. .. .. .. MIRZAPUR DISTRICT. District Board . . . . 1 " 29.31 162 13 0 1 .. .. .. .. Missionary . . . . 1 " 51.15 25 0 0 .. .. .. .. .. MORADABAD DISTRICT. District Board . . . . 2 " 180.44 197 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. 425 2 D
426 TABLE III427 PILIBHIT DISTRICT. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. RAEBARELI DISTRICT. Private . . . . . 1 General 16.13 258 12 0 1 .. .. .. .. SAHARANPUR DISTRICT. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SHAHJAHANPUR DISTRICT. Private . . . . . 1 General 48 197 2 4 1 .. .. .. .. SITAPUR DISTRICT . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SULTANPUR DISTRICT. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. UNAO DISTRICT. District Board . . . . 1 General 36.33 168 12 6 1 .. .. .. .. 2 D 2
428 TABLE IV. Province429 M. D. Eye Hospital, Allahabad G Ophthal- mic. 24 40.88 144.7 2 0 9 1 .. .. .. .. Naini Leper Home, Allahabad MN Leprosy 30 24 4 9 0 9 2 .. 1 .. .. ALIGARH DISTRICT. Mohan Eye Hospital, Aligarh P Ophthal- mic. 60 55.5 86.1 11511 2 2 .. .. .. X-Ray An X-Ray plant has been installed at Sadr Hospital, Aligarh and the Muslim University Hospital each and is worked by the Medical Officers there. ALMORA DISTRICT. Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Almora. MN Tubercu- losis. 40 15.65 .. 5830 1 .. .. 1 2+5 Pupil Nurses. Almora Leper Asylum . . MN Leprosy 100 85 40 11120 1 .. .. .. .. Leper Asylum, Chandaq . MN " 72 60.12 20 1000 .. 1 .. .. .. BAREILLY DISTRICT. Mental Hospital, Bareilly . G Mental 402 409.84 .. 10116 4 .. .. .. .. BENARES DISTRICT. K. E. VII Hospital, Benares . P Ophthal- mic. .. .. 4.54 .. .. 2 .. .. .. Venereal Diseases. .. .. 10.75 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Dentistry .. .. 8.02 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Tubercu- losis. .. .. 12.14 .. .. 1 .. .. ..
430 TABLE IV431 Bhagwandei Leper Hospital, Cawnpore. P Leprosy 40 29 4 28 15 7 1 1 .. .. .. Skin Clinic Dispensary, Cawn- pore. P ,, .. 45 .. 134 0 0 .. 1 .. .. .. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Cawnpore. MP Infectious Diseases. 8 0.90 31.71 43 1 0 1 .. .. .. .. U. H. M. Hospital and Prince of Wales Dispensary, Cawn- pore. G X-Ray Separate Statistics not available. DEHRA DUN DISTRICT. MacLaren Leper Hospital . P Leprosy 80 75.86 19.00 28 2 0 2 1 .. .. .. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Dehra Dun. MP Infectious Diseases. 12 0.07 .. 6 7 0 1 .. .. .. .. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Rishikesh. MP " 8 0.80 8.50 5 8 0 *1 .. .. .. .. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Mussorie. MP " 8 0.15 .. 1,257 0 0 .. .. .. .. 1 Infectious Diseases Huts, Mussorie. MP " 12 1.10 .. 189 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. FYZABAD DISTRICT. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Fyzabad. MP " 18 0.24 .. 7 6 0 1 .. .. .. .. Sadr Hospital, Fyzabad . G X-Ray .. 0.047 0.27 0 1 4 1 .. .. .. .. GARHWAL DISTRICT. Leper Asylum, Srinagar . P Leprosy 30 29.50 .. 9 2 6 1 .. .. .. .. GONDA DISTRICT. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Gonda. MP Infectious Diseases. 8 0.05 .. 625 0 0 .. .. .. .. .. * For six months only.
432 TABLE IV433 Mental .. .. 4.2 .. 1 .. .. .. .. X-Ray & Radium. .. .. 15.8 .. 1 1 .. .. 2 Balrampur Hospital . . P Ophthal- mic. .. .. 40.21 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Dentistry .. .. 18.33 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Lucknow. MP Infectious diseases. 52 21 55.1 59 3 4 1 .. .. .. .. MEERUT DISTRICT. L. P. Hospital, Meerut . . DB Dentistry .. .. 7.37 .. .. 1 .. .. .. Leper Hospital, Meerut . . MN Leprosy 60 53 .. 11 3 0 1 .. .. .. .. MUZAFFARNAGAR DISTRICT. Leper Hospital, Muzaffarnagar DB " 4 4.03 0.01 1 11 0 1 .. .. .. .. Sadr Hospital, Muzaffarnagar DB X-Ray No separate account kept. NAINI TAL DISTRICT. K. E. VII Sanatorium, Bho- wali. P Tubercu- losis.. 142 89.5 .. 90 0 0 3 .. 1 .. 12* Infectious Diseases Hospital, Naini Tal. P Infectious diseases. 8 6.59 .. 714 0 0 2 .. .. 2 .. Taluka E. Hospital . . MP ,, 30 1.10 .. 181 13 0 1 .. .. .. .. SAHARANPUR DISTRICT. Infectious Diseases Hospital, Saharanpur. MP ,, 42 2.6 .. 3 11 3 1 .. .. .. .. *6 males.
Categories(Others.) Civil Hospital, Beri G " 36 98.54 157.30 6 6 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. GURGAON DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Gurgaon G " 42 25.06 216.55 73 2 5 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 (Others.) Civil Hospital, Rewari G " 33 10.75 178.89 100 13 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Rahmatpur Mission Hospital, Palwal. MN Women 57 54.63 24.77 30 7 3 3 .. .. 2 3 13 .. 4 .. Baptist Mission Men's Hos- pital, Palwal. MN Men 26 17.00 55.71 46 15 10 3 .. .. 1 .. 4 .. .. 1 Civil Dispensary, Nuh DB General 26 26.01 110.25 16 0 11 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. KARNAL DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Karnal G " 99 28.69 96.24 60 3 5 2 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Panipat MP " 27 16.90 232.85 77 15 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Civil Hospital, Kaithal MP " 44 81.79 150.07 5 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 435
436 Categories437 Lady Reading Hospital, Simla P Women 100 68.41 34.47 96 8 0 4 1 1 4 4 19 .. 3 .. Walker Hospital, Simla . P General 39 8.5 6.8 905 5 6 1 1 1 3 6 .. .. .. .. KANGRA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Mission Hospital, Kangra . MN 438 CategoriesFEROZEPORE DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Ferozepore G " 46 30.82 364.01 54 13 4 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 Francis Newton Mission Hos- pital for Women & Children, Ferozepore. MN Women 50 48.29 26.61 35 14 4 4 .. 1 1 4 12 .. 10 .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Fazilka G General 30 47.82 189.42 22 14 8 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. M. D. Hospital, Moga DB " 78+ 708 in sheds. 211.54 626.24 15 6 8 5 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Silver Jubilee Memorial Hos- pital, Abohar. MP " 26 9.60 272.99 80 7 8 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Civil Hospital, Gidderbaha MP " 46 35.83 254.68 22 11 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 LAHORE DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Mayo Hospital, Lahore G " 4.8 421.77 587.76 103 3 0 17 7 1 5 18 48 .. .. .. Lady Willingdon Hospital, Lahore. G Women 74 60.62 27.34 153 5 4 4 1 1 3 14 10 .. 3 .. Lady Aitchison Hospital, Lahore. G " 1.0 91.11 142.91 109 5 0 5 .. 1 2 11 15 .. 10 .. Police Hospital, Lahore G Men 50 11.19 55.35 37 8 5 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Sir Ganga Ram Free Hospital, Lahore. P General 27 26.83 326.63 99 6 3 5 8 1 .. 2 6 1 1 2 (Others.) Civil Hospital, Kasur MP " 36 14.05 137.24 66 6 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 439
TABLE I2E GURDASPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Gurdaspur G General 54 25.57 301.59 52 1 10 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Batala MP " 26 20.09 270.39 50 2 9 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Civil Dispensary, Gharota DB " 24 4.32 121.23 59 14 11 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SIALKOT DISTRICT. (At Headquarters ) Civil Hospital, Sialkot G General 56 36.29 337.87 48 9 7 3 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Memorial Hospital for Women & Children, Sialkot. MN Women 90 67.75 83.75 40 8 0 5 .. 1 2 5 8 6 18 .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Daska DB General 36 142.07 412.67 7 6 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. C. E. Z. Mission Hospital, Narowal. MN Women 25 17.38 41.07 31 14 4 1 .. .. .. 1 3 2 8 .. GUJRANWALA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Gujranwala MP General 28 28 123.17 45 15 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Wazirabad MP " 28 8.30 263.95 175 12 3 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 441
TABLE I2 E 2 (Others.) Mission Hospital, Jalalpur Jatan. MN General 1.0 97.13 83.66 19 11 9 3 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 10 Civil Dispensary, Kharian DB " 20 10.91 118. 81 23 7 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SHAHPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Sargodha G General 54 42.31 189.91 72 14 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. Mission Hospital, Sargodha . MN Women 22 6.94 61.23 109 14 1 1 .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Shahpur Sadar DB General 24 20.20 89.50 39 13 5 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Civil Hospital, Bhalwal DB " 36 31.99 224.64 18 4 10 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. JHELUM DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Jhelum MP General 39 25.29 135.88 30 7 9 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Good Samariton Mission Hos- pital, Jhelum. MN Women 50 34.65 99 32 9 7 1 .. 1 .. 6 8 .. .. .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Pind-Dadan Khan. G General 25 7.10 127.08 105 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Civil Hospital, Chakwal DB " 32 19.23 99.5 36 5 10 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 443
TABLE I445 CAMPBELLPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Campbellpur G General 36 23.10 130.01 45 13 3 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Police Hospital, Campbellpur G Men 20 2.88 9.02 81 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Hazro MP " 28 14.66 110.36 53 9 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. MIANWALI DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Mianwali G General 40 25.80 135.76 37 3 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Victoria Memorial Female Hospital, Mianwali. MN Women 28 13.19 90.42 43 13 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. (Others.) Civil Hospital, Isakhel MP General 26 9.84 196.47 41 9 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. MONTGOMERY DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Montgomery G General 52 27.59 222.13 51 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Female Mission Dispensary, Montgomery. MN Women 25 10.3 34.43 68 0 0 2 .. .. .. 2 3 .. .. .. (Others.) Civil Hospital446 Categories447 Civil Dispensary, Ahmadpur Syal. DB 448 Province449 GURGAON DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 16 4.44 13.95 51 9 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 5 General 41 28.30 630.34 56 12 0 5 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. District Board 27 ,, 1.7 47.96 54.06 125 13 10 27 .. .. .. .. .. 15 .. .. KARNAL DISTRICT. 2 ,, 35 11.40 70.12 14 13 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Government District Board 24 ,, 1.1 2.68 79.54 293 15 8 24 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. AMBALA DISTRICT. 2 ,, 22 8.36 120.90 16 12 7 2 .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. Municipal District Board 15 ,, 70 1.69 81.77 181 12 4 15 .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. SIMLA DISTRICT. 1 ,, 7 5.07 50.563 55 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Government District Board 1 ,, 4 4.20 39.97 83 13 0 1 .. .. ... .. .. 1 .. .. KANGRA DISTRICT. 1 Men 50 8.05 74.97 78 78 13 5 6 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. Government 4 General District Board 24 General 1.8 3.50 44.87 115 15 11 24 .. .. .. .. .. 18 .. .. HOSHIARPUR DISTRICT. 1 Men 18 3.06 23.85 69 15 4 1 .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. Government District Board 21 General 87 5.34 100.52 108 14 4 21 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
450. Province451 District Board 28 ,, 1.8 4.88 85.92 180 3 6 28 .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. Private 1 ,, 4 1.67 72.11 99 6 5 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. LAHORE DISTRICT. Municipal 3 General 28 3.61 103.54 74 13 0 3 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. District Board 5* 452 Province453 GUJRAT DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 18 1.27 36.91 363 9 9 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 General Municipal 1 General 12 10.27 127.37 44 0 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 18 454 Province455 JHANG DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 22 2.24 92.75 433 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Women Municipal 1 General 4 5.39 147.09 66 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 17 456 TABLE III. Province457 AMBALA DISTRICT. Government 3 Men 52.12 214 9 4 3 .. .. .. .. SIMLA DISTRICT. Government 2 General 48.69 218 15 0 2 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 ,, 96.4 370 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 2 ,, 48.69 218 15 0 2 .. .. .. .. KANGRA DISTRICT. HOSHIARPUR DISTRICT. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. JULLUNDUR DISTRICT. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. LUDUIANA DISTRICT. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Government 2 General 8.50 198 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 ,, 176.44 327 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 1 ,, 71.87 327 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. FEROZEPORE DISTRICT. Government 6 Men 28.98 227 13 6 6 .. .. .. .. 2 F
458 TABLE III459 SIALKOT DISTRICT. Government 2 Men 170.17 243 1 4 2 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 General 351.54 570 3 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 1 ,, 104.63 304 5 4 1 .. .. .. .. GUJRANWALA DISTRICT. Government 4 Men 37.7 264 10 4 4 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 General 284.07 900 1 6 1 .. .. .. .. Private 1 ,, 74.84 165 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. SHEIKHUPURA DISTRICT. Government 5 Men 41.15 128 4 9 5 .. .. .. .. District Board 1 General 71.57 178 1 4 1 .. .. .. .. GUJRAT DISTRICT. Government 2 Men 54.64 210 9 4 2 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 General 162.80 276 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 2 ,, 63.92 244 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. SHAHPUR DISTRICT. Government 5 Men 48.89 213 2 7 5 .. .. .. .. 2 F 2
460 TABLE III461 LYALLPUR DISTRICT. Government 7 Men 65.34 167 12 0 7 .. .. . . .. Municipal 1 General 216.43 472 8 0 1 .. .. . . .. District Board 3 462 Categories463 AMBALA DISTRICT. Civil Dispensary464 TABLE 1V465 Rural Dispensary466 Categories467 Tuberculosis Hospital, Jullun- dur City. P Tubercu- losis. .. .. 68.0 .. 2 .. .. .. 1 Civil Hospital468 Categories469 Indian Infectious Diseases Hospital, Lahore. MP 470 Categories471 Civil Dispensary472 TABLE I. Province473 2 G GAYA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Police Hospital, Gaya G Men 22 10.63 6.11 29 13 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Gaya Pilgrim Hospital MP Gen474 TABLE I475 (Others.) Bettiah Raj King Edward Memorial Hospital. P " 112 105.04 246.41 24 2 0 3 .. .. 4 .. 8 .. .. .. Bettiah Raj Lady Dufferin Hospital. P Women 110 119.30 183.40 27 2 0 3 .. 1 2 2 7 11 2 .. MUZAFFARPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Police Hospital, Muzaffarpur G Men 24 55.74 6.04 44 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Sadr Hospital, Muzaffarpur MP & DB General 106 160.80 238.30 32 5 6 3 1 .. .. 5 .. .. 2 .. (Others.) Hajipur Sub-divisional Hos- pital. MP " 32 21.80 131.62 41 9 7 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Sitamarhi Sub-divisional Hos- pital. MP " 35 41.06 177.11 23 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. DARBHANGA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Darbhanga Medical School Hospital. G General 131 257.11 368.33 22 15 0 15 2 .. 4 4 8 .. 1 .. Lady Willingdon (Raj Dar- bhanga) Hospital. P " 84 74.40 483.80 36 6 6 9 2 .. .. 4 .. .. 1 .. (Others.) Samastipur Sub-divisional Hospital. MP " 21 24.27 130.77 38 3 0 2 .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. Madhubani Sub-divisional Hospital. MP " 36 32.37 209.42 42 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 2 G 2
476 TABLE477 Nathnagar Constable Train- ing School Hospital, Bhagalpur. G " 26 5.82 10.64 43 1 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Bhagalpur Sadr Hospital MP & DB General 94 86.90 143.23 30 0 0 2 4 1 .. 1 1 .. .. 1 Rani Shibtarini Female Hos- pital, Bhagalpur. P Women 31 29.07 69.01 24 9 0 1 .. 1 .. 1 2 1 .. .. (Others.) Supaul Sub-divisional Hospi- tal. DB General 41 37.64 98.39 26 1 8 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Madhipura Sub-divisional Hospital. DB " 25 22.81 212.80 23 10 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. PURNEA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Purnea Police Hospital . G Men 28 15.43 8.47 14 11 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Purnea Sadr Hospital MP & DB General 74 87.85 206.70 24 0 0 3 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 2 (Others.) Kishanganj Sub-divisional Hospital. MP " 26 36.87 169.22 34 2 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Araria Sub-divisional Hospital DB " 32 34.90 184.66 25 0 9 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SANTAL-PARGANAS DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Dumka Sadr Hospital . MP & DB General 36 45.52 111.90 32 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. ..
478 TABLE I479 RANCHI DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Ranchi Sadr Hospital MP & DB General 128 159.72 329.17 24 13 2 4 3 .. 3 3 .. 1 6 .. Ranchi St. Barnabas Hospital MN " 40 20.60 106.00 .. 4 .. 1 1 2 4 .. .. 2 (Others.) Murhu Mission Hospital MN " 20 10.5 36.9 48 0 0 .. 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. . . Kamdara Mission Hospital MN " 20 7.28 22.60 35 0 0 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. PALAMAU DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Daltonganj Sadr Hospital MP & DB General 60 54.30 163.58 31 13 9 1 2 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Daltonganj Police Hospital G Men 25 2.51 8.92 87 12 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil. MANBHUM DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Purulia Sadr Hospital MP & DB General 76 69.78 166.47 30 2 6 3 .. .. .. 2 .. 4 .. .. (Others.) Dhanbad Charitable Dispen- sary. MP " 64 66.68 139.24 26 15 0 3 .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. SINGHBHUM DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Chaibassa Sadr Hospital MP & DB General 50 54.8 119.77 33 12 0 3 .. .. .. 2 .. .. 4 .. (Others.) Tata Main Hospital, Jamshed- pur. P " 140 177.23 306.2 164 1 0 28 and 1 part time dentist 11 1 3 10 4 5 .. ..
480 Province481 SARAN DISTRICT. District Board 2 General 16 15.58 390.44 68 11 4 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. CHAMPARAN DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 18 7.07 4.90 39 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 2 General 16 8.59 223.72 124 5 9 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. MUZAFFARPUR DISTRICT. District Board 3 General 16 5.24 351.42 132 8 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. DARBHANGA DISTRICT. Government 1 General 14 11.88 68.48 27 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 8 4.91 96.48 87 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 3 1.48 121.76 65 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. MONGHYR DISTRICT. District Board 8 General 58 39.21 980.99 94 7 3 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 10 3.80 59.6 12 12 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BHAGALPUR DISTRICT. District Board 1 General 19 11.18 77.18 26 13 11 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Private 1 " 6 4.91 121.37 36 0 0 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
482 Province483 RANCHI DISTRICT. Government 1 General 4 1.52 .. 894 3 0 1 .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. Government 2 Men 36 8.77 20.86 29 11 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 General 12 3.17 94.07 102 15 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 4 " 48 23.19 187.19 53 6 11 4 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. Missionary 2 " 35 11.89 63.22 22 2 9 .. 2 1 1 1 1 1 .. .. PALAMAU DISTRICT. 5 General 36 60.89 385.68 8 10 0 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board Private 2 " 12 7.98 122.22 12 13 7 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. MANBHUM DISTRICT. 1 Men 14 6.05 4.39 52 5 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Government Municipal 1 General 4 0.58 38.73 119 10 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 2 " 8 1.44 191.52 318 8 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 7 0.65 171.20 472 5 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SINGHBHUM DISTRICT. 3 General 18 16.76 153.97 110 12 5 3 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Government District Board 2 " 15 8.17 170.63 64 10 11 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 3 " 16 1.67 123.54 305 15 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Private 1 Women 6 5.25 40.18 90 9 8 1 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. ..
484 TABLE III. Province485 SARAN DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 139.52 278 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 16 " 1,467.47 254 5 10 16 .. .. 2 .. Private 1 " 65.00 199 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. CHAMPARAN DISTRICT. Government 2 General 22.76 189 10 8 2 .. .. .. .. District Board 21 " 1,491.35 207 5 6 21 .. .. .. .. MUZAFFARPUR DISTRICT. Government 1 General 74.71 263 9 6 1 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 114.66 302 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 19 " 1,755.49 214 3 8 19 .. .. 1 .. Private 4 " 610.29 199 2 2 4 .. .. .. .. DARBHANGA DISTRICT. District Board 31 General 2,967.03 184 10 2 31 .. .. .. .. Private 10 " 991.13 123 6 3 10 .. .. .. .. MONGHYR DISTRICT. District Board 16 General 1,923.32 301 10 9 16 .. .. .. .. Private 3 " 138.04 190 0 0 3 .. .. .. ..
486 Province487 HAZARIBAGH DISTRICT. District Board 14 General 563.34 137 4 3 14 .. .. .. .. Private 2 " 72.07 270 0 7 2 .. .. .. .. Missionary 3 " 123.50 110 8 0 3 .. .. .. .. RANCHI DISTRICT. Government 2 General 96.43 257 3 7 2 .. .. .. .. District Board 11 " 425.54 167 11 10 11 .. .. .. .. PALAMAU DISTRICT. District Board 13 General 480.26 144 5 11 13 .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 105.23 287 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. MANBHUM DISTRICT. District Board 23 General 904.95 132 3 2 23 .. .. 2 .. Private 2 " 55.13 102 6 0 2 .. .. .. .. SINGHBHUM DISTRICT. District Board 9 General 418.50 192 0 7 9 .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 109.50 471 0 0 1 .. .. .. ..
488 Province489 SHAHABAD DISTRICT. Arrah Sadr Hospital DB Ophthalmic * 1.2 9.24 23 1 3 Venereal diseases. * 0.15 2.2 23 1 3 Ear, Nose & Throat. * 0.07 11.25 23 1 3 See Table I. No separate staff is sanctioned for these clinics. Dentistry * 0.21 6.81 23 1 3 Tuber- culosis * 0.18 1.49 23 1 3 * No separate beds have been allotted for these clinics. Leprosy * 0.05 0.25 23 1 3 Infectious diseases. 8 .. 0.04 .. SARAN DISTRICT. Chapra Sadr Hospital MP & DB Leprosy .. .. 2.2 .. No separate staff is sanctioned for the clinics. Siwan Sub-divisional Hospital MP& DB " .. .. 9.05 .. Gopalganj Sub-divisional Hos- pital. DB " .. .. 22.84 .. CHAMPARAN DISTRICT. Motihari Leper Clinic P Leprosy .. .. 18.0 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Bettiah Leper Clinic P " .. .. 27.0 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Ramgarh Leper Clinic P " .. .. 16.15 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Dhaka Leper Clinic G " .. .. 4.9 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Bokhari Leper Clinic G " .. .. 4.4 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 H
490 TABLE IV491 Ear, Nose & Throat. * 96492 TABLE IV493 Pakuri DB " .. .. 22.09 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Madhupur P " .. .. 33.53 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Hiranpur MN " .. .. 0.75 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Kundaini DB " .. .. 47.0 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Leper Colony, Saldaha MN 494 Categories495 Province496 TABLE I497 BETUL DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Main Hospital MP General 22 20.97 134.17 41 6 8 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. SAUGOR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Main Hospital MP General 46 30.08 195.13 36 0 0 2 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Dufferin Block of Main Hos- pital, Saugor. P Women 20 16.74 124.56 43 0 0 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Police Hospital G General 20 5.03 37.56 19 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. HOSHANGABAD DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Main Hospital MP General 27 30.93 168.88 59 7 5 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. (Others.) Main Hospital, Narsinghpur MP " 34 16.24 93.78 65 2 3 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Branch Hospital, Gadarwara MP " 22 9.45 126.97 84 7 7 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. NIMAR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Main Hospital, Khandwa MP General 44 45.65 269.72 50 6 2 4 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Lady Butler Hospital, Khandwa. P Women 30 32.55 103.45 58 7 7 2 .. 1 .. 4 4 .. .. .. Burhanpur Hospital MP General 29 27.37 315.21 54 9 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. ..
498 TABLE I499 BILASPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Main Hospital MP General 44 27.94 168.59 55 9 1 4 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Jackman Memorial Mission Hospital. MN Women 90 75.00 92.94 17 12 5 2 .. 2 .. 6 18 5 7 .. (Others.) Mission Hospital, Mungeli MN General 35 4.00 46.00 176 15 4 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 Mission Hospital, Champa MN " 24 18.12 39.50 160 7 11 4 2 1 2 5 .. .. .. 6 Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Pendra Road. MN " 80 63.70 .. 34 8 3 2 .. 1 1 4 10 .. .. .. BHANDARA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Main Hospital MP General 30 18.78 213.02 60 4 7 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. BALAGHAT DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Main Hospital MP General 26 10.84 120.36 72 5 6 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. AMRAOTI DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Irwin Hospital G General 62 78.22 304.02 52 8 8 3 3 1 .. 1 6 1 .. .. Dufferin Hospital P Woman 21 32.55 84.43 35 4 0 2 .. 1 .. 1 .. 3 6 ..
500 TABLE I501 BULDANA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Main Hospital MP General 26 25.70 216.91 18 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Women's Hospital, Shegaon P Women 28 45.83 133.46 21 0 0 2 .. .. .. 7 .. .. .. .. Jubilee Memorial Hospital, Khamgaon. P " 26 25.34 101.40 107 0 0 2 .. 1 .. 5 .. .. .. .. JUBBULPORE DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Victoria Hospital G General 180 152.12 402.90 53 2 8 9 1 1 1 6 9 .. .. .. Police Hospital G " 20 19.36 40.25 10 12 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Infectious Diseases Hospital MP " 20 0.16 .. 874 6 0 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Elgin Hospital P Women 40 46.37 34.93 35 10 8 2 .. 1 .. 4 5 .. 6 .. MANDLA DISTRICT. Main Hospital MP General 20 11.65 193.12 74 8 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
502 TABLE II. Province503 Private 2 " 4 2.13 54.64 11 8 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 11 1.86 113.16 143 10 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. CHHINDWARA DISTRICT. Government 2 General 28 11.69 31.20 31 4 6 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 4 1.27 202.36 193 13 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 9 " 28 11.39 490.16 186 2 7 9 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 Women 12 0.48 9.50 769 6 6 1 .. .. .. .. 7 .. .. .. Private 3 General 9 1.85 74.85 1,900 2 4 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BETUL DISTRICT. District Board 2 General 10 2.17 64.27 83 9 7 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SAUGOR DISTRICT. District Board 10 General 64 30.95 788.52 136 10 0 12 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. Government 1 " 14 7.59 20.07 20 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 " 12 0.21 53 2,537 0 0 1 .. .. 2 2 .. .. 1 .. Municipal 1 " 4 0.37 48.30 357 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. HOSHANGABAD DISTRICT. Government 2 General 25 1.08 13.86 159 12 8 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 3 " 28 10.63 318.49 211 11 8 4 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 6 " 41 17.07 410.43 129 7 8 6 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. ..
504 TABLE II505 DRUG DISTRICT. District Board 6 General 26 6 152 200 0 0 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BILASPUR DISTRICT. Government 1 General 14 6.84 25.58 26 14 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 6 3.12 105.90 57 9 9 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 4 " 17 9.15 187.54 75 7 5 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 6 3.60 92.34 63 10 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BHANDARA DISTRICT. Government 1 General 12 2.87 19.06 40 10 10 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 3 " 26 7.23 425.36 136 10 11 4 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 3 " 14 4.38 236.45 104 14 10 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. BALAGHAT DISTRICT Government 2 General 15 2.09 23.65 142 8 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 5 " 20 7.30 394.35 150 9 8 5 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Private 2 " 4 0.14 73.72 4,100 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 I
506 TABLE II507 Government 1 " 10 0.32 8.35 35 4 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 7 " 53 2.72 329.76 118 4 7 8 .. .. .. 1 .. 6 2 .. District Board 2 " 4 0.17 73.49 213 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. BULDANA DISTRICT. Municipal 7 General 63 28.09 1,256.28 109 2 3 8 .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. District Board 5 " 24 5.49 512.97 170 6 5 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. JUBBULPORE DISTRICT. Municipal 2 General 27 16.63 246.45 62 6 6 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. District Board 1 " 6 2.69 54.95 67 12 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Government 2 " 19 16.33 128.06 .. 5 .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. Private 3 " 16 4.34 201.86 125 3 11 3 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. MANDLA DISTRICT. District Board 7 General 17 5.14 275.69 305 10 2 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Government 1 " 11 5.89 20.25 12 6 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 " 2 0.02 49.75 15 0 0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 I 2
508 TABLE III. Province509 CHHINDWARA DISTRICT. Missionary 2 General 31.84 50 0 0 .. .. .. .. 1 Private 6 " 152.52 59 12 11 6 .. .. .. .. BETUL DISTRICT. District Board 2 General 35.47 127 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. SAUGOR DISTRICT. Government 1 General 59.84 566 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 261.62 270 7 0 1 .. .. .. .. HOSHANGABAD DISTRICT. District Board 2 General 119.76 127 3 0 2 .. .. 1 .. Private 1 " 113 209 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. NIMAR DISTRICT. District Board 2 General 78.64 86 4 0 2 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 53.42 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 33 300 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. RAIPUR DISTRICT. Leprosy 7 General 50 105 0 0 4 .. .. .. .. Private 2 " 82 254 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 " 8 38 0 0 .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 142 230 0 0 1 .. .. .. ..
510 TABLE III511 AMRAOTI DISTRICT. District Board 3 General 255.30 290 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. AKOLA DISTRICT. Government 1 General 37.48 301 7 8 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 6 " 400.38 236 13 4 6 .. .. .. .. Municipal 1 " 471.14 312 5 4 1 .. .. .. .. YEOTMAL DISTRICT. District Board 3 General 75.81 170 0 0 3 .. .. .. .. Private 1 " 36.77 91 2 4 1 .. .. .. .. BULDANA DISTRICT. District Board 9 General 581.70 164 10 8 9 .. .. .. .. JUBBULPORE DISTRICT. Government 2 1 Men and 1 General 51.06 42 9 5 .. 2 .. .. .. Municipal 3 General 538.05 299 10 0 4 .. .. 2 .. District Board 1 " 12.19 93 5 4 1 .. .. .. .. Private 4 " 76.14 79 8 3 3 1 1 1 .. MANDLA DISTRICT. Private 1 General 82.9 83 5 4 2 .. .. .. ..
512 TABLE IV. Province513 NIMAR DISTRICT. Leprosy Clinics514 TABLE IV515 Municipal Infectious diseases wards attached to the Main Hospital, Bilaspur. MP Infectious diseases. 6 0.03 2.5 No separate account is kept and no special staff other than the staff of the Main Hospital is maintained. BHANDRA DISTRICT. Leprosy Clinic attached to the Main Hospital, Bhandara. G Leprosy .. .. 2.89 Do. AMRAOTI DISTRICT. Tuberculosis Amraoti Camp G Tubercu- losis. .. .. 1.35 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Leprosy Clinics G 2 Leprosy .. .. 46 .. 2 .. .. .. .. Leper Asylum, Kothara P " 16 288 40 (Weekly average.) 5 13 0 1 .. .. .. 10 AKOLA DISTRICT. Dentistry Clinic attached to the Main Hospital, Akola. MP Dentistry .. .. 1.19 .. .. 2 .. .. .. Leprosy Clinic attached to the Main Hospital, Akola. MP Leprosy .. .. 7.62 .. .. .. .. .. .. YEOTMAL DISTRICT. Leprosy Clinic at the516 TABLE IV517 TABLE I. Province518 TABLE I519 NAGA HILLS DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Kohima Civil Hospital G General 50 50.51 54.43 26 5 0 2 (Others.) Mokokchung Civil Hospital G " 28 56.03 83.56 14 9 0 1 Wokha Civil Hospital G " 26 32.16 31.05 14 5 0 1 LUSHAI HILLS DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Aijal Civil Hospital G General 44 25.30 94.57 58 5 4 2 1 1 4 1st Assam Rifles Hospital, Aijal. G Special 25 0.63 19.05 0 5 0 1 (Others.) Lungleh Civil Hospital G General 22 11.52 52.23 43 13 10 1 1 Welsh Mission Hospital, Durt- lang. MN " 46 46.00 25.00 17 0 0 1 2 1 13 5 GOALPARA DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Dhubri Civil Hospital LB General 43 33.16 132.90 25 0 0 2 1 (Others.) Goalpara Civil Hospital LB " 20 7.67 101.34 48 3 0 2
520 Province521 NOWGONG DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Earle Hospital, Nowgong . LB " 53 43.15 77.32 18 1 0 2 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. (Others.) Nil SIBSAGAR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) B. B. Civil Hospital, Jorhat LB " 26 22.45 93.80 35 2 11 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Jail Hospital, Jorhat G Special 21 13.30 4-44 9 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. (Others.) Sibsagar Civil Hospital LB General 22 11.80 77.79 34 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... Golaghat Civil Hospital LB " 23 17.51 77.27 36 1 5 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. LAKHIMPUR DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Dibrugarh Civil Hospital G " 131 104.09 84.00 50 10 8 7 .. 1 2 1 .. .. 9 2 (Others.) Digboi Assam Oil Company Hospital. P " 75 56.66 Nil 111 8 0 8 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 12 GARO HILLS DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Tura Civil Hospital G " 23 13.23 57.70 52 1 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Kala-azar Hospital, Tura G " 50 18.00 Nil 18 13 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mission Hospital and Dispen- sary, Tura. MN " 35 11.33 16.00 31 0 0 1 .. .. 1 2 3 .. .. .. (Others.) Nil 2 K
522 TABLE I523 TABLE II Province524 TABLE II526 TABLE III. Province527 LUSHAI HILLS DISTRICT. Government 2 " 24.53 172 10 4 2 .. .. .. .. GOALPARA DISTRICT. Government 4 " 173.87 197 6 0 4 .. .. .. .. Private 4 " 220.06 140 2 7 4 .. .. .. .. Local Board 20 " 1,365.19 246 7 3 20 .. .. .. KAMRUP DISTRICT. Government 9 " 103.83 160 13 6 9 .. .. .. .. Local Board 21 " 880.36 186 6 7 21 .. .. .. .. .. .. DARRANG DISTRICT. Government 3 " 47.26 163 13 0 3 .. .. .. .. Local Board 13 " 514.17 197 12 0 13 .. .. .. .. NOWGONG DISTRICT. Government 10 " 90.67 151 13 9 10 .. .. .. .. Local Board 12 " 563.84 220 5 0 12 .. .. .. ..
530 TABLE IV525 DARRANG DISTRICT. Local Board 1 General 16 9.51 100.88 53 15 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. NOWGONG DISTRICT. Government 2 Special 32 6.98 3.81 55 4 3 2* .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Local Board 1 General 4 0.90 36.59 31 7 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SIBSAGAR DISTRICT. Government 2 1 Special 20 5.20 9.18 98 4 8 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 General LAKHIMPUR DISTRICT. Local Board 1 General 16 8.86 62.65 42 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. GARO HILLS DISTRICT. Government 1 Special 15 1.52 11.41 6 5 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. MANIPUR DISTRICT. Private 12 General 106 32.63 419.70 65 12 0 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Missionary 1 ,, 12 0.63 5.70 3 8 2 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. SADIYA FRONTIER TRACT. 6 4 General 46 8.21 46.28 59 12 9 6 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Government 2 Special BALIPARA TRACT. 2 1 General 27 7.91 37.97 52 2 6 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Government 1 Special * 1 Part-time.
531 DARRANG DISTRICT. Mental Hospital, Tezpur G Mental 690 705.77 .. 14 11 7 4 .. 2 .. .. SIBSAGAR DISTRICT. Leper Asylum, Jorhat528 TABLE III529 TABLE IV. Province 532 TABLE I. Province533 Women534 TABLE I535 Province536 TABLE II537 THAR PARKAR DISTRICT. District Board 9 " 34 16.04 540.50 214 11 0 9 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. NAWABSHAH DISTRICT. Municipal 2 " 19 2.7 369.3 148 8 7 3 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Women District Board 6 General 39 76.1 943.8 17 12 6 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. UPPER SIND FRONTIERTRACT. District Board 3 " 18 11.2 248.2 122 13 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. DADU DISTRICT. Government 1 " 8 22.4 105.8 48 11 3 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Municipal 2 " 14 3.0 124.0 144 1 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 5 " 25 11.1 303.6 98 0 9 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2L
538 Province539 LARKANA DISTRICT. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. THAR PARKAR DISTRICT. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. NAWABSHAH DISTRICT. District Board 2 General 169.1 212 9 3 2 .. .. .. .. UPPER SIND FRONTIER TRACT. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. DADU DISTRICT. Municipal 1 General 32.6 249 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. District Board 1 " 85 203 0 0 1 .. .. .. .. 2 L 2
540 Province541 Province542 Province543 (Others.) Nil. GANJAM DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Government Headquarters Hospital, Berhampur. G General 60 79.15 246 34 13 0 4 2 .. .. 3 .. 1 .. .. Baptist Mission Hospital MN Women 82 73 100 22 7 0 3 .. 1 1 7 15 5 4 .. (Others.) Chatrapur Hospital G General 24 19.66 164.72 47 1 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Phulbani Hospital G 544 TABLE II. Province-ORISSA. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES WITH LESS THAN 20 BEDS Table showing particulars of work and medical and nursing staffs for 1937. Category of Hospital or Dispensary. Number of Hospitals and Dispen- saries. For men, women or general. Num- ber of beds. Daily average number of in- patients. Daily average number of out- patients. Average cost per in-patient per month. Medical Staff Nursing Staff. Stipendiary. Honorary. Matron. Asstt. Mat- ron and Sisters. Staff Nurses. Probation- ers. Midwives. Pupil mid- Wives. Male Nurses. Rs. A. P. CUTTACK DISTRICT. Government 3 General 28 4.61 52.98 70 3 0 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Municipal 2 General 36 9.18 59.34 42 13 6 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. District Board 5 General 31 2.69 49.67 112 4 0 5 .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. PURI DISTRICT. Government 2 1 General 28 5.31 50.21 69 0 0 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Men District Board 6 General 46 2.42 55.34 196 13 0 6 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. ..
545 BALASORE DISTRICT. Government 1 Men 16 7.22 7.25 41 14 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. District Board 1 General 10 1.54 23.41 151 15 0 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. SAMBALPUR DISTRICT. Government 1 546 Province547 BALASORE DISTRICT. Municipal 1 548 Province549 Neali DB 550 Province551 Bhadrak DB Leprosy 1.00 1 Hatigarh DB 552 Province553 R. Udayagiri G Leprosy 8.71 1 Parlakimedi G 554 Province555 Province556 Province557 Province558 Province559 (Others.) Civil Hospital, Haripur MP 560 Province(Others.) Civil Hospital, Tank DB &quot; 26 11.03 108.55 45 12 2 1 1 DIR, SWAT AND CHITRAL. (At Headquarters.) Lady Minto Hospital, Mala- kand. DB &quot; 50 89.11 118.22 13 5 0 1 2 (Others.) Civil Hospital, Chakdara G &quot; 20 8.97 51.87 32 4 0 1 Saidu Hospital P 562 Province563 KOHAT DISTRICT. Government 3 ,, 32 23.09 337.85 50 0 10 3 2 Missionary 1 ,, 8 7.80 65.63 25 5 0 1 1 BANNU DISTRICT. Government 1 ,, 4 2.23 92.23 88 1 10 1 1 Municipal 1 Women 16 36.50 184.21 20 4 4 1 District Board 1 General 12 14.74 201.74 22 3 8 1 D. L. KHAN DISTRICT. Government 3 ,, 12 4.42 213.67 207 5 1 3 3 District Board 3 ,, 30 14.65 445.99 62 8 0 3 1 DIR, SWAT, CHITRAL AND MALAKAND. Government 4 ,, 38 13.77 208.76 90 8 8 2 1 District Board 1 ,, 4 7.40 163.30 25 4 6 1 KURRAM AGENCY. Government 2 ,, 15 9.86 208.48 40 15 3 1 SOUTH WAZIRISTAN. Government 4 ,, 22 6.66 170.73 93 14 11 1 3 NORTH WAZIRISTAN. Government 2 ,, 32 46.16 203.06 58 14 1 2 7 KHYBER AGENCY. Government 2 ,, 22 8.12 198.62 99 15 0 2 1
564 Province565 KOHAT DISTRICT. Government 5 " 73.34 39 5 2 3 District Board 1 " 63.55 72 10 3 1 BANNU DISTRICT. Government 2 " 42.87 67 6 3 2 Private 2 " 380.66 380 3 4 2 1 D. I. KHAN DISTRICT. Government 4 " 117.69 62 3 4 3 Municipal 1 " 163.43 94 4 0 1 Private 1 " 282.45 250 0 0 1 Missionary 1 " 46.50 Not available. 1 1 SOUTH WAZIRISTAN. Government 5 " 65.10 12 13 4 5 NORTH WAZIRISTAN. Government 5 " 142.10 41 5 1 1 KHYBER AGENCY. Government 1 " 2.04 8 5 0 1
566 Province567 Province568 Province569 MEKRAN DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) Civil Hospital, Panjgur G General 24 7.07 126.92 103 4 1 1 1 1 (Others.) Nil KALAT DISTRICT. (At Headquarters.) (Others.) Jail Dispensary, Mach G General 43 6.63 23.59 100 3 0 1 1 2 N
570 Province571 ZHOB DISTRICT. Government 3 General 22 7.11 192.62 146 13 9 2 3 Private 1 Women 9 6.42 54.40 48 11 2 1 1 MEKRAN DISTRICT. Government 1 General 7 5.40 55.93 56 1 2 1 1 Private 1 572 TABLE III. Province573 TABLE I. Province574 Province575 Province576 TABLE I. Province577 TABLE II. Province578 TABLE III. Province579 TABLE I. Province580 TABLE II. Province581 TABLE III. Province-CENTRAL INDIA AGENCY. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES WITHOUT ACCOMMODATION FOR IN-PATIENTS. Table showing particulars of work and medical and nursing staffs for 1937. Category. Number. For men, women or general. Daily average number of patients. Average cost per dispensary per month. Medical Staff. Nursing staff. Stipendiary. Honorary. Nurses. Midwives. Male Nurses. Rs. A. P. DISTRICT (NAME) Government Nil Municipal District Board Private Missionary There are no special hospitals or clinics.
583 APPENDIX II. STATISTICS REGARDING MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA.
584 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA. Women's, Children's and General Hospitals. Location and Name of Institution. Control. Type of Service Beds585 Kalimpong, Charteris Hospital C. of S. M. General 134 3,188 7,086 11,793 6,362 8,715 39,132 2 2 Kalna, Mission Hospital C. of S. M. " 75 980 10,652 22,477 12,227 2,350 28,560 1 1 Krishnagar, Mission Hospital C. E. Z. M. S " 72 701 3,558 6,688 Tours 1 1 Rajshahi, Mission Hospital E. P. M. " 24 128 15,384 26,910 Lectures 3,718 8,390 2 Ratnapur, Women's Hospital C. E. Z. M. S. Women and Children. 68 972 15,184 31,650 Tours 5,591 260 16,824 1 1 Sarenga, Santal Mission Hospital M. M. S. General 50 1,085 12,279 6,859 14,598 " 4,071 1,159 18,802 2 1 BIHAR. Bamdah, Mission Hospital C. of S. M. Eye and General. 100 3,054 27,600 4,904 Tours 8,945 400 15,211 1 Benagaria, Christian Hospital S. M. N. C. General 65 570 7,360 16,041 2,447 15,717 1 1 Hazaribagh, St. Columbas Hos- pital. S. P. G. " 70 1 1 Kamdara, Hospital of the Epi- phany. S. P. G. " 20 351 3,139 2,222 376 480 9,074 1 Hiranpur, Mission Hospital C. M. S " 40 600 13,000 3,241 11,541 1 1 Manoharpur, St. Francis Hospital S. P. G " 11 341 4,492 12,902 526 2,028 Murhu, St. Luke's Hospital S. P. G " 24 189 2,555 3,965 13,224 396 250 3,650 1 Patna, Duchess of Teck Hospital Z. B. M. M. Women and Children. 60 1,827 27,840 9,154 42,137 19,560 31,142 2 1 Ranchi, St. Barnabas Hospital G. E. L. C. General 27 667 14,007 15,091 38,236 7,181 300 17,925 2 1 Raxaul, Mission Hospital R. B. M. U. " 27 533 6,424 5,135 13,363 3,698 6,528 1 Tisri, Mission Hospital C. of S. M. " 24 367 5,825 7,000 1,150 1,500 1 BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. Anand, Emery Hospital S. A. " 120 3,583 20,037 42,782 1,28,500 1,06,400 2 1 Anand, Mission Hospital I. P. M. " 70 696 5,055 17,010 21,000 1 1 20
586 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA587 Kalimpong, Charteris Hospital. C. of S. M. General 3 4 12 99 538 62 Kalna, Mission Hospital C. of S. M. " 2 1 9 2 2 141 431 25 5 Krishnagar, Mission Hospital C. E. Z. M. S. " 1 7 5 1 1 1 124 109 221 67 Rajshahi, Mission Hospital E. P. M. " 3 2 31 263 573 Ratnapur, Women's Hospital C. E. Z. M. S. Women and Children. 1 4 9 2 1 3 256 903 127 80 Sarenga, Santal Mission Hospital M. M. S. General 2 1 8 3 1 34 210 85 10 BIHAR588 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA-Conld Women's, Children's and General Hospitals-contd. Location and Name of Institution. Control. Type of Service. Bed-Rated Capacity. In-Patients. In-Patients Days. OUT-PATIENT DEPARTMENTS. FINANCIAL. DOCTORS. Individuals treat- ed. Total treatments. Type of Health Service. Fees and Gifts From Patients. Grants. Total Current Ex- penses. Foreign National Government Municiapal 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 BOMBAY PRESIDENCY589 Nadiad, Thoburn Memorial Hos- pital. M. E. Ch. " 120 2,632 10,683 19,844 60,000 2 1 Nasik, Canada Hospital Z. B. M. M. Women and Children. 98 1,018 2,911 9,083 3 2 Nipani, Lafayette Hospital A. P. M. General 15 378 5,472 14,003 5,025 1 Panharpur, Women's Hospital P. I. V. M. Women and Children. 25 236 5,123 18,520 Tours 5,000 6,000 2 Poona (Panch Howd.), St. John's Hospital and Dispensary. C. S. M. V. General 40 1,067 14,722 4,336 14,088 4,090 500 11,441 1 Poona, St. Margaret's Hospital C. of S. M. Women and Children. 116 1,957 7,668 12,542 36,643 2 1 Poona, N. M. Wadia Hospital C. of S. M. General 90 2,000 20,000 25,000 Tours 17,200 1,450 38,000 1 1 Sankeshwar, Mission Hospital C. M. M. L " 20 365 1,825 3,764 10,720 Tours 2,798 3,738 1 1 Vengurla, St. Luke's Hospital A. P. M. " 100 1,352 3,287 11,943 In Schools 77,269 86,626 2 3 Vita, Mission Hospital and Dis- pensary A. P. M " 10 423 3,568 7,491 1 Wai, Willis F. Pierce Memorial Hospital. A. Mt. M. " 80 1,532 25,404 9,466 18,633 17,832 20,332 3 2 CENTRAL INDIA. Chhatarpur, Hospital for Women and Dispensary. A. F. M. Women 25 214 2,477 18,096 6,000 1 1 Dhar, Canada Women's Hospital U. C. C. M. Women and Children. 30 535 7,838 6,768 26,609 1,890 10,688 1 Hat-Piplia, Mission Hospital U. C. C. M. General 30 1,081 8,095 5,451 12,934 1,900 9,600 1 Indore, Women's Hospital U. C. C. M. Women 92 1,867 22,625 11,405 26,026 9,665 24,718 1 1 Jobat, St. Andrew's Hospital C. P. M. General 50 463 5,565 5,820 7,867 880 20,000 1 1 Neemuch, Women's Hospital and Dispensary. U. C. C. M. Women and Children. 50 630 7,860 5,374 18,843 3,000 11,352 1 1 Rutlam, Mission Hospital U. C. C. M. General 65 1,669 19,880 11,286 38,150 11,633 18,885 1 2 CENTRAL PROVINCES. Bilaspur, Jackman Memorial Hospital and Dispensary. D. C. I. M. Women and Children. 65 1,499 26,879 3,357 27,296 11,268 16,236 1 1 Bina, Hospital and Dispensary B. C. M. S. General 10 56 536 18,715 32,145 Camps 1,240 300 10,000 1 Champa, Christian Hospital G. C. M. M " 30 452 4,719 9,756 17,880 2,700 9,900 2 1
590 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA591 Nadiad, Thoburn Memorial Hos- pital. M. E. Ch. " 2 9 3 2 X-Ray 762 853 17 5 Nasik, Canada Hospital Z. B. M. M. Women and Children. 3 3 29 1 55 89 145 86 Nipani, Lafayette Hospital A. P. M. General 1 1 285 193 14 21 Panharpur, Women's Hospital P. I. V. M. Women and Children. 1 2 205 23 7 Poona (Panch Howd), St. John's Hospital and Dispensary. C. S. M. V. General 2 2 3 2 104 Poona, St. Margaret's Hospital. C. of S. M. Women and Children. 1 6 16 1 4 466 264 674 Poona, N. M. Wadia Hospital C. of S. M. General 1 5 1 780 1,345 Sankeshwar, Mission Hospital C. M. M.L. ,, 2 2 84 425 48 Vengurla, St. Luke's Hospital A. P. M. ,, 2 4 20 3 2 X-Ray 2 579 1,348 120 Vita, Mission Hospital and Dis- pensary. A. P. M. ,, 1 1 1,023 2 1 Wai, Willis F. Pierce Memorial Hospital. A. Mt. M. ,, 2 5 8 2 1 X-Ray 4 585 794 128 CENTRAL INDIA592 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA593 Hanumakonda, Victoria Memorial Hospital. A. B. T. M. General 60 711 7,055 6,220 10,600 4,519 13,608 1 2 Jalna, Mission Hospital C. of S. M. " 72 1,522 1,200 3,359 Tours 8,816 20,000 1 2 Karimnagar, Mission Hospital M. M. S. Women 54 954 22,360 " 4,317 13,381 1 1 Khammamet, St. Mary's Hospital C. E. Z. M. S. " 90 1,348 27,256 4,564 13,216 2 Luxettipet, Mission Hospital W. M. M. S. General 14 175 2,100 2,921 12,851 Tours 1 Medak, Mission Hospital M. M. S. 100 1,260 12,988 24,534 6,418 2 Nizamabad, Wood Memorial Hospital. M. M. S. 10 271 3,527 2,152 5,175 536 Sooriapet, Mission Hospital A. B. T. M. Women and Children. 22 318 4,921 1,577 3,186 Vikarabad, Hulda Crawford Memorial Hospital. M. E. Ch. General 20 806 25,806 31,704 Tours 4,373 8,840 1 KASHMIR. Rainawari, Rainawari Hospital. C. M. S. Women 60 600 14,005 10,938 Tours 6,440 1,000 15,366 1 1 Srinagar, Kashmir Mission Hos- pital. C. M. S. General 200 2,124 46,680 29,780 31,683 10,000 47,512 2 3 MADRAS PRESIDENCY. Akidu, Star of Hope Hospital C. B. M. General 24 350 4,176 3,595 8,050 Tours 2,523 8,682 1 1 Ambur, Bethesda Hospital M. E. L. I " 20 152 7,621 16,748 1,367 8,006 1 1 Bhimavaram, Augustana Hospital U. L. C. M. " 30 476 4,193 2,561 8,647 5,070 6,016 1 Chennimalai, Herbert Brough Memorial Hospital. L. M. S " 12 62 257 6,218 9,940 871 1 Chicaeole, Mission Hospital. C. B. M. " 36 311 5,373 11,403 6,000 1 1 Coimbatore, Moses Gnanabara- nam Eye Hospital. C. Sw. M. Eye 35 622 8,402 54,921 5,966 1,500 9,822 2 Conjeeveram, C. of S.M. Hospital C. of S. M. General 45 2,046 10,504 32,110 8,892 13,131 1 1
594 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA595 Hanumakonda, Victoria Memorial Hospital. A. B. T. M. General 1 3 14 1 1 30 48 72 Jalna, Mission Hospital C. of S. M 596 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA597 Madura, American Madura Hospital for Women and Children. A. Md. M. Women and Children. 130 3,470 37,514 63,200 10,738 545 15,070 3 3 Nagari, Nagari Hospital M. M. S. General 30 1,274 13,271 12,723 31,349 1 Nandyal, St. Werburgh's Hos- pital. M. M. S. Women and Children. 33 716 7,920 8,267 23,212 Tours 2,960 9,093 1 2 Narsapur, Godaveri Delta Mission Hospital for Women and Children. C. M. M. L. 598 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA599 Madura, American Madura Hospital for Women and Children A. Md. M. Women and Children. 1 7 44 1 1 8 410 2,044 632 Nagari, Nagari Hospital M. M. S. General 2 2 3 1 48 1,339 25 41 Nandyal, St. Werburgh's Hos- pital. M. M. S. Women and Children. 1 5 1 3 12 45 86 40 Narsapur, Godaveri Delta Mission Hospital for Women and Children. C. M. M. L. " 2 6 3 1 89 104 Nazareth, St. Luke's Hospital S. P. G. General 2 2 1 1 124 670 Nellore, American Baptist Mission Hospital A. B. M. Women and Children. 2 6 36 1 1 162 337 27 Nidadavol, U. L. C. M. Hospital U. L. C. M. General 2 4 2 255 695 18 Nidubrolu, The Jubilee Hospital for Women and Children. Salvation Army Women and Children. 1 5 1 1 42 82 59 Nuzvid, Gifford Mission Hospital S. D. A. General 2 1 14 4 2 168 337 30 25 Ongole, Clough Memorial Hospital A. B. M. " 2 12 30 1 X-Ray 1 1,164 111 19 Pasumalai, Caroline Clark Memo- rial Hospital. Amer. Md. M. " 1 306 Pithapuram, Bethesda Hospital C. B. M. " 1 4 2 1 1 201 2,205 3 Pithapuram, C. B. M. Hospital for Women and Children. C. B. M. Women and Children. 3 4 32 1 8 1 301 825 306 Rajamundry, U. L. C. M. Hospital U. L. C. M. General 1 7 17 4 236 1,284 181 75 Ramnad, St. Martin's Hospital S. P. G. " 1 4 14 1 1 206 431 209 Ranipet, Scudder Memorial Hos- pital. Arcot Asm. " 1 7 18 1 1 X-Ray and Radium. 3 6 461 1,617 88 75 Renigunta, American Luther Hospital. Amer. L. M. " 6 1 1 65 35 5 15 Rentichintala, United Lutheran Hospital. U. L. C. M. " 1 5 2 1 3 50 566 38 Sholinghur, Goodlet Memorial Hospital. Au. P. M. " 1 3 2 22 60 Tirukoilur, Danish Mission Hospital. D. M. S. " 2 8 3 156 822 38 50 Tirupattur, Mission Hospital C. Sw. M. " 2 6 19 1 2 X-Ray 1 1,774 5,613 33 5 Udipi, Mission Hospital B. E. M. Women and Children. 2 5 10 2 1 32 232 56 8
600 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA601 N. W. F. PROVINCE. Bannu. Pennel Memorial Hos- pital. C. M. S. General 118 1,522 21,596 90,459 Tours 6,987 24,329 2 2 Dera Ismail Khan, Reynell Taylor Hospital. C. M. S. " 56 500 1,784 4,006 22,256 1,490 8,290 1 1 Karak, Mission Hospital C. M. S. " 12 148 Mardan, Mission Hospital D. P. M. Women and Children. 80 1 Peshawar, Afghan Mission Hos- pital. C. M. S. General 113 1,405 84,300 11,745 40,004 11,534 24,616 1 1 Tank, Zenana Mission Hospital C. E. Z. M. S. Women and Children. 65 973 8,748 16,892 Camps and Tours. 1 ORISSA. Berhampur, Women's and Children's Hospital. B. M. S. Women and Children. 81 1,234 3,868 21,137 16,572 1 2 Jharsagudah, Mission Hospital N. M. S. Serango. Mission Hospital C. B. M. General 10 113 1,619 15,884 23,607 1,000 1,000 9,437 1 1 PUNJAB. Ambala City, Philadelphia Hos- pital. A. P. M. General 50 600 4,000 17,621 14,000 2 2 Amritsar, St. Catherine's Hos- pital. C. E. Z. M. S. Women and Children. 100 1,491 7,860 23,444 23,000 1 2 Bhiwani, Farrer Hospital B. M. S. General 65 1,332 6,943 17,693 8,051 1,020 16,294 2 2 Chichoki, Mallian Mission Hospital. S. D. A " 35 494 6,926 5,214 8,933 Tours 1,500 12,876 1 Gujarat, Don Memorial Hospital C. of S. M. Women and Children. 35 583 5,804 5,687 15,540 Tours 3,397 11,763 2 Jagadhri, Mission Hospital N. Z. P. M. General 60 926 18,297 6,741 14,722 Tours 4,026 500 22,000 2 1 Jalalpur-Jattan, Mission Hos- pital. C. of S. M " 100 2,177 33,393 13,252 52,107 12,075 376 19,750 2 1 Jhelum, Good Samaritan Hos- pital. A. U. P. M, " 50 591 6,536 42,920 900 12,729 1 Kangra, Maple Leaf Hospital M. S. C. C. Women and Children. 30 600 6,500 6,644 10,745 1,185 11,951 1 1 2 P
602 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA603 N. W. F. PIOVINCE604 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA605 Nasirabad, Cantonment Mission Hospital. C. of S. M. " 30 814 9,600 1,200 12,434 2 Udaipur, Mission Hospital. " General 25 450 14,334 43,654 1,963 12,251 1 1 TRAVANCORE. Cheriazhikel, St. Thomas Hos- pital. M. T. S. C. M. M. General 20 300 3,652 7,642 1,790 2,363 1 Nagercoil, Catherine Booth Hos- pital and Out-stations. S. A " 273 4,838 43,632 27,599 93,215 3 54,377 2,963 74,500 1 7 Neyyoor, South Travancore Medical Mission. L. M. S " 386 8,150 1,09,500 1,83,837 2,20,731 1,08,062 2,128 1,34,318 2 19 UNITED PROVINCES. Akbarpur, Mission Hospital M. M. S. Women 20 284 4,479 13,569 Tours 500 100 4,283 1 Azamgarh, Christian Hospital for Women " " 40 60 2,401 10,091 1,401 9,257 1 Bareilly, Clara Swain Hospital M. E. Ch. " 80 800 10,363 4,273 13,497 11,176 300 28,390 2 2 Cawnpore, St. Catherine Hospital S. P. G. Women and Children. 75 915 3,791 10,544 2,927 1,200 29,127 2 Fatehgarh, Memorial Hospital A. P. M. General 100 1,400 20,142 7,059 18,003 14,691 1,924 28,893 2 1 Fatehpur, Lilly Lyle Broadwell Hospital. W. U. M. S. Women and Children. 45 448 7,571 7,080 20,250 3,546 19,668 1 1 Jhansi, Ackerman-Hayt Hospital " " 50 751 9,434 2,807 18,223 6,683 26,121 2 2 Kachwa, Mission Hospital and Dispensaries. B. G. M. S. General 100 1,233 32,898 67,047 Tours 5,351 45,601 2 1 Kasganj, Mission Hospital. A. P. M. " 32 835 9,408 5,836 11,248 Tours 6,866 1,215 9,571 1 1 Landour, Community Hospital L. C. H. A. " 22 177 1,800 2,701 15,350 14,633 1 1 Lalitpur, Harriot-Benson Memorial Hospital. R. E. C. " 25 600 3,000 15,000 48,000 18,640 1 1 Lucknow. Lady Kinnaird Memorial Hospital. Z. B. M. M. Women and Children. 60 2,320 15,807 38,846 Tours 32,116 2,000 40,931 2 3 Moradabad, Thomas Emery Hospital. S. A. General 50 685 2,714 10,882 Tours 9,772 24,822 1 1
606 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA-contd. Women's, Children's and General Hospitals-concld. Location and Name of Institution. Control Type of Service. NURSES. Qualified Midwives. Qualified Compounders. Qualified Laboratory Technicians. X-Ray and Radium. STUDENTS. OPERATIONS. OBSTETRICAL CASES. Foreign. National. Student. Midwives. Compounders. Laboratory Tech- nicians. Mahor. Minor. Normal. Abnormal. Normal and Ab- normal com- bined. 1 2 3 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 PUNJAB-concld. Ludhiana, Memorial Hospital, Ludhiana. W. C. M. C. Women 7 11 65 70 22 1 554 2,895 924 147 Montgomery, Nancy Fulwood Hospital A. R. P. M. " 3 20 12 Mulan, Mission Hospital C. M. S. Women and Children. 2 5 20 4 307 1,284 258 90 Palampur, St. Luke's Hospital M. S. C. C. General 1 4 1 10 91 31 Palwal, Mission Hospital for Men B. M. S. Men 1 1 3 2 1 X-Ray 4 40 1,148 Palwal Rahmpatpur, Women's Hospital. B. M. S. Women 2 2 12 1 1 5 2 255 224 36 20 Pasrur, Mission Hospital A. U. P. M. Women and Children. 2 1 1 240 36 20 Siatkot, Memorial Hospital. " Women 2 5 20 1 4 20 1,208 251 32 RAJ PUTAN-concld. Ajmer, Mission Hospital C. of S. M. Women and Children. 1 5 15 1 115 247 186 119 Banswara, Sharan Sthan Hospital. U. C. C. M. General 1 5 5 2 48 529 65 27 Dholpur, Sri Kisar B. M. S. Women and Children. 1 2 14 1 74 287 140 8
607 Nasirabad, Cantonment Mission Hospital. C. of S. M. " 4 10 1 136 524 157 Udaipur, Mission Hospital. " General 1 6 123 1,640 TRAVANCORE608 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA. Dispensaries. Location and Name of Institution. Control. Type of Service. Beds609 Chuchadunga, Dispensary S. D. A. " 3,800 Gopalganj, S. D. A. Mission Dispensary. S. D. A. " 5,300 15,400 7,000 Haluaghat, Dispensary N. M. S. " 800 1,200 200 2 Jobarpar, Jobarpar Out-door Dispensary. O. M. " 4,269 20,905 320 70 500 3,000 1 Shikarpur Mission Dispensary C. M. S. " 8,531 21,627 1,116 1,989 BIHAR. Iagatpur, Dispensary 2,347 5,060 Jasidih, Dispensary C. M. S. General 5,514 10,206 1 Kizom, Dispensary C. of S. M. " 2,224 75 250 325 Pokhuria, Dispensary C. of S. M. " 581 230 1 Pulbazar, Dispensary C. of S. M. " 1,076 320 Ranchi, Elizabeth Dispensary G. E. L. C. " 3,836 70 1 Sukhia Pokri, Sukhia Pokri Dis- pensary. C. of S. M. " 5,493 8,118 145 500 716 BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. Ahmednagar, Dispensary S. P. G. General 4,401 19,410 Tours 1,298 7,740 1 Ahwa-Dangs, Dispensary C. B. A. " 1,950 45 325 Baramati, Dispensary Au. C. C. M. " 1,352 3,896 Biladia, Dispensary C. M. S. " 2,357 4,487 Cambay, Dispensary S. A. " 7,470 Dandi, Dispensary W. M. M. S. " 2 4 1,443 2,496 Tours 765 2,377 Dohad, Dispensary I. P. M. " 669 1,079 Tours 98 2,655 1
610 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA611 Chuchadunga, Dispensary S. D. A. " 2 Gopalganj, S. D. A. Mission Dispensary. S. D. A. " 1 Haluaghat, Dispensary N. M. S. " 1 Jobarpar, Jobarpar out-door Dispensary. O. M. " 1 Shikarpur Mission Dispensary C. M. S. " 4 56 BIHAR612 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA613 CENTRAL INDIA. Amkhut, Dispensary and Child- ren's Nursing Home. C. P. M. Children 25 3.020 1 1 Kharua, Dispensary and Nursing Home. U. C. C.M. General 5 33 6.967 20,135 2,400 1 Sitama and Pertabgarh, Dispen- saries. U. C. C. M " 2,000 7,000 120 550 CENTRAL PROVINCES. Amarmow, Dispensary and Hospital. B. C. M. S. General 10 233 1,631 12.016 25,163 Tours 200 2,875 1 Baitalpur, Dispensary E. S. N. A. " 4 147 1,282 6,000 3,255 1 1 Basna, Seva Bhavan Hospital and Dispensary. G. C. M. M. " 12 509 5,475 10.200 1,520 3.220 1 1 Bisrampur, Dispensary E. S. N. A. 4,001 4,407 250 269 582 Chandrapur, Dispensary E. S. N. A. " 1.000 1,000 60 516 Chhapara, Dispensary F. C. S. M. Women and Children. 1,098 7,110 1 Dhuma, Dispensary F. C. S. M " 815 6,533 Dhapewada, Dispensary C. of S. M. General Ghatula, Dispensary A. Mn. M. " 1 Khurai, Dispensary E.N. S. M. " 5,401 17,829 300 1 Mahasamund, Dispensary E. S. N. A " 4,000 268 565 Murwahi, Dispensary N. M. S. " 5,451 7,951 40 800 Nagpur, Village Dispensaries Mure M. Hosp. " 10,229 15,240 Tours 833 2,180 Nimpani, Dispensaries E. N. M. S. " 1,160 1,670 20 409 Panagar, Dispensary C. E. Z. M. S. " 8 9 2,382 5,818 1 Patpara, Dispensary C. M. S. " 12 19 16,802 Saoner, Dispensary C. of S. M. " 1,167 2,635 87 576 1 Seja, Dispensary E. N. M. S. S. " Selu, Dispensary C. of S. M. "
614 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA615 CENTRAL INDIA616 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA. Dispensaries617 MADRAS PRESIDENCY. Christianagaram, Mission Hos- pital and Dispensary. S. P. G. " 8 120 3,349 18,964 3,300 1 Dummagudon, Dispensary and Hospital. C. M. S. " 6 57 16,229 48,661 506 2,000 3,815 1 Kamakerai, Dispensary C. M. M. L. " 4,000 10,000 Kilanjunai, Dispensary S. P. G. " 6 156 8,404 20,707 2,249 1 Nagalapuram, Dispensary. S. P. G. " 7 3,645 18,014 1,755 1 Pungannur, American Arcot Mission Dispensary. Amer. Ar. Mission. " 3 1,194 3,112 Tours 600 2,167 1 Saidapet, Chingleput District Dispensary. Amer. Advent. Mission. " 8,545 3,151 1 Sawyerpuram, Mission Hospital and Dispensary. S. P. G. " 8 77 6,801 44,198 2,296 1 Sompetta, C. B. M. Dispensary C. B. M. " 7 66 3,244 10,550 1,220 4,010 1 Tinnanur, Chingleput Methodist Mission Dispensary. M. M. S " 4,668 7,197 364 100 2,228 1 MYSORE. " Bowringpet, Central Dispensary M. E. Ch. " 87,000 1 Hadya, Dispensary M. M. S. " 2 18 9,114 10,765 Tours 1 N.-W. F. PROVINCE. " Nil. ORISSA. Udayagiri, Moorshead Memorial Dispensary B. M. S. " Tours 200 7,055 2 2 Q
618 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA619 MADRAS PRESIDENCY620 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA621 SIND. Hyderabad, Dispensary and Dai's Training School. C. E. Z. M. Women 2,090 3,597 Tours 1,625 6,580 9,843 1 TRAVANCORE. Agestunpuram, Dispensary L. M. S. General 1 Chandanakavu, Dispensary C. M. M. L 622 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA623 SIND624 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA625 MADRAS PRESIDENCY. Arogyavaram, Union Mission Tuberculosis Sanatorium. (4) 233 625 1 5 2 11 1 1 1,00,468 30,589 1,41,405 Yes Visrantipuram, Tuberculosis Sanatorium. 55 160 2 1 2 1 9,810 5,435 23,350 11 MYSORE STATE. Bangalore, Zenana Mission Tuberculosis Sanatorium. (5) 50 RAJPUTANA. Tilaunia, Mary Wilson Sanatorium 88 82 1 1 1 4 1 1 7,557 15,990 841 PUNJAB. Sanawar, Lady Irwin Tuberculosis Sanato- rium. 58 80 1 1 1 1 (6)2,600 16,168 30 655 UNITED PROVINCES. Almora, Tuberculosis Sanatorium 36 53 1 1 5 4,389 3,360 10,747 9 (1) Conducted by the Government of Bihar. (2) Three Co-operating Missions contribute Rs. 600 each annually. The only other contribution is that paid for salaries of Mission staff. The Sanato- rium has been entirely self-supporting since 1934, with the exception of the contributions mentioned. (3) Maintained and staffed by the St. Luke's Hospital, Vengurla. (4) One foreign pathologist clergyman and one foreign matron additional staff. (5) Maintained and staffed by the Zenana Mission Hospital for Women and Children, Bangalore. (6) Grants through missions.
627 BIHAR. Baripada, Leper Home 120 Bhagalpur, Leper Home 215 Muzaffarpur, Leper Asylum 60 60 1 1 129 2,597 3,289 7,669 Purulia, Leper Home and Hospital 794 1 1 2 3 16 367 3,765 30,718 Yes 79,109 Saldoha, Leper Home 306 BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. Belgaum, Leper Home 44 Miraj, Leper Home 175 Nasik, Leper Home and Hospital 112 108 1 2 3 29 30 7,416 4,667 11,659 Poladpur, Leper Hospital and Home 128 166 1 12 5 9,681 7,320 18,147 Poona (Kondhwa), Leper Home 172 Pui, Pui Leper Hospital and Home 66 74 1 1 77 3,819 1,969 7,338 Sankeshwar, Sankeshwar Mission Hos- pital, Leper Colony. (6) 50 50 Sholapur, Sholapur Leper Home 76 67 2 30 3,600 3,300 7,000 Vengurla, Friends Leprosarium (7) 60 59 CENTRAL INDIA. Dhar, Henderson Memorial Leper Home 64 20 1 24 694 2,634 2,776
626 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA628 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA629 MADRAS PRESIDENCY. Calicut, Chevayur Leper Home and Hospital. 224 296 1 1 386 20 20,416 3,495 26,540 Chingleput, Lady Willingdon Leper Settlements. 750 1,039 1 2 2 1 2 112 1,30,273 Yes Manmadura, The Doyapuram Hospital and Home for Lepers. 282 465 2 1 2 12 183 66 22,325 11,218 34,709 Narsapur, Bethesda Leper Home 150 100 1 1 1 362 5,887 8,530 Ramchandrapuram, Leper Hospital and Home. 132 120 2 (13) 2 1 240 1,495 8,137 3,726 10,949 Salur, Leper Home 126 Vadathorasalur, Leper Asylum 140 142 1 1 1 43 60 9,935 3,828 13,949 Vizianagram, Leper Asylum and Hos- pital. 112 122 1 1 7,367 706 8,426 ORISSA. Cuttack, Leper Hospital 287 PUNJAB. Ambala, Leper Home and Hospital 60 65 1 1 Palampur, Palainpur Leper Home 60 66 1 1 21 465 5,633 7,628 Rawalpindi, Leper Home and Hospital 135 144 1 1 (16) 3 150 14,061 1,579 15,705 Sabathu, Leper Home 160 153 1 1 73 14,700 768 17,094 Tarn Taran, Leper Home 233 TRAVANCORE. Alleppey, Leper Home 38 Nagercoil, Leper Hospital (14) 460 520 Neyyoor, Leper Hospital (15)
630 MISSION MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA-concld. Leper Hospitals and Homes-concld. Location and Name of Institution. Capacity No. of In-Patients. RESIDENT DOCTORS. VISITING DOCTORS. NURSES. Compounders. OPERA- TIONS. Out-patients. GRANTS. Total Current Expenses. Foreign National. Foreign National. Foreign. National. Major. Minor. Government. Mission to Lepers. UNITED PROVINCES. Rs. Rs. Rs. Almora, Leper Home. 88 Chandag, Leper Home. 66 Meerut, Leper Home 59 Naini, Naini Leper Home and Hospital 575 1 1 1 1 12 135 42,900 34,315 95,062 (1) See St. Luke's Hospital figures for staff members. (2) Calcutta Corporation grant. (3) Arthington Hospital staff attending. (4) See Charteris Hospital figures for staff members. (5) Compounder in Training. (6) Sankeshwar Mission Hospital staff attending. (7) St. Luke's Hospital staff attending. (8) Student compounders. (9) Student nurses. (10) Under the management of the Mungeli Area Christian Hospital. (11) Four out-lying Dispensaries in addition to the Leper Home. (12) The whole staff are mission employees except the Superintendent. Their emoluments are met by Government grants. The Mission to Lepers contributes to the Church of Scotland Mission towards the cost of Superintendent. All other maintenance charges are met by Government grants. (13) Locally trained Nurses. (14) Under the management of the Catherine Booth Hospital, Nagercoil. (15) Under the management of the South Travancore Medical Mission, Neyyoor. (16) One foreign pharmacist.
631 APPENDIX III. STATISTICS REGARDING HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES UNDER THE CONTROL OR SUPERVISION OF THE POLITICAL DEPARTMENT.
632 HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES UNDER THE CONTROL OR SUPERVISION OF THE POLITICAL DEPARTMENT. Name of Hospital or Dispensary. By whom maintained. Medical Staff. No. of beds. Daily average number of Total number of patients treated during 1937 Total number of operations performed during 1937. Approximate population and area served by hospital or dispensary. Common diseases found. In- patients. Out- patients. In- patients. Out- patients. Major. Minor. Population. Area. BUNDELKHAND. Civil Hospital, Nowgong Crown Representative and Indian States. R. S. 1 S. A. S. 2. 98 57.33 199.64 1,834 28,497 521 769 14,58,238 Neighbouring States and part of U. P. Malaria, Tuberculo sis, Vesical Calculi, Venereal Diseases, Cataract. INDORE. Residency Hospital, Indore. C. R. Six 12 7.37 61.25 179 10,040 1 155 4,390 1.55 sq. miles. Malwa Bhil Corps Hospital, Indore. C. R. and Regimental Funds. S. A. S. 1. and R. S. in visiting medical charge. 32 1.0 60.0 403 21,900 20 1,600 Central India Agency, Jail Hospital, Indore. C. R. S. A. S. 1 16 3.35 25.92 129 9,463 1 60 300 The Daly College Hospital, Indore. College S. A. S. 1 8 0.4 18.0 180 2,441 25 400 Roberts Nursing Home, Indore. Aided by C. R. R. S. 1 and K. E. Hospital Staff. 8 8.38 1.11 90 422 3 15 King Edward Hospital, Indore. Do. 14 238 234.2 244.7 4,002 89,300 929 5,123 5,00,000 20,000 sq. miles. Malaria, Pneumonia and Tuberculosis. HYDERABAD (Deccan). King Edward Memorial Hospital, Secunderabad. Local Fund 12 268 241.59 503.61 8,875 74,769 421 4,039 1,20,801 Malaria, Diseases of Digestive system, Bronchitis, Dysen- tery and Enteric Fever,
633 BANGALORE. Bowring Civil Hospital, Bangalore. C. R. R. S. 1 86 86.0 192.0 1,464 22,953 186 728 1,34,113 Enteric, Dysentery, Pneumonia, Peptic Ulcer, V. D. Anky- lostomiasis. Lady Curzon Hospital, Bangalore. Do. Do. 127 102 304.0 3,176 29,004 760 69 Ditto. Gosha Hospital, Bangalore. Do. Do. 29 19 108 627 8,865 17 82 Ditto. Isolation Hospital, Bangalore C. R. Do. 48 13 527 Ditto. Veloo Mudr Dispensary. M. P. Do. 617 59,856 869 Ditto. Ulsoor Dispensary M. P. Do. 400 55,166 722 Ditto. Saadut Dispensary M. P. Do. 440 45,554 565 Ditto. Fraser Town Dispensary M. P. Do. 295 45,488 162 Ditto. RAJKOT. West Hospital, Rajkot C. R. C. M. O. 1 A. S. 1. S. A. S. 4 Pathologist 1. 111 96.3 180.8 1,755 17,595 543 1,312 27,00,000 20,000 sq. miles. Malaria, Eye diseases and diseases of diges- tive and respiratory system especially tuberculosis. KASHMIR. Kashmir Residency Dispen- sary, Srinagar. C. R. R. S. 1. S. A. S. 1. 7.38 1,442 1 34 4,300 34 miles radius. Tuberculosis, Venereal diseases, Leprosy and Rheumatism. Kashmir Nursing Home, Srinagar. Private aided by Army- headquarters. 14 rooms +2 Isolation rooms. 1.41 53 C. R.634 HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES UNDER THE CONTROL OR SUPERVISION OF THE POLITICAL DEPARTMENT- concld. Name of Hospital or Dispensary. By whom maintained. Medical Staff. No. of beds. Daily average number of Total number of patients treated during 1937. Total number of operations performed during 1937. Approximate population and area served by hospital. or dispensary. Common diseases found. In- patients. Out- patients. In- patients. Out- patients. Major. Minor. Population. Area. RAJPUTANA Adam's Memorial Hospital, Mount Abu. C. R. R. S. 1 S. A. S. 2. 30 8.70 99.27 296 13,263 24 329 5,000 6 sq. miles. Malaria and Pneu- monia. Residency Hospital, Jaipur C. R. S. A. S. 1 2 0.08 54.12 3 8,149 226 700 Residency Area Malaria, Pneumonia, Respiratory diseases, Digestive diseases and Ophthalmia. Residency Hospital, Udaipur C. R. R. S. 1 S. A. S. 1. 6 0.59 49.38 11 4,818 150 1,000 3 sq. miles. Malaria, Syphilis, Dysentery, diarrhoea and Rheumatic fever. Agency Dispensary, Bharat- pur. C. R. S. A. S. 1 88.37 5,338 70 500 Agency and Civil Lines. Malaria, Conjunctivi- tis, Respiratory and digestive derange- ments. C. R.-Crown Representative. R. S.-Residency Surgeon. S. A. S.-Sub-Assistant Surgeon.
635 APPENDIX IV. STATISTICS REGARDING HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES UNDER THE CONTROL OR SUPERVISION OF THE EXTERNAL AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT. 2 S
636 HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES UNDER THE CONTROL OR SUPERVISION OF THE EXTERNAL AFFAIRS DEPART- MENT. Name of Hospital or Dispensary. By whom maintained. Medical Staff. No. of beds. Daily average number of Total number of patients treated during 1937. Total number of operations performed during 1937. Approximate population and area served by hospital or dispensary. Common diseases found. In- patients. Out- patients. In- patients. Out- patients. Major. Minor. Population. Area. BALUCHISTAN. Civil Hospital, Quetta C. G. C. S. 1 A. S. 1 S. A. S. 6 100 54.79 261.47 2.052 50,674 261 934 34,881 540 Sqr. miles. Diseases of digestive and respiratory system and eyes; Malaria and Ulcers of skin. Four Rural Dispensaries C. G. S. A. S. 3 10 miles radius. Civil Hospital, Loralai C. G. Agency Surgeon 1 S. A. S. 2 46 24.68 146.55 1,073 28,859 60 946 3,000 Malaria, Sand Fly fever, Pneumonia, Rheumatism and eye diseases. GILGIT. Civil and Scouts Hospital, Gilgit, and Hospitals and Dispensaries at637 NORTH WAZIRISTAN. Civil Hospital, Miranshah C. G. Agency Surgeon 1 S. A. S. 1 16 36.19 111.09 711 28,824 107 1,275 1,40,000 65x60 miles. Malaria and Gun shot- wounds. Khajuri (Bichi, Kashkai) Dispensary C. G. S. A. S. 1 7.96 726 20 Ditto. Idak Dispensary C. G. 54.93 13,818 596 Ditto. Datta Khel Dispensary C. G. S. A. S. I 26.10 7,808 87 Ditto. Dosalli Dispensary C. G. S. A. S. 1 17.69 4,829 76 Ditto. Spinwan Dispensary C. G. S. A. S. 1 14.85 4,377 61 Ditto. Shewa Dispensary C. G. 20.89 2,193 39 Ditto. Razmak Hospital C. G. A. S. 1 16 9.97 90.97 476 24,297 25 722 Ditto. Miranshah Scout Hospital C. G. Agency Surgeon 1 and S. A. S. 3 70 26.40 15.85 688 2,213 13 326 2,864 Ditto. Dosalli Scout Hospital C. G. S. A. S. 1 15 4.23 8.98 260 1,428 3 75 Ghiom Scout Hospital C. G. S. A. S. 1 10 1.85 13.10 8 141 Datta Khel Scout Hospital C. G. S. A. S. 1 12 1.90 5.75 97 822 18 Spinwan Scout Hospital C. G. S. A. S. 1 16 1.67 6.90 78 785 27 Bichi-Kashkai (Khajuri) Scout Hospital. C. G. S. A. S. 1 10 1.69 7.57 18 137 7 Shewa Scout Hospital C. G. 0.62 3.10 43 288 5 Camp Hospitals C. G. 2.36 15.16 181 1,386 30 C. G.638 HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES UNDER THE CONTROL OR SUPERVISION OF THE EXTERNAL AFFAIRS DEPART- MENT639 KABUL. British Legation Hospital, Kabul. C. G. Legation Surgeon 1 and S. A. S. 1 6 112.1 6 40,909 8 177 2,00,000 Trachoma, Rlieuma- tism. Digestive disorders, Tuber- Leprosy. culosis, Leprosy. IRAN. Meshed Consulate Dispen- sary (June to December 1937). His Britannic Majesty's Consul- General for Khorasan. Medical Officer, Meshed. 3.1 527 6 120 Trachoma, Trichiasis, Intestinal Diseases, Dysentery, Pneu- monia, Diseases of skin, Venereal, diseases and Dental caries. British Vice-Consulate Hos- pital, Zabul. Do. One Indian I. M. S. Officer and one S. A. S. 16 0.09 31.0 32 11,521 6 29 18,000 10 miles radius. Ditto. British Vice-Consulate Dis- pensary, Zahidan. Do. S. A. S. 1 2 666 6 530 Ditto. NEPAL. British Legation Hospital, Nepal. C. G. Legation Surgeon 1 and S. A. S. 1 16 4.04 121.4 83 32,291 21 176 2,60,000 15 x 20 miles. Goitre, Infections of Ascaris, Hook worm, Elephantiasis, Dy- sentery, Malaria, Scabies, Trachoma. PERSIAN GULF. Residency Dispensary, Bushire C. G. R. S. 1 Military A. S. 1 5 0.27 31.07 6 5,183 19 188 15,000 10 sq. miles. Malaria, Eye diseases, Diseases of Respi- ratory system. Victoria Memorial Hospital, Bahrain. Aided by Govt. M. O. Bahrain. 12 Agency Hospital, Mascut . Govt. A. S. 1 S. A. S. 1 20 TIBET. Civil Dispensary, Gyantse C.G. Agency Surgeon 1 S: A. S. 1 26 871 18 159 Venereal diseases, Dental cases re- quiring extraction, Minor injuries, Indi- gestion, Ophthal- mic cases mainly Cataract. C. C.641 APPENDIX V. REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE LHASA MEDICAL MISSION (1936-37.) BY CAPTAIN W. S. MORGAN, I. M. S.
642 REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE LHASA MEDICAL MISSION, 1936-37. The duties of the Medical Officer to the Lhasa Mission are two-fold643 from Tsona, 3 weeks journey from Lhasa on the Assam border and he had been waiting in Lhasa 3 months for our arrival: he was instrumental in sending us another case from the same area. Two other cases came from Khongpo in Northern TibetINDEX. PAGE. A Acts646 PAGE. C647 PAGE. E Earthquake648 PAGE. H649 PAGE. K650 M651 M652 M653 M654 M655 PAGE. N656 PAGE. R Rabies and Anti-rabic treatment 211, 237, 238, 240, 241. Radiology657 PAGE. S Sanatoria658 PAGE. TList of Agents in India from whom Government of India Publications are available. (a) PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT BOOK DEPOTS. MADRAS: