10 Copies 131/IP NI. 3.IX A IP/19/NZ.3 Edinburgh REPORT ON THE Nagpur school of Medicine CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1870. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74950770.tif] NÁGPÚR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1871.
No. 1192/107 FROM THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Dated Nagpúr, the 8th June 1871. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your Report on the Nágpúr School of Medicine for the year 1870-71, and to inform you that the Officiating Chief Commissioner considers the results of the year to be satisfactory. 2. The school, generally, appears to have flourished; and it is gratifying to find that it has at last among its students one Maratha Brahman, who promises well in every way. The example sot by him will, it is hoped, be followed by others. 3. Colonel Keatinge notes the favourable manner in which you refer to the services of the Teachers of the School and their Assistants, and he would express his approval of the mode of teaching by Babu Jadab Kishan Ghos. The remarks of the Babu, as quoted by you in your 11th para., express sound views. 4. Colonel Keatingo is also glad to think that the Native gentlemen resid- ing at Nâgpúr take an interest in the School. Their support is calculated to render it popular with all classes. 5. it afford the Officiating Chief Commissioner pleasure to acknowledge the good management of the School, and the success with which it has been accompanied. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. W. NEILL, Offg. Secretary
No. 28. FROM THE PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nágpúr, the 3rd May 1871. SIR, The fourth Session of the Nágpúr School of Medicine having come to a close, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commis- sioner my third report of the progress of the School. 2. At the close of the preceding Session, March 31st, 1870, thirty- two students remained under instruction, and on the 1st of June an examination of candidates for admission was held, in which I was kindly assisted by Captain Jacob of the Educational Department. Forty-one candidates presented them- selves, and were .examined in Urdú, reading, writing from dictation and the first four rules of Arithmetic. Sixteen were found sufficiently qualified, and were ac- ordingly admitted. 3. Of the sixteen new students, ten were Mussalmans, two Rajpúts, and two Márathá Bráhmans, one Vaidya and one Kayath Hindú. Six were inhabitants of Nagpúr and Kámthí, two came from Jaba1púr, one from Ságar, one from Chándá, two from Furrakabad, one from Bijnore, one from Ascot, one from Bangalore, and one from Mymun Sing. 4. At the commencement of the Session 1870-71 there were therefore forty-eight students Of these, three absconded, five were dismissed for incapa- bility, and three for misconduct in the course of the year. Twenty-one, being found qualified on examination at its close, were made Passed Medical pupils and reported fit for admission into the service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants. Seventeen students, therefore, remain on the rolls at the close of the Session. 5. Of the sixteen students admitted in June 1870, three require special mention,2 ing Government on the completion of his course, with the intention of establish- ing himself hereafter as an independent Medical practitioner. 6. Some progress has thus been made towards the carrying out oftwo of the principal ends for which the .Nágpúr School. of Medicines was established, viz., the education of Maráthás to be the physicians of their own race, and the for- mation of a class of independent Medical practitioners. 7. The third and no less important object of the school,3 also speaks highly of the attention and respectful conduct of his class. Although. I have already spoken favourably of the B á bú, I think I should omit a portion of the praise due to him, if I failed to notice here that his work is particularly ar- duous. as he has to teach the two important subjects of Surgery and Anatomy. I have had abundant proof of the great amount of time and energy he expends upon each. 12. Results of Examinations.4 15. With this sum. I have been enabled to provide the following prizes;5 Mohan Lal was first in Materia-Medica, and therefore obtained the prize in that subject. In Anatomy he and Ramchandra Vishnu stood so nearly equal, that it was difficult to determine to whom the prize was due, On the whole it was thought that there was perhaps a slight superiority on the part of Ramchandra Vishnu, amd the point was almost decided in his favour, when he with great generosity came forward and begged that the prize might be awarded to Mohan Lal, who as the younger man required some encouragement, while he himself was quite satisfied with the knowledge he had gained. Under these circumstances the prize has been given to Mohan Lal, but I do not think the good feeling of Ramehandra Vishnu should be allowed to go unrewarded, I have therefore thought it right to present him on behalf of the School with a book prize equivalent in value to that awarded to Mohan Lal. 20. Finance.Cash Account of the Náypúr School of Medicine from 1st April 1870 to 31st March 1871. RECEIPTS. Rs. A. P. Rs. A P. DISBURSEMENTS. Rs. A P. Rs. A. P. Balance in hand 1st April 1870 3,132 14 0 Pay of Principal from April 1870 to March 1871, being 12 months at Rs. 250 per mensem 3,000 0 0 Government grant from 1st April 1870 to 31st March 1871 12,000 0 0 Pay of three Teachers from April 1870 to March 1871, being 12 months at Rs. 200 each 7,200 0 0 Pay of students 2,749 7 9 Subscriptions from districts for the year 1870-71 2,950 0 0 Contingencies. 12,949 7 9 Subscription received from Native gentlemen for prizes 475 0 0 Establishment 564 12 0 Furniture 128 0 0 Stationery and petty charges 162 0 6 Fees from Hospital Assistants for registration of diplomas 22 8 0 15,447 8 0 Paid for Urdu books for use of students 310 7 0 854 12 6 Cost of engraving diploma plate, printing 23 copies, freight, and charges. 220 0 0 Cost of executing die for Prize Medal 125 0 0 Two silver medals, prizes of 1869-70 with charges 30 0 0 Prize books for students, 1869-70 95 0 0 Cost of two gold medals and four silver medals and one silver watch prize for 1870-71 280 0 0 Cost of prize books for 1870-71 70 0 0 Cost of endorsing stamp with School device, and engraving a book plate and printing 50 copies 70 0 0 Sundry remittances to England for books purchased for Library, &c., freight and charges, &c. 725 2 8 1,925 9 8 15,729 13 11 Balance in hand on 31st March 1871 2,850 8 1 Total Government Rupees 18,580 6 0 Total Government Rupees 18,580 6 0 W. B. BEATSON, M.D., F.R.C.S. Principal, Náypúr School of Medicine.
IP|19|NZ.3 Edinburgh REPORT ON THE nagpur school of medicine CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1871. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74951138.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHILF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS: 1872, 4-27-290
No.3122/108 FROM THE ASST. SECRETARY To THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE PRINCIPAL NAGPUIR MEDIAL SCHOOL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 2nd September 1872. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge receipt of your fourth Annual Report on the working of the Nagpur Medical School. 2. The School was started in 1868, and had three principal ob- jects in view:ii General of Hospitals. The Chief Commissioner regrets that it was necessary to refuse admittance to these youths, not only because many of them " were well educated young men, capable of receiving and profiting by the teaching of the School," but also on the broader ground, that the second object for which the School was formed stands in peril of being defeated, 4. In 1868, of the 22 new students admitted, 13 were natives of Nagpur; in 1869, of 16 admitted, 8 belonged to these Provinces; and again in 1870, out of 16 admitted, 10 belonged to them. In the pre- sent year, of the new students, only 5 were natives of these Provinces, viz., 2 came from Sagar and 3 from Hoshangabad. It may, however, be that some of the young men to whom admission was refused may follow your instructions and qualify themselves in the manner prescribed by the Government; should this not be the case, the Chief Commissioner would be not unwilling to take into consideration the advisability of having a Local as well as a Military class in the School; and with this view Mr. Morris desires to be favoured with ex- plicit information as to the compromise said to exist in the Bengal School of Medicine regarding which you have in para. 9 quoted Babu Durga Doss Roy at length. 5. The results of the examination the Chief Commissioner con- siders satisfactory. 8 Students had completed the full term of study and were found duly qualified, and 7 of them have been recommend- ed for admission into the Medical service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants; the eighth was a free Student, receiving no stipend, and consequently exempt from the condition of Government service. The Students admitted last year also seem to have done well on the whole, for you write that " 4 passed very satisfactory exami- nations in both Materia Medica and Anatomy, and 5 had made " fair progress." It is a matter for regret that you were obliged to recommend the dismissal of 2. Their dismissal may, it is hoped, be a warning to the three youths, Jageer Parshad, Lutchmon, and Mir Syud Ali, who are to be tried for another year. 6. The question of arming the Principal with a more summary power of dismissal, power to inflict fines, and to refuse annual in- crease of stipend in cases of incompetence, negligence, and inatten- tion, will receive due consideration. 7. Mr. Morris is glad to observe that you are again able to speak in high praise of the Staff of Teachers, and requests that you will communicate to Babus Durga Doss Roy, Jadub Kishon Ghose; and Nundo Lal Ghose his acknowledgments for the Zeal and effi- ciency which they displayed. It is a peculiar good fortune for the pupils to be attached to a School in which the numbers not being large, individual instruction can be attended to. In large Schools like the Calcutta and Agra
111 ones, where pupils count by hundreds, attention to each individual pupil is of course impossible. The prizes which the liberality of Native gentlemen residing at Nagpur enables you to bestow must also offer inducement to increased diligence and exertion on the part of the Students. In conclusion, I am to thank you for your report, and to con- gratulate you on the generally successful results of your labours. I have the honor to be, Sir, LINDSAY NEILL, Offg. Asst. Secretary.
No. 24. FROM THE PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, Dated Nagpur, the 20th May 1872. SIR, The fifth session of the Nagpur School of Medicine having come to a close, I have the honor to submit, for the information of the Chief Commis- sioner, my fourth Report of the progress of the School. 2 At the close of the preceding session, 31st March 1871, 17 Students remained under instruction; and on the 1st June 15 new students, attached to the School by order of the Inspector General of Hospitals, Indian Medical De- partment, reported themselves for admission. 3. Thirteen Candidates for admission had previously presented themselves before me in consequence of a Notification issued in the Central Provinces' Gazette, as in former Years. This notice was withdrawn at the instance of the Inspector General of Hospitals, who pointed out in his Secretary's letter No. 66, dated Fort William, 27th April 1871, that pupils admitted to the School without having undergone a year's preliminary training in a Regimental Hospital or Civil Dispensary would be ineligible for Government employ as Hospital Assistants. In accordance with the Inspector General's suggestion, admission was refused to the candidates who appeared in consequence of the Notification, and they were instructed to return to their homes, travelling allowance being granted to them, and to qualify themselves for admission in the manner laid down as in G. G. O. No. 550, of the 5th June 1868. This step was the only one open to me in face of the order and instructions quoted, but I took it with much regret, as many of the candidates were well educated young men, capable of receiving and profiting by the teaching of the School. 4. Of the 15 new students sent by the Inspector General, 2 were from Sagar, 3 from Hoshangabad, 5 from Benares, 1 from Amballa, 1 from Allahabad,. 1 from Fyzabad, and 2 from Lucknow. 5 of the 15 were therefore natives or inhabitants of the Central Provinces,-8 were Hindus and 7 Mussulmans. 5. At the commencement of the session 1871-72 there were therefore 32 students; of these, 1 absconded, and 2 were dismissed as incapable; 8 were found qualified on examination, and of these 7 have been reported fit for admission into the service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants. 21 students therefore remain on the rolls at the close of the session.
2 6. In proceeding with the usual course of instruction it soon became evi- dent that although some of the 15 new pupils were fair specimens of their class, they were as a body inferior to the general run of students admitted in previous years. In September, at the desire of the Inspector General of Hospitals, I held an examination of these young men for the purpose of ascertaining the extent of their qualifications in Hindustani (reading, writing, and arithmetic) and compar- ing them with the students of former years. Their number was then 14, 1 having previously absconded; and of these, 6 (Mussulmans) were found to be sufficiently acquainted with Urdu and Arithme- tic; 5 (Hindus) knew Hindi and Arithmetic; 2 (Hindus) knew a little English, but were insufficiently acquainted with either Urdu Hindi, or Arithmetic; 1s (Musulman) knew Urdu but had no knowledge of Arithmetic. As to their progress in the School, 5 had done well, 4 were pretty good, but deficient in diligence; 4 were very dull and possessed of very little aptitude for learning,3 dismissal. I would here point out that under existing rules the Principal has not sufficient power over the pupils, and that his hands require to be strength- ened. Dismissal itself ceases to be feared, when in the ordinary course of things months elapse before it is sanctioned. The Principal should be armed with a more summary power of dismissal, power to inflict fines, and to refuse annual increase of stipend in cases of incompetence, negligence, and inattention. 8. Teachers.4 with him in thinking that the establishment of a local service similar to the- Bengali class of the Calcutta Medical College is worthy the attention of Government. 11. Babu Jadub Kishon Ghose lectured 88 times on Surgery, and held 58 examinations; on Anatomy he lectured 93 times and held 42 examinations. Dissection was also carried on as diligently as possible, but only 36 bodies were obtainable during the cold season. The Babu speaks well of the conduct and pro- gress of his class, and after closely watching his teaching during the year, and per- sonally carrying out the general examination at its close, I can speak with con- fidence as to the excellence of his method of teaching. He does not consider the result of the examination of the new students as very satisfactory, and expresses the following opinion as to their aptitude for learning:5 There were 8 students who had completed the full term of study, and all were found sufficiently qualified,6 For second year Students. 7. Abir Chand Rai Bahadur's prize for knowledge in Materia Medica, a Silver Medal. 8. G. Ramiah Garu's prize for proficiency in Anatomy, a Silver Medal. 9. Raja Janoji Bhonsla's prize to the second best in Anatomy, a Silver Medal. 10. Raja Janoji Bhonsla's prize to the second best in Materia Medica, a Book Prize. 11. G. Ramiah Garu's prize for proficiency in Medicine, a Silver Medal. 12. Raja Janoji Bhonsla's prize for proficiency in Surgery, a Silver Medal. 13. Raja Suliman Sha's prize to the second best in Surgery, a Book Prize. 14. Raja Suliman Sha's prize to the second best in Medicine, a Book Prize. 15. For good conduct and assistance to the lecturer on Materia Medica, a Book Prize. For first year Students. 16. G. Ramiah Garu's prize for progress in Materia Medica, a Book Prize. 17. G. Ramiah Garu's prize for progress in Anatomy, a Book Prize. 18. Raja Janoji Bhonsla's prize to the second best in Materia Medica, a Book Prize. 19. Raja Janoji Bhonsla's prize to the second best in Anatomy, a Book Prize. 15. The examinations for these prizes were conducted as usual by written questions, which were answered in writing in my presence. The answers were altogether satisfactory, and in some cases exceedingly good. Prakash Chunder Sen, the free student before spoken of, showed as usual a decided superiority, and obtained the first prizes for Medicine, Surgery, and General Proficiency. The second prize for third year students in Medicine and Surgery was gained by Mahomed Syed Yousoof Ally, Of the second year students, Mohun Lall obtained the first prizes in Surgery and Medicine, and the second in Materia Medica. Mahomed Yacub, a very diligent and attentive student, gained the first in Materia Medica and Anatomy, and the second in Medicine. Ramchandra Vishnu, the Maratha Brahmin, took the second prize in Anatomy, and Ruffiuddeen the second in Surgery. Of the new students, Chota Lall obtained the first prize in Matera Medica, Nohur the first in Anatomy; and the second prizes in these branches were gained by Joongay and Shew Pershad. 16. Finance.7 Materia Medica specimens, and chemical apparatus. The School now possesses a really good Medical library, a fair museum of Materia Medica, and the founda- tion of a Chemical laboratory, which I hope shortly to bring into working order. The balance remaining in hand will be required to meet unforeseen contin- gences, and to complete the library, museum, and laboratory. Contributions from the Local Funds of the districts will not this year be required, the expenses of the current, having been provided for by the Adminis- tration. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, W. B. BEATSON, Principal, Nagpur School of Medicine.
8 Cash Account of the Nagpur School of Medicine from 1st April 1871 to 31st March 1872. RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Balance in hand on 1st April 1871 2,850 8 1 Pay of Principal from 1st April 1871 to 31st March 1872. 3,000 0 0 Government Grant from 1st April 1871 to 31st March 1872 12,238 11 4 Pay of 3 Teachers from do. to do. 7,438 11 4 Pay of 2nd and 3rd year's students from do. to do. 1,134 2 5 11,572 13 9 Subscriptions from districts for the year 1871-72 3,210 0 0 Contingencies. Subscriptions received from Native gentlemen for prizes. 400 0 0 Establishment 608 0 0 Fees from Hospital Assistants for registration of Diplomas. 52 8 0 Furniture 497 5 3 Stationery and petty charges 187 3 6 1,292 8 9 Received for books purchased by the teachers 29 1 4 Paid for Urdu Books for use of Students 120 14 3 Do. do. by Native Doctors 15 0 0 Paid for English Books from England, including freight and other charges 1,437 9 10 Do. on account of a clock sold 7 8 0 Paid for Chemicals 551 11 9 Paid for Materia Medica specimens 602 10 0 15,952 12 8 Paid for engraving medals 53 13 0 Received from Government on account of pay of 15 Native Medical pupils from May 1871 to 31st March 1872 975 12 3 Paid travelling allowance to applicants for admission 108 0 0 2,874 10 10 Pay of 1st year Native Medical Pupils 975 12 3 Stoppages from Native Medical pupils on account of Books 64 8 0 Travelling allowance to Medical Pupils 73 6 0 16,789 3 7 Do. from do. on account of Fines 55 8 5 Balance in hand 3,195 2 3 Pay of a deserted Native Medical pupil 11 14 5 Received from Government on account of travelling allowance to Medical pupils 131 14 10 73 6 0 Total Rupees 19,984 5 10 Total Rupees 19,984 5 10 41317 M3.IXA IP/19/NZ.3 IP Edinburgh REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1872. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74951942.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS 1873. ENo. 1678/74 FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, OFFG. ASST. SECRETARY TO CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 21st May 1873. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge receipt of your letter No. 11 dated 28th ultimo, being your fifth Annual Report on the working of the Nagpur Medical School. 2. The most satisfactory feature in the report is the fact that out of 15 new pupils sent to the School in June last, by the Inspector General of Hospitals, as many as 14 belonged to the Central Provinces. For previous years the figures stood thus:2 a very creditable examination. It is not however alone to the Brahmin class that you should look for pupils, for in the Bombay Presidency there are, the Chief Commissioner has reason to believe, many excellent Medical Subordinates belonging to the Sudra caste, and there may be similar men here who only require encouragement to come forward. This point was brought to your notice by the Chief Commissioner in 1869, and he trusts it has not been lost sight of. Regarding the Mahratta Brahmin already mentioned, you write that "he last year was nearly overcome when he found that under new regulations "he could not be certain of being retained in the Central Provinces." The exigencies and demands of the medical service may of course from time to time require that pupils, who have received their education in these Provinces, should be drafted elsewhere, but the Chief Commissioner hopes that for some years to come this will be the exception and not the rule. He would have been glad to learn from you how many of the pupils, who have been passed out of the school, are in Medical employ in these Provinces, and how the training. they have received in it has fitted them for the discharge of their present duties. On these points your report is silent, and Mr. Morris desires that you will notice them in future years. 4. The result of the examination is satisfactory, and with the numerous prizes which the liberality of the patrons of the school enables you to offer, it would have been a matter of surprize if the students had not earnestly Striven to do well. 5. The expenses of the institution have been unusually large this year, owing to the necessity of procuring anatomical models and books of reference from Europe. Such expenditure will not however recur every year. 6. The Staff of teachers remains the same as in former years, and to one and all Mr. Morris desires you to convey his acknowledgments for the man- ner in which they have worked, and the assistance they have given you in the management of the School, which has been very satisfactory, and such as to merit the best thanks of the Administration. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, LINDSAY NEILL, Offg. Asst. Secretary. L.No. 11 FROM THE PRINCIPAL NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, TO THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 28th April 1873. SIR, The sixth session of the Nagpur School of Medicine having come to a close, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commissioner my fifth Annual Report of the progress of the School. 2. At the close of the preceding session, March 31st 1872, 21 students remained under instruction, and on the 1st of June, 15 new students, attached to the School by order of the Inspector General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department, reported themselves for admission. 3. Of the 15 new students sent by the Inspector General, 6 came from Jabalpur, 2 from Hoshangabad, 1 from Seoni, 1 from Sagar, 2 from Betul, 1 from Nowgong, 1 from Gadarwara, and 1 from Narsingpur. Six were Hindus and 9 Mahomedans. 4. At the commencement of the session 1872-73 there were therefore 36 students. Of these two absconded, 3 were dismissed as incapable, and 7 being found qualified on examination have been reported fit for admission into the Hospital Assistant Class. Twenty four students therefore remain on the rolls at the close of the session. 5. In the number of students passed out of the School as qualified Hospi- tal Assistants on this occasion, the Mahrata Brahmin, Ramchunder Vishnu, who has been frequently mentioned in former reports, is included. The passing of this young man is a source of much satisfaction to the teachers and myself. I cannot speak too highly of the determination he has shown in the pursuit of his studies, now brought to a successful termination in face of the violent opposition of his friends and relatives. More than once he wavered, and last year was nearly overcome when he found that under new Regulations he could not be certain of being retained in the Central Provinces. But his good common sense finally triumphed, and he now leaves the school a well qualified Hospital As- sistant with the best wishes of his teachers. 6. In my last Annual Report, I had to notice that the new pupils were not equal to the general run of students admitted in former years, and I might repeat this remark on the present occasion, but I do not desire to dwell upon it. Some experience in the superintendence of the Medical education of young men of this class has proved to me that careful teaching, aided by kindness and encourage- ment, will do much to raise even a low standard of intelligence. I have endea- voured to impress this feeling upon the teachers of the School, and I am glad to say that they have cordially responded to it. Babu Jadab Kishen Ghose, in his report on the working of his class, mentions the inferiority of some of the new pupils, but he adds "I think however that it is neither proper nor becoming in us to be constantly harping on this subject. It is better in my humble opinion that we should continue to do our appointed work to the best of our ability, and B. k.2 try to make the best of the new admissions." His colleagues have been actuated by the same spirit of determination to overcome difficulties, and they have been rewarded by seeing the slothful, the half hearted, and the timid, gradually change into eager, resolute, and self confident students. Two of the new pupils have certainly thrown up their books and absconded from the school. Complete success can never be expected, but more would I am certain have gone, had their imme- diate teachers been less earnest and faithful in their work, or less kind and conci- liatory in their method. 7. The conduct of the pupils of all grades has been uniformly good, and their attendance at lectures, examinations, and dissections exemplary. Much good has, I believe, been effected in this respect by the power of stopping promotion and increase of pay accorded to the Principal since my last report. 8. Teachers.3 7 students, below mentioned by name, have been recommended for admission into the service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants:4 10. Rajah Janoji Bhonsla's prize to the 2nd best in Anatomy5 petent staff of teachers, its educational power is very considerable, and it is only desirable that it should be more fully utilized. It is now in a position to relieve the overcrowded Presidency Schools, and it could teach with ease three times its present number of pupils, if stipends and hutting allowance could be provided for them from the Presidency from which they are sent. The balance remaining in hand will be required for further additions to the Library, Museum, and Laboratory, and to meet unforeseen contingencies. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, W. B. BEATSON, M.D., Principal, Nagpur School of Medicine.
Cash Account of the Nagpur School of Medicine from 1st April 1872 to 31st March 1873 . RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS. Rs. A Rs. A P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Balance in hand on the 1st April 1872 3,195 2 4 Pay of Principal 3,000 0 0 Pay of 3 Teachers 8,930 10 3 Pay of students 2,375 4 1 Received from Government on account of Salaries, Pay of students, and Contingencies 15,464 11 4 14,305 14 4 Contingencies. Hutting money 18 0 0 Establishment 792 0 0 Travelling allowance 78 1 0 Furniture 17 0 0 Stationery and Petty charges 172 0 0 Paid for Urdu books for students 107 12 0 Subscriptions from Native Gentlemen for prizes 350 0 0 Sundry remittances to England for books purchased for Library, engraving, freight and other charges 345 11 1 Cost of prize books and Medals 700 0 0 Received from Hospital Assistants for registration of diplomas 17 8 0 Sent to England for Anatomical Models, freight and other charges 2,016 0 0 Travelling allowance 78 1 0 Hutting money 18 0 0 15,928 4 4 Paid to a Native Medical Pupil for 2 months, in com- pensation for money retrenched from his pay by Allahabad Paymaster 16 0 0 4,262 8 11 Balance in hand 554 15 5 Total Rupees 19,123 6 8 Total Rupees 19,123 6 8 B.k.M3.IXA IP/19/NZ.3 IP Edinburgh REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1873. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74951978.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1874. GNo. 2102/103 FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, OFFG. ASST. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. TO THE PRINCIPAL OF THE NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 19th June 1874. SIR, I am directed by the Chief Commissioner to acknowledge receipt of your sixth Annual Report of the progress of the Nagpur School of Medicine. 2. At the Annual Examination eleven students proved themselves qualified for admission into the class of Hospital Assistants, and have already been attached, some to dispensaries in this Province, and the services of others placed at the disposal of the Inspector General of the Indian Medical Department. This gives a total of 55 students passed out of the school since its formation in 1868, and it is gratifying to learn that, with one exception, the conduct of all these young men has been good, and that they have shown themselves efficient and good practical workers. 3. The teaching staff of the school has remained the same as in former years, but will this year lose the services of Assistant Surgeon Nundoo Lall Ghose, who has been transferred to the Medical School about to be opened at Patna. The Chief Commissioner trusts that a worthy successor will soon take his place. 4. The school appears in every way to be in a thoroughly satisfactory condition, and the completion of the New City Hospital, which has been placed under the executive charge of Assistant Surgeon Jadub Kishn Ghos, will afford additional facilities for clinical instruction. 5. The only matter in which you appear to meet with difficulties is the class of students which is attached to the school. Up to 1871 the school was open to all comers; but in that year the Inspector General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department, pointed out that no pupil would be eligible for Government employ as a Hospital Assistant unless he had undergone a year's preliminary training in a Regimental hospital or Civil dispensary; and for the last three years students have been sent to the school by the Inspector General. The result does not appear to be satisfactory. The Chief Commissioner, on referring to your reports, finds that out of 15 students so attached in 1871, 1 absconded before September of that year, 4 were found to be very dull and to be possessed of very little aptitude for learning, and I was found so utterly idle and inattentive that you were compelled to recommend his dismissal. Again
2 out of 15 students attached to the school in 1872, 2 absconded, 3 were dismissed as incapable; and out of the remaining 10, 2 had made very little progress at the end of the year. Lastly, out of the 20 new students who joined in 1873, 8 were dismissed for incapacity and inattention, and 2 more have been recommended for dismissal. These bad results seem to indicate the necessity of some modification in the existing systemNo. 25. FROM THE PRINCIPAL OF THE NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 9th June 1874. SIR, The seventh session of the Nagpur School of Medicine having come to a close, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commissioner my Sixth annual report of the progress of the school. 2. At the close of the preceding session, March 31st 1873, 24 students remained under instruction; and on the 1st of June 20 new students, attached to the school by order of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department, reported themselves for admission. 3. Of the 20 new students, 2 were inhabitants of Nagpur, 6 came from Jabalpur, 3 from Narsinghpur, 1 from Betul, 1 from Hoshangabad, 1 from Sagar, 1 from Indore, 1 from Hyder- abad, 2 from Arcot and 2 from Madras. 14 therefore belonged to the Central Provinces and 6 to other districts. 14 were Mussalmans and 6 Hindus. 4. At the commencement of the session 1873-74 there were therefore 44 students. Of these, 8 were dismissed for incapacity and inattention; and 11 proved qualified by examina- tion, have been admitted into the Hospital Assistant Class. 25 students therefore remain on the rolls at the close of the session. But of these, 1 has for some time continuously absent- ed himself, and 1 has expressed his wish to resign. Both of these have been recommended for dismissal. 5. It is to be regretted that the batch of students sent to the school at the commence- ment of the session contained so many young men of inferior qualifications, fitted neither by in- clination nor capability for their work. It has furnished the whole number above mentioned as absconded, dismissed and reported for dismissal. Of the 20, thus 10 only remain; of these, 4 are very intelligent, and 5 of fair ability, diligent and likely to succeed. It seems probable that under the present method of selection this will always be the case. The entrance examination is not of a very rigid character, and this passed, the most incapable candidate is pretty safe during the year he is attached to a Military hospital or dispensary with little or nothing to do. The real test comes when he is required to enter upon an actual course of study in a school, and the inevitable result is the failure of the idle and incapable. Continued experience confirms me in the opinion that the preliminary year of so called training at a dispensary or Military hospital is altogether useless. It deters the better educated class from seeking admission into the service and furnishes a twelve months secure pay to the idle and incapable. Thus in every way it entails a loss on Government. To ensure a regular supply of efficient Hospitals Assistants from among the present class of young men, a larger number of students should be annually sent to the school with a view to their being weeded as speedily as possible. 6. With reference to the relative number of admissions from different districts, and the causes of the variation in it which occur from year to year, I find I did not in my last year's report furnish any explanation. I may now state that the increase in the number of residents of these Provinces sent to the school, is due to the action of the Surgeon General, who alone distributes pupils to the various schools. I gather from the notices put forth by the Surgeon Z M 202 General that he is desirous that the Nagpur School should fulfil to the utmost its original pur- pose of educating natives of the Central Provinces. The Principal of the school does not under present arrangements exercise any voice in the selection of students, beyond encourag- ing applicants and directing them to appear before the annual-Examining Committee. In this respect every possible endeavour has been made to carry out the views of the Chief Commis- sioner expressed in 1869. Marathas, however, whether Brahmins or Sudras, but rarely apply, and their education in an Urdu school is surrounded with difficulties. Of the few who have entered the school, all proved unwilling or incapable, with the exception of Ramchandar Vishnu, who completed his course last year and is now a valuable subordinate at the City Hospital. 7. The conduct of pupils of all grades, and their attendance at lectures, examinations and dissections, with the exceptions above noted, has been generally good. The power of stop- ping promotion and increase of pay accorded to the Principal has continued to be most useful, but discipline would be more easily maintained if sentences of dismissal could be carried out more rapidly. Dismissal is really dreaded by well disposed students and the threat of it has been found a powerful instrument in enforcing diligence and obedience. A considerable time, however, must elapse before a recommendation for dismissal under ordinary circum- stances is approved, the moral effect is thereby weakened, and in the meantime a pupil who wishes to be dismissed attends the school, draws his pay, and sets a bad example by his enjoy- ment of idleness or by his discontent at what he is pleased to consider his unwarrantable detention. 8. TEACHERS.3 These students below mentioned by name have been since admitted into the service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants:4 8. Rajah Janoji Bhonsla's prize for diligence, good conduct, and assistance to the lecturer of Anatomy and Surgery. A book prize. 9. For general good conduct. A book prize. For second year Students. 10. Rajah Suliman Sha's prize for proficiency in Anatomy. A silver medal. 11. G. Ramiah Garu Rai Bahadoor's prize for proficiency in Materia Medica. A silver medal. 12. Abeerchund Rai Bahadoor's prize to the second best in Anatomy. A book prize. 13. Rajah Janoji Bhonsla's prize to the second best in Materia Medica. A book prize. 14. Rajah Janoji Bhonsla's prize for knowledge in Surgery. A silver medal. 15. Rajah Suliman Sha's prize for knowledge in Medicine. A silver medal. 16. G. Ramiah Garu Rai Bahadoor's prize to the second best in Surgery. A book prize. 17. To the second best in Medicine. A book prize. 18. For good conduct and assistance to the lecturer on Materia Medica. A book prize. 19. To the 3rd best in Medicine. A book prize. For first year Students. 20. Rajah Janoji Bhonsla's prize for proficiency in Anatomy. A book prize. 21. Rajah Suliman Sha's prize for proficiency in Materia Medica. A book prize. 22. To the 2nd best in Materia Medica. A book prize. 23. G. Ramiah Garu Rai Bahadoor's prize to the second best in Anatomy. A book prize. 24. To the 3rd best in Anatomy. A book prize. 25. To the 4th best in Anatomy. A book prize. 16. The examination for these prizes was conducted by oral questions in my presence. The answers were satisfactory in all cases, and in some exceedingly good. Nohur of the 3rd year obtained the 1st prize for General Proficiency and Surgery. The 1st prize in Medicine and the 2nd in Surgery was obtained by Abdool Guffoor of the 3rd year. The 2nd and 3rd prizes for third year students in Medicine and those for diligence in dissection and good conduct were gained by Mahesh Persaud, Kadur Bux, Joonga, Ashruff Hoosain and Chotay Lall respectively. Of the 2nd year students Shewpershad obtained the 1st prizes in Medicine, Surgery and Anatomy;Abdool Kurreem Khan the 1st in Materia Medica, the 2nd in Anatomy and that in Pharmacy. The 2nd prizes in Surgery, Medicine, Materia Medica, and the 3rd in Medicine were gained by Raja Ram, Abdool Karim Khan, Abdool Kyom Khan and Surjo Row respectively. Of the new students, Parum Lall got the 1st prize in Anatomy and the 2nd in Materia Medica; Jehangir Bux the 1st prize in Materia Medica and the 2nd in Anatomy. The 3rd and 4th prizes in Anatomy were gained by Syed Mohamed Sofi and Purun Singh respectively. 17. FINANCE.5 Cash Account of the Nagpur School of Medicine from 1st April 1873 to 31st March 1874. RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Balance in hand on the 1st April 1873 ... ... ... 554 15 5 Pay of Principal 3,000 0 0 Received from Government on account of Salaries, pay of Students and Contingencies 16,185 12 6 Pay of 3 Teachers 9,000 0 0 Travelling allowance 111 14 0 Pay of Native Medical Pupils 2,980 11 2 Pay of Establishment 765 0 0 Received from Hospital Assistants for Registration of diplomas 17 8 0 Travelling Allowance to Native Medical Pupils 111 14 0 Received from Hospital Assistants on account of books and instruments 2 4 0 15,857 9 2 Contingencies. Subscriptions received from Native gentlemen for prizes 450 0 0 Stationery and petty charges 39 0 3 16,767 6 6 Sundry Remittances to England for prize books, medals, instruments, cost of binding books, engraving, freight, and other charges 870 13 1 909 13 4 Balance in hand ... ... ... 554 15 5 Total Rupees ... ... ... 17,322 5 11 Total Rupees ... ... ... 17,322 5 11 BIP/19/NZ.3 IP REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1874. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952029.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1875. 23No. 2536 105. FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, OFFG. ASST. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces.To THE PRINCIPAL OF THE NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 21st July 1875. SIR, I am directed by the Chief Commissioner to acknowledge receipt of your seventh annual report on the School of Medicine, and am to make the following brief observations. 2. At the close of the preceding session, March 31st 1874, 25 students remained under instruction, and on the 1st June 31 new Students joined. Of these 31 new students 16 were inhabitants of the Central Provinces, and the rest came from various other parts of India. 3. The character and qualifications of the students, and more particularly of the new ad- missions, appear not to have been good; one absconded, one was imprisoned for theft, and fifteen were dismissed for incapacity, inattention and misbehaviour. Your report does not state the quota of dismissed students furnished by the Central Provinces admissions, but it is satisfactory to learn that three of these latter are Maratha Brahmins* who hold out promise of success. 4. The Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department, has recently drawn the attention of all Deputy Surgeons General and other Medical Officers to the necessity for discretion in the selection of young men who are to be trained as Hospital Assistants and for careful supervi- sion during their year of probation. The Chief Commissioner can see no reason, if the re- quisite discretion in selection be exercised and if proper supervision be observed, why young men of suitable attainments and calibre should not be got. 5. In the 8th paragraph of your report you comment on the bad example set by pupils whom you have sentenced to dismissal, but which dismissal is subject to the sanction of supe- rior authority, who remain on at the school in idleness and draw their pay. The Chief Commissioner cannot understand why such pupils should be allowed to draw pay. On their suspension stoppage of pay should ipso facto follow. 6. Some changes have taken place in the staff of teachers during the year and a re-distri- bution of their duties has also been made. Mr. Morris is glad to see that you are able to report so satisfactorily regarding all of them; and one of them, Assistant Surgeon Jadub Kishn Chose, is personally known to the Chief Commissioner as an efficient and painstaking teacher 7. Through the liberality and public spirit of a few native gentlemen you were able to offer incentives to learning in and general proficiency, in the shape of 21 prizes; and these appear to have been carried off by twelve students,2 9. The Chief Commissioner regrets to have to notice that during the time these exami- nations were being held, a number of the students mixed themselves up in a night brawl in the city; eight of them were convicted by the Magistrate and were sentenced to pay fines, ranging from Rs. 15 to Rs. 8. It is to be hoped that the precautions since taken by you will prevent a recurrence of anything of the kind. 10. In conclusion I am to acknowledge your services as Principal, of which the Chief Commissioner is not unmindful. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, LINDSAY NEILL, Offg. Asst. Secretary.
No. 32. FROM THE PRINCIPAL OF THE NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER. Central Provinces, Dated Nagpur the 1st July 1875. SIR, The eighth session of the Nagpur School of Medicine having come to close, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commissioner my seventh annual report of the progress of the school. 2. At the close of the preceding session, 31st March 1874, 25 students remained under Instruction; and on the 1st of June 31 new students, attached to the school by order of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department, reported themselves for admission. 3. Of the 31 new students, 3 came from Kamthi, 1 from Bangalore, 1 from Seoni, 1 from Trichinopoly, 1 from Kolapore, 3 from Jubbulpore, 1 from Canouj, 3 from Narsinghpur, 2 from Bulandshahr, 5 from Nimar, 1 from Tanna, 1 from Betul, 1 from Aurangabad, 3 from Luck- now, 1 from Cawnpur, 1 from Unao, 1 from Rai Bareli, 1 from Gondah; 16 therefore belonged to the Central Provinces and 15 to other districts, 19 were Mussalmans and 10 Hindus, 1 Christian, and 1 Jew. 4. At the commencement of the session 1874-75 there were therefore 56 students. Of these 1 absconded, 15 were dismissed for incapacity, inattention and misbehaviour, 1 has for some time continuously absented himself, having been put in prison on a charge of theft; 1 was unable to appear for the final examination owing to serious illness, and has since died; and 12 being found qualified onexamination on the close of the session were made Passed Medical Pupils and reported fit for admission into the service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants. 26 students therefore remain on the rolls at the close of the session. I have not included in this number that remain on the rolls at the close of the session the free student (Abdul Wahab.) He entered the school in 1873, receiving no stipend, and being exempt from the condition of serving Government on the completion of his course, with the intention of establish- ing himself hereafter as an independent medical practioner. 5. Of the 31 students admitted in June last, 4 require special mention. These 4 were Mahratta Brahmins of the Central Provinces. Of these, Daji Ramchandra, Mughun Ragoba, and Heera Lal are very promising, especially the 2 former, who being well educated, earnest and devoted to their studies, are almost certain to succeed. The other, Ballaji Vittoba was found incapable of acquiring knowledge from natural inaptitude and deficient preliminary training, and has since been dismissed. 6. Some progress has thus been made towards the carrying out of three of the princi- pal ends for which the Nagpur School of Medecine was established, viz. the education of Mahrattas to be the physicians of their own race; the formation of a class of independent practitioners; and the supply of Hospital Assistants for Government service. The last I think has fairly been carried out, as the Nagpur School of Medicine has already added about 60 Hospital Assistants to the Subordinate Medical service. 7. I have already in previous reports dwelt on the inferior qualifications of the majority of the young men sent to the school, many being neither fitted by inclination nor capability for their work. My former remarks on this subject apply equally to the last year's batch, of whom nearly one-half, 14 out of 31, were found to be incapable of acquiring knowledge. These were speedily eliminated. 19 7 75 W Y 235 239
2 8. The conduct of pupils of all grades and their attendance at lectures, examinations, and dissections, with the exceptions above noted, has been generally good. The power of stop- ping promotion and increase of pay accorded to the Principal has continued to be most useful. I am sorry to say; however, that some of the students were not at all times amenable to dis- cipline. I would repeat here what I have said in previous reports, that "discipline would be more easily maintained if sentences of dismissal could be carried out more rapidly. Dismis- sal is really dreaded by well disposed students, and the threat of it has been found a power- ful instrument in enforcing diligence and obedience. A considerable time however must elapse before a recommendation for dismissal under ordinary circumstances is approved, the moral effect is thereby weakened, and in the meantime a pupil who wishes to be dismissed, attends the school, draws his pay, and sets a bad example by his enjoyment of idleness or by his dis- content at what he is pleased to consider his unwarrantable detention." 9. A change has taken place in the staff of teachers since last report. In June last Babu Nundo Lall Ghose, teacher of Materia Medica and Chemistry was transferred in the same ca- pacity to the Bankipur Temple Medical School. Hs was succeeded by Assistant Surgeon Kali Kissen Ghose, who joined in September last. I am glad to state that during the short time he has been attached to to the school. he has given me much satisfaction and has shown himself a careful and painstakin teacher. Babu Doorga Dass Roy and Jadub Kissen Ghose also deserve my best thanks, for the careful and energetic way in which they have conducted their duties and which has already carried for them the commendation of the Chief Commissioner. The former has been appointed to the Dacca school, and be has lately left to join his appoint- ment, and his successor, Assistant Surgeon Jadoo Nath Ghose, has arrived. In consequence of this change, I recommended a redistribution of the duties of the teachers, which has received the sanction of the Surgeon General. Assistant Surgeon Jadub Kissen Ghose has hitherto borne more than his fair share of work, having had to teach two subjects, Anatomy and Sur- gery, while holding executive charge of the Mayo Memorial Hospital. He has now been ap- pointed teacher of Medicine, for which he is eminently fitted, and Assistant Surgeon Jadoo Nath Ghose becomes teacher of Surgery and Anatomy. By this arrangement Jadub Kissen Ghose is relieved of half his original lecture work, and is able to give a greater amount of time to the care of the hospital and clinical teaching. Hospital Assistant Dillawar Khan has con- tinued to be useful as a Demonstrator and Librarian. He has also left for Raipur and in his place a promising passed student of this year, Abdul Kurreem Khan, has been appointed. 10. The general working and progress of the school has been satisfactory. 11. Babu Doorga Dass Roy reports the general conduct of his class to have been good and its progress fair. The number of lectures on medicine given by him was 115, and he held 44 weekly examinations, clinical instruction was also constantly given. 12. Babu Jadub Kissen Ghose lectured 106 times and held 34 examinations in Surgery; on Anatomy he lectured 81 times and held 19 examinations. In all therefore he delivered 187 lectures and held 53 examinations. Under his superintendence and with the assistance of Hospital Assistant Dillawar Khan, dissections were carried on during the cold season. There was a great dearth of subjects last year. 7 bodies were dissected, and the Babu speaks highly of the efficient assistance he received from student Rajaram as prosector and monitor to the junior students. The students generally have dissected diligently, and nothing has been heard of prejudice against anatomical pursuits. 13. Babu Kali Kissen Ghose gave 180 lectures on Materia Medica and 33 on Che- mistry, inclusive of examinations. His class, with exception of the pupils dismissed for in- competence and idleness, was attentive, diligent, and respectful in demeanour. 14. RESULT OF EXAMINATIONS.3 These students below mentioned by name have been since admitted into the service as Passed Medical Pupils:4 Abdool Kurreem Khan of the 3rd year respectively. Of the 2nd year's students, Jehangeer Bux obtained the four principal prizes of the 2nd year. Puram Lall of the 2nd year obtained the 2nd prizes in Materia Medica and Surgery. Syed Mohamed Sofee, the 2nd in Medicine and the prize in Pharmacy; and Sookhundun, the 2nd in Anatomy. Of the 1st year's stu- dents Daji Ram bhundra and Haffiz Syed Abdool Vadud got the first prizes in Anatomy, Materia Medica and Medicine respectively. Abdool Futteh Khan, Mugun Raghoba and Behari Lall have also been awarded each with a prize for proficiency in Anatomy and Materia Medica. 17. FINANCE.IP/19/NZ.3 REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1875. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952071.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1876. 24 4 76 m. 255-240
No. 1564/63 FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, OFFG. ASST. SECY. TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 25th April 1876, SIR, * Including 1 free student. I am directed by the Chief Commissioner to acknowledge receipt of your letter No. 10, dated 7th April, being your eighth annual report on the progress of the Nagpur Medical School. The salient figures of the year which closed on the 31st March last appear to be these. On 1st April 1875, 27* students remained under instruction, and 30 new students joined the School. Of these latter, 9 were residents of the Province, and 21 came from beyond it. The Hindu element preponderated in these new admissions, there being 16 Hindus to 14 Mussul- mans, Hitherto Mussulmans have generally formed the majority. 2. There were then 57 students at the commencement of the session, and they seem to have formed 3 classes, viz, 1st class (or 3rd year students) containing 10 pupils, 2nd class (or 2nd year students) containing 17 and the 3rd class (or 1st year students) containing 30 pupils. Of the 1st year students, 5 were dismissed during the course of the year for incapacity and idleness, and all the students of the 3rd year, 10 in number, are now reported fit for ad- mission into Government service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants, so that there remain 42 students on the rolls. Of these 42, viz. 17 in the 2nd class, and 25 in the 3rd, 11 in the 2nd had made good progress in all branches, while the remaining 5 have not done at all well and are to receive no promotion; 14 in the 3rd class passed satisfactory examinations, 6 did fairly or indifferentl, and the remaining 5 did very badly. 3.The Chief Commissioner therefore finds that 5 pupils of the 2nd year have not done at all well, that 11 of the 1st year have also done so ill as to be allowed to remain on. the rolls of the School on trial only, and that 5 more of the 1st year had to be dismissed; and subject to these rather important qualifications he is glad to accept your assurance and that of the other teachers regarding the good conduct, diligence, and constant attendance at lectures of the pupils. 4. The Chief Commissioner regrets that the giving of prizes was held at a time when it was impossible for him to be present at it, but he was glad to learn that Colonel Mackenzie, Judicial Commissioner, presided on the occasion, and that there was a good attendance of visitors. 5. It has afforded the Chief Commissioner much satisfaction to learn that the teaching of the School is so efficient, and from his personal knowledge he is able to endorse much of what you say in commendation of the teachers Assistant Surgeon Jadub Kissen Ghose gave 122 lectures, Assistant Surgeon Kali Krishna Ghose 136, and Assistant Surgeon Jadu Nath Ghose 255 lectures. The Chief Commissioner would like in future to know whether you, as Principal, also deliver lectures to the students or whether you confine yourself to examinations, or merely to general supervision and control of the School. On these matters he is at present only imperfectly informed. 6. On the whole the Chief Commissioner believes that the Nagpur Medical School is in a good and satisfactory condition; it is now recruited in pretty equal proportions from Hindus and Mussulmans; a Maratha Brahmin student is no longer a rare and exceptional case: prejudice against anatomical pursuits is not heard of; year by year a fair number of students gain admission into Government service; the teaching staff is good, and the library and other accessories of the institution flourishing. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, LINDSAY NEILL, Offg. Asst. Secretary. 2 4 76 0. 254 240
No. 10. FROM THE PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. TO THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 7th April 1876. SIR, The ninth session of the Nagpur School of Medicine having come to a close, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commissioner my eighth report of the progress of the school. 2. At the close of the preceding session, 31st March 1875, 26 stipendiary and 1 free student remained under instruction; and on the 1st June 1875, 30 new students, attached to the school by order of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department, reported themselves for admission. 3. Of the 36 new students, 1 came from Bangalore, 2 from Umballah, 1 from Harda, 1 from Jubbulpore, 3 from Kamptee, 4 from Nagpur, 2 from Cawnpur, 1 from Gorruckpur, 3 from Benares, 1 from Furruckabad, 1 from Meerut, 2 from Bulandshahar, 2 from Bareilli, 1 from Unao, 1 from Muzaffernagore, 1 from Lucknow, and 3 from Agra; 9 therefore belonged to the Central Provinces and 21 to other districts, 14 were Mussulmans and 16 Hindus. 4. At the commencement of the session 1875-76 there were therefore 57 students; of these 5 were dismissed during the course of the session for incapacity and idleness, and 10 were found qualified on examination on its close and reported fit for admission into the service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants. 42 students therefore remain on the rolls at the close of the session. I have included in the number that have been found qualified to enter the service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants the free student Abdul Wahab. He entered the school in 1873, receiving no stipend, and being exempt from the condition of serving Government on the completion of his course, with the intention of establishing himself hereafter as an independent medical practioner. This pupil has changed his mind now and is very anxious to enter the Government service on the same conditions and rules which obtain for Passed Medical Pupils and Hospital Assistants. This medical pupil formed the subject of a former communication at the time cholera broke out in this district (vide letter No. 176, dated the 16th August 1875) where I recommended for the favourable consideration of the Chief Commissioner the admission of this man into the service as a Native Doctor. The reasons which have led him to alter his original intention are his sense of the uncertainty of private practice and of his inexperience and youth, which he fears will prevent his obtaining the confidence of the people, his anxiety to gain increased skill and knowledge in the practical part of his profession, and lastly his limited means which are insufficient to support him while waiting to obtain private practice. Under thsse circum- stances I would strongly recommend his case for the favourable consideration of the Chief Com- missioner; such an admission into the service will not be without precedent, as a free student of a former year passed by me was accepted by the Bengal Government, employed in the Jail at Furridpur, and is now Assistant Teacher of Anatomy in the Dacca Medical School. 5. Of the 30 new students admitted in June last one requires special mention. This lad (Vishnoo) is a Mahratta Brahmin of Nagpur. He is very promising and is sure to succeed. I am glad I am again able to speak well of the 4 Mahratta Brahmins who were prominently brought to the notice of the Chief Commissioner in my last year's report. They have all done well at the annual examinations, especially Dajee Ram Chunder and Mughun Raghoba. 6. The conduct of pupils of all grades and their attendance at lectures, examinations, and, dissections, with the exceptions above noted, has been generally good. The power of
2 stopping promotion and increase of pay accorded to the Principal has continued to be most useful. I am also glad to say that the summary power of suspending pupils who are not always amenable to order and discipline, and stopping their pay, granted to the Principal last year, had had a good effect on the idle and incorrigible. Dismissal is really dreaded by well dis- posed students and the threat of it has been found a powerful instrument in enforcing dili- gence and obedience. 7. No change has taken place in the staff of teachers since last report. Babu Jadu Nath Ghose who joined early in June last has shown himself to be a careful and painstaking teacher, and has given me much satisfaction. Babu Kali Krishna Ghose has also distinguished himself as a steady and painstaking teacher. I am glad I am again able to speak in high praise of the zeal and efficiency of Baba Jadub Kissen Ghose, and my best thanks are as usual due to him for the careful and energetic way in which he has conducted his duties and which has already on previous occasions earned for him the commendation of the Chief Commis- sioner. The harmonious manner in which the three teachers have worked together and the respect they have obtained from their pupils has been a great satisfaction to me, and I hope they may long continue at their several posts. Hospital Assistant Abdul Kureem Khan, who was appointed last year as Assistant to the Teacher of Anatomy and Surgery, is altogether a new and young hand. He has tried to do his best and give satisfaction. 8. The general working and progress of the school have been satisfactory. 9. Babu Jadub Kissen Ghose gave 122 lectures on the principles and practice of medi- cine, inclusive of examinations. Since his appointment to the executive charge of the Mayo Hospital he has been able to give a greater amount of time to the Clinical teaching. This has conduced greatly to the advantage of the school, as of necessity his practical instructions to the pupils have been more constant than before. 10. Babu Kali Krishna Ghose gave 136 lectures on Materia Medica and 48 on Chemis- try, inclusive of examinations. His class, with the exception of a few of the pupils, was atten- tive, diligent, and respectful in demeanour. Owing to family misfortunes the Assistant Sur- geon was obliged to leave the station on three months' privilege leave, and his duties and the superintendence of the examinations of his class devolved on Assistant Surgeon Jadub Kissen Ghose, who has discharged the work in addition to his own to my entire satisfaction. 11. Babu Jadu Nath Ghose lectured 126 times and held 30 examinations in Surgery. On Anatomy he lectured 129 times and held 33 examinations. In all therefore he delivered 255 lectures and held 68 examinations. Under his superintendence and with the assistance of Hospital Assistant Abdul Kureem Khan and Prosector Azeez Mohamed Khan, dissections were diligently carried on during the cold season. There was a dearth of subjects during the period under review. Fifteen bodies were dissected, and the students generally have dissected diligently, and nothing has been heard of prejudice against Anatomical pursuits. The amount of work done in this department is highly creditable to Assistant Surgeon Jadu Nath Ghose. The Babu speaks highly of the diligence, attention and respectful conduct of his pupils. 12. In the month of March all lecture courses were brought to a close, and a general ex- amination of the school commenced for the purpose of passing such third year pupils as were qualified, and awarding prizes to the most deserving of all classes. This terminated on the 1st April with satisfactory results. 10 students, including the free student Abdul Wahab, had completed the full term of study, and all were found sufficiently qualified; the first 2 pass- ing with much credit. The students below mentioned by name in order of merit have been recommended to be admitted into the service as Passed Medical Pupils:3 and will receive no promotion. Of the 25 first year students, 14 passed very satis- factory examinations in both Materia Medica and Anatomy, 6 had made fair progress in Ana- tomy but did indifferently in Materia Medica and Chemistry, and the remaining 5 did very badly in both branches. These 11 may be tried four another year, but they should not receive the increased pay of second year students. 14. The distribution of last year's prizes was unfortunately delayed till last month owing to the non-arrival of medals, watches, &c., from England, and to some other causes. I have therefore not been able to ask contributions from any of the Native gentlemen who have hitherto assisted me in this matter. One of them, G. Ramiah Garu Rai Bahadoor, who was always a liberal patron of the students, has been removed by death. I have issued letters in- viting subscriptions, which I have no doubt will be forthcoming, but in any case I propose to give the following prizes, and if necessary will provide them or make up any deficiency in the contributions to the sum of Rs. 350. For third year Students. 1. For proficiency in Medicine. A gold medal. 2. For proficiency in Surgery. A silver watch by Messrs. E. Dent and Co. 3. For diligence in dissections. A book prize. 4. For proficiency in Clinical Medicine. A book prize. 5. For proficiency in Clinical Surgery. A book prize. 6. To the second best in Medicine. A book prize. 7. To the second best in Surgery. A book prize. 8. For general proficiency and good conduct. A book prize. For second year Students. 9. For proficiency in Materia Medica. A silver medal. 10. For proficiency in Anatomy. A silver medal. 11. To the second best in Materia Medica. A book prize. 12. To the second best in Anatomy. A book prize. 13. For proficiency in Surgery. A silver medal. 14. For proficiency in Medicine. A book prize. 15. To the second best in Medicine. A book prize. 16. For proficiency in Pharmacy. A book prize. 17. To the second best in Surgery. A book prize. For first year Students. 18. For proficiency in Anatomy. A book prize. 19. For proficiency in Materia Medica. A book prize. 20. To the second best in Anatomy. A book prize. 21. To the second best in Materia Medica. A book prize. 22. To the third best in Anatomy. A book prize. 23. To the third best in Materia Medica. A book prize. 24. To the fourth best in Anatomy. A book prize. 15. The examination for these prizes was conducted by oral and written questions. The answers were satisfactory in all cases and in some exceedingly good. Jahangeer Bux of the third year obtained the 1st prizes in Medicine and Surgery and the prize for proficiency in Clinical Medicine. Azeez Mohamed Khan obtained the second prizes in Medicine and Sur- gery and that for diligence in dissection. Bhondo Lall obtained the prize in Clinical Surgery. Of the second year students, Dajee Ram Chunder gained the first prizes in Medicine, Sur- gery and Anatomy and the prize for proficiency in Pharmacy. Haffiz Syed Abdool Vadud got the first prize in Materia Medica and the second in Medicine. Behari Lall obtained the second prize in Surgery. To Maghun Raghoba was awarded the second prize in Anatomy. Abdool Hossain got the second prize in Materia Medica. Of the first year students, Abdool Baree obtained the first prizes in Anatomy and Materia Medica. The second prizes in Ana- tomy and Materia Medica were respectively gained by Ram Logan Singh and Vishnoo. The third prizes in the same subjects were obtained by Ram Deen Tewaree and Sooruj Bullee Acharjee respectively. The fourth prize in Anatomy has been awarded to Soorj Bulle Acharjee.
4 16. Agreeably to the instructions laid down by the Accountant General, Central Pro- vinces, in his minute dated 15th July 1874, the following prescribed forms of the annual ac- count of the Medical School, Nagpur, are submitted for the information of the Chief Commis- sioner, Central Provinces:IP IP/19/NZ.3 REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1876-77. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952128.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1877. 29No. 2011/75 FROM A. H. L. FRASER ESQ., OFFG. ASST. SECRETARY TO TH CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. TO THE PRINCIPAL, Nagpur School of Medicine, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 23rd May 1877. SIR, I am directed by the Chief Commissioner to acknowledge receipt of your letter No. 16 dated 4th ultimo, in which you have submitted your report of the working of the Medical School during the year 1876-77. 2. Apparently there is no difficulty in getting pupils for the school, either from these provinces or from elsewhere; and while 42 pupils attended the school when the year began, 30 new pupils joined during its currency; and it is so far satisfactory to notice, that 13 of these new pupils belong to the Central Provinces. 3. But the Chief Commissioner notes with great regret, the very unfavourable report which you have seen it your duty to make regarding the character and calibre of the pupils. Not less than 13 of the 72 pupils attending the school have been dismissed during the year under report for incapacity, misconduct, and ill health; and you have recommended the dismissal of 12 more. This is very serious indeed; but in the light of what you yourself point out, and in the light of Dr. Brake's manifest concurrence in your judgment, Mr. Morris does not believe that you have judged your pupils too severely. The facts which you have brought to notice, and the causes which you have assigned for them, will no doubt receive the consideration which they deserve from the Medical Department. You probably remember that the unsatisfactory results of the present system of a year's precollegiate training of candidates, formed the subject of a Circular Memo of the surgeon General, Indian Medical Department, (No. 34 dated 31st May 1875); and certain instructions were given as to the conduct of the examinations for selection, and as to the supervision and instruction of the selected candidates during their preliminary year at the Dispensary. The results which you bring to notice this year, would seem to show, either that these measures have not been adopted here, or that they are not efficient to obviate the evils deprecated. 4. In the opinion of the Chief Commissioner it seems clear, from what has been frequently urged, that the selection of candidates by a Military Committee accompanied by a year's preliminary training in a Dispensary or Hospital, has resulted in supplying an inferior class of pupils; while the rejection as unfitted of a large number of those enrolled, involves a wasteful expenditure. Nor is the ill success of the present arrangements peculiar to the Nagpur Institution, for the fact has been prominently commented on, in connection with results in the North West Provinces. The time, therefore, seems to have arrived, when the matter might be reconsidered in view of the experience gained under the system of selection as now worked; and the Chief Commissioner hopes, that the subject may again receive the attention of the higher Medical authorities.
2 5. It is Pleasant to turn from this subject, to notice the very favourable terms in which you have to speak of some of the pupils, and especially of the three Maratha pupils mentioned in the ninth paragraph of your letter under reply, one of whom, Daji Ramchandra, stands first in the list of passed pupils in order of merit. It would certainly not have been a wise measure "to withdraw the annual encouragement in the shape of prizes" from such lads; and the Chief Commis- sioner is glad that you did not do so. 6. The Institution continues a success, and has been well managed. The Office of Principal was held for nine months by Dr. Brake during you absence on furlough, and by yourself for the remainder of the year. The duties of super- vision been ably discharged, white the lectures have devolved on the Native Professors, whose services are specially commended. I am to request, that, the acknowledgments of the Chief Commissioner, may be communicated to these gen- tlemen. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, Offg. Asst. Secretary.
No. 16. FROM SURGEON MAJOR W. B. BEATSON, M. D., PRINCIPAL, MEDICAL SCHOOL, Nagpur, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Gentral Provinces, Nagpur. Dated Nagpur, the 4th April 1877. SIR, The tenth session of the Nagpur School of Medicine having been brought to a close, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commis- sioner my annual report on the progress and working of the school. 2. At the close of the preceding session on the 31st March 1876, 42 stipendiary pupils remained under instruction; and on the 1st of June 1876, 30 new students were attached to the school by order of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department. 3. Of these, 29 only reported themselves; 1, a Mahratta Brahmin, who had passed his preliminary year at the Nagpur Mayo Hospital, absconding as soon as he was ordered to join the school. The place of the absentee was sup- plied, at the request of the Officiating Principal, by a young Madrasi who had been serving in the hospital for some months as a Compounder. The number was thus again made up to 30. Of these, 13 belonged to the Central Provinces, and 17 to other parts of India. 17 were Mohammadans and 13 Hindus, 5 of the latter being Mahratta Brahmins. 4. At the commencement of the session 1876-77 there were therefore 72 students. Of these, in the course of the year, 13 were dismissed for general incapacity, misconduct and ill health, 1 died, and 11 were found qualified on examination at the close of the session for admission into the service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants, and 12 recommended for dismissal. 35 students therefore remain on the roll at the end of session. 5. As I was absent on leave at the opening of the session, I had no oppor- tunity of inspecting and examining the newly admitted pupils; and on my return I was sorry to find that they were considered by the teachers of the school to be a very unpromising set, deficient in ordinary education and ability, wanting in attention and capacity, and in many instances unwilling to work. Subsequent observation and the results of the general examination of the school which I have just completed, confirm these views, and lead me to the belief that there is an annual deterioration in the character of the students sent for instruction to this school. This last set of students is perhaps the worst we have ever had; but every year since the introduction of the system of selection by a Military Committee,
2 followed by a year's preliminary training in a hospital or dispensary, I have had to notice the inferior qualifications of the pupils sent to join the school, and to dismiss many before the end of their first session. From the first, I expressed an opinion adverse to this system; but for the last three or four years I have ceased to urge it, being unwilling to seem to offer opposition to a measure sanctioned by the highest authority. Each year, however, it has become more and more evident to me that the, necessity of passing a preliminary year at a dispensary, on small pay, and with- out opportunities of study, deters educated and energetic young men from enter- ing the service, while it holds out encouragement to the idle and worthless. I may I trust be permitted to bring forward again my views on this subject, as I find I do not stand alone in them. I find it stated in the Parliamentary Report on Sanitary measures in India in 1874-75, that the Inspector General of Hospitals and Dispensaries in the North-West Provinces considers "that the "plan of substituting a year's residence at a Civil hospital, for a year's study at "a Medical school, has proved a mistake. In the majority of cases, the lads "learn little or nothing, and fall into idle habits, only beginning their studies "when they join the school, after a year of the worst possible preparation. It "is not to be wondered at, that of about 50 students who annually join the "Medical School of Agra, only 16 or 18 ever remain to complete the curriculum "of three years' study, and of these very few know any English." 6. Under the old system, an advertisement in the Central Provinces' Gazette never failed to attract a number of young men of fair, and sometimes of superior, education. The Principal and Teachers of the school were able to judge of the educa- tional receptivity of the candidates, and being responsible, as selecting officers, took care to admit only such as seemed generally likely to succeed. The students at once admitted to the school entered upon their work with keenness and alacrity. Rejection for incapacity before the end of the course was rare. The amount of knowledge displayed at the final examination was often surprising, and the general character of the passed students gained for the school, during the first year's of its existence, the high commendation of the Surgeon General. 7. Students are now selected by a Military Committee, which performs its duty when it puts the candidates to the prescribed test in simple reading, writing and arithmetic, Beyond their examination, the Committee has no interest in them; most of them then pass the preliminary year at a dispensary in compar- ative idleness, and enter the school, demoralised and unfitted for work. To this state of things must be attributed the unsatisfactory results I have this year to report. 8. It is perhaps well that on this occasion other testimony is available as to the worthlessness of a large proportion of the last set of pupils. I find from the recorded results of a test examination held in October last by Surgeon Major John Brake, who officiated as Principal of the School during my absence, that the progress and attainments of the new students after three months' attendance at the school were found to be very unsatisfactory, so much so, that out of 30, he was compelled to recommend the dismissal of 11. The results of my own examinations just completed, prove that this measure, severe as it may seem, was really too lenient, and that the painful duty of recommend- ing further dismissal remains to me.
3 9. The general inferiority of these students, however, is, I am happy to say, not altogether unrelieved by brighter examples. Last year I had to men- tion with commendation the names of Vishnoo, Daji Ram Chandra, and Maghan Raghoba, all Mahratta Brahmins of Nagpur. These have continued to do well; and 2 have now passed the final examination with credit. I trust to be allowed to retain the services of Daji Ram Chandra at the Mayo Hospital, as one of the two Hospital Assistants allowed on the staff. 10. The conduct of all the pupils has been so far good, that there have been no offences against order while in the school; but there has been much irre- gularity of attendance, carelessness about study, and want of attention to hospital duties; and I find on reference to the Order Book, that fines were inflicted on one or more students by the Officiating Principal no less than 29 times in the course of 9 months, for inattention and irregularity. The general tendency to quietness and good order would be a source of satisfaction, if orderly behaviour alone were sufficient to make a good Hospital Assistant. But simple good con- duct, even when accompanied by a desire to learn, is of no avail, if there be no aptitude to receive instruction. It is in this that so many of the students are wanting: many are willing to learn, and try to do so, but committing to memory by rote is their only idea of study,4 Seventeen students had completed the full period of study; but I regret to say, that of these, six entirely failed. The eleven students, below mentioned by name in order of merit, have been recommended to be admitted into the service as Passed Native Medical Pupils:5 Haffiz Syed Abdool Vadoodh, 2nd prize in Surgery and Medicine, a silver watch. Maghan Raghoba, prize for diligence in dissection, a book prize. 2nd Year. 1st prize in Surgery, a silver medal, Ajodhia Pershad. 1st prize in Medicine, a silver medal, Ajodhia Pershad, 2nd prize in Anatony, a book prize, Ajodhia Pershad. 2nd prize in Materia Medica, a book prize, Ram Deen Tiwaree. Prize for proficiency in Pharmacy, a book prize, Ram Deen Tiwaree. 2nd prize in Surgery, a book prize, Ram Deen Tiwaree. 1st prize in Anatomy, a silver medal, Abdool Baree. 1st prize in Materia Medica and Chemistry, a silver medal, Abdool Baree. 2nd prize in Medicine, a book prize, Soorajbullee Acharjee. 1st Year. 1st prize in Materia Medica, a book prize, Muhomod Habibullah. 2nd prize in Anatomy, a book prize, Muhamud Habibullah. 1st prize in Anatomy, a book prize, Abdool Majid Khan. 2nd prize in Materia Medica, a book prize, Abdool Majid Khan. The examinations for these prizes were conducted in my presence by oral and written questions; and I consider they have been fairly earned. 17. In my last year's report I mentioned that I had issued letters to for- mer patrons of the school, inviting subscriptions toward the purchase of prizes for the session then terminated. These invitations were as usual kindly res- ponded to by Raja Janoji Bhonsla, Raja Suleman Shah, Bunseedhur A birchund Rai Bahadur. The leading Pleaders of the Courts also favoured me with a contribution; and, to complete the amount required, I have added Rs. 100. The names of Native Gentlemen to whom my thanks are due, and their subscriptions, are as follows:6 18. Agreeably to instructions furnished by the Accountant General, Cen- tral Provinces, in his minute dated 15th July 1874, the following prescribed forms of the Annual Account of the Medical School, Nagpur, are submitted for the information of the Chief Commissioner, Central Provinces. FOR THE YEAR 1876-77. I.IP/19/NZ.3 IP REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1877-78. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952177.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1878.
No. 3135/149 FROM A. H. L. FRASER, ESQUIRE, ASST. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE. Dated Nagpur, the 6th August 1878. SIR, I am directed by the Chief Commissioner to acknowledge your letter No. 61, dated 10th ultimo, in which you report on the progress and working of the Medical school during the year 1877-78. 2. At the close of the preceding session 29 pupils remained under instruction; and 29 more joined the school last June. It is satisfactory to find that sixteen (apparently not fourteen, as you have it) of the new pupils belong to the Central Provinces. *This office letter No.1376- 38, dated 12th April 1878 to Sanitary Commissioner. 3. As in past years so in the present year you have to report very unfavourably on the character and abilities of the pupils. Out of the 58 pupils on the roll 14 have been already dismissed for misconduct, inattention, or ill health; and one more has been recom- mended for dismissal on account of gross misbehaviour. You find that the new pupils admit- ted in June have been as a whole inferior to the general run of students admitted in former years; and you attribute this to the method of selection in force. Under the recent orders regarding Hospital Assistants new arrangements are being made; and considering you have so frequently protested against the pre-collegiate year of training. the Chief Commissioner has directed* that a system be tried in which it shall have no part. The standard of preliminary examination will also be raised, and will embrace a knowledge of English. The Chief Commissioner trusts that this change of system may be attended by the improvement which you have led him to expect. 4. It is satisfaction to find that five Maratha Brahmins are among the newly admitted pupils. The prejudice against medical pursuits amongst this class though decreasing has not, however, yet been overcome. The number of pupils belonging to it is still small; and you mention the instance of a young man who prosecuted his studies in spite of violent opposi- tion on the part of his relatives and friends. He has been successful in his studies and has passed out of the school. The Chief Commissioner will be glad to give due weight to his desire to be employed in this part of the Province. 5. Your opinion of the general conduct of the pupils who have been permitted to re- main in the school, is satisfactory. They have as a rule been attentive, amenable to discipline and diligent; but deficient education stood much in the way of advancement in the case of not a few. The final examinations, however, were fairly satisfactory; and in some cases, the papers submitted were creditable. The first in order of merit has already been highly commended by you; and on your recommendation the Chief Commissioner appointed him Demonstrator of Anatomy and Librarian in the school. 6. Generally, then, the school has continued fairly successful. The professors still receive very high commendation; and your own supervision has been constant and close. I am to convey the Chief Commissioner's thanks to you and your staff for your successful labours. Mr. Morris also notices with satisfaction the interest shown in the school by the Native gentlemen whom you name as subscribers for the purchase of prizes. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. H. L. FRASER, Asst. Secretary.
No. 61. FROM SURGEON MAJOR W. B. BEATSON, MD., F. R. C. S., Principal,Nagpur school of Medicine. To LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 10th July 1878. SIR, The eleventh session of the Nagpur School of Medicine having come to a close, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commissioner my annual report on the progress and working of the school. 2. At the close of the preceding session on the 31st March 1877, 29 pupils remained under instruction; and on the 1st of June 1877, 30 new students were attached to the school by order of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department. 3. Of these, 29 only reported themselves; one a Mohamedan, being unable to join on account of ill-health, was dismissed from the service by order of Government. Of the 29 who joined the school in June last, 3 came from Damoh, 2 from Seoni, 1 from Saugor, 1 from Hoshangabad, 1 from Betul, 8 from Nagpur, 1 from Patna, 1 from Agra, 2 from Allahabad, 3 from Madras, 1 from Delhi, 1 from Mirzapur, 1 from Bulandshaher, 1 from Benares, 1 from Unoa, and 1 from Arcot. 14 therefore belonged to the Central Provinces, and 15 to other parts of India. 14 were Mohamedans and 15 Hindus, 5 of the latter being Mahratta Brahmins of Nagpur. 4. At the commencement of the session 1877-78 there were therefore 58 students; of these, in the course of the year, 14 were dismissed for general incapacity, inattention, ill-health, and misbehaviour; and 19 were found qualified on examination at the close of the session for admission into the service as 3rd class Hospital Assistants. 25 students therefore remain on the rolls at the close of the session. I have included in the number that remain, the Mahratta Brahmin (Daji Sadasive, No. 1000) whose dismissal I have re- commended for false and dishonest conduct, and whose retention in the school I consider undesirable. He is a young man of good ability, but, in my opinion, no amount of ability should condone gross misbehaviour. The order of his dismissal is not yet out, and he is still therefore considered as one remaining on the rolls at the end of the session. 5. Of the 29 students admitted in June 1877, 5 require special mention. These 5 were Mahratta Brahmins of the Central Provinces; of these, only 2 now remain to pro- secute their studies. They have been found willing, but are naturally somewhat inapt, and deficient in preliminary training, and I am therefore doubtful of their future success. Of the other 3, one left the school of his own accord; the remaining 2 have been found deficient, have made very little progress, and have therefore been recommended for dismissal. In the number of students passed out of school as qualified Hospital Assistants on this occasion, one Maharatta Brahmin, Vishnu, of Nagpur, is included. This young man has prosecuted his studies under great difficulties, and in spite of the violent opposition of his friends and relatives, but with success. The passing of this young man is a source of much satisfaction to the teachers and myself. He is well behaved and intelligent, and very anxious to be employed in Nagpur. I would therefore beg to recommend him to the notice of the Chief Commissioner, and hope that his case may receive favourable consi- deration. 6. In proceeding with the usual course of instruction, it soon became evident that although some of the 29 pupils were fair specimens of their class, they were, as a body inferior to the general run of students admitted in previous years. It is to be regretted that among the students sent to the school every year, there are so many young men of inferior qualifications, fitted neither by inclination nor capability for their work. The new students of this session furnish the whole number above-mentioned as absconded, dismissed, and reported for dismissal. Thus of 29, 15 only remain. Of these, 4 are very intelligent; and 6 of fair ability, diligent, and likely to succeed. Of the ultimate success of the re- maining 5 I am very doubtful. I have already in previous reports dwelt on the inferior qualifications of the majority of the young men sent to the school; and it is evident that my former remarks on this subject, the method of selection by a Military Committee, and the disadvantages of a year's residence at a Civil dispensary or Military hospital, apply with equal force on the present occasion. 7. As I was absent on other duty at the beginning of the session I had no opportunity of inspecting and examining the newly admitted pupils; this duty therefore devolved on my locum tenens, who in August 1877, at the desire of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical De- partment, held an examination of the newly admitted students for the purpose of ascertaining, the extent of their general and professional qualification, and their progress and ability to
2 profit by further instruction. The result of this was very insatisfactory; much so, that out of 29, he was compelled to recommend the dismissal of 11. The Surgeon General, how- ever, reversed this decision, as after calling for the examination papers, he considered the test to which the lads had been submitted too severe, and in this I fully concur; but, I regret to have to report, from my own observation and the results of the general examinations which I completed March last, that the severe measure proposed was too lenient. The painful duty of recommending further dismissals consequently remained to me. The result of test exam- ination was no doubt in the main correct, although the method of procedure was wrong. After much consideration I have been obliged to recommend the dismissal of 7 boys out of 22 who remained after the dismissals in August last. Of the 11 boys dismissed, by my locum tenens and recalled by order of the Surgeon General, only 6 returned; and of these, I am obliged to say 4 have entirely failed to profit by rejoining the school. The remaining 2, being of average ability, have been allowed a further trial of six months. It is to be regretted that the test examination in August last was too severe; a simpler test would have sufficed to prove the incapacity of the boys now finally recommended for dismissal: some of these were so utterly deficient and had made so little progress, that they failed to recognise the common- est drugs; whilst others, after writing answers to set questions, were unable to read them. 8. The conduct of pupils of all grades, and their attendance at lectures, examinations and dissections, with the exceptions above noted, have been generally good: some of the pupils have not always been amenable to discipline. I have observed several instances of irregu- larity of attendance, disobedience of orders and carelessness in study, and these have always been punished with fines or severe reprimand. I have in previous reports dwelt on the use- fulness of the power which has been accorded to the Principal, to stop promotion and increase of pay. The summary power of suspending pupils also has had a good effect on the idle and incorrigible. The threat of dismissal has always been found a powerful instrument in enforcing diligence and obedience. 9. No change of importance has been made in the method of teaching since last report. Full courses of lectures on Anatomy, Elementary Physiology, Materia Medica, Elementary Chemistry, Principles and Practice of Medieine and Surgery, Elementary Pathology and Hygiene, with frequent examinations, have been delivered by each teacher; and the progress of the students has been closely watched by my locum tenens and myself throughout the sessions. Practical instruction has also been imparted to the boys at the Mayo Hospital and its out-door dispensary. The teachers have had great difficulties to contend with in the shape of imperfectly educated minds, and the absence of good verna- cular text-books. They all, however, I am glad to say, testify, with some exceptions, to respectful attention of the boys, and the desire displayed by a great majority of them to acquire knowledge. 10. There has been no change in the staff of teachers during the year, and I am glad to be able to speak, as usual, in high praise of the zeal and efficiency of Babus Jadub Kissen Ghose, Kali Kissen Ghose, and Jadu Nath Ghose, which have already earned them the commendation of the Chief Commissioner. No teachers could devote more care and attention to their work or set a better example to their pupils. It is right that I should also quote here the favourable opinion of the conduct and qualifications of the teachers left on record by the Officiating Principal:3 result of the oral examinations have convinced me that many of the students are wanting in natural aptitude learning and are deficient in common sense. There are many who are willing to learn, and try to do so, but committing to memory by rote is their only idea of study. They learn by heart, without understanding, and are therefore apt to get bewildered and confused when brought face to face with the practical part of their profession, or when they have to deal with any thing that is out of their groove. 16. 19 students had completed their full period of study, and all were found sufficiently qualified, and have been recommended to be admitted into the service as passed Medical pupils. These students are below mentioned by name in order of merit:4 18. The distribution of last year's prizes has been unavoidably delayed, owing to my absence from the station on other duty. The prizes were not ordered by my locum tenens during my absence, but they are now on their way to India, and I hope to see them distributed early next month; I have not therefore been able to issue letters to Native gentlemen inviting subscriptions for prizes for this year. But I have no doubt the usual subscriptions will be forthcoming. The names and donations of Native gentlemen who have contributed for the prizes of last year are given below. My best thanks are as usual due to these gentlemen for their continued liberality. I have added to this amount the sum of Rs. 100. Rs. Raja Janoji Bhonsla 100 Raja Sulemanshah 100 Abeer Chand Rai Bahadur 50 Mr. Balwant Rao, Pleader 25 " C. Narayanswamy Naidu, Pleader 25 " Gopal Haree Rao, Pleader 25 " Jadub Kissen Ghose, Assistant Surgeon 25 " Bipin Kisto Bhose, Pleader 10 " Birreshur Dutt, Extra-Assistant Commissioner 10 " Waman Rao, Pleader 5 Dr. W. B. Beatson, Principal 100 Total Rs. ... 475 19. Agreeably to instructions laid down by the Accountant General, Central Provinces, of his Minute dated 15th July 1874, the following prescribed forms of the annual account in the Nagpur School of Medicine are submitted for the information of the Chief Com- missioner. For the year 1877-78. I.IP/19/NZ.3 REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1878-79 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952207.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1879. 8 5 79 5C. 144 262
No. 2286 101 FROM A. H. L. FRASER, ESQUIRE, ASST. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, TO THE PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 26th May 1879. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge your letter No. 32, dated the 19th ultimo, which is the annual report on the progress of the Nagpur School of Medicine for the year 1878-79. 2. At the close of the preceding session 24 pupils remained under instruc- tion; and 22 new pupils (of whom 15 belonged to districts of the Central Pro- vinces) were admitted during the year, under the orders of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department. Of the total number of 46 students, 9 belonged to the 3rd year, 15 to the 2nd, and 22 to the 1st. Of the 3rd year students, 8 completed their course of study with success, and have been classed as "Passed Medical Pupils;" the 9th was suspended for dishonesty in copying at the examination. Of the 2nd year students, 3 were dismissed, 3 failed to pass, and 9 passed their examinations very fairly. Of the 1st year students, 5 were dis- missed; but of the remaining 17, 16 are favourably reported on. These are briefly the educational results of the year's work. 3. The Chief Commissioner observes with satisfaction that your report of the conduct and character of the pupils is on the whole more favourable than in former years; and the discipline of the school seems to be pretty well main- tained. The Assistant Surgeons forming the teaching staff continue to merit your warm commendation; and to them the success and reputation of the school are mainly attributed. 4. In regard to the remarks contained in paragraph 10 of your letter under reply, I am to say that the question has already been disposed of for the time being in this office letter No. 1376-38, dated 12th April 1878, to the address of the Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces. 5. It seems probable that the school will henceforth be a strictly Provincial institution. In all the provinces of India the Subordinate Medical Service has been separated into two classes, (1) military, and (2) civil; and the fact mentioned in paragraph 10 of your report that the Surgeon General, Indian Medical De- partment, does not propose in the present year to attach any students to the school, gives additional force to the probability. The connection of the school with the Provincial Subordinate Medical Service is so close that its circumstances and future have been specially recommended to the consideration of the Inspec- tor General of Dispensaries. The day will not be long distant when it will be impossible to hold out the promise that every passed student shall enter the service of Government. 6. In conclusion I am to convey the Chief Commissioner's thanks for your report and for the interest you take in the school. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. H. L. FRASER, Asst. Secretary. 23 5 79No. 32. FROM SURGEON MAJOR JOHN BRAKE, M. D., Principal, Nagpur School of Medicine. TO THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 19th April 1879. SIR, I have the honor to submit, for the information of the Chief Commissioner, the annual report on the progress of the Nagpur Medical School for the year ending 31st March 1879, when the 12th Session was closed with the examination of 43 students in 3 classes. 2. At the end of the preceding Session on 31st March 1878, there were 43 on the rolls, of whom 19 were passed as qualified for admission to the Subordin- ate Medical Service as 3rd Class Hospital Assistants from April 10th, leaving 24 first and second year's students to further prosecute their studies; and on the 1st June 1878, 22 new pupils were admitted by order of the Surgeon General, making a total of 46 at the commencement of the Session that has just closed. These were classed as follows:2 5. I found the subjects of Materia Medica and Chemistry, in which these students had been tested before, had been somewhat neglected this third year, being looked upon as not essential for passing; still the answers were fairly good. In future pass examinations these subjects will be considered of more impor- tance than heretofore. 6. The names of the passed students in order of merit are:3 far as the persons assaulted were concerned, was compromised by a payment of Rs. 8 compensation levied from the students at fault, but this was not considered sufficient in regard to the discipline of the school. The Principal fined each of the students from Rs. 1 to 3 in addition to his share of the Rs. 8; two, who had been punished before for turbulent conduct, were not allowed to remain in the school quarters, and the Havildar Major and Lance Naicks, old students, who should have put down the disturbance, instead of join- ing in it as they did, were reduced at once from their positions of trust, and re- placed by others. No outbreak has occurred since. 10. During the year a great alteration in the method of selecting students has been ordered, and the standard of preliminary education greatly raised, a fair knowledge of English being an essential qualification. The late Principal, in opposition to the opinion expressed by myself as In- spector General of Dispensaries, by the two Deputy Surgeons General in these Provinces, and entertained, I believe, by the Surgeon General, Indian Medical De- partment, objected strongly to a pre-collegiate year of practical instruction at a hospital or dispensary; and the Chief Commissioner sanctioned the experiment of taking one half of the students direct, the other half being received after about 12 months' hospital training. The custom hitherto has been for the Surgeon General to send yearly to the Nagpur Medical School, a number of young men trained as pupils at some dispensary either in the Central Provinces or elsewhere, as shown in paragraph 2 of this report: trusting to receive about 15 such students who would have had the required pre-collegiaite year's training, the late Principal caused to be issued in the "Central Provinces' Gazette" of November 2nd 1878, a Notification calling for candidates for 15 studentships to be given in May next, without this preliminary experience. On November 18th, however, a memoran- dum was received from the Secretary to the Surgeon General at Calcutta to the effect that no pupils would be sent by him to the Nagpur Medical School this year, so that the comparison between students with and without the pre- collegiate year's training and experience cannot be made without a modification of the rules last framed. On this subject however, I have made a special reference, but consider it necessary to mention it here, as likely greatly to influence the con- dition of the school. If a sufficient number of respectable young men with the preliminary quali- fications now required, come forward, I should be very sanguine as to the suc- cess and high reputation of the Nagpur Medical School. 11. There has been a temporary alteration in the teaching staff:4 energetic and good teacher, and constantly gives clinical explanations when visiting the wards of which he has charge. Assistant surgeon Jadu Nath Ghose delivered 177 lectures and held 32 examinations in Surgery, and 126 lectures and 26 examinations in Anatomy, besides demonstrating on the dead body, both dissections and operations. The answers given by the students, both in their written papers and at viva voce examinations, show the care devoted by the professors to the subjects taught. Most of the lectures were over before I took charge, but I was able to test their character at many of the weekly examinations. The ability, energy and interest in their pupils shown by Babus Jadub Kishen Ghose and Jadu Nath Ghose have so frequently been brought to notice by myself and Dr. Beatson, that I can only add here, that they have fully kept up their good name and are entitled to my best thanks for their services and assistance during the past year. I have every reason to believe that my pre- decessor was quite satisfied with Babu Kali Krishna Ghose. In the ensuing session I propose giving a course of lectures myself upon a subject that has hitherto been to a great extent ignored, viz. Obstetrics and diseases peculiar to women. 13. As in former years the donations to the school for prizes, &c., have been liberal, amounting to Rs. 580. The names of the donors are given below:5 II.IP/19/NZ.3 REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1879-80, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952243.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1880.
No.1827 94 FROM A. H. L. FRASER, ESQUIRE, ASSISTANT SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. TO THE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, For Civil Medical Administration. Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 15th May 1880. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge receipt of your letter No. 4-C, dated 22nd ultimo, forwarding the report on the Nagpur Medical School for 1879-80. * Vide his letter No. 3413A, dated 13th November 1878, to the Principal of the Medical School. 2. You draw the attention of the Chief Commissioner to two points mentioned in the report. The first is the fact that the Surgeon General has discontinued sending pupils to the medical school from other parts of India. You deprecate this, and urge that some effort should be made to restore the former practice. I am to inform you that the Chief Commissioner has made every effort to secure foreign pupils for the school, so that the teaching power of the school may be fully utilized. This office endorsement No. 438-14, dated 28th January last, conveyed to you the information that he had failed in an effort to obtain pupils destined for the subordinate medical service in the Central India Agency and Berar; and the Surgeon General has not less definitely declined to send pupils intended for employment in the service under his control.* At present, it appears from paragraph 4 of the report now submitted that a sufficient number of pupils has been obtained to justify the continued main- tenance of the institution; and, until the provincial establishment is completed, it will be possible to find employment for all the students who qualify as "passed medical pupils." But if the school is to train local students only, and meet only local requirements, it is difficult to see how it can be maintained in a state of efficiency for more than a few years. 3. The second point to which you draw attention is the proposed course of lectures in Hygiene. The Chief Commissioner views this arrangement with approval. It will enable the Administration to meet the wishes of the Government of India and Secretary of State regarding the employment of vaccinators in sanitary work. After passing through this course of training, and with the aid of the Sanitary Primer recently published by Government, these officials should be qualified to render valuable assistance in this work. They will not only know what measures are worthy of adoption, but they will be able to explain their importance intelligently to the people. The Chief Commissioner will watch with interest the effect of this arrangements. 4. Turning to the report itself, the Chief Commissioner observes with satisfaction that the attendance of the students has been very regular, and their conduct good: that the Principal speaks very highly of their general progress and of the especially excellent character of the answers given by some of them, which, he says, "would have ensured their passing many of the examining boards "in the United Kingdom, and redound to their own credit as well as that of "their teachers;" and that the teaching staff continues to merit strong com- mendation.
2 5. I am to request that you will convey to the Principal and Teachers of the school an expression of the Chief Commissioner's cordial appreciation of the work they have done; and I am to renew the expression of his thanks to the several contributors to the prize fund, already personally communicated to them in public darbar. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, A. H. L. FRASER. Assistant Secretary. 15 5 80 3c 345 175
No.4 C FROM J. A. C. HUTCHINSON, M. D., DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces, TO THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Camp Pachmarhi, the 22nd April 1880. SIR, In forwarding for the consideration of the Chief Commissioner, Cen- tral Provinces, the Report of the Nagpur Medical School for 1879-80, written by Surgeon Major J. Brake, Principal of the School, I have the honor to make the following short observations:FROM SURGEON MAJOR JOHN BRAKE, PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. TO THE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 19th April 1880. SIR, I have the honor to submit, for the information of the Chief Commis- sioner, the annual Report on the progress of the Nagpur Medical School, for the year ending 31st March 1880. 2. At the close of the preceding Session, on 31st March 1879, there were remaining on the rolls of the school:2 first Session. All are Hindus, one coming from Damoh, another from Bhandara, the third residing in Nagpur. 4. For the current year a different arrangement has been made, this with a slight modification I consider a much better one. From the young men who passed the High School Examination in September last, twenty were selected for medical scholarships; of these, six have withdrawn under one excuse or another; but 144 intelligent and very promising young men remain attached to dispensaries till the opening of the Session in June next, learning under the guidance of the several Hospital Assistants the rudiments of their profession, becoming familiar with the appearance of ordinary diseases and the remedies used, as well as get- ting preliminary instruction in Anatomy and Materia Medica. This year the pro- bationers are under my own observation at the dispensaries of Nagpur and are doing well, but in future years they might, by preference be left to get their preliminary experience at the head quarter dispensaries of their own districts, not coming to Nagpur till the commencement of the medical session. They will thus be near their own homes and under the Civil Surgeons, who will be able to keep them under close observation, soon learning whether they will be fit for admission to the Medical school. 5. Of the fourteen, one is a Mahomedan and the remainder Hindus. Two are residents of Nagpur, two come from Wardha, four from Jubbulpore, and one from each of the following districts,3 The prize winners in the second year are:4 I would also speak in favourable terms of Hospital Assistant Ramdin Tewarri, the Demonstrator of Anatomy, whose name I accidently omitted from my last report. This young man is a very good Anatomist and has been most useful as a Demonstrator during the yast two years. This year he is giving instruction to the probationers who will enter the school in June next. At many of the weekly examinations I was present, and myself delivered a short course of lectures on practical Midwifery. 12. The Chief Commissioner was good enough to distribute the prizes on January 1st of the present year, thanking at the time the several donors to the prize funds. I am pleased to record a slight increase in the amount received this year, which would have been great but that for some reason Raja Suleman Shah re- duced his donation from Rs. 100 to Rs. 50. I have asked if there is any special reason for the change, either in the management of the funds or of the school; but cannot hear of any, and for my own part know of none. The following is a list of donations received:5 I. Annual account of the Medical School, Nagpur, for year 1879-80. Receipts. Amount. Disbursements. Amount. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Fees ... ... ... Pay of Principal 3,000 0 0 Receipt on account of Books and Instruments ... ... ... " " Teachers 8,840 1 6 Stipend of Pupils 2,969 6 5 Receipt on account of diplomas ... ... ... Travelling allowance of Teacher 24 0 0 ... ... ... " " of Pupils ... ... ... Compensation to Pupils in lieu of uniform ... ... ... Establishment 878 15 3 Miscellaneous contingencies 257 15 4 Total Rs ... ... ... Total Rs... 15,970 10 6 II. Annual account of the Subscription Fund of the Nagpur School of Medicine for year 1879-80. Receipts. Amount. Disbursements. Amount. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Balance in hand on the 31st March 1879 13 7 9 Sent to Mr. H. Lewis, for prize books 300 0 0 Donations since received 590 0 0 Sent to Mint Master, Calcutta, for medals 161 7 1 ... ... ... Required for Watches, &c. 128 8 11 Balance in Treasury 13 7 7 Total Rs 603 7 9 Total Rs 603 7 9
IP/19 REPORT ON THE Nagpur School Of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES FOR THE YEAR 1880-81. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952285.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1881.
No. 1863 93 FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, C. S., OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces, Dated Nagpur, the 25th May 1881. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge your letter No. 1859-C.C. dated 6th instant, forwarding the report of the Principal on the working of the Nagpur School of Medicine for the year ending 31st March 1881. 2. At the beginning of the Session of 1880-81 there appear to have been the following students under instruction:2 (c) Thirteen probationers selected for admission during 1880 who are at present receiving instruction in Main dispensaries. Of these proba- tioners, 11 are Hindus, and 2 Mohammedans; 3 belong to the Nagpur district, 4 to Narsinghpur, 3 to Jubbulpore, 2 to Bhandara and 1 to Wardha. 5. Regarding the discipline of the school and the conduct of the pupils a few words may be said. The conduct of the 3rd year students cannot be said to have been good. Nearly one-half of the number failed to pass, and the habits of five became dissipated. They also appear to have led away the three 2nd year students to a certain extent. The 1st year students, on the other hand, behaved well. These facts seem to the Chief Commissioner to indicate that the new system whereby lads selected from the students in schools of the Central Provinces are attached to the school is preferable to the old system by which youths from any part of India were forwarded by the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department, for instruction. Under the new system we have a guaran- tee that the probationers have a certain amount of instruction and a capacity for acquiring knowledge, and most of them are near their families, while on all home influences can be brought to bear. Under the old system, on the other hand, youths on the verge of manhood were sent to Nagpur, where they had neither relations nor friends. They were too young to be trusted like men and too old to be treated as boys, and the sole restraint on them out of school hours was servants, who might or might not report irregularities of conduct to the Principal. It might be anticipated that under such circumstances the less steady would succumb to idleness and evil influences. 6. The teaching staff of the school remains the same as in previous years. The Principal, Surgeon Major John Brake, delivered a short series of lectures on Midwifery during the year. Assistant Surgeon Jadub Kishn Ghose, who has been connected with the institution for the past 12 years, is its resident manager, and as he is also in execu- tive charge of the Mayo Hospital is particularly fitted to direct the clinical stu- dies of the students. Assistant Surgeon Kali Kishn Ghose has been a teacher in the school since 1874, and in addition to lecturing on and examining in Materia Modica and Chemistry, gave a course of 44 lectures and 7 oral examinations on Hygiene. This course was attended by the 3rd and 2nd year students and by 12 superintendents of vaccination, 44 vaccinators and 1 compounder. At the end of the course an examination was held and 10 superintendents, 37 vaccinators and 1 compounder received certificates of proficiency. The Principal of the school writes:No 1859 C.C. FROM J. A. C. HUTCHINSON, ESQUIRE, M. D., DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, central povinces. To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 6th May 1881. SIR I have the honor to forward for the consideration of the Chief Commissioner the annual Report of the Nagpur Medical School written by Surgeon Major John Brake, the Principal. 2. It appears from the above that the students under the old rules passed out of the school at the close of the official year ending 31st March 1881. But it seems that after all there are a number of these young men who are still in the school, as only 7 out of 12 succeeded in passing. The remaining 5 failed, " and as the results of the weekly oral examinations were generally unfavourable, there could be no hesitation in rejecting them, and they have been suspended." It is questionable whether this suspension should not give way to dismissal, as in the Principal's words "two of the rejected ones had become quite reckless, and led the other three into idle and dissipated habits notwithstanding repeated exhortations, warnings and punishments," for it would be unwise to admit into the subordinate medical service those who are reckless and dissipated. 3 The same year which saw the young men of the 3rd year passing out witnessed the examination of the youths who had been admitted on the new plan, viz. selecting young men as probationers from those who had successfully passed the High Shcool Scholarship examination held in September. These young men after selection are posted for six months to dispensaries in their native districts. 4. The advantages of this plan are, that a great proportion of the young men know English well, and therefore can use English text books, and can read the medical periodicals of the day. And as regards being posted to dispensaries they are broken into what will be required of them as students, and they will not find things strange when they appear at the Medical school. 5. We further learn that there are only three students to pass out of the school next year, and this number may be further reduced by incompetence or casualty. This paucity will necessitate our applying to the Surgeon General with the Government of India, for a supply of medical subordinates to make up the deficiency caused by casualties, pensions, and leave. 6. The education is necessarily an expensive one, and will become more so as the numbers of medical subordinates annually required become smaller. The only advantages of retaining the school are that the youths of the Central Pro- vinces can be taught their future profession in immediate proximity to their homes, and are less liable to become "reckless and dissipated" than if associa- ted with a large number of students drawn from various parts of India. It might lessen the cost of the school if a depot for medical stores was asso- ciated with it. There is but little doubt that such a depot would be an advan- tage to these Provinces.
2 Again a class for training young men to be compounders and vaccinators would extend the usefulness of the school, and be of great service in the import- ant duties which these men have to perform. 7. It appears that the discipline of the school requires the comments of the Principal. He writes: " It was found that all the 3rd and 2nd year students had subscribed to form a fund for bribing the chaprasis to overlook irregularities at examinations and at other times." This action seems not to deserve the com- mendation which is expressed in the term " generally good." 8. The Principal writes in high terms of his staff of teachers, and there is no doubt they deserve the praise bestowed on them. 9. In conclusion the session which has closed was characterized by the delivery of an experimental course of lectures on Hygiene by Assistant Surgeon Kali Krishna Ghose, teacher of Materia Medica. This course was attended by the 3rd and 2nd years students and by twelve superintendents of vaccination and 44 vaccinators. This course has been a success, and it is to be hoped it will continue. The plan already hinted at of starting a class of young men to be trained as vaccinators would be preferable. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, J. A. C. HUTCHINSON, Deputy Surgeon General, C. P.
No, 90. FROM SURGEON MAJOR JOHN BRAKE, PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. To THE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpir, the 25th April 1881. SIR, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commis- sioner, the annual Report on the progress of the Nagpur Medical School for the year ending 31st March 1881. 2. The year is noticeable, as at its close there passed from the school the last of the pupils received under the old rules; and there were examined at the close of the first year of study, the first of the young men received under the new rules. 3. The change was alluded to in paragraphs 3 and 4 of my last year's report, and it will be sufficient here to point out that whereas under the old rules, nearly all the pupils were received under the orders of the Surgeon Gene- ral, Indian Medical Department, from all parts of Bengal, to be educated for general service, the students now entertained are drawn exclusively from the Central Provinces, for loca service only. 4. At the close of 1879 fourteen young men were selected as probation- ers from those who had successfully passed the High School Scholarship exami- nations held in September; these after having been attached for six months to one of the dispensaries in Nagpur, were admitted in June last as students at the school. 5. One young man resigned on July 12th, returning all stipends he had received, but the remaining thirteen completed their first year's course satisfac- torily. 6. The fact of these young men having been classed at the High School examinations, which embrace English and the higher rules of arithmetic besides other subjects, is sufficient evidence of their application and ability to learn, and I have been very favorably impressed with their conduct and general behaviour throughout the year; they are a well-behaved and intelligent class of young men, and being conversant with the English language are able to use English text books, so much better than those published in the Vernacular dialects. Every encouragement will be given to them to keep up their knowledge of Eng- lish, so that if so minded they may constantly improve and increase their know- ledge by keeping themselves acquainted with the most recent experience of their profession in India, England, America, and elsewhere as published from time to time in English periodicals. 7. I am pleased to find that the best of my Hospital Assistants are always anxious to read the London and Calcutta Medical Journals. 8. During the present year 13 probationers have been similarly selected, and these are now receiving preliminary instructions at the main dispensary of the districts in which they dwell. They will be admitted to the school in June next. Three belong to the Nagpur district, four to Narsinghpur, three to Jubbulpore, two to Bhandara, and one to Wardha. Two are Mohamedans, and 11 Hindus.
2 9. A course of 44 lectures and 7 oral examinations on Hygiene were given by the Teacher of Materia Medica, at which attended all the students of the 3rd and 2nd year, as well as 12 superintendents of vaccination, 44 vaccinators and 1 com- pounder (a volunteer from Sambalpur); these vaccinators were from every district in the Province, and at the end of the course in August were examined by means of written answers to a series of questions. Ten superintendents, 37 vaccinators and 1 compounder received certificates of proficiency, 14 in the first, 18 in the second, and 16 in the third class. All these have a very fair knowledge of Hygiene and should be able to give good advice to their countrymen, as well as afford intelligent assistance to the health officers under whom they may serve at any time. Two superintendents and nine vaccinators failed to pass a satisfactory exam- ination. The students of the school had questions on Hygiene included in their examination papers at the end of the session. 10. The general examination for the year lasted from 4th March to 25th March, all the pupils writing answers to a number of questions on all the subjects of the course. These answers, as usual, were read before the several teachers and myself, marks being given for each answer as read. Viva voce questions were given when considered desirable or necessary; and the skill of the 3rd year students in bandaging &c., was practically tested by me. 11. Thirteen third year students were examined and seven passed; the last on the list did not quite come up to the standard, but he has fair general know- ledge, and had been very ill during the session and not able to devote much time to Materia Medica and Chemistry, but will I believe make a good Medical Subordinate. 12. A list is given showing the percentage of marks gained by the passed men on each subject. Hyder Hussain, the fourth on the list, is a very intelligent and hard reading young man, and would have taken a better place, had not a sheet of his answers in Anatomy been confiscated on being found in the possession of another student Ramji Mull. This last named young man had barely passed in Medicine, was detected copying in Anatomy, and declined to be examined in Surgery. 13. Five other young men failed, and as the results of the weekly oral examinations were generally unfavorable there could be no hesitation in rejecting them and they have been suspended. 14. Two of the rejected ones had become quite reckless, and led the other three into idle and dissipated habits notwithstanding repeated exhortations, warnings and punishments. List of passed Medical pupils in order of merit. Percentage of marks gained. Medicine. Surgery. Anatomy. Materia Medica. Chemistry. Total. 500 1 Allah Buksh 73.8 93.1 72.4 67.4 45.5 352.2 2 Ram Pershad 59.2 94.3 71.4 61.6 57.3 343.8 3 Chujjo Mull 74.6 74.3 63.9 73.9 52.9 339.6 4 Hyder Hussain 66.1 78.7 38.2 69.8 87.7 339.5 5 Jotee Ram Tewaree 57.6 73.1 51.1 64.1 47.0 292.9 6 Lutchmon Pershad 63.0 54.3 64.5 43.5 67.6 292.9 7 Sohan Lall 50.9 59.3 57.0 39.7 22.0 228.9
3 The following received prizes:4 Vishram Sitharam Hade; prize in Anatomy, an Honorary Certificate. Ramchandra Krishnachandra; prize in Anatomy, an Honorary certificate. Prathap Singh; prize in Materia Medica, an Honorary Certificate. Results of examination of 1st year students in order of merit. Percentage of marks gained. Anatomy. Materia Medica. Chemistry. Total. 300 1 Gulab Singh 93.0 93.8 91.9 278.7 2 Vishram Sitaram Hade 83.3 86.1 87.3 257.2 3 Govind Vithal Gade 73.1 95.2 87.3 255.6 4 Prathap Singh 73.6 91.6 89.6 254.8 5 Ramchandra Krishnachandra 83.6 81.1 88.5 253.2 6 Ramji Tokaram 83.9 71.9 89.6 245.4 7 Ujaghur Pershad 74.4 80.2 85.0 239.6 8 khalillol Rahmon 80.0 69.1 74.5 223.6 9 Girdhari Lall 63.1 72.2 65.5 200.8 10 Narain. Raghunath 70.3 54.6 68.9 193.8 11 Nanak Pershad 63.2 51.2 65.5 179.9 12 Hari Ram 66.9 50.9 48.2 166.0 13 Yagambrarm 53.9 38.5 60.9 153.3 18. The attendance of the students has been very regular with two or three exceptions amongst the 3rd year men, all of whom failed to pass. The conduct too has generally been good. Four of the 1st year students were punished for card playing, since when there have been no complaints against them. 19. It was found that all of the 3rd and 2nd year students had sub- scribed to form a fund for bribing the chaprasis to overlook irregularities at examination and at other times. All implicated, the givers, as well as receivers, were severely punished, the student officers removed, and the appointment of Havildar left vacant till the end of the year. To prevent any laxity of super- vision I remained in the room each day of examination, some 8 or 9 hours from its commencement at 8 A. M., till its close about 5 P.M. The other faults were comparatively trifling, neglect of duty, failing to write up lectures, and quarrelling. 20 Of the teaching staff I can but repeat my commendations of former years. Assistant Surgeon Jadub Kissen Ghose, as resident medical officer has the general management of the school and of the hospital. He is a most indefatigable Assistant, clever and intelligent. He has the well-being of the school as well as of the hospital thoroughly at heart, is an excellent operator and good practitioner, and I can place every reliance on him personally and professionally. Besides the clinical observations made at the bedside, he deli- vered 118 lectures in Medicine and held 58 oral examinations. Assistant Surgeon Jadoo Nath Ghose delivered 118 lectures and held 47 examiations in Anatomy, dissecting for demonstrations ten bodies. In Surgery he delivered 191 lectures and held 42 examinations. He is very careful and minute in his demonstration and teaching, and most anxious to give sound instruction to the students, and is a quiet, intelligent, and painstaking Assistant. Assistant Surgeon Kali Krishna Ghose delivered 115 lectures on Materia Medica, and held 54 examinations; and 42 lectures on Chemistry with 14 exa- minations. He also undertook the course on Hygiene, and gave 44 lectures and 7 examinations in that subject. As a large number of men of full age and unconnected with the school attended this course, I made a point of being present at nearly all the lectures, and can speak favorably of the character of instruction given as well as of the attentive demeanour of the hearers.
5 Kali Krishna Ghose is always painstaking and zealous, and being a well educated and intelligent man is a very valuable Assistant. All the teachers report favorably of the attendance at the classes. Hospital Assistant Ramdeen Tewaree continued as Demonstrator of Anatomy and Librarian throughout the session, when he left to assume charge of the dispensary in the Kawardha State. He is an intelligent man and did good service. He has been succeeded by Passed Medical Pupil Abdul Kadir, the gold medallist of his year, who promises to do well. I myself gave a short course of lectures on Midwifery. 21. The Chief Commissioner was pleased to distribute prizes on the 24th November 1880, and I am glad to be able to append a very satisfactory list of donations to the prize fund. Last year from mistake Raja Sulemon Shah reduced his subscription from Rs. 100 to 50, but has since given the Rs. 50 at first deducted, and has subscribed the full Rs. 100 for the current year. The following is a list of donations received:6 II.Ip/19/NZ.3 IP REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1881-82, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952327.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1882.
No.1818 103 FROM C. W. IMRIE ESQUIRE, C. S., OFFG. ASST. SECY. TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, TO THE DEPUTY SURGRON GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 26th May 1882. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge receipt of the annual report on the Working of the Nagpur Medical School for 1881-82, with your covering letter No. 2331-C. C. of the 8th instant. 2. There were 29 students under instruction throughout the year,2 important subject. He would be sorry to close the. school, as he is convinced that excellent work is done there; and I am to ask you to communicate to the Principal and Teachers his appreciation of their labours during another success- ful year. 5. In conclusion I am to say that the Chief Commissioner is: again glade to observe that the Rajas and gentlemen of Nagpur have made handsome donations towards prizes for the best students of the year, and to request that you will convey to them an expression of his recognition of their liberality. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, C. W. IMRIE, Offg. Asst. Secretary.
No.2331/C. C. FROM B SIMPSON, ESQUIRE, M. D., DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces, TO THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 8th May 1882. SIR, I have the honor to forward for submission to the Chief Commissioner, the annual Report of the Nagpur School of Medicine for the year 1881-82. 2. The system of selecting probationers from amongst those who had suc- cessfully passed the High School Scholarship examination appears to have worked admirably. 3. Towards the close of 1879, 14 young men so selected, were attached to dis- pessaries, and were admitted to the School in June 1880. Of these one resigned, paying back all stipends.; and I find from Dr. Brake's report for the past year that the remaining 13 are still borne on the rolls of the School, and have all passed the examination qualifying them to remain: four of them obtaining more than 3/4ths, 3 more than 2/3rds, and the remaining 6, more than 1/2 marks. The examination of these, as well as of those who passed their final exami- nation, was a searching one, and conducted by the Principal with much care and patience. 4. The small number of punishments and reprimands awarded, viz, eleven, (and these were confined to 4 of the number) is very satisfactory. 5. The first year's class comprises 13 students, of whom one Maroti Ganesh is recommended for dismissal. A reference to the marks awarded shows that he failed signally in all the subjects for examination. 6. The discipline of the School appears to have been well maintained; and the Principal speaks in high terms of the work of the Teachers. 7. There are 26 students at present on the rolls of the School, and other 10 probationers will be added in June next. 8. The system at present adopted in selecting probationers is infinitely preferable to the old one, and calculated to produce a much better class of prac- titioners. At the same time the expense is greater; and it is a matter for regret that the Chief Commissioner's efforts to induce the Government of other pro- vinces to send a certain number of students to the School have hitherto failed, as notwithstanding the exceptionally good opportunities for practical teaching, which the Mayo Hospital affords, it is difficult to see how the School can be much longer maintained on its present footing. I have the honor to be, Sir. Your most obedient Servant, B. SIMPSON, D., Deputy Surgeon General, Central Provinces.
No. 180. P. FROM BRIGADE-SURGEON JOHN BRAKE, PRINCIPAL, NAGPUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, Central Provinces. To THE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 24th April 1882. SIR, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commis- sioner the annual Report on the progress of the Nagpur Medical School for the year ending March 31st 1882. The three young men referred to in my last report as about to enter upon their third year of study, have all passed their final examination, and will I believe prove useful and trustworthy Hospital Assistants after they have had more experience. Their positions in order of merit, and the percentage of marks gained in each subject, are shown in the accompanying table:2 In this subject, Anatomy, four young men gained over 90 per cent from a possible total of 608, and in Materia Medica from a total of 398 marks, three gained more than 90 per cent, and five more than 80 per cent. In Surgery five gained more than 80 per cent. The positions, and percentage of marks in the various subjects, are shown in the following return:3 In, Materia Medica 5 gained over 90 per cent of marks from a total of 344, and the competition was so close that I considered myself called upon to award 3 prizes and two certificates of honor, as though the class is small, those at the head were nearly equal, and all very good indeed. In Anatomy the competition was even closer, and from a total of 532 marks 8 gained over 90 per cent, the highest on the list receiving 526 or 98.8 per cent, the next 96.6 per cent. The positions and percentage of marks are shown in the following table:4 dispensaries of the districts in which they have been dwelling, and, will enter the school on June 1st, having had a short preliminary experience in dispen- sing, dressing, and examining patients. These are only received from 7 districts out of the 18 in the Provinces, and it is impossible for me to say, why some districts never furnish any appli- cants. No preference is given to any particular district. Applications are registered as received, and the seniors by position elected, provided they furnish certificates of physical fitness and good conduct. This year Saugor sends three, Damoh two, and Seoni, Wardha, Jubbul- pore Narsinghpur, and Bhandara one each; seven are Hindus and three Muhammadans. Applications are received from other Provinces, but preference always given to residents in the Central Provinces. There has been no change in the Teaching staff, and I can but repeat my high commendation of one and all. Babu Jadub Kissen Ghose gave 113 lectures, and held 56 examinations in Medicine. He is a sound teacher and good practitioner, and his clinical remarks in the wards are good and practical. Babu Jadunath Ghose gave 106 lectures, and held 40 examinations in Anatomy, and 167 lectures and 39 examinations in Surgery, dissecting 12 bodies for demonstration. He is always careful and minute in his instructions. Babu Kali Krishna Ghose gave 136 lectures, and held 31 examinations in Materia Medica, 48 lectures and 17 examinations in Chemistry, and 41 lectures and 7 examinations in Hygiene. He is most painstaking and zealous in his teaching. Hospital Assistant Abdul Kadir has done very well as Demonstrator of Anatomy during the year. I myself gave a course of 19 lectures in Midwifery, which were regularly attended and attentively listened to by students of 2nd and 3rd year. Prizes were distributed by the Officiating Commissioner of Nagpur on 7th of January 1882, and subscriptions have been received from the following gentlemen:5 The annual accounts of the School are given below:IP/19/.NZ.3 REPORT ON THE Nagpur School of Medicine, CENTRAL PROVINCES FOR THE YEAR 1882-83. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74952369.tif] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS 1883.
No.1713a/85 FROM L. K. LAURIE, ESQUIRE, C. S., OFFG. Asst. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 20th April 1883. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of the report on the working of the Nagpur Medical School for 1882-83, received with your letter No. 36 of 3rd instant. 2. In the report for 1881-82, it was recorded that at the end of that year, there were 13 students about to commence their third year of instruction, 13 students entering on their second year,. and 10 selected probationers. A third year's student deserted on July 19th, and did not return. One of the second year students was dismissed before the commencement of the June Session: and two other second year students who were unpromising were sent away after the Session had begun. When it became known that the school was to be closed at the end of March 1883; and that students who had not by that time finished their course would be transferred to the Patna Medical School, one of the ten first year students resigned and seven showed such a want of application that they had to be sent to their homes. There remained 12 third year, 10 second year, and 2 first year students, who continued their course till the end of the year. 3. Of the 24 pupils just enumerated, only 1 (a second year man) failed to pass. The Chief Commissioner is gratified to learn that the 12 third year students who have passed out of the school and have since been gazetted for duty, are likely to do good service, seeing that they have taken full advantage of the opportunities for acquiring a practical as well as a theoretical knowledge of their profession which the school and hospital afforded them. He shares the hope expressed by Dr. Brake that the second and the first year students (eleven in number) who are now to proceed to Patna will bring credit to the school in which they commenced their studies: and he approves the proposal to send their examination papers to the Principal of the School to which they are going, so that their attainments may be estimated without the necessity for further test at the outset. At the same time a report should be sent on the general conduct of each of the students since he entered the Nagpur School: and although the offences for which two young men were severely punished during the year may, as Dr. Brake remarks, be venial ones in the eyes of the offenders, it will be as well to explain these and other acts of misbehaviour, so that it may be known in what respects the students are in need of advice and control from their new teachers. 4. It was not without much hesitation and very great regret that Mr. Morris resolved that, for reasons of economical and administrative expediency with which you are acquainted, the Nagpur School of Medicine was to be finally closed at the end of last month. .During the fifteen years which have elapsed since it was opened, the character of the teaching therein given, and the practi cal results shown by the many efficient Hospital Assistants recruited from among
2 its pupils, have deserved and won his continuous approval. He takes this oppor- tunity of expressing his cordial thanks to Dr. Brake, who has been Principal of the School for the last four and a half years (besides officiating for about 18 months altogether in 1876-77), for the great diligence, skill and zeal which he has evinced in its management, and in the training of the students. The Chief Commissioner had hoped that the period of the School's existence would at least be conterminous with Dr. Brake's tenure of the office of Civil Surgeon of Nagpur: but it was impossible to ensure this without continuing an expenditure which, as already indicated, was disproportioned to the practical aims of the institution. The services rendered by the three teachers, Mr. Jadub Kishen Ghose, Mr. Jadunath Ghose and Mr. Kali Kishen Ghose also merit warm commendation. The first named of these, on whom the title of Honorary Assistant Surgeon to the Viceroy had been conferred by the Government of India in recognition of his merits, has now retired upon pension: but Mr. Jadunath Ghose as Civil Me- dical officer of Chhindwara and Mr. Kali Kishen Ghose in charge of the Mayo Hospital will, the Chief Commissioner feels sure, continue to maintain the high reputation which they have made for themselves during their connection with the School of Medicine. 5. In conclusion, I am to express the Chief Commissioner's hope that the new arrangements under which ten candidates will be annually selected from natives of these Provinces and sent to Patna to study medicine with the support of stipends furnished by this Administration, and with the prospect of succeeding by competition among themselves to vacancies in your staff of Hospital Assist- ants and Vaccinators, will meet with success: and that the passed students who are unable to secure admission to Government service will, as private practi- tioners, find both useful and remunerative occupation. He thinks it desirable that the pupils of the Nagpur School who are now to proceed to Patna (and among whom he has been happy to include as a stipendiary the "free" student Chit- tambaram Pillay referred to in the fourth paragraph of your letter) should have a prior claim to any vacancies in Government service which may hereafter occur, even if the grades which some of them may take at their final examination may be inferior to those achieved by students selected under the new system. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, L. K. LAURIE, Offg. Assistant Secretary.
No. 2120-D. DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL'S OFFICE, Central Provinces. FROM W. WATSON, ESQUIRE, M. D., OFFG. DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces, To THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 6th April 1883. SIR, I have the honor to forward for submission to the Chief Commissioner the Annual Report of the Nagpur School of Medicine for the year 1882-83. 2. The School was closed on the 31st March, owing to the requirements of the Central Provinces not being sufficient to warrant the necessary expenditure. 3. When the school was closed there were attending it, 12 third year's students, all of whom passed the qualifying examination. They now rank as Passed Medical Pupils, and in that capacity will be posted as follows:2 7. The conduct of the students has generally been very good. Only 8 of them were punished, 3 students being twice punished. The offences were for the most part trivial. 8. Most of the students showed that they were thoroughly acquainted with the subjects on which they were examined. 9. At the examination, 4 third year's students got ¾th marks; 4 second year's students got ¾th marks. There were only 2 first year's students. Both got 85 per cent of the marks. 10. Dr. Brake thinks that some of these young men could compete with success at any European school, and that if they continue to work as they have hitherto done, they will do great credit to the school where they commenced their education, and which they are now leaving. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, W. WATSON, Offg. Dy. Surgeon General, Central Provinces.
No.36. FROM BRIGADE SURGEON J. BRAKE, late PRINCIPAL MEDICAL SCHOOL, TO TEE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, 3rd April 1883. SIR, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commis- sioner the Annual Report on the progress of the Nagpur Medical School for the year ending March 31st 1883. This will be the last report, as it having been considered desirable to close the school, owing to the requirements of the Central Provinces not being suffi- cient to warrant the expenditure, and no assistance being received elsewhere, the students who have satisfactorily completed their second and first year's studies will be transferred to another school. The school opened for the session on June 1st 1882, with 13 third year's students, 12 second year's students including Chittambram Pillay, a free student, that is, one not receiving a stipend from Government, and ten young men selected from applicants who had passed the High school examination for North- brook scholarships. There was at the time a rumour that the school was about to be closed, and this, I believe, was the cause of a great want of application on the part of the new students; so that when the question of closing was definitely settled, after a number of viva voce weekly examinations, I recommended that seven of the first year's men should be sent to their homes and two of the second year who had not improved and were otherwise unpromising, one from failing eye- sight, the other from want of application. One of three first year's men retained as painstaking and intelligent, refused to be transferred and was allowed to resign. A third year's student, Ramji Tukaram, from the Nagpur district deserted on July 19th and could not be found, so that at the end of the Session there were present:2 in the rudiments and principles of their profession, besides having had excellent opportunities of tending patients and examining disease in the wards of the Hos- pital, the practical questions being based on cases treated during the year. Some of the young men could compete with success in the examination at any of the European schools. If the young men of the second and first years continue as they have begun, I am quite sure that they will, in the school to which they are about to be sent, bring credit to the school they are now leaving. I propose to send their written answers, so that their new teachers, if so inclined, may be able to judge of their attainments. Of the 3rd year3 The award of Prizes is as follows:4 Mr. Kali Kishen Ghose gave