IP|QB.10 SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART IV. 1889. 1.X SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART IV. 1889. 1.Are Choleraic Comma-Bacilli, even granting that they are the proximate cause of choleraic symptoms, really efficient in determining the epidemic diffusion of cholera? BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. In the present paper I propose, in the first place, to detail the results of a series of experiments on the behaviour of Choleraic Comma-Bacilli when intro- duced into water and soil, and subsequently to consider how far they are cap- able of affording an answer to the question contained in the title. A.2 Scientific Memoirs by minute size and of the faint bluish tinge characteristic of colonies of commas in Agar-Agar plate-cultivations, but twenty-six large, prominent white ones, resembling those present in the cultivation from the water previous to contamin- ation, being also present. On examination the small colonies were found to be composed of large, well developed commas of considerably greater size than those which were present in the material primarily used in inoculating the water. The large white colonies, on the other hand, consisted of short, thick straight Bacilli. A tube, which was inoculated from one of the small colonies, sub- sequently yielded a characteristic growth of commas, smaller than those in the plate-cultivation, but still larger than those in the primary tube. Two days after the last plate-cultivation had been set another one was inoculated with a like amount of the water. On the following day it was found to contain a scanty crop of colonies. They were all of small size, and the numbers of bluish and white ones present were approximately equal. On the following day the number of colonies still remained very limited. Nine prepar- ations from bluish colonies, and three from white ones, failed to show the pre- sence of any recognisable commas. Six days later another plate-cultivation of the water was set, as before. On the following day one or two very minute colonies, and two thin, widely diffused yellowish patches had made their appearance. Twenty-four hours later the entire surface of the plate was almost covered by a continuous thin yellowish stratum and gave off a very sour smell. A very few defined white colonies were also present. Six preparations were mounted. On examination these were all found to contain straight Bacilli, those corresponding to the diffused growth being distinguished by their slenderness. Another similar plate-cultivation was set forty-eight hours after the previous one. Two days later it contained only one or two colonies, consisting of large straight Bacilli and very minute Micrococci. Two days later, or in other words thirteen days after the water had been inoculated, another plate cultivation was set and the water was then thrown out. Seventy-two hours after, it only showed five small, white, circular colonies, all of them consisting either of short, straight Bacilli, or Micrococci. EXPERIMENT II.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 3 Three days later the cultivation was again examined, as a considerable in- crease in the number and size of the colonies had evidently occurred. It had a peculiar disagreeable, musty, but non-choleraic odour. Six preparations were mounted and of these one contained small commas. Five days after the beginning of the experiment a second plate was set as usual. Forty-eight hours later four dense, small white colonies had appeared. Three preparations were mounted and found to consist of large micrococci and short thick rods with rounded extremities. Eight days after the beginning of the experiment a fresh plate was inocu- lated. Forty-eight hours later a very limited number of colonies had appeared, and the cultivation had a faint disagreeable but non-choleraic smell. Prepar- ations were mounted from twelve colonies. On examination they were found to contain various forms of straight Bacilli, but nothing in any way suggestive of commas. EXPERIMENT III.4 Scientific Memoirs by tions were mounted from colonies, the appearance of which was most suggestive and one of them was found to consist of commas of large size. Another plate was inoculated four days after the introduction of the commas into the water, and on this occasion only one dip of the needle was employed. Two days later the cultivation contained a very limited number of concrete colonies of bluish and yellowish tint.1Twelve preparations were mounted, but in none of them was there anything even suggestive of commas. Six days after contamination of the water another plate was set, this time with o 5 C.C. On the following day the cultivation showed only a very few con- crete colonies and two diffused patches. It was quite devoid of any perceptible smell. Eleven preparations were mounted but in none of them were commas present. EXPERIMENT IV.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 5 Another plate-cultivation, containing 1. C. C., was set six days after the commencement of the experiment. After a period of twenty-four hours it was found to be crowded with colonies. The majority of them were prominent and yellowish, and clearly not composed of commas. A few blue ones were, however, also present. The smell of the cultivation was faint and of a some- what spirituous character. Two preparations were mounted, one from one of the yellow colonies and the other from a blue one. The former contained short oval rods, the latter comma-bacilli. Another cultivation, again containing 1. C. C. of the water, was set two days later. After forty-eight hours it contained an abundance of prominent ochre- tinted colonies and a few small flattened bluish ones. It was devoid of smell Six preparations were mounted. Those from yellow colonies consisted of short oval rods and micrococcoid bodies, those from blue ones contained short, thick, straight rods. No commas were present in any of them. Eighteen days after the beginning of the experiment another cultivation, containing 1. C. C. of water, was started. Two days later it contained a con- siderable number of large colonies of various kinds. The smell was very faint and slightly acid. Six preparations were mounted, and one of these was found to contain small commas. Seven days later6 Scientific Memoirs by greenish-yellow colour. The smell was very faint and non-choleraic. No commas could be found in any of the preparations taken from it. In this experiment, as in the others in which the water was not boiled, a development of green algae made its appearance at the bottom of the beaker after some time, and active evolution of oxygen then set in. The phenomena afforded an excellent demonstration of how a body of water originally very foul will gradually purify itself if only the addition of new supplies of filth be pre- vented. B.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 7 due to the presence of schizomycete colonies. A plate-cultivation was inocu- lated as in the previous experiment. On the following day it contained an enor- mous number of colonies and emitted a strong, offensive, but non-choleraic odour. Twenty-four hours later the smell had become faint and choleraic. The surface of the gelatine presented a generally diffused greenish-yellow colour, due to a thin overgrowth, consisting of long, slender Bacilli. Numerous defined colonies of small straight Bacilli were also present, but no commas could be detected. Sixteen days after the beginning of the experiment a new cultivation was set. Forty-eight hours later the surface of the gelatine was of a generally dif- fused, brilliant greenish-yellow colour. It was almost odourless and thickly be- strewn with large flattened patches, which were greenish-blue and greenish-yellow by transmitted light, and there were also generally diffused brilliant yellow haloes around them, and in many places over the general surface. In addition, there were very many small, discrete, yellowish colonies embedded in the substance of the gelatine. Small straight Bacilli abounded, but no recognisable commas were to be found. EXPERIMENT III.8 Scientific Memoirs by thick, yellowish strata, with a few more prominent masses. It had no perceptible smell. No commas could be found, the growth apparently consisting entirely of large, straight Bacilli EXPERIMENT IV.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 9 was again heated in the bath, and finally for several hours over a Bunsen flame On the following day the growth in two tube-cultivations of commas was mixed. with some salt solution and poured over the earth. Two days later a plate-cultivation was set as usual. On the following day it contained immense numbers of colonies, large yellowish ones and minute blue ones being apparently present in approximately equal numbers. The yellowish colonies consisted of the form of Bacillus which appeared in the cultivation of the earth previous to the additions of the commas, the blue ones of commas. These were of rather large size and somewhat pale and granular. The smell of the cultivation was bat-like. Four days after the introduction of the commas another plate-cultivation was set. On the next day it presented microscopic characters similar to those present in the previous cultivation, the small blue colonies, however, being relatively more abundant. The smell was a curious mixed one, the bat-like odour being accompanied by a characteristic choleraic one. The results of microscopic examination were identical with those in the previous case, the large yellowish colonies being composed of large, straight Bacilli and the blue ones of commas. On the following day the cultivation had a very strong, unmixed odour of bats. Seven days from the beginning of the experiment another cultivation was started. Seventy-two hours later it had a strong, decidedly choleraic smell, and was crowded with colonies. These, as before, consisted of large yellowish and of small blue ones. The blue ones consisted of commas, both isolated and in the vibrionic condition. Ten days after the addition of the commas to the earth another plate was set. It was examined after forty-eight hours and found to have a faint smell, and to be full of colonies similar to those in the previous cultivation. As in it, the blue colonies contained commas of slender form and only staining feebly. On the twelfth day another cultivation was set. Twenty-four hours later it was crowded with minute colonies and had a very faint, rather pleasant, vinous smell. On the next day the smell remained unchanged no commas could be found, the colonies seeming to consist of two forms of straight Bacilli only, one presenting short, thick, isolated rods, the other slender ones, both separated and associated in filaments. On the fourteenth day another cultivation was set. Twenty-four hours after it was absolutely crowded with colonies, the majority of which were of large size and yellowish colour. The smell was disagreeable and bat-like. Small slender commas were present in half the preparations, which were mounted. Another cultivation was set on the fifteenth day. Two days later it had a faint, choleraic smell, and was covered with bluish and yellowish colonies, of various sizes. Five, out of six, preparations which were mounted contained commas. C
10 Scientific Memoirs by On the twenty-first day another plate was inoculated. Two days later it had a strong disagreeable smell, and was covered with large blue and yellow colonies. Three out of four preparations contained commas. Twenty-eight days after the inoculation of the soil another plate was set. Forty-eight hours later it had a strong but somewhat choleraic smell, and con- tained numerous colonies, the majority of a yellowish tint, but a few bluish ones also being present. The former consisted of large, thick, straight rods, the latter of small commas. On the forty-seventh day a final cultivation was set. In the course of twenty-four hours it had become full of colonies, like those in the previous case, and had acquired a faint, somewhat choleraic smell. The blue colonies, as before, consisted of commas. EXPERIMENT VI.11 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Table II.12 Scientific Memoirs by a tendency to an increase in size of the individual commas connected with transference to a less nutritive medium, the conditions appearing in one case to make for rapid multiplication, in the other for continued growth, of individuals. There can be little doubt that the persistence of the commas in the case of the heated media must be regarded as due to the artificial advantage which they there acquired in the struggle for existence. The temperature was not sufficient to produce any important change in the water or soil, save reducing the number of living organisms in them. In regard to the mixture of soil and fæculent matter, it is easy to realise so far exactly why such a reduction should have been of advantage to the commas. The change which primarily takes place in con- nection with decomposing fæculence of normal quality in Calcutta is an exces- sive development of filamentous fungi, which is accompanied by extreme acidity and a temporary suppression of schizomycete evolution generally, and, from what we know of the nature of the comma-bacilli, such conditions must be espe- cially unfavourable to them. In the case of the water, however, there is no such development of filamentous fungi present, so that the boiling here must have acted in some other fashion. It seems probable that here also it was the partial sterilisation that was the efficient factor, due to its destructive effects on the schizomycetes normally present. The removal of these was calculated to favour the commas in the struggle for existence, certainly by increasing the amount of food at their disposal, and also, quite possibly, by arresting the formation of waste products, arising in connection with the development of other forms and directly toxic in their effects on the commas. In the case of the soil the effect would not be limited to the suppression of the higher fungi, but would also par- tially extend to the schizomycetes originally present in it and the fæculence with which it was mingled; and, although actual sterilisation was not attained, must have destroyed large numbers of them and may have determined the absence of species specially antagonistic to the commas. In the discussion of the vexed question of the relation of Comma-Bacilli to cholera generally, it would appear to have been very commonly assumed that, in order to a definite decision of it, all that was necessary was to show that choleraic symptoms accompanied the multiplication of commas within the intestinal tract, or the introduction of special toxic matters of the nature of ptomaines formed by them into the system, by that or other paths. Great dili- gence has therefore been applied to experimental research in this direction, and the fact that morbid effects are frequently the result has, by those who regard these as of truly choleraic character, been regarded as a final one, while another school of observers has devoted all its energies to endeavour to show that the symptoms are not really choleraic in their nature. It appears to have been, to a great extent at all events, lost sight of that there are really two subor- dinate questions involved in the major one of the relation of the Bacillus to the disease. These are first:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 13 rise to choleraic symptoms? and second:14 Scientific Memoirs by of abnormal onesMedical Officers of the Army of India. 15 possessed by the commas in their normal state.1For example, while the ordinary commas are killed by exposure to drying for a few hours, the Arthro- spores are said to retain their vitality under similar circumstances for weeks, and while commas are incapable of surviving the action of the normal gastric juice the Arthrospores can survive it, and are therefore capable, without any assistance, of inducing cholera in healthy animals to whose digestive canal they have gained access. The formation of Arthrospores, according to this, comes to replace the adju- vant measures or the naturally developed dyspeptic conditions of the previous class of experiments. In order, however, to show that the Bacilli alone are efficient determinants of epidemic diffusion of cholera, it would still be necessary to show that Arthrospores are normally formed under the ordinary conditions to which the parent commas and spirochætal forms are exposed. Assuming that Hueppe is perfectly correct in regard to the formation, nature, and properties of the Arthrospores, there is as yet an absence of evidence to show that they are formed under normal conditions. Their development has only been observed under the influence of special conditions, and one of these apparently is that the parent Bacilli were in pure cultivations. There is a great tendency to assume that all phenomena presenting them- selves in pure cultivations are to be taken as sufficient indices to the normal behaviour of the special organism under observation in other circumstances. But this, of course, by no means necessarily is the case, and there is no evi- dence to show that in the case of the Comma-Bacilli any development of Arthrospores would occur, even under the influence of exhaustion of medium and special temperature, if the cultivations were no longer pure ones; or, in other words, were the Bacilli exposed to a struggle for existence. On the contrary, there is evidence indicating that under such circumstances there is no tendency to the development of Arthrospores, but merely to rapid and final disappearance of the Bacilli. Taking the case of the present experiments on their behaviour in soil and water of various degrees of pollution16 Scientific Memoirs by not find that it has been specially sterilised for them, it is already fully occupied by native Schizomycetes with which a struggle must be maintained, and under normal circumstances, even in localities such as Calcutta, the experimental evidence goes to show that they very rapidly succumb to it. But this Laboratory evidence is quite in accordance with that which presents itself on a large scale in connection with the phenomena of the occurrence of epidemics of cholera. As we have already seen, Koch has recorded a striking example of the rapidity with which Comma-Bacilli will disappear from large bodies of foul water to which they have gained access, and, if we are to regard the commas as in any way causally related to cholera, the proportion of cases in which they die out rapidly in localities to which they have gained access must be very great. Under normal circumstances the local conditions, then, would appear to be so unfavourable to their multiplication and persistence that, however efficient they may be as producers of choleraic symptoms, they can neither persist or multiply sufficiently to give rise to any appreciable effects. The normally unfavourable conditions in any locality must to a great extent be of two classes Medical Officers of the Army of India. 17 rôle indeed in so far as epidemics are concerned. If Hueppe's observations be accepted the subordination would, of course, not be so great, but it would still be present, as it would still be necessary that the local conditions should be adapted to allow of the multiplication of the Bacilli and of the development of Arthrospores from them. In both cases alike it would be the presence of abnor- mal local conditions, and not mere importation of commas, that would be the primary determinant of epidemic occurrence of the disease, and the preven- tion of the development of such local conditions would be the end to be aimed at in the endeavour to prevent such an occurrence. As we have already seen, the deviations from the normal tending to favour the establishment of the Bacilli must probably lie either in increase of suitable nutritive supply, or in the lowering of the struggle for existence with other organisms, and the practical measures to avoid the establishment must there- fore be aimed either at diminution of supply of suitable nutritive material or the increase of the struggle for existence. The former aim will certainly be more or less attained by improvements in local sanitation tending to increased purity of soil and water, the latter would no doubt be to some extent achieved by the same method, for diminished nutritive supply in itself implies increased struggle but could only be satisfactorily arrived at by means of an accurate acquaint- ance with the nature of the organisms most inimical to the Bacilli. Even could such information be attained there can be no doubt that the endeavour to diminish nutritive supply would be the preferable course to follow, as it by no means would necessarily follow that the organisms which were inimical to Com- ma-Bacilli should be innocent or desirable inhabitants of a locality. As Naegel long ago pointed out, 1it is quite possible that excessive dirt in a locality may be an efficient cause for the prevention of the prevalence of certain forms of disease in it, the excess of saprophytic organisms tending to the suppression of more or less parasitic ones, but no one could regard it as, therefore, desirable to increase the accumulation of dirt. It is worth while to consider the principal ways in which the struggle for exist- ence to which the Comma-Bacilli are exposed in any locality to which they gain access might be diminished. It might be diminished simply as a result of diminution in the number of conflicting organisms generally, the nutritive supply remaining at the same time unaltered. The greater the diminution was the more would the locality come to resemble a sterilised medium in its relation to the Comma-Bacilli. Diminution might also be dependent, not on mere general decrease in the number of organisms present, but on special decrease or disappearance of organisms specially inimical to Comma-Bacilli, either directly or indirectly by means of their products. Thirdly, it might be dependent on the presence of organisms which, in place of being mere competitors for nutrition or directly inimical, were positively favourable to their development. 1Nägeli, C.v., Die niederen Pilze in ihren Beziehungen zu den Infectionskrankheiten und der Gesundheits- pflege. München und Leipzig18 Scientific Memoirs by That such a relation may exist even between Bacilli is well known, and a very striking example of it has presented itself during the current year in the Laboratory in Calcutta. In it the relation has advanced so far as to come to be one of actual commensalism, or perhaps rather of parasitism, in so far as one of the associated species of Bacilli is concerned. The favouring or host- species was apparently merely the common Hay-Bacillus, and was readily susceptible of pure cultivation. The other was a much smaller, slender form in which the rods were either isolated or associated in filamentous fashion. The rods and filaments are in themselves colourless, but their presence in any cultivation of the Hay-Bacillus is soon revealed by the gradual development of a red tint passing on gradually into a splendid scarlet. When first observed the growth manifested itself spontaneously in connection with a cultivation of the Hay-Bacillus derived from a sample of blood which had been obtained from a supposed case of anthrax. Here, after the cultivation was some days old, and when the surface of the gelatine was covered by a thick, yellowish stratum of the Hay-Bacillus, a bright scarlet, shining patch some- what elevated above the surrounding surface, and contrasting beautifully with it, made its appearance. This gradually spread, and ultimately the entire surface of the Hay-Bacillus became of the same scarlet hue. Very many attempts have been made to procure pure cultivations of the intrusive species, but always in vain. Plate-cultivations have yielded pure growths of the Hay-Bacillus, and so have tube-cultivations inoculated from others in which the mixed growth is at an early stage of development. The latter fact is due to the very different rates of growth of the two species when they are simultaneous- ly introduced to a new medium. Even where the inoculating material is derived from tubes of long duration, and in which the elements of the Hay-Bacillus are only present in relatively very small numbers and in a condition of evident extreme involution, a yellowish halo of them in pure, or almost pure, condition almost invariably manifests itself around the scarlet point of the inoculation, and by inoculating from this area in one or two successive cases a stage is arrived at in which the yellow growth alone makes its appearance and retains the character of a pure cultivation permanently. The difference in the rate of growth of the two Bacilli is, to a considerable extent, due to the fact that the medium alone is necessary for the growth of the Hay-Bacillus, while that of the other species is dependent on the pre-existence of its companion. That this is so comes out very clearly in cases where a tube which has become occupied by a large growth of the Hay-Bacillus as the result of previous inoculation is inoculated with the material of a mixed growth of long duration in which the other species is present in excess; for in such cases red colouration very rapidly manifests itself over large areas, in place of spreading slowly over the surface in the track of its host. The relation between the two species would appear to be one rather of true parasitism than of commensalism, for there can be no doubt that the growth of the
Medical Offiers, of the Army of India. 19 Hay-Bacillus is checked just in proportion to the amount of the other species, which is inoculated along with it, and the older any cultivation is and the more the latter species comes to abound in it, the more do involution-forms of the Hay-Bacillus tend to abound. Plate-cultivations, even from the oldest sources, in which the Hay-Bacillus is at a minimum, fail to yield pure cultivations of the other species, because when isolated from the former its elements do not find the conditions necessary for their further development. An example of this kind illustrates, on the one hand, the favourable influence which the presence of one species of Schizomycete may exert on the develop- ment of another, and on the other hand the possibility of the determination of obstruction or suppression of development under a similar association. In this case the presence of the Hay-Bacillus determined the growth of the other spe- cies, and the growth of the latter obstructed the development of its host. In the light of such facts, it becomes readily conceivable how variations in the local conditions in any area of a nature to be quite inappreciable to ordinary observation may determine the development or the extinction of organisms im- ported into it, and therefore, in cases where these are of pathogenic nature, the presence or absence of special forms of disease, But variations in local conditions may tell in this direction in another fashion also; they may not only determine the possibility of the existence of pa- thogenic organisms in the area, they may also tell on their capacity for producing their specific effects on the organisms of the inhabitants. If we accept Koch's theory of the epidemic diffusion of cholera, the essential coincident epidemic diffusion of an abnormal dyspeptic condition may, quite conceivably, be due to the presence of abnormal organisms in the affected localities. View the question as we may, however, the paramount importance of local conditions and the subordinate and secondary rôle which Comma-Bacilli must play in reference to epidemic diffusion of cholera is very evident. The more the facts are considered, the more evident does it become that no contagionist theory will account for the phenomena of epidemic diffusion of the disease, and that the only one which will do so must be of the nature of that which has been so long advocated by the observer who has done most to advance our knowledge of the subject. It is very possible to differ from Von Pettenkofer in regard to matters of detail, and yet to believe that he has all along been in the right in insisting on the primary importance of local conditions. It is of little moment whether these act by preventing or favouring the development of a germ, the multiplication of a mature form, the presence of specially resistent elements, or receptivity on the part of the inhabitants; in any case, they must be the primary determinants, and those, too, which may be hopefully contended with. A soli- tary living Bacillus, imported into a favourable locality, may, assuredly, if the Schizomycete origin of cholera be a fact, give rise to an epidemic, and on purely theoretical, as well as on practical grounds, the futility of measures aimed at pre- D 2
20 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. venting the possibility of such importation needs no demonstration. But if it be allowed that epidemics can only arise under the co-operation of certain favour- ing local conditions, a hopeful field for efforts at prevention is at once opened out, and with the practical recommendation that the improvements in local sanitation which they necessarily imply will not have been absolutely fruitless, even should they not at once arrive at their special aim in reference to cholera. On every occasion on which quarantine or similar measures attempting to prevent impor- tation are enforced, and cholera, in spite of them, succeeds in establishing itself, even the most ardent believers in the benefit of such procedures must allow that a futile waste of effort and money has taken place, but any improvement in local conditions must remain a benefit, even though its immediate purpose be not achieved. CALCUTTA: 14th October, 1888.
Notes on the Life-history of Ravenelia sessilis, B. and Ravenelia stictica, B. and Br. BY D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. During the past few years I have, as opportunities presented themselves, been accumulating notes on the life-history of the two species of Ravenelia mentioned in the heading, and as these now are fairly complete save in regard to one or two details, it appears to be worth while to publish them, more especially in consideration of the very imperfect knowledge which has as yet been arrived at in regard to the peculiarities of the genus. In so far as I am aware, all that is yet known is that Ravenelia is a genus of the Uredineæ producing uredospores and very peculiar teleutospores. In regard to the development of the latter, however, there would appear to be no accurate information, and in re- gard to the presence of any other forms of fructification no information of any kind. In the present paper I hope to be able to show that in both species a development, of what must apparently be regarded as spermogonia forms the starting-point of each annual cycle of development, and that in Ravenelia sessilis no less than five different forms of reproductive bodies are present,22 Scientific Memoirs by both releutospores and uredospores are to be met with in varying numbers. The number of spores which are present in them is, however, small. On the dried dead pinnules beneath the trees, however, great numbers of teleutospores are to be found, together with smaller numbers of uredospores. When the new crop of leaves first makes its appearance and until the latter have fully expanded and the flowers have unfolded in numbers, there is no indication of the presence of the parasite. This state of things is, however, of very brief duration, and the leaves speedily become spotted with patches of spermogonia (Fig. 13, Plate I). Taking the phenomena presented by a tree in the year 1887 as an example, the following was the sequence of events: On March the 11th the tree was quite bare of leaves. On the 28th it was in full new leaf and just coming into flower, but showed no traces of a new crop of Ravenelia sessilis. On April the 3rd the new leaves were universally spotted, due to the presence of groups of spermogonia, and on the 17th the latter were beginning to dry up and blacken, while pustules of uredospores were appearing here and there at the edges of the groups. The spermogonia make their appearance as small groups of minute, dull brown, circular, elevated points on somewhat discoloured and yellowish areas of the surfaces of the pinnules (Fig. 13, Plate I). The discoloration, as a rule, penetrates right through the thickness of the pinnules, and spermogonia appear at corresponding points on both upper and under surfaces. The size of the patches and the number of spermogonia which they contain vary considerably in individual instances. In groups of average size the spermogonial area has a diameter of about 0.5 mm., and is surrounded by a discoloured zone about 0.25 mm. in breadth. The number of spermogonia in a group varies from 1 or 2 up to 30, but, as a rule, 10 or 12 are present. In most cases they are arranged around a central point in circular fashion,. several concentric circles being present in the larger groups, but in some instances the arrangement is irregular, or even almost linear. The number of groups on individual pinnules varies very considerably. In one case as many as 20 were present on the upper and 18 on the lower surface. Vertical sections through the pinnules show that the spermogonial areas of the laminæ are much thinner than surrounding ones, the patches being sunk below the level of the rest of the surface both on the upper and under sides of the leaves. These thin spermogonial areas are throughout so densely occupied by fungal hyphæ that the normal structure of the pinnule is quite obscured. They stain very deeply with Spiller's purple. In the deeper, central portions of the, lamina the hyphæ are arranged horizontally, so as to form a dense stratified mass. At the level of the epidermis the fungal tissue becomes more or less vertical, and masses of cells pass outwards between and around the compressed epidermal cells at particular points corresponding, to the bases of the spermogonia. At the level of the outer surface of the epidermis dense masses
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 23 of erect twigs are given off, which gradually elevate the cuticle as they elongate. The peripheral twigs of each mass elongate much more than the central ones, and, growing up convergently around them, gradually form a definite bounding layer, which, as time goes on, gradually acquires a brown colour (Fig. 12, Plate I). The hyphæ of the included, cushion-like mass are slenderer than the peripheral ones. They do not elongate so much, but terminate in pointed extremities, which play the part of sterigmata and bear minute oval spermatia (Figs. 10, 11. Plate I). As maturation advances a definite opening arises at the apex of each spermogonium to permit of the discharge of the spermatia. Individual sper- mogonia vary greatly in size. Three which were situated side by side in one patch gave the following measurements, the first set of figures referring to diameter and the second to height24 Scientific Memoirs by all. Around the surface of the epidermal cells, and between them and the cuticle, every uredosporic pustule shows a dense cushion, or disc, of small- celled fungal tissue, from which the stalks of the uredospores arise. The bed from which the uredospores arise is therefore in this species quite superficial, and, due to this, the stalks often remain adherent to the spores when detached by friction subsequent to the rupture of the cuticular covering of the pustules. An account of the structural details of the spores will be found in connection with the data regarding the subsequent crop of them. No further development or diffusion of the parasite occurs in the leaves which are primarily affected, and at the end of the hot season it is represented simply by a set of groups of dried-up spermogonia, surrounded by varying numbers of concentrically arranged uredosporic pustules. With the onset of the rains a fall of leaf, almost, if not quite, as complete as that in the beginning of the hot weather, sets in, and a new crop of much larger leaves makes its appearance. This soon shows abundant evidence of the presence of the para- site, not, however, as in the case of the previous crop, by a preliminary eruption of spermogonia. These are entirely absent and groups of uredosporic pustules are developed directly (Fig. 14b , Plate I). These, both in their arrangement and in individual characters, differ somewhat from their predecessors. When they first appear they do not show any definite tendency to assume a concentric arrangement (Fig. 14b , Plate I), and to the end they never have it so strongly marked as those of the previous crop (Fig. 14a , Plate I). The groups are, moreover, naturally distinguished by the absence of the central groups of black points representing dried-up spermogonia. The individual pustules of this crop are considerably larger and more prominent than those of the preceding one; they are generally more or less circular in place of elongated, and they have a rich brown in place of a pale umber tint. They occur on both surfaces of the pinnules, but more abundantly on the lower ones. This is illustrated by the following figures. The pustules present on seven pinnules of a leaf were counted and found to number 126, but of this total only 37 were situated on the upper and 89 on the lower surfaces of the pinnules. They make their appear- ance at first in small numbers and quite isolatedly, but, as time goes on, the numbers increase and the pustules form distinct patches. The mycelium corresponding with the pustules presents the same general features as that of the pustules of the previous crop, being relatively incon- spicuous in the central strata of the leaf and forming dense sub-cuticular sporo- genous beds. The size of the spores, when dry,appears to be the same for both crops, being about.c31 x.015 mm., but, when wet, is possibly a little less in the spores of the second crop, in so far as length is concerned, probably due to slight differences in the nature of the epispore, which is somewhat thinner and less deeply coloured in them than in the spores of the previous crop. The stem is about.005 mm in thickness and of various lengths, up at any rate to.06
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 25 mm. In form the spores are obovate. They are of a rich, golden-brown colour over the greater part of the surface, and deep brown over the apex, due to the increased thickness of the epispore here (Fig. 9, Plate I). Over the upper half of the spore the epispore is thickly tuberculate, and below this scattered tubercules are also present. About half-way up a series of circular pores form a band around the body of the spores (Fig. 8a , Plate I). Each spore contains a large, pale nucleus, surrounded by a mass of cytoplasm, which, in the case of the first crop, is often more or less coarse and lumpy in texture, but in that of the second one is finely granular. When an infected leaf fades, the tissue in, and immediately around, the pus- tular patches retains its brilliant green colour long after the rest of the surface has become bright yellow, and the same phenomenon holds good in regard to teleutosporic patches. This indicates the fact, which is borne out by micro- scopic examination of sections, that there is no injury to the vitality of the tissue-elements of the host within the specially infected areas. On the con- trary, there is very manifest evidence of protoplasmic hypertrophy, especially in the epidermal cells, and the parasitic and host elements appear to hold a relation to one another very similar to that which the fungal and algal elements hold in many lichen thalli. Within the green pustular areas the chlorophyll corpuscles are plump and well preserved, and there is manifest excess of colour- less cytoplasm specially in the epidermal cells. In the surrounding yellow areas the cytoplasm generally is very scanty, and the chlorophyll corpuscles are represented by mere shrunken, yellowish granules. It might at first sight appear that the detachment and destruction of cuticular tissue connected with the maturation of the pustules must necessarily produce an injurious effect on the subjacent tissues of the host. This is not the case, however, due, no doubt, to the fact that the exposed surfaces are everywhere covered by a dense continuous stratum of small-celled fungal tissue, from which the spores originate and which replaces the cuticle in protective function. As will be shown in the case of R. stictica, where such a protective surface layer. of fungal tissue is absent, desiccation and death of the host tissues within the pustular areas does eventually take place. For some time only pustules of the character described above, containing large uredospores, present themselves, and then others of mixed character begin to appear. In the first form of mixed pustules which appear the pustules contain, in addition to the large uredospores, varying numbers of much smaller ones (Fig. 16, Plate I). In some cases these are present in enormous numbers, but they never occur alone, being always associated with either uredospores or teleutospores, or with both. They are of narrow, oval form, measure about 8 X 2 µ, and are almost colourless, having at utmost a pale, bluish green tinge (Fig..8 b, Plate I). They contain a finely granular protoplasm and a distinct, pale nucleus, which stains deeply with Spiller's purple. They are connected by relatively long E
26 Scientific Memoirs by pedicles with the same bed of small-celled fungal tissue from which the large uredospores and teleutospores which they accompany arise. In order to dis- tinguish them from the large uredospores they may be described conveniently as microspores. It is not for some time later, and only towards the close of the rains, that teleutospores begin to appear. They appear first in the outer pustules of the groups on the upper surfaces of the pinnules which have gradually replaced the original isolated pustules. On the under-surfaces of the pinnules the number of pustules remains throughout limited, and they do not here form concentric groups, but either remain solitary or form small irregular patches. This is probably due to the uredospores falling away from the pinnules, and not remaining in the neighbourhood of the parent pustules to the same extent which they do on the upper surfaces, and, correlated with it, we find a much smaller development of teleutospores taking place. At first teleuto- spores only appear in small numbers in pustules otherwise occupied by uredo- spores, but a rapid increase takes place in their numbers in subsequently developed pustules, and within a short time pure teleutosporic pustules, and pustules containing teleutospores and microspores only, make their appearance. Still later, very few uredosporic or microsporic pustules are developed on the upper surfaces of the pinnules, while pure teleutosporic ones go on appearing in constantly increasing numbers up to the time when the leaves fade and fall. Uredosporic pustules continue, however, to form the characteristic feature on the lower surfaces throughout. During the earlier portion of the period in which teleutospores are formed no less than six kinds of pustules are present in large numbers. These are:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 27 mycelium below (Fig. 2, Plate II). This cushion of small-celled tissue be- comes clothed by a stratum of short, erect, often somewhat clavate cells (Fig. 17, Plate I). These ultimately give rise to the spores, but the development does not take place simultaneously over the whole sporogenic layer. On the contrary, successive crops of spores are developed until the layer is gradually exhausted. At any point where spore formation is about to occur two or three adjacent cells elongate, become manifestly clavate, and ultimately adhere to one another at their free extremities. The latter next become shut off by transverse partitions, and are further sub-divided into two or more portions by vertical ones. The entire body at this stage consists of several separate stems, and a common broad head, composed of a number of closely adherent cells, varying in number from four to nine, or even twelve. Each of these cells next gives origin to two or three terminal cells, which also adhere to one another by their lateral surfaces, and the head thus becomes more or less hemispherical. The distal cells of the head now grow much more rapidly than the basal ones, assuming an obconical form and spreading out so that the entire mass becomes flatter than at first (Fig. 18, Plate. I). It now consists of a concavo-convex stratum of large distal cells, borne on a somewhat convex mass of basal cells. Whilst these changes are taking place in the head, the cells of the stalk elongate, and, as this elongation appears to be in great part due to the upward pressure of neighbouring, younger spore-elements on the head, they become greatly attenuated in doing so. The outer surfaces of the external stratum of basal cells of the head have gradually, as the latter expands, come to be directed downwards, and they each now begin to develope a pro- trusion towards their upper, or, as it now is, outer extremity (Fig. 4, Plate II). A series of short sacs thus makes its appearance all round, the head on its under- surface, and, as these gradually elongate, the so-called cysts are formed. The upper, convex surface of the head now becomes gradually invested by a thick continuous stratum of cuticle of a deep brown colour (Fig. 3, Plate. II). It is not tuberculate, but simply irregularly thickened over the greater part of the surface, but a single row of true short tubercles is situated along a line corresponding with the outer margin of the spore, where the outer and inferior surfaces of the external row of cells meet (Figs. 5, 6, Plate I). Even in very old spores there is not the slightest tendency to separation of the constituent cells, the continuous thick cuticular epispore binding them all together, so as to resist pressure and friction very strongly, so that when rupture does occur it merely takes the form of irregular fissuring. In this they differ from the spores of R. aculeifera, as described by Cooke1,and from those of a yet undescribed species occurring on Phyllanthus emblica, of which I published figures in 18712. As maturation 1"The Genus Ravenelia," by M. C. Cooke, M A.28 Scientific Memoirs by advances the stem-cells and the basal cells dry and shrivel up, save the cystic protrusions of the latter, and ultimately the head is detached from the stem, usually due to the excessive upward pressure of younger spores. The stem cells are now once more set free from one another and remain as a series of long hair-like processes on the surface of the pustule (Figs. 17, 18, Plate I). The length of these hairs is very considerable, in some cases being as much as .066 mm., and renders the specific name of the species very inappropriate. The epidermal cells of the host beneath the pustules are specially rich in pro- toplasmic content, and are also of somewhat smaller size than the corresponding cells elsewhere, either due to pressure or to processes of proliferation similar to those often occurring in the case of the algal elements of a lichen. The sub- epidermal cells beneath the pustular areas are also characterised by excess of protoplasmic content, although not to such a high degree as the epidermal ones. The mature detached teleutospores, when first separated from their stalks, consist of flattened concavo-convex, more or less circular masses of cells. The convex surface is covered by a thick, deep brown epispore, and surrounded by a row of short tubercles (Figs. 5, 6, Plate I). The under-surface presents a marginal, elevated, somewhat convex rim, corresponding with the true outer, but now under, surfaces of the marginal row of spore-cells. Within this is situated the row of cystic protrusions of the outer portions of the peripheral basal cells, which in the normal fresh spores pass more or less vertically downwards as a fringe of short,colourless, highly refractive blind tubes, but which in dried speci- mens very frequently become flattened out, so as to form a horizontal frill around the spore (Figs. 1, 2, 3, Plate I). The central deeply-concave area of the under-surface corresponds with the shrivelled central basal cells and central portions of the peripheral ones (Fig. 7, Plate I). The cystic protrusions of the peripheral basal cells do not persist beyond a certain period in the mature spores. Their function is apparently to facilitate the adhesion of the spores to surfaces with which they may come in contact, and with the rest of the basal cells they soon disintegrate and disappear. The spores, therefore, at different periods present very different appearances. Newly matured ones show the cysts very clearly, while in many old ones not a trace of them remains. Intermediate forms occur, showing the cysts in various stages of disintegration. The cysts at an early stage are, as previously mentioned, strongly refractive and appear plump and full. Subsequently, they become much dilated, and at the same time their contents shrivel up into threads and their walls become very thin, save along their lateral surfaces. Ultimately the thin portions of the walls disappear, and the thicker ones persist as a series of fine filaments fringing the spores and looking not unlike fine mycelial threads. Other thread-like elements also are present in some cases, due apparently to persistent remnants of the cell contents remaining after the solution of the walls. When the cysts and basal cells have disappeared, the spores, when viewed from
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 29 beneath show a deep central depression corresponding with the bases of the spore-cells (Fig. 6, Plate I). Immediately around this an imperfect cuticular ridge is present, indicating the site where the outer surfaces of the peripheral basal cells were attached to the outer edges of the bases of the corresponding spore-cells (Fig. 5, Plate I). External to this is the zone corresponding with the extero-inferior surfaces of the peripheral spore-cells, surrounded externally by the line of tubercles separating these surfaces from the true apical areas of the same cells. The size of individual spores varies very greatly, due to the varying number of stems and basal cells from which they originate. Those of average size and regular form measure about.085 mm. in diameter and about.023 in height, but in, some cases they may attain a diameter of.1 mm. and a height of .04 mm. Others again are very small. The size is determined by the number of spore-cells present, the latter varying very little in magnitude, as a rule. The central cells at their upper extremities present hexagonal, pentagonal, and rarely quadrangular faces. The marginal ones are pentagonal or quadrangular, and are somewhat larger, or at all events broader, than the central ones, giving diame- ters of about 19.8µ X 16.5µ to the surface of the thick epispore, which is here about 3µ in thickness, while the central cells are about 16.5 x 14.8µ. Some spores contain as few as seven cells, and others as many as thirty-seven or more. Each mature cell contains a finely granular protoplasm, including a clear nu- clear area and in many cases one or more oil globules. All attempts at artificial cultivation of teleutospores have as yet failed to give any results. The uredospores, on the other hand, germinate freely in infusion of the leaves of the host. Several attempts at artificial infection by means of teleutospores have been made, but only in one case was there any apparent re- sult. This, however, may have been due to the fact that the seedling plants which were supplied for experiment as specimens of Albizzia Lebbek eventually turned out not to belong to that species, but to Albizzia procera. In the case in which a result appeared the pinnules of a healthy seedling were smeared with water containing an abundance of teleutospores, and shortly afterwards showed two patches of spermogonia, agreeing precisely in character with those nor- mally developed on Albizzia Lebbek. Late in the season, and shortly before the fall of the leaves, a second and very distinct form of teleutospore often occurs in the persistent uredosporic pustules on the under-surfaces of the pinnules (Fig. 1, Plate II). They arise by simple stems about.059 mm. in length from the same bed of small-celled tissue as the surrounding uredospores of the pustule. The spore is rounded and apparently composed of four cells, surrounded by a common thick epispore, of dark sepia colour, and beset with a number of peculiar olive-green processes, about 10µ. in length, arising by dilated bases and terminating above in stellate expansions (Fig. 4, Plate I). The body of the spore without the processe
30 Scientific Memoirs by measures about 33 x 30µ. Such spores never occur independently. They are always associated with normal uredospores, and as they appear to rise from the same sporogenic tissue as the latter do, they must provisionally be regarded as a second form of teleutospore of R. sessilis. The series of events occurring in the annual cycle of development of R. stictica is essentially parallel to that present in the case of R. sessilis, but differs in regard to certain details, which are partly intrinsic and partly dependent on differences in the characters of the host plant. As in the case of the other species the cycle may be regarded as commencing with the appearance of the new crop of leaves on the host subsequent to the complete defoliation which takes place at the beginning of the hot weather. The leaves which fall at this time are universally coated beneath by a dirty brownish stratum, consisting of innumerable teleutospores and a sprinkling of uredospores. The trees are bare of leaves for a few days only, and then become covered by a crop of brilliantly green new ones, and these very soon show signs of infection in the appearance of minute, dull ochreous spots, consisting of groups of spermogonia (Fig. 8, Plate II), On the upper surfaces of the leaves the spots are slightly elevated, and on the under ones correspondingly depressed. Each patch, as in the case of the corresponding fructification in R. sessilis, passes right through the leaf, the tissues of the host being interwoven with a dense web of mycelial filaments con- nected on either side with cushions of sub-cuticular, small-celled elements. The groups vary in size greatly, but large ones may measure as much as.625 mm. in diameter. When the spermogonia first appear they show as minute hard whitish prominences on a surface of apparently unaltered host tissue. After- wards they gradually become brownish peripherally, with a central ochre-coloured area, where they ultimately open. Finally, pale yellowish masses of spermatia escape from the orifices, apparently involved in a mucoid basis (Fig. 10, Plate II). By this time the spermogonial areas of the lamina have become somewhat deeper green than the rest of the surface, and are somewhat elevated or depress- ed according to the side of the leaf on which they are situated. A narrow yellowish peripheral zone is sometimes recognisable around the patches. Still later, and when uredosporic pustules are beginning to break out peripherally, the spermogonial areas become brownish. The spermogonia on the upper surfaces of the leaves are much more conspicuous than those on the lower ones, due to the relatively small development of uredosporic pustules which takes place around them. The deeper tissues of the laminæ within the spermogonial areas are every- where interwoven by delicate, septate mycelial filaments with intracellular haus- toria, which at the level of the epidermis become continuous with masses of cells, passing upwards around the cells of the host and uniting to form dense cushions of small-celled tissue constituting the bases of the spermogonia (Figs. 9, 10, Plate II). From these, dense masses of erect, more or less convergent filaments arise,
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 31 forcing the cuticle in front of them as they elongate. The peripheral ones are considerably longer than the central ones and ultimately acquire a brownish colour. They converge around the central ones and form a definite bounding stratum. Oval spermatia are developed from the tips of the shorter central fil- aments and accumulate in masses until, on the rupture of the cuticle and the se- paration of the apices of the filaments of the bounding stratum, they are enabled to escape in masses upon the surfaces of the leaves (Fig. 10, Plate II). The spermogonia are somewhat smaller than those of R. sessilis, having an average diameter of.0766 and a height of.0255 mm. The spermatia, on the other hand, are larger than in the other species, giving diameters of 3 x 632 Scientific Memoirs by fructification, it is necessary to describe certain of the structural features of the host tissues. The leaves of Pongamia glabra are characterised by the presence of a double row of pallisade-cells beneath the superior epidermis. Beneath the deep row of pallisade-cells is a stratum characterised by the presence of large, irregularly rounded cells, between which and the inferior epidermis one or two rows of delicate elongated cells, with their long axis vertical to the epidermis, and leaving large intercellular spaces, build up a loose tissue. Dense masses of delicate jointed mycelial filaments are visible at the level of the deeper pallisade-cells and of the stratum of large rounded cells imme- diately beneath them, and these, in the case of the majority of pustulesMedical Officers of the Army of India. 33 however, be taking place, for, after the lapse of a few weeks, the under-surfaces of the leaves, both old and new, become gradually coated with a thin, brownish stratum due to universally distributed eruption of minute pustules containing uredospores and teleutospores. There is in this crop not a trace of spermogo- nia. Sections of the laminæ show them to be everywhere penetrated by mycelial filaments. At points corresponding with the bases of the pustules, such filaments are present in great abundance and become continuous with masses of cells which, as in the case of those of the uredosporic fructification of the previous crop, are situated in the intercellular spaces between the deeper por- tions of the subepidermal cells of the host (Fig. 12, Plate II). From these masses of cells teleutospores in large numbers, and a certain number of uredo- spores, arise. The pustules are always of very small size, only yielding a small number of spores each, but, as they are everywhere present, the quantities of spores, and specially of teleutospores which they furnish, are enormous. The uredospores resemble those of the previous crop, and, like them, have long stalks, which pass up between the cells of the subepidermal tissue and give origin to the spores beneath the epidermis, which is first elevated and stretched, and finally ruptured, as they increase in size. The development of the teleutospores is essentially similar to that of those of R. sessilis. As in that species, each spore is the product of several distinct stems which unite terminally and develop a mass of basal cells from which the true spore-cells are produced (Fig. 13, Plate II). The number of basal cells and spore-cells always, however, remains comparatively limited, and the basal cells do not give off any special cystic protrusions. Perfectly fresh mature spores are, however, not devoid of cystic appendages, the entire bodies of the basal cells becoming dilated and taking the place of the special cysts. Each detached spore at this time is thus seated on a very delicate cushion of very tenuous cysts, which in some cases carries a short portion of the stalk attached to it inferiorly. The cysts are very perish- able, and they never show the brilliant refraction of the fresh cysts in R. sessilis. As in the case of the cysts of that species fine mycelioid radiant filaments, due to persisting portions of the cell-walls, often form fringes around the base of the spores after the cysts themselves have disappeared. The teleutospores vary very greatly in size, due to the very different number of constituent cells which is present in different instances. In some spores only five cells are present, while others may contain as many as nineteen or twenty. The spores never attain magnitudes equal to those of large teleutospores of R. sessilis. On an average they have a diameter of about.0626 mm. and a height of.0198 mm. They are of a deep golden brown colour. The epispore over the upper-surface is thickly tuberculate (Fig. 5, Plate II), and the marginal cells are also provided with a single row of large spines, situated, like the row of tubercles around the teleutospores of R. sessilis, along the line where their inferior and outer surfaces meet. The size of the individual spore cells varies F
34 Scientific Memoirs by with their position as in R. sessilis, the marginal ones, as a rule, being larger than the central ones. The central ones superiorly have pentagonal or qua- drangular, rarely hexagonal faces, and give diameters of about 18.1x16.5µ. The marginal ones are quadrangular or pentagonal, and are about 19.8µ in transverse diameter and from their outer to their inner margins. After the basal cells have entirely disappeared the external spore-cells still show the site of attachment of their outer edges by means of a line of projecting cuticular ridges (Fig. 6, Plate II). External to this line the epispore is smooth up to the line of spines separating the inferior and extero-superior surfaces of the spore, and beyond this it becomes tuberculate. Mature spores, after the disintegration of the cystic basal cells, have a concavo-convex form, the convexity being relative- ly somewhat greater than in the case of the spores of R. sessilis, due to the smaller number of cells present (Fig. 5 b, Plate II). There is no tendency to separation of the cells even in very old spores, either naturally or as the result of pressure or friction. Only a limited number of spores is developed in each pustule due to the small extension of the sporogenic issue in any case, and, as they are developed successively, as in the case of those of R. sessilis, it is rare to find any pustule with more than one mature spore connected with it. Due to the deepsite of the sporogenic tissue and the inclusion of the stalks of the spores within the host-tissues, the pustules never show hair-like processes, like those occurring on the superficially seated pustules of R. sessilis. The principal points demonstrated by these observations are the following:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 35 us to understand how such great masses of cells as are present in such teleuto- spores as those of R. sessilis, come to be connected with such slender stalks, which remained an obscure point even when the complex nature of the stem was recognised, but the spore-cells were regarded as taking origin directly from it. Finally, it is clear that, in dealing with dried specimens of detached spores, the presence or absence of cysts or stalks cannot be regarded as of specific import- ance, seeing that in one and the same species cysts may be present at one time and absent at another, and that stems of very considerable length may be present without having any tendency to adhere permanently to the basal cells, more especially in cases such as that of R. stictica, in which they remain through- out buried among the tissues of the host. D. D. CUNNINGHAM. CALCUTTA; 23rd October, 1888. F 2
ii PLATE IIDescription of the Plates. PLATE I.PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 1 x 180. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 2 x 360. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 6 x 690. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 3 x 360. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 8 x 690. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 4 x 690. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 11 x 370. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 9 x 900. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 5 x 690. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 12 x 370. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 10 x 690. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 14. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 15 x 660. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 13 x 50. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 16 x 150. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 17 x 600. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000026.tif] Fig. 18 x 660. RAVENELIA SESSILIS. Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, July 1888.
PLATE. II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 1. x 370. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 3. x 370. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 2. x 260. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 4. x 370. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 6. x 690. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 5. x 370. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 8. x 77. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 7. x 690. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 11. x 50. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 9. x 370. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 12. x 370. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 13. x 390. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000032.tif] Fig. 10. x 690. FIGURES 1 - 4. RAVENELIA SESSILIS, B. " 5-13. RAVENELIA STICTICA, B.& Br. Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, October 1888.
On the Life-history of a new Cæoma on Smilax aspera, Linn.; BY A. BARCLAY, M.B., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. My attention has been directed for some time past to an interesting Uredine, which occurs on Smilax aspera, Linn., in Simla (North-West Himalayas), but I have hesitated thus long in publishing a description of it, because I hoped to have been able to complete some gaps in its life-history, and because, for reasons which will presently appear, I felt some uncertainty as to whether the aecidial form was really such, or only an abnormal uredo form. My doubt on this latter point has, however, been removed since I had the opportunity lately of consulting Professor R. Hartig of Munich upon it, and of showing him my preparations, and I take this opportunity of expressing my best thanks both to him and to his assistant Freiherr von Tubeuf, not only for the kind interest they took in this research, but also for the extreme kindness and courtesy with which they received me during my stay in Munich. Professor Hartig quite agrees with me in regarding this hitherto somewhat doubtful form as a true Aecidium, and it now only remains for me to explain why I do not still delay publishing an account of it, until I have been able to clear up some remaining doubtful points in the life-history of the parasite. I have determined to delay no longer, because I cannot now foresee when I may he able to take up the investigation again, and because the facts I have already obtained appear to me to be sufficiently interesting to warrant a publication of them as they are. The features of special interest in this Uredine are, (a ) that it is apparently the first complete aut38 Scientific Memoirs by convenient to begin with the aecidial stage found towards the end of June, or in July, when the host, after the setting-in of the rains, throws out its new shoots and leaves. At this time, in certain definite localities only, although the plant is widely distributed all over the region, these newly-developed leaves, which are readily distinguishable from the older leaves of the previous year's growth by their much lighter colour, and more delicate texture, may be found attacked by an aecidium-bearing mycelium. But, although, comparatively speaking, only a very few individuals of this widely distributed plant are thus attacked, yet when a plant is attacked, it is often largely so. Only these new young leaves, and sometimes the new stems bearing them, are attacked by the aecidium, and never the older leaves or stems. When the leaf blade is attacked, conspicuous bright yellow patches are formed, more or less irregular in shape, and varying in size from a small point to about 2 cm. in diameter (Fig. 1, Plate 1). These patches are, moreover, considerably thickened, and bulged, with their convexi- ties usually towards the lower surface of the leaf. The short petioles are very frequently attacked, the young shoots rarely. A single leaf may bear from one to twelve patches of invasion, and if these be carefully examined when nearly mature, minute papillæ, brownish on their summits, are seen scattered over them both on the upper and lower surfaces, and these are the aecidia, which do not open widely, as in the other hitherto described Cæomata, but only by a pore through which the aecidospores are extruded in the form of small powdery masses. A still closer examination of these patches with a lens reveals some pellucid spots, especially on the upper surface, and these are spermogonia. Later in the season, towards the end of September, and in October, the aecidal form begins to disappear, although a few aecidial patches may still, with diligent search, be found so late as the beginning of November. The leaves which bear aecidia apparently drop off early after the aecidiospores have been shed, for in November, although a very few ripe aecidial patches may be found, no dried-up patches can be discovered on still adherent leaves. But now, in October, a new phase of the fungus is revealed. On many leaves of the same generation which bore the aecidia, but which have now become tougher and darker green, a number of uredo-pustules may be found; and it is especially noteworthy that those leaves which still, at this late date, exceptionally bore aecidia, always presented many of these uredo-pustules, but at some little distance from the aecidial area, with intervening healthy tissue. In other words, the uredo-pustules are formed by a distinct mycelium with, as will be later noticed, very different characters and properties. This uredo-phase of the fungus life-history is also very much more widely distributed than the aecidial, and is to be found almost everywhere, wherever the host grows, and not only in certain restricted localities as in the case of the aecidial phase. At this time when the uredo stage is beginning to show itself, the lower surfaces of the leaves attacked exhibit a few, or a very great many, slightly paled circular areas
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 39 of mycelial invasion, on each of which appear minute pustules, containing yellowish brown uredospores. These invaded areas are not in the least thickened, and, as the slight paling of the green tissues caused by the mycelium is most pronounced on the lower surfaces of the leaves, where only the pustules are formed, the affection is by no means conspicuous, and in this respect offers a very striking contrast to the aecidial affection, In the special localities where the aecidium was formerly prevalent this uredo-affection is especially prevalent, and the attacked leaves present so many foci of attack that the circular areas of each separate attack frequently merge into neighbouring areas, and thus a large area of the leaf's under-surface is uniformly paled, and bespattered irregularly with uredo-pustules. But, when the leaves are not so extensively attacked, a very peculiar and characteristic arrangement of uredo- pustules is evolved. At first, after a circular paled area has been formed by the mycelium, a uredo-pustule usually breaks out from the centre of the area. A little later a circle of other pustules is formed around the central pustule. Later still, a second larger circle, around the first circle, is formed near the margin of the paled area. But before this last circle is formed the develop- ment of teleutospores, in the form of puccinia, has commenced in the earliest formed uredo-pustules, and especially in the first circlet of these. This teleu- tospore formation begins to take place in November. The originally very small uredo-pustules enlarge greatly when teleutospore formation sets in, so that the neighbouring pustules of the circlet often coalesce, sometimes wholly, when a complete circular wall of teleutospores is formed round the central pustule, which does not enlarge to any great extent, and which often does not form any teleutospores, until a much later date. More usually this circular wall of teleutospores is broken in continuity at one or two places. With the onset of the winter the continued production of teleutospores goes on slowly, but apparently more or less continuously, and in the following spring the condition of the attacked leaves is as follows. Such leaves now exhibit slightly paled circular patches, varying in number from one to about twenty, without any thick- ening or hypertrophy. The larger patches measure from 6 to 7 mm. in diameter and the smallest about 2 mm. The teleutospore beds are aggregated together circularly in hemispherical dark-brown compact masses (Fig. 2, Plate I). Sometimes in the smallest paled areas there is only one such bed of spores in the centre of the discoloured area, indicating the formation in the previous autumn of only one uredo-pustule, but usually there are two or more segments of a circle, around a central space, which contains the first formed uredo-pustule now containing a few teleutospores, with remains of uredospores. When a leaf has been extensively attacked the circular arrangement, as already explained is lost, but otherwise the circular teleutospore beds are surrounded by the second circle of uredo-pustules, about nine to ten in number. This outer- most circle of pustules contains frequently only old uredospores, and perhaps a few G
40 Scientific Memoirs by teleutospores, though sometimes these pustules also produce many teleutospores. They do not, however, enlarge and coalesce to form another ring. In this condition the fungus awaits a fresh season of growth for the host at the onset of the rainy season, when the young leaves are again attacked by a mycelium bearing aecidia, thus completing the circle of development. Before proceeding now to a description of the microscopic characters of the fungus, I may mention that if a leaf bearing teleutospore beds be placed in a moist chamber for some hours, the spore beds swell very noticeably, and become lighter brown in colour, or even brownish yellow. This swelling is due, as will be more particularly explained further on, to the swelling of a gelatinous sheath, enclosing the stalks of the teleutospores, as in the case of Gymnosporangium spores. The amount of swelling, however, in the case of this Smilax fungus is much less than it is in Gymnosporangium, not so much because the gelatinous sheaths themselves swell less, but because the stalks are very considerably shorter than those of Gymnosporangium spores. This peculiar structure of the stalks of the teleutospores is interesting in its resemblance, not only to Gymnosporangium spores, but also to the teleutospores of Puccinia Berberidis, Montagne, occurring on the leaves of Berberis glauca, found on the Island Juan Fernandez, and figured by De Bary in the plate illustrating his paper on Aecidum abietinum 1I will recur to these resemblances later. Microscopic characters of the Fungus.Medical Officers of the Army of India 41 and these bundles are often seen to limit abruptly the extension of mycelial invasion. When the petiole is attacked it is also greatly hypertrophied, the areas of transverse sections through normal and attacked petioles being in the ratio of about 100 to 170. Such transverse sections, through attacked petioles, show that the aecidia are laid in the fundamental parenchyma tissue, below the hypoderma. The fundamental parenchyma cells are throughout considerably hypertrophied, for, whilst in transverse sections the normal cells measure in outline from 57 x 38µ to 82 x 50µ, those among mycelium measure from 95 x 63µ to 139 X 88µ. The teleutospores by transmitted light are pale yellow, double-celled bodies, Puccinia, with long stalks, which, as already stated, are surrounded by a gelatinous sheath, swelling considerably in water (Fig. 13, Plate I). The free end of the upper cell is usually perceptibly thickened. The spores vary greatly in size from a total length of 74.0 to 50.8µ. The upper cell was found to vary in size from 38µ in length by 16µ in breadth to 25 X 15µ and the lower cell from 36 X 16µ to 25 x 15µ. The spore is slightly constricted at the septum, which measures usually 14µ in breadth. These spores are detach- able with difficulty, not only from their beds, but from one another, as they tend to break off in masses when scraped off by a needle. The stalks are from 2 to 2½ times as long as the whole length of the spore, i.e. about 125 to 156µ and when swelled in water they are about 12µ in diameter. A nuclear space is sometimes clearly defined in each cell, but not always. The epispore is smooth and without any markings. When the stalk is swelled in water the central thin axis is clearly defined, as in Gymnosporangium. The spores germinate in water very readily, throwing out a promycelium from each cell, into which the pale yellow contents of the spore body wander, accumulating in the distal extremi- ties (Fig. 14, Plate II), leaving the proximal parts filled with colourless fluid. The promycelium of the upper cell emerges from the apex of the cell, and that of the lower from a point near the septum, as in most Puccinia, but unlike Gymnosporangium. From this point the further developmental phenomena are curious, and until the issue of the last Botanische Zeiting, 1which I have just received, unlike those of any hitherto described species. The observations made in this number of the Botanische Zeitung by F. Kienitz-Gerloff on the peculiar development, at times, of the teleutospores of Gymnosporangium clavari42 Scientific Memoirs by the septa, and separate, and apparently represent, sporidia. Frequently only three of the four cells formed thus separate, the fourth not maturing. These detach- ed cells, or sporidia, have usually one or two vacuolated spaces, and measure from 14 x 8µ to 18 x 11µ (Fig. 15 a, b, c , Plate II). I have never, however, succeeded in getting them to germinate, unless, indeed, Fig. 15 a, plate II, represents the germination of a spore not yet detached; but, on the other hand, this may, and I think probably does, represent an abortive attempt at the usual sporidial forma- tion through a sterigma. Of the numerous cultivations I examined carefully this was the only case exhibiting such growth, all the rest developing exactly as I have described and depicted. The absence of any observed germination of these sporidia makes one serious gap in the life-history of this fungus. It may also be urged that this peculiar sporidial development is due to the unsuitable media (water and a decoction of Smilax leaves) in which I placed the teleuto- spores. This of course is possible, but against this view I may note that it, and one other teleutospore, to which I shall presently allude, are the only ones of the many teleutospores I have observed germinating, which develope so, and that they invariably develope so most readily, and without any sign of hesi- tation. In 24 hours a cultivation presents innumerable such sporidia. The single other case to which I have alluded, is a Uromyces on Solidago verga-aurea, Lin., which behaves in exactly the same way, and in which, moreover, the peculiarly developed sporidia germinate readily in water. Figure 16, Plate II, represents the teleutospore before germination; Figure 17 a, one which has commenced to germinate, but in which the promycelium still remains undivided; and Figure 17 b, the cast-off terminal end of another promycelium, with four sporidia still adherent to one another, formed just as those of the Smilax fungus are, in two of which germ tubes are thrown out. I will not here encumber this paper with a detailed description of this Uromyces, but merely mention those points in support of the views I take, that this sporidial formation is a new type of normal germination. The uredospores are oval, or more usually pyriform, pale yellow bodies, beset externally with very prominent spines (Fig. 12, Plate II), and so closely resemble the aecidiospores as to make it difficult to distinguish the one from the other. Figure 9, Plate II, represents some spores from leaves which were collected early in October, and preserved in botanical drying paper. The spores were sketched late in November after the leaves had been 24 hours in a moist chamber. These may be compared with fig. 8, Plate II, representing aecidiospores drawn under exactly similar conditions. Among the uredospores a few club-shaped para- physes may always be seen. The spores are formed singly on short stalks about the length of their own long diameter (Fig. 6, Plate I). The fresh spores, after lying a few minutes in water, measure on an average 46.5 x 31.7µ. The epi- spore is thickened at the broad free end. These spores do not germinate at all readily in water: only in one of many cultivations did a few germinate, throwing
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 out a usual, long tube, sometimes with short branches. This cultivation, made on the 11th October, contained new matured spores. The aecidium is deeply placed both in the leaf and in the petiole, and is not bounded by any peridium, but by a layer of convoluted hyphæ (Fig. 4, Plate I). It opens by a narrow mouth both on the upper and lower surfaces of the leaf. The hymenium is curved and the aecidiospores are given off successively from basidia, but the ripe spores do not remain attached to one another, forming rows, as usual. On the contrary, as each spore ripens, it is cast off, and the cell below, which up to this time remained in a rudimentary condition, then grows rapidly, forming another ripe spore, and so on (Figs. 18 and 19, Plate II). The spores are pale yellow, mostly oval, with an epispore of variable thickness, thickened at one end, and beset with large coarse spines, which are deciduous. When just wetted, the spores measured on an average 43.2 x 25.6pµ, varying from 36 x 28µ to 52 x 16µ. The thickness of the epispore is usually about 4µ and 6 to 10µ at the thickened end. These spores, like the uredospores, do not germinate at all readily in water. In one only of the numerous cultivations I made had a few commenced to germinate after four days. Some of these had thrown out two small germ tubes (Fig. 11, Plate II), and some only a single one (Fig. 10, Plate II). Beyond this they never went, the germ tubes were 8µ in diameter. The spermogonia occur plentifully both on the upper and lower surfaces of the leaf, but more especially on the upper. They are deeply sunk below the epidermis (Fig. 3, Plate I), and through their mouths a tuft of brittle paraphyses protrude. They are of the usual structure, and measure when ripe, 145µ in depth and 157µ in breadth, the paraphyses protruding about 50µ beyond the mouths. Even in this stage, and before the inception of aecidia, the leaf tissues are greatly hypertrophied, one measurement made showing the depth of the laminal tissue in invaded areas to be 504µ against a normal depth of 296µ close by. Concluding Remarks. 44 Scientific Memoirs by on Smilax without any result, and secondly, because even in nature, although the teleutospores are widely and plentifully distributed over the Simla region, the aecidial form is found only in certain few localities, where only, I presume, the special conditions necessary for attack exist (these localities were moist, densely wooded, and therefore very shaded). The resemblance of the teleutospores to those of Gymnosporangium induced me also to make many attempts to reproduce an Aecidium (Roestelia) on Pyrus variolosa, Wall., which in certain years is very common in Simla, but without success. This Roestelia is the only representative of the genus in Simla, and there can, I think, be no doubt that it is caused by the only Gymnosporangium in Simla, one on Cupressus torulosa, Don. I have, how- ever, elsewhere1shown that, although these last two fungi must be related, I could never demonstrate it by experiment. And this case shows very forcibly how easily inoculation experiments may fail, because it is scarcely conceivable that this only Gymnosporangium, which occurs in Simla, is not related to the only Roestelia we have. There is also this parallelism between the Pyrus and Smilax Aecidia that both are relatively rare in comparison with the largely distributed and readily germinating teleutospores, and here, too, I think my inoculations have not suc- ceeded, because some special unknown condition, comparatively rare even in nature, must be present before attack by the teleutospores can take place. I was even more unsuccessful in attempting to produce the uredo-form by sowing with aecidiospores, for all my experiments in this direction were fruitless. The fact, however, that in nature, in October, the leaves which bore aecidia were also invariably attacked by the uredo-producing mycelium lends strong support to the view that this was the result of infection by the aecidiospores produced on the same leaf. The total result therefore is that, although unimpeachable evidence does not exist to connect the two forms of fungus with one another, such a connec- tion is rendered in the highest degree probable by a consideration of the facts above set forth. In my introductory remarks I noted that I felt doubtful whether the phase I have described as aecidial were really so or not. I doubted because (1) the aecidia were unlike other aecidia in opening by a pore, (2) because the aecidio- spores were not formed in rows as usual, and (3) because the aecidiospores are morphologically scarcely distinguishable from the uredospores. But, as I have said, I have now no longer any hesitation on this point, because the character and properties of the mycelium producing the aecidia are very different from those of the uredo-producing mycelium, and because the acidia are always accompanied by spermogonia, and the mycelium which produces these organs never produces teleutospores. The reason why the aecidiospores are not formed in rows may, I think, be due to the aecidia not opening widely enough to admit of this. As soon as a few aecidiospores are formed within the limited capacity of the aecidium there is no room for others until some are extruded. 1Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. LVI, Part II, No. 3, 1887.
Medical Offcers of the Army of India. 45 Lastly, a few remarks with reference to new affinities suggested by the new type of sporidial formation displayed. Had it not been for Prof. R. Hartig's discovery of the life-history of CDescription of the Plates. PLATE I.Description of the Plates. PLATE I.PLATE. I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000068.tif] 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000068.tif] 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000068.tif] 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000068.tif] 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000068.tif] 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000068.tif] 6. A. Barclay, del, CAEOMA SMILACINIS. Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, September 1888.
PLATE. II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 9. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 12. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 10. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 14. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 15. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 16. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 13. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 18. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000071.tif] 19. A. Barclay, del, CAEOMA SMILACINIS. Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, September 1888.
47 Are Venomous Snakes auto-toxic? AN INQUIRY INTO THE EFFECT OF SERPENT-VENOM UPON THE SERPENTS THEMSELVES. BY SURGEON L. A. WADDELL, M.B., DEPUTY SANITARY COMMISSIONER, BENGAL. INTRODUCTORY. Practical bearing of inquiry. An interesting question which presents itself in studying the phenomena of serpent-poisoning is that which refers to the insus- ceptibility or otherwise of a serpent to its own venom, or that of its fellows. And this question is not without a practical bearing upon the treatment of snake-bite: for, were such immunity proved to exist, a study of its conditions might possibly afford indications for combating the action of the venom on man. Seeming anomaly of subject. That an animal should be subject to poisoning by one of its own normal secretions, must, primâ facie, seem improbable, as this would prove detrimental to the individual and to the species. And especially so, when, as in the present case, the exposure to poison- ing would be habitual: for snakes are frequently receiving accidental injuries to the mouth, with abrasion of the mucous membrane of the buccal cavity, and thus, not unfrequently, must absorb some of their own venom.1 Should, on the contrary, snakes be proof against poisoning by their own venom, then the problem presents itself of how to account for the organism of the serpent being able to resist a chemical poison which is so deadly to most other animals. Conflict of opinion on question. As to whether such insusceptibility really exists, authorities differ widely in opinion. On the one hand are those who assert the existence of this insuscep- tibility:48 Scientific-Memoirs by Russell,1Fayrer, 2Richards, 3Nicholson, 4and Hopley 5give results of experi- ments or observations which led them to conclude that the cobra (Naja tripu- dians) is insensible to its own venom or to that of its fellow species. And Indian snake-charmers also have come, by experience or tradition, to hold the same belief. Breton 6and Fayrer 7extended to poisonous snakes in general this principle of insusceptibility. And analogous experiments upon scorpions, by Bourne 8and others 9led to the conclusion that the poison of a scorpion is quite powerless to kill the same individual, or another individual of the same, or even of another species. In favour of susceptibility. On the other hand, Professor Weir Mitchell of PhiladelphiaMedical Officers of the Army of India. 49 clusions states at one place definitely and unreservedly,1that "the poisonous snakes are not affected by their own poison," yet, he notes on the following page that, although "in many of the various experiments I have performed, the Cobra, Daboia, and Krait did not appear able to poison themselves or each other, some of the experiments render this doubtful. " And Richards, although noting2that "I believe one cobra cannot poison another" and3"I am quite satisfied the cobra cannot kill another cobra;" and recently4he relates how healthy cobras, which he kept together in captivity, would "very often on the slightest provocation begin to fight in a most savage" fashion, biting each other fiercely, with the result that "neither of the combat- ants ever seemed any the worse for the fight." Yet, he notes,5"I came to the conclusion, after numerous experiments, that one species of snake could kill another" (by the context) venomous snake of the same species.6 Desirability of further investiga- tion. Such conflict of opinion upon so elementary a point rendered a further investigation of the subject desirable50 Scientific Memoirs by between the venom-duct and the canal of the fang and the more or less erectile nature of the fangMedical Officers of the Army of India. 51 Part II.52 Scientific Memoirs by obtained. This venom was mixed with an equal bulk of water, and at 9-15 A.M.' 25 minims of this solution were injected hypodermically (and very slightly supra- muscularly) about the middle of the back of this cobraMedical Officers of the Army of India. 53 This snake was observed every hour during the day and seemed to be unaffected. Next day. 54 Scientific Memoirs by EXPERIMENT IX.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 55 beneath fascia, which had been pricked by injection needle, but no softening or exudation. Viscera strictly normal in appearance. To test the activity of the venom used in Experiment XIII, the following experiment was made:- EXPERIMENT XIV.56 Scientific Memoirs by Temperature as in Experiment XIII. During that day it seemed unaffected. Nor did it seem affected during the fourteen subsequent days. On the fifteenth day after injection it was taken out of its cage and it bit fiercely, yielding clear venom. It was immediately thereafter killed and dissected. Post-mortem Examination. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 57 To test the activity of the venom used in Experiment XX the following experiment was made immediately after injecting the cobra:58 Scientific Memoirs by septicæmia, or other accidental causes. No post-mortem examination appears to have been made. Thus, in regard to neither of these three cases is there evidence to show that the fatal event was due to the venom. On the contrary, the likelihood that death resulted from other and accidental causes is so great that these three experiments may well be eliminated from the series; and when so eliminated, there remain 20 experiments, with no deaths. Mitchell's experiments on rattle- snakes versus rattlesnakes. Mitchell records1seven experiments on rattlesnakes with rattlesnake venom, and concludes that "the above experiments were on the whole so definite in their results that I did not think it necessary to multiply them," and that these rattlesnakes "really died from the venom." An examination, however, of the details of his experiments renders it difficult to conceive how Dr. Mitchell was led to such a conclusion. But before examining the particulars of these experiments seriatim, it is necessary to remember, firstly, that these snakes had been for some time in captivityMedical Officers of the Army of India. 59 experiment. "The interior organs were healthy, and the heart contained loose soft clots." In Experiment VII, the snake died on the seventh day and had bloody extravasations into the peritoneal cavity, and the intestines were spotted with ecchymoses. But such appearances are common to death from septicæmia, and it is noted that the wound "penetrated the muscles, which were dark and much softened." Mitchell's inference from his ex- periment scarcely warranted. Thus, taking this series of Dr. Mitchell's observations as a whole, and keeping in view the above-noted sources of error to which these experiments were especially subject, we find that the results, far from "definitely" warranting the conclusion that the rattlesnakes "really died from the venom," can more readily be interpreted as supporting quite an opposite conclusion. And this opposite conclusion gains from Dr. Mitchell further support from his observation11that in the "numerous instances in which I had wounded the mouths of rattlesnakes or torn the vagina dentis while robbing them of poison, on none of these occasions have any serious results followed the injury, even where the venom had fallen upon the abraded surfaces in considerable amount." General conclusion on the auto- toxicity of venom. Summarizing the results of all the foregoing observations, it will be seen that, when the suspicious elements are eliminated from the experiments of Mitchell2and of Fayrer, the results are in accordance with those of the present series of experiments, and also with the recorded rough experiments of Russell and of Richards upon cobras biting each other; and, that they generally confirm and extend the prin- ciple formulated by Fontana in regard to viper-venom, viz. "that the venom... is neither a poison to the snake itself nor to those of its own species."3 In inquiring into the cause of venomous snakes (all?) being immune to their own venom or that of their species, it becomes necessary to ascertain the effect of venom upon snakes of other species60 Scientific Memoirs by Effect of cobra-venom on Tri- meresuri. Upon these three vipers the effect of cobra-venom was tried. The details of the experiments are as follow:61 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Effect of Cobra, Daboia, Bunga- rus and Echis biting each other. I here present a summary of all the published observations I can find, relating to the toxic action of venomous snakes upon each other. The snakes comprise the Cobra, Daboia , Bungarus fasciatus et cæruleus, and Echis carinata. And the toxic effect was estimated by forcing one snake to bite another of a different species62 Scientific Memoirs by NATURE OF OBSERVATION. Serial No. of Case. Observer. Page of 'Thana- tophidin of India' where re- ported. Time under observation after bite. Result. REMARKS. Daboia russellii biting CobraMedical Officers of the Army of India. 63 Analytic summary of results. In analyzing the experiments shown in the table, it is to be remembered that they were subject to most of the experimental errors already referred to in Part I, so that many of the experiments must be eliminated. When the series is thus modified many of the divergent results disappear; but much uncertainty must remain until more exact experiments are forthcoming. At present the nett result of these experi- ments may be stated as showing that64 Scientific Memoirs by Experiments with Cobra-venom on Innocent Snakes. Experiment No. SPECIES OF SNAKE. Length of Snake in inches. Amount of Venom inject- ed (approxi- mately). Result. Duration of life from time of injection. Post-mortem examination. REMARKS. XXV Ablabes rapii 18½ ½ grain Died 95 mins. Very slight streak capil- lary hæmor- rhage at seat of injection. XXVI Simotes bicatenatus 26 ¼ gr. and after 4 days 1 ½ grs. Doubt- ful. Doubtful ...... A very strong thick- set snake. Was still alive, although very sluggish se- cond day after last injection, or sixth day after first in- jection. XXVII Tropidonotus subminia- tus. 22½ ½ gr. Died 11 hours No obvious exudation or discoloration at site of in- jection. Simotes bicatenatus 8¼ 1/3 gr. ,, 2¾,, None made. XXVIII Dipsas gokool 28½ 1¼ grs. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 65 Experiment No. SPECIES OF SNAKE. Length of Snake in inches. Amount of Venom inject- ed (approxi- mately). Result. Duration of life from time of injection. Post-mortem examination. REMARKS. XXXVII Gonyosoma gramineum 16 1/8 ½ gr. Died. 85 Mins. None made Had received con- siderable flesh- wound during cap- ture, but was newly caught and very active. XXXVIII Ablabes collaris 23 1 66 Scientific Memoirs by Experiments on Innocent Snakes bitten by Venomous Snakes. No. BITING SNAKE. BITTEN SNAKE. Observer. Length of Snake. Result. Duration of life from time of bite. REMARKS. 1 Cobra ' Nooni paragodoo ' (Zamenis fasciolatus ? ). Russell1 ... Died 1¼ hours. 2 ,, ' Tartutta' (Dipsas tri- gonata? ). Medical Officers of the Army of India. 67 General summary of results. In these experiments the smaller snakes all died more or less rapidly from the cobra bite, in accordance with the results of my own experiments with cobra-venom as previously given. In the case of the large and powerful 'rat-snake' (Ptyas mucosus ), however, the results were very varied. This want of uniformity is doubtless in part owing to the experimental errors incidental to biting as a means of intro- ducing the poison, and to insufficiently long observation. But, after allowing for these sources of error, the series of experiments seems sufficient to indicate that the full-grown rat-snake offers a considerable resistance to the action of the venom. Experiments on pythons, and further and more exact experiments on rat-snakes, are desirable. Part V.68 Scientific Memoirs by two dying in an hour, and two living for three to five days. Fayrer gives an account1of three large frogs (Rana tigrina) bitten by cobras: two of these died in 26 minutes and in 60 minutes respectively, while the third, which had been bitten by a cobra which had just bitten other animals four times, was reported next day to have " remained quite well." Brunton and Fayrer2give three experiments on frogs with small doses of cobra-poisonMedical Officers of the Army of India. 69 On Fish. Fontana found 1that from the viper-bite eels "die later" than "the other kinds of fish" he had experimented upon, and not until the end of 18 or 24 hours. Fayrer reports2a case of a fish (Ophthiocephalus marulius), 14 inches long, bitten near the tail by a cobra dying in 50 minutes. On Invertebrates and Plants. Upon leeches3spermatozoa and infusoria, on many of the lower forms of plants4and on cell movement in Vallisneria, &c., 5 snake-venoms have been found to have little or no toxic effect. Part VI.70 Scientific Memoirs by Fact of possessing a poison- apparatus. Neither does the mere possession of an active poison-apparatus secure immunity. For, as we have seen, cobra-venom proved rapidly fatal to the tree-vipers experimented upon. 1And the Dipsad71 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Additional arguments favouring hypothesis. In support of this hypothesis the following additional arguments may be adduced: Injection of purely chemical material alleged to procure immu- nity from specific disease. Injection of purely chemical material may, it is reported, procure immunity from a specific disease: the protection conferred by 'vaccine' being, it is alleged, attributable, in certain cases, to the action of the soluble chemical products resulting from the growth and development of the morbific germ, rather than to any direct action of the fungus itself.1 Venom not a general protoplasm- poison. Venom is not a general protoplasm-poison,2so that its presence need not necessarily be incompatible with cell life. Habituation of protoplasm to foreign food. It is an established fact that cells may, by a process of education, become habituated to nutriment, which they at first reject when it is presented to them in a concentrated form.3 It is thus not impossible that the protoplasm of the snake may become gradually habituated to the presence of this extraneous proteid material-venom. Alleged practice of inoculation among snake-charmers. It has long been suspected that certain snake-charmers by a process of inoculation with venom gain protection against the bite of a particular species of venomous snake.4 And this belief was not effectually disposed of by Fayrer's experiments on the hurriedly prepared dogs submitted by him to snake-bite.5 1M. BOUCHARD and others have demonstrated (says the Lancet, 1888), that a rabbit may be protected against the pyocyanic disease by injecting under its skin the soluble products of cultures deprived of all microbes by heat and filtration; and that immunity can also be secured by injecting sterilized urine of rab- bits dead from pyocyanic infection, and MM. Charrin and Ruffer (France Med. No. 126) find that the soluble products of artificial cultures are eliminated by the kidney without losing their power of conferring immunity. Dr. WOOLDRIDGE ("Note on Protection in Anthrax," Proc. Roy. Soc., 1887, p. 313), found as regards anthrax that the albuminous culture-fluid freed from anthrax bacilli (and spores?) by filtration confers protection. Confirmation, however, of such experiments by KOCH or other thoroughly reliable ob- server is needed. As it is highly remarkable that strictly soluble material can make so very lasting an impression on the system. 2The evidence on this point is extensive, viz. 72 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. The inter-immunity of venom- ous snakes explainable. This hypothesis would also lend itself to explain the relative or absolute protection possessed by one species of highly viru- lent snake against another highly venomous snake of a different genus or family (e. g. the Daboia against the Cobra). For, Mitchell and Reichert have shown1that the various serpent-venoms examined by them are mixtures of two or three proteids (viz. 'Venom-albumin,' 'v.-globulin,' and 'v.-peptone'); and that the venom of one species of snake differs from that of another, mainly, if not entirely, in the different proportions in which these con- stituent proteids are present. The Daboia and Cobra might, in this way, be re- garded as being protected against each other2to that extent to which their venom contains a corresponding proteid, and thus have to contend against only a moiety of the poison. 3 The hypothesis here put forward can readily be tested by experiment; and to this test I propose submitting it when opportunity offers. 1loc. cit. And Dr. WOLFENDEN has generally confirmed this observation as regards cobra-venom (Ind. Med. Gas., 1885). 2Vide p. 63. 3The venoms of the Cobra and Daboia appear to have much in common: "The general symptoms produced by the poison of the Daboia are nearly the same as by that of the Naja. " BRUNTON AND FAYRER, loc. cit., p. 68. SILLIGURI, November 17th, 1888. L. A. WADDELL, M.B. Government of India Central Printing Office.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART IV. 1889. 1