IP/13/AF3 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT ON THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1878. FRAMED ON THE WEEKLY AND ANNUAL RETURNS, ON THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND ON THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY SURGEONS GENERAL. WITH STATISTICAL TABLES. Compiled in the Office of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996048.tif] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1879.
MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT ON THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1878- FRAMED ON THE WEEKLY AND ANNUAL RETURNS, ON THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND ON THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY SURGEONS GENERAL. WITH STATISTICAL TABLES. Compiled in the Office of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996060.tif] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1879
Note .[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996069.tif] No. S.B. /375 OF 1879. FROM THE SURGEON-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To THE SECRETARY To GOVERNMENT, MILITARY DEPARTMENT. Bombay, 29th October 1879. SIR,ii *1st Regt. L. Cavalry. 9th Regt. N. I. 26th Regt. N. I. 5. For convenience I have included the returns of those corps*which took part in the Malta and Cyprus expedition in the total for the Presidency Division and Aden, and this arrange- ment gives a larger average strength for that Division than any shown in previous years. The following four tables give the average strength, daily sick, admissions, and deaths in hospital, in the Divisions into which the medical administration of the Army is portioned, separately, for the year under review, together with the rates prevailing for the five years preced- ing it. Presidency Division and Aden. Years. Average Strength. Average daily Sick. Admissions. Deaths in Hospital. 1873 3,358 140.2 4,513 28 1874 3,343 133.4 3,861 32 1875 3,288 125.4 3,551 36 1876 3,207 128.7 3,363 45 1877 3,196 104.2 3,547 40 1878 4,633 175.5 7,440 37 Poona Division. Years. Average Strength. Average daily Sick. Admissions. Deaths in Hospital. 1873 8,209 250.4 7,334 35 1874 8,197 241.2 6,855 36 1875 81,459 224.2 7,607 40 1876 74,486 220.4 7,249 42 1877 77,716 261.2 8,671 72 1878 6,822 246.8 9,608 88 Northern Division. Years. Average Strength. Average daily Sick. Admissions. Deaths in Hospital. 1873 8450 392.9 13,498 52 1874 8362 376.2 12,426 53 1875 8547.1 318.2 10,714 105 1876 8937.3 365.5 11,177 68 1877 8601.3 294.4 8,977 67 1878 8264 451.9 16,540 131 Sind Division. Years. Average Strength. Average daily Sick. Admissions. Deaths in Hospital. 1873 2950 92.7 3,690 50 1874 2848 84.9 3,459 55 1875 2837.5 104.9 3,603 32 1876 2999.4 142.2 5,129 92 1877 2991.7 128.5 3,935 36 1878 3952 168.6 6,424 49
iii Incidence of sickness and mortality. 6. The incidence of sickness and mortality as regards Divisions gives a preponderance in the Northern, where the percentage ratios of admissions and deaths to average strength present were 200.1 and 1.6 respectively. The rates of admissions vary much in this Division and range from 346.6 per centum amongst the 11th Regt. N. I. at Bhooj, to 76.4 amongst the 18th N. I. at Deesa. The admission rate in the Bombay Division was 162.5 per cent., but much of this is due to the lare number of admissions in the 1st Regiment Light Cavalry, which took part in the Malta expedition; in this Corps they averaged 216.9 per cent. to strength present. The admission rate in Sind was 153.9, the highest rate being that in the 30th N. I. at Jacobabad, viz. 230.9. In the Poona Division the admission rate was 140.8, and the highest prevailing in any one Corps was that in the Sappers at New Jhansi, 272.1. The death rate in hospital in these three last-named Divisions, calculated on the average strength present, gave percentages of 0.8 in the Presidency and Aden, 1.3 in Poona, and 1.2 in Sind. Diseases. Malarious fevers. 7. The disease causing the greatest number of admissions was malarious fever. Under this head 59.7 per centum of the total admissions for the whole Presidency are returned, being 16.1 per cent. in excess of 1877, when the rate was 43.6. This admission rate from malarious fevers varies in the different divisions, and ranges from 67.8 per cent. in the Northern to 48.9 in Sind. In the Presidency it was 54.4 and in Poona 55.5 During the year 1877 the percentages under similar conditions for the division as above enumerated were 45.3, 42.1, 40.0, and 43.9 respectively. The divisional rate of increase over 1877 was as under:iv Most of the medical officers speak of it as running a benign course, but at the same time almost prostrating the Regiments while it lasted. Eruptive fevers. 8. The number of admissions from eruptive fevers was 124, as compared with 212 in the previous year. The death-rate from this class of diseases was 1.6 per cent. on the admis- sions, as against 1.8 in 1877. They were more general in the Northern Division than in any of the others, as every corps therein, with the exception of two, the 3rd Regiment Light Cavalry at Neemuch and the 1st Mountain Battery at Raj- kote, returned some admissions under this heading. Enteric fever. 9. There were 9 cases of enteric fever reported, of whom 5 died. Five of the cases with 2 deaths took place in the 1st Regiment N. I. at Ahmedabad. There are no particulars given of these cases beyond the following remark in the inspection report of Deputy Surgeon General Wyllie, "The only unusual event was the appearance of enteric fever in April, and 2 deaths unfortunately resulted before it was fully diagnosed. The runlets, here covered, leading from family quarters were suspected, opened out, and the disease at once disappeared." In the 16th N. I. three cases occurred, and the following remark by the Medical Officer in charge is the only record of them, "There were three cases of enteric fever, all of which proved fatal." In the Poona Horse one case is returned which recovered, but there is no special remark made regarding it. Under the instructions contained in Government Regulation No. 1786, Military Department, dated 30th April 1879, a circular has been issued directing medical officers to carefully record and forward the cases of patients suffering from this disease, with a view to help to elucidate the question raised by Surgeon General Gordon of Madras, and in the current year's report I hope to be able to record the result of the year's research as to the frequency or otherwise of cases of enteric fever in the Native Army. Rheumatism. 10. The rate of admissions for rheumatism on the total treated was 3.4 per cent. for the whole Presidency, as against 5.0 for 1877. The highest rate prevailed in the Presidency Division 4.8 per cent. and the lowest in Sind 2.2. The rates prevailing in the Poona and Northern Divisions were 3.8 and 3.0 per cent. respectively. The Regiment returning most cases under this heading was the 22nd N. I., which was moved between Ahmedabad, Bombay, Poona and Belgaum in the course of the year. Lung affections. 11. Pulmonary diseases furnished 2.9 per cent. of the total treated, as against 4.5 in 1877. They were more numerous in the Presidency Division, where the ratio per cent. was 4.3, than in any of the others. In the Poona Division they furnished 3.1 per cent., in the Northern 2.3, and in Sind 3.1. The ratios prevailing in the Divisions as just named in 1877 were 3.9, 3.8, 5.4, and 3.1 respectively. The 22nd N. I. suffered more from these affections than any other corps in the Bombay Army. The Medical Officer reports that both at Poona and Belgaum, and on the line of march between these two places, a large proportion of the fever cases were complicated with chest affections. Bowel affections. 12. Diarrhv some mortality, one death each in the 1st Light Cavalry and 26th N. I., and three in the 9th N. I. Diarrhvi terranean Expeditionary Force, but as they are fully detailed in the medical report of the Force by Deputy Surgeon General Beatty, printed as an Appendix, it will not be necessary to allude to them further here. Vaccination. 17. Vaccination and re-vaccination has been most carefully attended to by all the Medical Officers in charge of Corps. Scurvy. 18. There was a large increase in the admissions from scurvy over 1877, they being 251 as against 170. The increase is altoge- ther debitable to the Northern and Sind Divisions, and in the former the stations where it showed most were Mhow, Bhuj, Nassirabad, and Baroda. In Sind, the Regiments stationed at Hyderabad and Jacobabad were most affected. The stations in the Presidency Division where it showed with most frequency were Surat, Bombay, and Aden, and in the Poona Division, New Jhansi and Kholapur. Lines. 19. The lines occupied by the Native soldiers are as a general rule very ill-constructed and deficient in many sanitary essentials necessary to render a habitation healthy. Whenever new lines have to be constructed in future, it will be well to note carefully the sanitary instructions as regards the erection of Native houses and laying out of Native villages, published at page 839 of the Bombay Government Gazette, dated 25th of September 1879. The principles laid down in these, if applied in the construction of sepoys' huts, will ultimately conduce much to the health and well-being of the inhabitants. One point the medical officers in charge of Regiments generally agree upon is, the great desirability of a well-raised and solid plinth on which to construct the huts. Surgeon Peters, in medical charge of the 2nd Regiment N. I., gives an instance in Belgaum where the damp- ness of the floors caused by the lodgment of a quantity of rain water behind a recently erected bund in the vicinity of the lines, intercepting the drainage flow, gave rise to a great increase in the number of fever cases. On a sluice gate being opened in the bund, the water subsided, the natural drainage flow went on, and the fever cases became fewer. The lines occupied by the Native troops at Satara are said to be exceedingly bad, and new ones are much needed. Those at Surat are reported by Deputy Surgeon General Moore as badly situated, badly ventilated, and badly constructed. At Aden the lines are said to be situated in about the worst part of it, the houses are small, the streets narrow, and the ventilation defective. The lines at Neemuch occupied by the 3rd Light Cavalry are reported by Surgeon Major McDowell as " miserably small and low huts." The Medical Officer of the 6th Regiment N. I. at Mhow says, "The huts are low, single tiled, without plinths, built of mud and sunburnt brick, and hence they are very damp during and after the rains, which circum- stance predisposes the inmates to attacks of malarious fevers and chest affections." The 10th N. I. at Neemuch occupied lines " originally defective as to general construction, space, light, ventilation, and a total absence of plinths." At Deesa the 18th N. I. occupied lines " which have been periodically reported for some years past as old, bad, and past repair." At Mehidpur the lines are reported as old, bad, and not built on plinths. On the other hand, the Native Infantry Lines are reported very good at Poona, Dharwar, Nassirabad, and Malegaon. Conservancy. 20. In stations where at all practicable, the trench system of night-soil conservancy and disposal is adopted, and medical officers pretty generally agree as to the advantages in regard to cleanliness and purity of surroundings to be obtained by this system. During the rainy season the trench system does not work so well in consequence of the distance the trenches have to be placed from the lines, the exposure to wet going to and from them, the sloppiness of the ground, and the depreciation of the deodorizing properties of clay when damp. The trenches should be supplemented by latrines at all stations, to be used only when circum- stances may interdict the use of the former. But where latrines are brought into use, it is essential that they be so constructed as to reduce to a minimum the
vii dangers of subsoil pollution, and that a sufficient staff of sweepers be maintained to ensure their being always kept clean and pure. In many stations, from want of space, position of the lines, nature of the soil, &c. &c., the latrine system has to be adopted in its entirety, and in these dry earth as a deodorizer is chiefly used. The general plan adopted is to place iron pans to catch the night-soil, in which it mixes with dry earth, and when these fill, the contents are removed in filth carts somewhere beyond cantonment limits, to be either disposed of as manure, or buried in pits. From both Dharwar and Malegaon the medical officers reported that the trench system was carried out with complete success, and that the ground containing the filled in and disused trenches is now under cultivation. At Deesa trenches are sunk in the beds of nullahs during the dry season and on its banks during the rains. In Baroda the trench system is used during the dry season, and the medical officer reports, " it is found necessary to post police sentries to enforce their being used, and prevent the men from defiling the surrounding country instead." It will be of course no easy task to change the ordinary habits of the sepoy so as to bring them within a proper sanitary system, but the result to be attained is of such immense importance that no trouble taken to secure it will be thrown away. Above all things the surround- ings of his dwellings must be clean and well conserved, otherwise the atmosphere permeating them will be tainted and unwholesome, ultimately leading to impair- ment of health, long residence in hospital, and loss of service to the State. Water supply. 21. Nearly all the reports speak in favourable terms of the water supply, and it would appear that a greater amount of attention has been paid to this essential of health during recent years. There are however still some stations where the water supply is deficient. At Aden particularly it is reported, " The men get two gallons of sweet and three gallons of brackish water per diem. They complain that the quantity is insufficient, and an increase of one gallon of sweet water has been recommended by the Surgeon of the Regiment, but the increase has not yet been sanctioned." In Sattara the wells in the lines dry up in the hot season, and in consequence the men have to go a long distance for a supply of potable water. It is stated however that a scheme is under consideration for supplying both city and camp with good drinking water, to be brought in from a distance, and when this scheme has been carried out, the lines, it is hoped, will be independent of the wells. In the lines occupied by the 6th N. I. at Mhow, one of the three wells in use "is very near the latrines of the 13th N. I.:" another, used by " Purwarries," " is near the hospital latrine." At Neemuch the supply was scarce during the first half of the year, but improved with the rainfall. Deepening the wells and building a lateral nullah has had an appreciable effect on the quantity of the supply. Surgeon Ferguson, of the 24th Regiment N. I., reporting of Mehidpur, says, "a constant supply of good water is still a desideratum," and I would invite attention to the details he enters into of the defects of the present one. The Surgeon of the 1st Sind Horse reports that, " the water of the out- posts is extremely bad on account of dissolved impurities, Sooie being worst in this respect." In the report of the 19th N. I. the Medical Officer says, "The water of Kurrachee, apart from its being of inferior quality, is decidedly limited in quantity." With these exceptions, the water supply is spoken well of, and the medical officers stationed at Poona particularly speak in the highest terms of the Kurruckwasla water supplied to the lines. Food and clothing. 22. As in the previous year, the ruling prices of food grains ranged very high; and reports pretty generally speak of the difficul- ties sepoys, more particularly those with families to maintain, had to contend with in providing themselves with a sufficiency of whole- some food. Under the most favourable circumstances however it does not always follow that sepoys, particularly Hindoos, will provide themselves with the first quality of food grains while they can get damaged or inferior grains at a cheaper rate. This at least seems to be the general prevailing impression, and to obviate
viii its consequences and secure as far as possible the physical strength to be obtained only by a sufficiency of good and sustaining food, it is proposed by some to issue rations to the sepoys on a system which would not excite caste prejudice. Surgeon Major. Ross, of the 4th Rifles, particularly alludes to this point, and his remarks would seem worthy of consideration. I have had in a former paragraph of this report to refer to the greater proportionate preponderance of mortality amongst Hindoos than Mussalmans, and this fact would lead to the inference that the more liberal and less parsimonious view of the latter race as regards the food they consume, have much to do with giving them a greater power of resistance to the inroads of disease. In regard to clothing I have nothing to add to what has been previously urged in former reports. The remarks of many of the medical officers in regard to the number of men who lie up in hospital, thereby causing the State the temporary loss of their services, on account of simple "shoe-bite," I would beg to bring to the prominent notice of Government. Should the sandals recom- mended in my last year's report be considered "unmilitary," a greater attention to the proper fitting of the boot and the general use of a thick woollen sock, would go far to obviate the occurrence of this source of trouble and inconve- nience. Hospitals. 23. Whilst the generality of hospitals have been well reported on as regards accommodation, hygienic condition, &c. &c., there are still a few that require many improvements to render them proper receptacles for the sick. Of the hospital at Sattara, Surgeon Major Miller, 8th N. I., says, " There is no proper hospital at this station for the Native Troops. It is merely an ordinary bungalow in the Sudder Bazaar, rented for the accommodation of the sick. A regular hospital is very much required, and if new lines are built, one must be got. The present house is too small, and the sick are too crowded, and tents have to be pitched for their treat- ment." I would also beg to urge on the notice of Government his further remarks on the same subject, and to solicit their early consideration for some means to provide proper hospital accommodation for the sick amongst the Native Troops at Sattara. The hospital of the 14th N. I., Belgaum, is complained of on account of its darkness, and Surgeon Major Hughes further calls attention to "the want of an observation ward in which cases of infectious disease might be segregated, pending the pitching of a tent or the erection of a shed." The hospital of the 1st Sind Horse at Jacobabad is said to be exceedingly damp and the brick flooring is all crumbling away. Cinchona febrifuge. 24. In the treatment of malarious fever cinchona febrifuge was very largely used as a substitute for quinine, with most satisfactory results. At its first introduction there was a certain amount of prejudice against its use, and in consequence of its being so much cheaper than quinine, it would appear that a kind of impression got abroad that motives of economy alone were at the bottom of its introduction as an agent in the treatment of ague amongst the Native Troops. In time this feeling wore away, and an impartial use of the drug, not alone amongst military medical officers, but by those also in civil employ, has lead to the conclusion that quite 75 per cent. of the ordinary malarious fevers met with can be successfully treated with it. I have to highly commend the careful manner in which its value was tested by Surgeon Ferguson, 24th N. I., and the comprehensive table, to be found in his report, in which he records its success as compared with " specifics" usually used in the treatment of malarious fevers. Its issue to the vari- ous medical charges in conjunction with quinine is now confined to the rela tive value experience has shown it bears to that drug as a specific, thereby causing a large saving to the State. Mediterranean expedition. 25. I beg to attach as an appendix to this report a short medical history of the expeditionary force which left Bombay in April 1878, drawn up by Deputy Surgeon General Beatty,
ix who accompanied it as Principal Medical Officer. The medical equipment of such portion of the force as was fitted out in Bombay, consisted of a field medical companion, a pair of field medical panniers, two reserve chests, and a splint box. This equipment differs materially as regards construction, arrange- ment and contents from any heretofore supplied, and the modifications were such as suggested themselves to meet the exigencies of field service in this country. A similar equipment was despatched with such of the Bombay Troops as took part in the operations in Afghanistan, and the Principal Medical Officer with the Kandahar column has reported to this office in regard to it, " I have been so much impressed with the suitability for field service of both the field panniers and reserve chests supplied to Troops belonging to the Bombay Presidency, as to completeness of fittings and of the materials they contain, that I have fully resolved to recommend, at the close of the expedition, that similar arrangements should be adopted for the Bengal Presidency." I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, W. G. HUNTER, M.D., Surgeon General.
MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITION. By Deputy Surgeon General BEATTY, P. M. O. Strength of Indian Expeditionary Force, 1st and 2nd Divisions. 2 Field Batteries R. A. 2 Regiments N. Cavalry. 4 Companies Sappers and Miners. 5 Regiments Native Infantry. Of the above, Bengal furnished 1 Regiment Native Cavalry. 3 Regiments Native Infantry. Madras. 1 Regiment Native Infantry. 2 Companies Sappers and Miners. Bombay. 2 Field Batteries R. A. 1 Regiment Native Cavalry. 2 Regiments Native Infantry. 2 Companies Sappers and Miners. Under Circular Memorandum No. 987/B, dated 18th April 1878, Army Head Quarters, the marginally noted Troops embarked for service in the Mediterranean. The force embarked in two Divisions, the first on 29th of April, consist- ing ofxii MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITION. Ship. Corps. Medical Officer. Marina 26th Bombay N. I. Junior Medical Officer, Surgeon Clarkson Macedonia Detachment 9th Bengal Cavalry. Passed Medical Pupil Azeezoola Dawood- sha. Trinacria Detachment 1st Bombay Lancers. Passed Medical Pupil Dhunjeebhoy Rut- tonjee, No. 742. Baron Colonsay 1st Bombay Lancers Junior Medical Officer, Surgeon E. W. Young. St. Mildred Ditto Hospital Assistant 9th Regiment N. I., Shaik Nadir. Hannibal Ditto Senior Hospital Assistant Samuel Sam- son, from 9th N. I. Brambletya Ditto Surgeon Street and Hospital Assistant of Corps. Kilkerran 9th Bengal Cavalry Apothecary Robinson. Narcissus Ditto Assistant Apothecary Cardoz. Arosboy Ditto Medical Officer of Corps. Citadel Ditto Surgeon Adey and Passed Medical Pupil. Seaforth Ditto Surgeon Koyajee. Previous to sailing, a careful medical inspection was made of each Transport, and written sanitary instructions as under were communicated to the several officers placed in medical charge. Sanitary instructions issued to all officers in medical charge of transports. " All Medical Officers and Medical Subordinates proceeding in charge of Troops with the Expeditionary Force, are requested, during the voyage,to see that the following sanitary arrangements are most carefully attended toxiii MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITION. 2 detachment medicine chests,weight about 50 lbs. each, which can be carried by a cooly, for use on board ship and shore, in event of part of a Regiment being detached for service. 2 chests, Nos. 5 and 6, containing reserve stock of medicines, calculated for a 6 monthsxiv MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITION. Precautions used for prevent- ing the spread of disease. The between decks, where a case of cholera and most of the diarrhMEDICAL HISTORY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITION. XV Conservancy. It was found necessary to arrange for the conservancy of each encampment on a totally different plan. At Fort Manoel, where the tents were pitched on rocky soil, close to the seashore, conservancy was managed by means of barges, 10 of which were in daily use. These barges were so arranged that the solid and liquid excrement were most carefully separated and deodorized with dry earth. Down the centre of each barge iron buckets, filled with dry earth, were deposited, and trowels, holding 1 lb., left for the purpose of covering the excrement with earth. The barges which had been in use during the day were towed out to sea at night, and after being thoroughly cleansed and disinfected, were returned to their places, others being supplied in the meantime. Trench conservancy at St. An- tonio. At St. Antonio the trench system of latrines was used, but owing to the rocky soil on which the troops were encamped, it became necessary to have pits sunk 6 feet deep and 3 feet wide for each Regiment. The sweepers attended twice daily, and covered the night-soil with dry earth, previously deposited for the purpose. When the pits filled to within a foot or two of the surface, they were covered in and abandoned and new ones dug. Further mensures adopted for ensuring a perfect system of sanitation. To ensure sanitation being the more effectively carried out, orders were issued directing one of the medical officers at the respective camps St. Antonio and Fort Manoel to alternately act as weekly sanitary officer, in addition to his regimental duties, and report any special circumstance requiring immediate notice. Disposal of dead bodies. Bodies of persons who died at St. Manoel were taken out to sea and buried, no burning being permitted; whilst at the camp of St. Antonio, a dis- tance of six miles from the town of Viletta. cremation was allowed to those who adopt this method of disposing of the dead. Dooley bearers instructed in carrying doolies. As the greater portion of the bearers enlisted were totally untrained, a uniform system of instruction was established, and each medical officer in charge of a Regiment was directed to afford instruction, and see that the bearers were practised daily for one hour in putting doolies, dandies, and stretchers together, placing and removing wounded men, and carrying them without jolting. In time a commendable amount of proficiency was attained, and the bearers became a very useful set of men. General Hospital for European and Native sick. Whilst at Malta, owing to the extreme heat in tents at St. Antonio, and the difficulty of treating cases of sickness amongst the European troops, it was arranged that all cases of a serious nature should be sent in ambulance carts for treatment to the European General Hospital at Malta. For the treatment of similar cases amongst the Native troops, a general hospital, afford- ing accommodation for 32 beds, was established at the Lazaretto Barracks, and a Medical Officer placed in special charge. Extreme temperature during the day. The range of the thermometer during the day reaching 125° in the sun and 90° in the shade, it was recommended that the hospital marquees should be thatched over. This suggestion, which was at once com- plied with, served to reduce the temperature in tents consi- derably, and tended much towards the comfort and recovery of the sick. Parasitic affection of the mouth. In the month of June a number of cases of inflammation of the mucus membrane of tongue and inside of cheeks and lips were brought to notice. The disease was particularly prevalent amongst the Native troops encamped at St. Antonio and Fort Manoel, and was believed to be produced by insufficient nitrogenous food. In several cases which appeared amongst the sepoys of the 25th Madras N. I., ulceration of the cornea was a prominent symptom. Change of diet recommended. It was at once recommended that a bi-weekly issue of 8 oz. of meat be granted to the troops and native followers in lieu of 1 lb. of flour, and an equivalent of vegetables, such as onions and potatoes, granted instead of the sanctioned 4 oz. of dall. Nature of disease. The disease on further careful microscopical enquiry was ascertained to be of parasitic nature (oidium albicans) wholly unconnected with any scor- butic affection, and which soon yielded to an improved diet and disinfecting local remedies.
xvi MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITION. Exemption of the disease amongst the men of the 2nd Ghoorkas. It was a noteworthy fact that the 2nd Ghoorka Regiment, though encamped on the same ground as the other Regiments, had a complete immunity from this disease. This Regiment, from the time of its leaving Bengal, whilst at sea, and during its entire residence at Malta, had arranged privately for a bi-weekly issue of meat to the men. General health of men at Malta. The general health of the men, both Europeans and Natives, was good; and, with the exception of some cases of fever, and ordinary diseases, no serious outbreaks of sickness occurred. Departure of Troops to Cyprus. Orders were received on the 12th July for the departure from Malta of the I. E. Force to Cyprus, and it became necessary to arrange for the care of the sick, both European and Native, who were unable to accom- pany the Force. It was ordered that all the sick of the native portion of the Force be taken to Cyprus, as none could be allowed to remain in Malta; whilst the Europeans who were unfit to accompany the Force, were accommodated in the station hospital at Valetta. Re-embarkation of Troops for Cyprus. On the 18th July, the Force re-embarked on board the transport ships for Cyprus, which port was reached about the 22nd instant. 1 Battery of Artillery, together with the 9th Bengal Cavalry, remained at Malta. Owing to want of space at Larnaka, the principal port, 1 Battery R. A., 1st Bombay Lancers, 26th Bombay N. I. were brigaded at Chiflick Pasha with two British Regiments of Infantry; whilst at Larnaka itself; the 9th Bombay N. I. was encamped, the remaining Native Infantry Regiments, viz. 31st Bengal N. I., 13th Bengal N. I., and 25th Madras N. I. being located at different ports on the island. Selection of a general hospital for European and Native sick. As was arranged at Malta, a large upper storied airy building was selected as a general hospital for the use of H. M.'s British Troops, the lower portion of which was set apart for the reception of all serious cases occurring amongst natives. Fever at Chiflick pasha and Larnaka. During the month of August, after a heavy fall of rain, fever of a very severe intermit- tent type attacked some of the troops on the island. The European troops at Chiflick Pasha, who were exposed to exces- sive sun heat, under canvas, and the Sappers and Miners, who had been for a considerable time subjected not only to exposure from heat, but great bodily exertion in damp places, suffered most. Between the 3rd and 7th August, the admissions were 33 or 22.44 per cent. out of a total strength of 147. Precaution taken. To protect the patients as much as possible, the hospital tents were thatched over, and orders issued prohibiting work during the extreme heat of the day. Removal of F-2 Battery. Owing to the large increase in the number of cases amongst the F-2 Battery, the encamping ground was shifted, and the immediate removal of all sickly men on board of one of the transport ships lying in the harbour, recommended. Marked benefit rapidly followed this change, and no case of fever occurred amongst any of those who had to quit the former encamping ground. Return of Troops to India. On the 20th of August orders were received for the speedy re-embarkation and return of Troops to India, a few only remaining behind for special duty. Mortality of Troops, European and Native. The greater portion sailed on the 22nd instant and arrived at Bombay harbour on 24th September 1878, after an absence of exactly five months. Of Europeans only 5 diedxvii MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITION. SCALE OF SEA RATIONS (Non-cooking) allowed for Fighting Men and Camp Followers of all classes on the return voyage, from Cyprus to Bombay. Articles. Fighting Men and Followers. REMARKS. lbs. oz. Ghee 0 3 Salt 0 ½ Garlic 0 1/10 Tamarind 0 2 Parched gram 0 8 Powa 1 0 Sugar 0 6 Onions 0 2 When Powa is not procurable, 4 oz. of raw gram and remainder of dried fruits, such as dates, raisins, figs, &c. may be substituted for it. SCALE OF SEA RATIONS (Cooking) allowed for Fighting Men and Camp Followers of all classes on the return voyage from Cyprus to Bombay. Articles. Fighting Men and Followers. REMARKS. lbs. oz. Flour or rice 1 8 Dhall, potatoes, or onions, on alternate days 0 4 Ghee 0 2 Salt 0 1/2 Garlic. 0 1/10 Firewood 2 0 Turmeric 0 2/16 Black pepper 0 1/10 Chillies 0 2/16 Coriander 0 2/16 Cummin 0 1/10 Sugar 0 2 Fresh mutton every other day 0 4 Fighting men only. 1. No meat rations to be issued to camp followers. 2. Dried fish may be issued to Madras Troops, when meat cannot be procured. 3. Biscuit may occasionally be issued to Madras Troops, instead of flour or rice, when necessary. 4. Limejuice and tamarind to be considered as medical comforts, and issued on re- commendation of medical officer, with a proportionate amount of sugar. 5. As fresh potatoes in largequantities are liable to decay, a proportion, say INDEX. [The Regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1878.] PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. PAGE 1st Regiment Light Cavalry, Malta 1 9th do. N. I., Malta 3 26th do. do. do. 5 Aden Troop, Khor Maksar 7 17th Regiment N. I., Surat 8 21st do. do. Bombay 10 22nd do. do. do. 13 25th do. do. Aden 15 POONA DIVISION. Poona Horse, Sirur 17 Sappers and Miners, Kirkee 19 2nd (Prince of Wales' Own) Regiment N. I. (Grenadiers), Belgaum 21 3rd Regiment N. I., Kolapur 24 Left Wing 3rd Regiment N. I., Sholapur 25 4th Rifles, Satara 25 5th Regiment N. I., Poona 29 8th do. do. do. 30 12th do. do. Dharwar 33 13th do. do. Malegaon 35 Left Wing 13th Regiment N. I., Malegaon 37 14th Regiment N. I. Belgaum 38 Detachment 14th Regiment N. L. I., Kaladgi 39 15th Regiment N. I., Ahmednagar 40 NORTHERN DIVISION. 2nd Regiment L. C., Deesa 43 3rd (Queen's Own) Regiment, Neemuch 44 No. 1 Mountain Battery, Rajkot 47 1st Regiment N. I. (Grenadiers), Ahmedabad 49 6th do. do. Mhow 50 7th do. do. Rajkot 53 10th do. do. Neemuch 55 11th do. do Bhuj 60 16th do. do. Nusseerabad 62 18th do. do. Deesa 64 20th do. do. Baroda 66 23rd do. do. Mhow 68 24th do. do. Mehidpur 70 Left Wing 24th Regiment N. I., Augar 75 28th Regiment N. I., Rajkot 79 Detachments 23rd and 6th Regiments N. I., Indore 80
( xx ) SIND DIVISION. PAGE 1st Sind Horse, Jacobabad 83 2nd do. do. 84 3rd do. do. 86 No. 2 Mountain Battery, Jacobabad 87 19th Regiment N. I., Kurrachee 88 27th do. do. Hydrabad 90 29th do. do. Dera Gazi Khan 92 30th do. do. Jacobabad 94
MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1878. (The Regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1878.) PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Average Strength present during the year 4,633 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength Present 3.8 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength Present 0.8 H. M.'s 1st Regiment Light Cavalry. MALTA.2 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. 1. The regiment embarked for Malta the first three days in the month of May last; from Malta it was sent on the 18th July to Cyprus, here it remained until the end of August, when it returned to Bombay and Poona. On the 11th of November it marched out of Poona, en route for Neemuch, where it arrived on the 3rd of January 1879. The lines and their surround- ings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. They are in much the same condition as last year, the court yards around the huts have been for some time considered objectionable, affecting ventilation, and are a cloak to dirty habits. The drainage is chiefly natural, superficial drains lined with stone exist between the lines of each troop, and the drainage from each hut flows into these. Conservancy. 3. The lines have been kept clean and the latrines regularly cleaned out twice daily; they are well situated to the east of the most northerly line of huts, and distant 140 yards. The excreta are removed daily by the conservancy carts to the cantonment manure ground. Water supply. 4. Is very abundant, and is received direct from the Kurruckwasla waterworks through pipes; the water is not clean, but is reported to be wholesome. There is a good supply of pure well water also, but I am told the sowars and families for the most part prefer the former. Food and clothing. 5. The supply of provisions in the bazaar is good and plentiful, and vegetables easily procured; prices remained high after the famine. A black blouse is now worn on parade instead of the stable jacket formerly in use, the men are pleased with the change and say they are able to move about better in them than in the old tight stable jacket. The boots the men wear are in my opinion unsatisfactory. During the march from Poona to Neemuch, there were no less than 42 men admitted into hospital or were unable to ride from shoe-bites. The price of these boots is about Rs. 5 a pair, and they are as a rule badly made and ill fitting. For a little more money a better boot could be procured, and the men should always be forced to wear some sort of sock. Duties, exercise and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. The duty is for the most part light, the men getting on an average 13½ nights in bed. A class is held twice a week for the purpose of teaching recruits gymnastics. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is an excellent one, and was very fully described in the report for the year 1874; it will accommodate 29 patients within the walls, but more accommodation has been required during the last months of the year, owing to the number of ague cases admitted; the excess have been placed in the verandahs, the greatest number at one time in hospital having been 60. The dry earth system has been carried out in the hospital latrine. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the Regiment for the year has been good. In Malta there were several admissions for fever, generally of a mild intermittent type, and a few cases of dysentery, some of which were severe, but none ending fatally. The high temperature and exposure the men were subject to would account for this sickness, their tents not supplying a sufficient protection from the sun. In Cyprus for the first fortnight or three weeks, the health of the Regiment was good, and while men in the European regiments were suffering in large numbers from fever and dysentery, our men were exempt; later, however, our men suffered a good deal from remittent fever with congestion of the liver and severe headache, and these cases were slow to recover, becoming anæmic, and having a very characteristic malarial aspect. In a great many instances the sea voyage from Cyprus to Bombay improved this. But on my return, Surgeon Major Colston having previously arrived with the head-quarters of the regiment, I found no less than 60 men in hospital, the majority suffering from anæmia and what was called Cyprus fever. I should mention that the men suffered from the affection of the mouth and tongue on arriving at Malta, which was so fully reported upon at the time by the Medical Officers in charge of regiments suffering from the disease. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The influence of the Deccan climate on the Regiment during the past 7¾ years appears to nave been favourable, and the sickness and morta- lity low. Details of treated. 10. Fever3 PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. and 1 hyperæsthesia. Diseases of the eye4 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The vicinity is thickly populated on the North side, but on the South there are princi- pally sheds and buildings connected with the G. I. P. Railway. On the East is the Carnac Bunder, on the West the Crawford Market. I can only endorse Deputy Surgeon General Hunter's remarks at page 3, Bombay Army Medical Report of 1876. The lines consist of 10 blocks of pendals facing North and South, each composed of three blocks of huts and one detached for the residence of the Native Commissioned Officers. Conservancy. 3. One latrine divided into two parts, each containing 28 seats. 14 each side, 1 for the women and 1 for the men. The latrine is situated to the North-East of the Lines, at a distance of only 48 feet from the last block of pendals. It is regularly flushed, and the filth runs into the pumping station, whence it is pumped into the sea, about a quarter of a mile off. The seats are too few for the number of inhabitants of the lines, which, with the addition of the Detachment 8th Regiment, cannot be well under 2,000 men, women and children. Water supply. 4. Vehar water is supplied to the troops but not to the sick in hospital; the water has never been laid on, but it has lately been a cause of corres- pondence between the Medical Officer and Commanding Officer and authorities concerned; the amount is ample for drinking and washing purposes. It is collected in four large iron tanks, each holding 700 gallons of water. Food and clothing. 5. With regard to clothing there is nothing in addition to last year's remarks to add. Food in abundance, but somewhat dear. The men however received the usual grain compensation. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The duties in Bombay were very hard for the men of the Regiment, the number of nights in bed being only 4.5. Hospital. 7. This has been described and reported upon in pages 2 and 3, Army Medical Report Book for 1876. General health and physique. 8. The health of the men and physique have been very fair since the Regiment returned from Malta and Cyprus. Sixty-four of the oldest and most worn out men have been invalided during the year, but the recruits are a very fine body of young men. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The health of the Regiment was certainly not improved while it was stationed at Malta and Cyprus. The men suffered very seriously. Diarrh5 PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. H. M.'s 26th Regiment N. I. MALTA.6 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. abundant supply of water was drawn7 PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. mixed alkaloid obtainable. The admissions from respiratory diseases were 63, viz. bronchitic catarrh 35, pneumonia 3, asthma 3, bronchitis 22. Of the diseases of stomach and bowels there were 137 cases, diarrh8 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 1. The head-quarters has been into the interior twice on duty during the year. 2. The line is situated at the western side of the hospital, site is good, and the whole of the pendals have been in good repair during the year. 3. There is one latrine attached to the hospital; it is kept very clean and the night-soil is removed three times a day. 4. Two gallons of condensed water and 3 gallons of Shaik Othman water (brackish); both qualities are good of their kind and the quantity is deemed sufficient. 5. Rations are not issued to men of the " Aden Troop." Khakee or white clothing for the hot, and cloth for the cold season, are well adapted for the climate. 6. Ordinary Guard duties and patrolling in the interior. The men practise athletic sports and sword exercise on holidays and twice a week on Tuesdays and Thursdays, which appears to do them much good, and improves their health. 7. An excellent hospital is in use with accommodation for 12 patients, and it gives a cubic space for each patient of 3212.3 cubic feet. The accommodation is good. The Deputy Surgeon General on his late inspection reported as follows:9 PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1875 Poona 120.2 3.4 0.4 1876 Surat 189.0 5.6 2.4 1877 Do. 210.9 4.2 0.8 Average 173.4 4.4 1.2 1878 Surat 169.1 3.7 3.7 Location and movements. 1. The Regiment has been stationed at Surat the greater portion of the year. In course of relief it was ordered to Dharwar, and left Surat in three Detachments on the 3rd, 15th of December, and 3rd of January respectively. The lines and surroundings; present condition, hygienic or otherwise. 2. On this head I may confine myself to the remark that the Regiment and Lines were specially inspected by Deputy Surgeon General Moore in September 1878, and that I believe the lines were condemned by him as badly situated, badly ventilated, and badly construct- ed. It is therefore hardly necessary for me to say more than that I fully concur in that opinion. In strong contrast to the lines at Surat are those at this station, Dharwar, where the lines completed in 1875, on the standard plan, appear all that is desirable as regards locality, ventilation and construction. Conservancy. 3. The latrines at this station, Dharwar, are on the trench system, and appear to answer the purpose well. They are situated to the rear of the lines, and in good position as regards prevailing winds. Sweepers are employed to keep the lines clean. Water supply. 4.The water supply at Dharwar is good and sufficient, and is obtained from wells. Food and clothing. 5. At Surat the supply of food was not as good as usual. The famine in other parts of India and a most unusual heavy fall of rain; contributed to this: the rain was so heavy and continuous that the crops rotted in the ground. 90 inches of rain fell during the year, the average being about 36 inches. At Dharwar there seems to be a plentiful supply of rice and some of the common grains, but wheat is scarce and very dear. As regards clothing,the only change introduced has been the institution of puggaries for the Sepoys and Native officers; and in this Regiment socks have been introduced, with the most marked benefit as regards blistered feet, as was amply proved on the march up from Vingorla to Dharwar, when not more than two or three cases occurred in the whole regiment. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments, and their effects on health. 6. The duty has been light throughout the year. The recreative amusements of the men are of their own invention. The hospital and its surround- ings, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital at Surat was an upper storied bungalow, well arranged, and ventilated, but too close to native villages. That at Dharwar is, I may say, faultless with the exception of its mud floor; it is well situated, no native village within a mile, and has ample accom- modation, and is well ventilated. General health, physique, &c. 8. The Regiment was stationed three years at Surat, and during that period the men very much deteriorated in health. They suffered much from malarious fever; the climate was very enervating; the water bad, and the lines ill constructed. The men are however decidedly improved; the march up and this salubrious station giving them a more healthy appearance, and, as will be seen, the sickness has diminished. 3 m
10 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Influences of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The rainfall for the year at Surat was 90 inches, a heavy continuous downpour, with hardly a break. This is much above the average, which is 36: it did not appear however to have any special prejudicial influence on the health of the men. Details of treated. 10. The total number of admissions from all causes was 1,130, a considerable decrease from last year, which was 1,501. Of these 707 were from malarious fever, for although in the summary 46 cases of febri- cula are given, they come under the head, I think, of malarious fever, being cases of fever of short duration without any marked premonitory prolonged rigour; so that taking these cases as all of malarious origin, and comparing them with last year, there is a considerable decrease. In 1877 the admissions from malarious fever were, ague 676, febricula 409, remittent fever 16, being a total of 1,101, so that I am justified in my previous assertion that the general health has improved. Dysentery and diarrh11 PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in hospital. 1875 Bombay 90.1 3.2 0.9 1876 Do. 80.6 2.5 0.4 1877 Do. 82.8 2.5 1.1 Average 84.5 2.7 0.8 1878 Bombay 150.4 4.3 1.3 Location and movement. 1. The head-quarters and main body have as usual been stationed in Bombay, besides furnishing the usual detachments in course of annual relief to the Persian Gulf and Indian Government steam vessels as per subjoined details:12 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The following table gives the number of admissions, and percentage of sick to strength during the year at the head-quarters and detachments mentioned below:PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 13 presented by me14 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Hospital and its immediate surroundings, &c. &c. 7. No changes have taken place in the hospital building and its surroundings since last yearPRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 15 H. M.16 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Hospital accommodation. 7. The hospital is very good, and built of pucka masonry on an elevated stone plinth. The main ward, which alone is occupied, accommodates 22 patients at, 100 square feet per man; the rest of the patients live in the verandah. There are two other rooms, each capable of holding 8 patients, one at each end of the main ward. Of these one is occupied by a dementia patient, the other is taken up by the office. There are also two other smaller rooms next the office at the west end, which serve as a dispensary. The office room is to be vacated at once for patients, and the office removed to the dispensary, while the latter is to be transferred entirely to the small room beyond. This I think will be a great improvement, for the hospital receives not only the sick of the 25th Regiment, but also those of the Aden Troop and of the Sappers and Miners. The surroundings are very good indeed with the exception of the latrines, which require fresh paving. This is a subject now under the consideration of the proper authori- ties, and will I hope be looked to without delay. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the men has been very good, lately not so much so. This is to be attributed to the change of season and the occurrence of some cases of dysentery and diarrh17 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. POONA DIVISION. Average Strength Present during the year 6,822 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength Present 3.6 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength Present 1.3 H. M.18 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food. 5. A considerable number of cases of scurvy occurred, chiefly however complicating cases of already existing primary disease; this necessarily shows that the men must still be more or less pinched for means. Food, though much cheaper than it was last year, is still above good year prices, and many of the men, more especially those with large families, are yet in the hands of the Bunias from the debts incurred during the last two years. The pay of the sowar in Silledar Corps is really very little when all his cuttings have been deducted. Duties, exercise and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The duties of the men are not excessive. Polo is played three times a week, and besides being a healthy exercise, it teaches the boys and Oomedwars of the Regiment to ride. There is a regular gymnastic course for the younger men and recruits. The Regiment is very healthy, the percentage of average daily sick being 2.3. Hospital and its immediate surroundings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The old hospitals o badly reported on formerly has been pulled down, and a new standard guard has been built in its place. A new hospital on the standard plan has been built, and is now almost ready for occupation, in the open ground to the east of the lines. The building now being temporarily used as a hospital was the old Regimental stores; it is only a few degrees worse than the old hospital, and was only used as makeshift under pressure of circumstances. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the men is good, and though they are small as a body, they are active and intelligent. Influence of climate. 9. The climate is remarkably healthy and dry. Upwards of 1,000 young trees have been planted during the past year, 692 of which are alive and flourishing. Details of treated. 10. The number of admissions during the year were 352. Of these 172 were admissions from fever, being the largest item, as usual. There were 19 cases of dysentery, 7 of venereal, 6 of respiratory disease, and 2 of scurvy. Though only two cases of scurvy are reported, yet in many instances this disease showed itself as a secondary complication. Mortality and its causes. 11. The death-rate this year has been high when compared with the last three years. Three deaths occurred from ague and other complications which subsequently developed themselves, 1 from cholera, and 1 from tertiary syphilis Epidemics. 12. There were no epidemics in the Regiment during the year. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. The total number of primary vaccinations during the year were 53, all success- ful. There were 31 children on the rolls unvaccinated; many of these were too young and sickly or were in course of vacci- nation. Invaliding and its causes. 14. The number of invalids this year, 26, was again most unusually large, and this was due to the regiment being under expectation of active service, and hence getting rid of doubtful men that otherwise would have been kept on. Of these 11 were invalided as being above 62 years' service, 4 for chronic rheumatism, 2 for defective vision, 3 for debility and old age, 1 for femoral and 1 for scrotal hernia, 1 for tertiary syphilis, and one for varicose veins, other causes two. Two supernumerary Native officers were invalided and absorbed. Requirements and recommend- ations. 15. None, with the exception that iron latrine pans might be introduced in place of the present system, when funds will permit. Special observations, new ex- perience in treatment, sanita- tion, &c. 16. In the cholera case which occurred and was reported in July, the treatment followed was, large and repeated hypodermic injections of hydrate of chloral, with sedatives, as chloroform and spirit of æther, combined with simple astringents internally on the relaxation. theory promulgated by Surgeon Major Hall. Undoubtedly benefit was obtained by this, as there were no cramps at all, and both the purging and vomiting were sensibly checked. The patient died during the secondary fever. Further experiments on guinea worms were limited, as only one case of a syce came under observation. The man was placed on his face, care being taken that he could not see, and I then inserted the sting of a large scorpion into a piece of the worm which had been drawn out. On my forcibly compressing the poison bag he at once exclaimed that he felt a tickling or thrilling sensation in the calf of his leg, the locality of the worm, distinctly showing that the animal was sensibly affected by the poison. Next day a considerable portion of the worm came away.
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 19 Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General BEATTY. Both the sanitary condition and conservancy arrangements of the lines were excellent at the time of my inspection on the 3rd of December 1878. The pernicious practice of depositing night-soil in the dry bed of the river in which melons are cultivated, has been prohibited. During the past year several hundreds of trees have been planted between and surrounding the lines, which in the course of a few years will add materially to the comfort of the men. Since last report, new cells have replaced the old ill-constructed ones, and a new guard room has been built on the site of the old hospital. A new hospital, on the standard plan, has also been erected, and is now nearly ready for occupation. The sick were most carefully looked after by Surgeon Stewart, who takes much interest in his work, and in the management of his hospital generally. His remarks on the treatment of guinea worm by the injection of scorpion poison are of interest. H. M.20 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food and clothing. 5. The food supply has been a little better than in the preceding year, though the price is still kept almost to the same rate as mentioned in last year's report. The clothing is the same, therefore it is not necessary to repeat its description. Duties, exercise and amuse- ments, their effects on health. 6. In the report of the preceding year the duties of the Sappers were said to be heavy. At present there are about 55 men of the 11th Regiment N. I. located here for duties in the Kirkee Cantonment, which lightens the Sappers' work to some extent. There is a gymnasium, and a European Non-Commissioned Officer is told off to instruct the men in gymnastic exercise. The time of the men might also be well employed in gardening in the vicinity of their lines, if some kind of inducement were held out to them. Hospital and its immediate surroundings, present condition and otherwise. 7. A description of the hospital having been fully given in the reports of previous years, I consider it unnecessary to repeat it here. The objec- tionable system of clay washing the floors of the hospital, so frequently condemned in former reports, is still practised. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the men who went on field service with the Malta expedition suffered considerably, and on their return from Cyprus many were invalided. Of those who remained at home the general health showed no improvement on that of the previous year. Several cases of the admissions from fever have exhibited enlargement of the spleen and a great number of children have suffered from affections of the spleen. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The proximity of the lines to the sloping banks of the river, and the incomplete drainage for carrying off the surplus and waste water from the tanks, as well as the want of surface drainage for carrying away the storm water, have in my opinion an unfavourable influence on health. Details of treated. 10. The number of admissions were 1279, of these 684 were from ague, being more than 50 per cent. of the total admissions, 59 from lung diseases, 32 from diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 21 Intermittent fever was the prevailing disease. Latterly most of the cases were treated with emetics of ipecacuanha and tartarized antimony, followed by decoction of nim bark, and the preparations of cinchona only given in severe cases. The large numbers in hospital from April to October may be accounted for by the old and sickly men being left behind when the two companies proceeded to Malta. The best and strongest men were selected for what at that time was considered to be field service. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General BEATTY. My annual inspection was made on the 3rd November 1878, when only two companies were present, the remainder being absent on duty. The fears entertained by Surgeon Major Niven (the officer formerly in medical charge) in regard to the proximity of' the lines to the river banks, and incomplete drainage, acting unfavourably on the men22 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. left Vingorla on the 28th November and arrived at Ahmedabad on the 2nd and 3rd Decem- ber. The two detachments, consisting of five companies, composed the head-quarters detachment which left Ahmedabad on the 9th December, reaching Deesa on the 18th idem and Pallee on the 1st January, and finally arriving at Nusseerabad on the 14th January 1879. The roads were very heavy, the soil sandy, the drinking water more or less brackish; the food supply in most places limited in quantity and inferior in quality, and the weather extremely cold, the temperature ranging frequently in the morning between 34° and 50° F. In consequence of which, towards the latter part of the march several men took ill with fever and pneumonic affections, of whom two died on the line of march and four in the hospital at Nusseerabad, where they were sent by rail; but these casualties having occurred in January 1879, are not included in the accompanying returns. The last detachment, consist- ing of three companies, left Vingorla on the 9th December, and following the same route via Bombay, Ahmedabad, Deesa, Sirolee, and Pallee, reached Nusseerabad on the 25th January 1879. The second detachment left one native officer sick at the Marine Battalion Hospital, Bombay, and one havildar at Ahmedabad. The third detachment left five sick at Ahmedabad (one of whom died subsequently) and eleven at Deesa, for treatment, the men being unable to march, making in all eighteen sick left behind for treatment and seven deaths. On the whole, the long march, in consequence of the great privations to which the men had been subjected, has not had the same salutary effect on the men's health as short marches generally have. The head-quarters detachment were in tents for two months and three days, while the last detachment were two months and fourteen days. The sanitary arrangements were carried out as satisfactorily as possible. Surgeon Bull came in charge of the last detach- ment, which he joined on the 19th December. The lines and their surround- ings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. In my last annual report I had the honour to notice (at page 39 of the Medical and Sanitary Report of the Native Army of Bombay for 1877) that a good portion of the ground between the lines and the Khanapur road used for rice cultivation was under water for several months during the monsoon, and to this cause a good deal of the malarious fever may be attributed. In consequence of a bund having been built since across this piece of low ground close to the Khanapur road, the rain water reached this year quite up to the foundation of the latrines, and this interfered with the drainage from the lines, causing thereby the floors of a good many of the huts to be damp, and increased the number of fever cases, as will be seen under para. 10. But on the sluice being opened, with the subsidence of water, the fever cases also went down. Conservancy. 3. The latrines have been repaired. Water supply. 4. Good; same as last year. Food. 5. The supply has improved although a good deal of the grain was damaged. by an untimely fall of rain last year before the harvest was in. Duties, exercise, amusements; their effect on health. 6. Same as last year. The men had on an average 4 4/5 nights in bed, and their duties, exercises and amusements had on the whole a salutary effect upon the men's health. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital and its surroundings have been very clean. The latrines were put into repair. In consequence of the large number a cases treated in hospital, the excess over 20 patients for whom there is accommodation in the ward had to be treated in the verandah when fever was prevailing. General health and physique. 8. In consequence of an improvement in the grain supply, the health of the men improved considerably during the latter part of the year's stay in Belgaum, and there was very little scurvy visible among them, which they had contracted in Aden. Influences of climate or local circumstances. 9. This year there was an unusually heavy fall of rain, amounting to 55.85 inches up to 11th November, in consequence of which there has been a good deal of fever both in Belgaum and the surrounding dis- tricts. There was slight cholera towards the early part of the year only, but it completely disappeared after the seasonable fall of rain. Details of treated. 10. From 1st January to 31st October, for a period of ten months while the Regiment was stationed in Belgaum, there were 376 admissions, and with the 15 remained from last year's returns, there were altogether 391 treated. In November and December there were 75 admissions in the head-quarters hospital and 57 in the detachment hospital; so that in all there were 523 treated against 375
23 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. of last year. There were 175 admissions for fever during the ten months in Belgaum and 54 during the last two mouths while the Regiment was marching; in all 229 cases or nearly 50 per cent. of total admissions. Diarrh24 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.25 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. The disproportionately large number of cases of "ague" treated during the year was caused by the prevalence of this disease among the left wing at Sholapur. The increase of "syphilis " on the previous year, an increase of 30 cases, is also due to the large number of admissions for " primary syphilis" at the same station. One case of pyæmia occurred, following abscess due to guinea worm. Mortality and its causes. 11. Nine deaths occurred during the year in Hospital and four more are reported while on sick leave and furlough. The deaths were caused by second- ary syphilis, remittent and intermittent fevers, encephaloid cancer, anæmia, and pyæmia. Epidemic. 12. No epidemic occurred in the regiment during the year, though malarial fever assumed an almost epidemic from among the left wing at Sholapur. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Vaccination and re-vaccination were carried out in a very much more efficient manner than during the previous year. An increase of 11 primary vaccinations and total increase of 42 re-vaccinations during the year26 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movement. 1. The head-quarters of the Rifles were stationed at Satara until the 14th November 1878, on which date they moved out and began the march on poona via Nagwari, Bhunj, Yellow, Wickvi, and Khed. The sites of these live camps were well selected. On the march itself the general health of the men improved, and comparatively few fell out for whom it was necessary to procure carriage on account of foot soreness arising from badly fitting boots. The Regiment, which for five years had been broken up in consequence of furnishing detachments of two companies each to Bombay and Asirgarh, re-assembled in Poona in its entire strength on the 19th November 1878. Lines and their surroundings. 2. The lines erected on the standard plan have their history inscribed in English and Marathi on a marble slab built into the east wall of the quarter-guard. The inscription runs thus:27 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. paratively moderate rates. The price of grain and compensation on account of dearness of provisions were much higher than in Poona. The average amount of grain compensation in Satara for 10 months was Rupees 6-15-0, and in Poona for the year Rupees 3-12-0. Com- pensation is an evil that should be eradicated from the native army. A fixed rate of pay and the adoption of a system of rations which did not excite caste prejudice, would without doubt improve the efficiency of the sepoy, who too often starves himself on compensation, with the view of saving every rupee of his monthly stipend. These misers are the men who most frequently come on the sick list, and whose cases are benefited by diet rather than medicine. The clothing of the Regiment remains unaltered. The uniform of rifle green is, more suitable for a temperate than tropical region. It was stated last year that sepoys when off duty donned native attire but wore no under clothing. This is still the case. On duty however the native dress is worn under their uniform, an arrangement which strikes one as being exceedingly slovenly and indicative of the sepoy's want of the sense of comfort. Sepoys with few exceptions wear no stockings. As a substitute on the march some of them wrap rags round their feet, which answers well and prevents chafing and blisters. The Kilmannock cap now in wear gives the men a smart appearance on parade, and the red pugrie of their undress does not misbecome the Asiatic countenance. The new helmet of the European officers is a great improvement on the one condemned in last year's report, as it is intrinsically lighter and more shapely. By removing the cover of invisible green, the ordinary Regulation helmet appears, the only difference being that the chin chain and spike are bronzed and the pugrie a myrtle green. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ment; their effect on health. 6. The routine duties of the regiment were a little heavier in Satara than Poona. judging by the average number of nights in bed, which were respectively 7 1/6 and 8 1/8. At either station these duties were not harassing to the men, and do not appear to have influenced the general health unfavourably. Visiting the bazar excepted, sepoys as a rule do not spontaneously take constitutional exercise. There was no talimkhana when the Regiment arrived in Poona, but one is now in contemplation. In Satara the talimlkhana was in great request, and gymnastic feats were skilfully accomplished by many of the recruits and young men of the Regiment, some of whom distinguished themselves by carrying off prizes at the soldiers' sports which take Place annually in Satara. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The distance between the hospital and lines. 1.150 yards. is inconveniently great. The site selected for the new hospital will remedy this evil. The present establishment (originally intended for medical stores) has ample accommodation for the sick of the Regiment under ordinary circumstances. There are two wards of un- equal size divided by the dispensary, which. is also used as an office. The ventilation and lighting are very good. The out-houses are in fair order. The compound in front of the hospital is laid out as a garden, which with little trouble might be turned to good account, by the cultivation of flowers and vegetables. The desiderata of the hospital are three: 1st, a detached or separate ward for contagious diseases; 2nd, a dead-house for post mortem examinations; and 3rd, the direct service of water from the Kurruckvasla canal. On the arrival of the Regiment in Poona, the dry earth system of conservancy was introduced in the hospital latrines, and works well. It seems unnecessary to say more regarding the hospital and its surroundings, as these topics have been discussed in many previous annual reports. General health and physique. 8. When the Bombay and Asirghar detachments were recalled, and the Regiment assembled n Poona on the 19th November 1878 in its full strength. the general health of the men was reported good. Of course there was with increase of strength an increased number of sick. The increase of strength rose from 386 to 672, and the daily average number of sick for the week ending 15th November rose from 4.1 to 17.7 in the succeeding one. The Bombay Detachment furnished the larger number of admissions to hospital, chiefly due to ague, complicated with bronchitis. In the remarks for the week ending 28th December, it was stated that the health of the men had improved since coming to Poona. During the first six months of the year in Satara the health of the men was good. In July it was only fairly good. In August the standard of health was lowered in consequence, it is believed, of the insanitary state of the lines. In September there was no improvement. As a result, the hospital was overcrowded, and it was found necessary to pitch tents for the accommodation of some of the sick. Cold and damp in the miserable quarters of the men accounted for much of the sickness which then prevailed. There is no doubt that the goodness of the Satara climate Was influenced unfavourably, and the health of the men injured by compelling them to live in huts which are not fit for human dwellings. They began to improve at the end of October, and in November and December the weekly reports were more satisfactory. Regarding the physique of the men, the height, weight, and chest measurements were carefully noted. The average height of the privates is 5 feet 6 1/2
28 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. inches. The tallest man in the ranks measures 6 feet 3 inches and the shortest 5 feet 4 inches. The average weight of the men is lbs. 123.3. The heaviest man weighs 216 lbs. and the lightest 98 lbs. It will thus be seen that the general physique is good, and if I mistake not, above the average of other Regiments. In the event of active service for which the rifles are well fitted, 30, or 40 men would have to be eliminated from the ranks on the score of age or physical disability. Influence of climate. 9. The climate of Satara and Poona are not dissimilar. In the year under review the rainfall at both stations was almost identical in amount, as may be seen by referring to para. 4, and the mean annual tempera- ture I believe differs but little. In a climate like that of Satara, the general health would be greatly improved if better quarters were provided for the sepoys. In regard to these, our men benefitted immensely by the change to Poona. Details of treated. 10. Admissions to hospital 850, with 32 that remained, give a total of 882 treated. 823 were discharged. cured, 10 died, 21 remained in. hospital at the close of the year, 25 Proceeded on sick certificate, 3 were discharged, one with a gratuity and two whose disease was changed on re-admission. Of the 882 cases treated, admissions from ague, 502, exceeded those from all other causes, and are 92 in excess of the numbers under treatment for this disease in the previous year. Fever therefore impaired the general health more than all other maladies combined, and yet its power in a station like Satara would be felt but little, if our sepoys were properly housed. Although the cases treated were numerous, it is satisfactory to record no deaths under this head. There were only two admissions from remittent fever. In the list of general diseases, a case of chicken-pox, and two admissions for measles, are reported from Bombay and Asir- ghar. Four cases of mumps occurred. Admissions from chronic rheumatism and lumbago numbered respectively 29 and 4. Twelve from syphilis (primary 10 and secondary 2), bronchitis 13, and pneumonia 4, were the chief admissions in the list of respiratory diseases. Eighty-five admissions occur in diseases of the digestive system. Dysentery fur- nished 30 and diarrhoea 25 cases. Guinea-worm 13 in diseases of the cellular tissue, boils 32 in affections of the cutaneous system, and contusions 56 in the list of injuries, are somewhat numerous. The residue of the diseases which appears in the return calls for no special comment. Mortality and its causes. 11. Of the 882 patients under treatment during the year, 10 died in hospital, from the following causes:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 29 sion, rallied under the treatment for a time, but ultimately succumbed. The other, who was similarly treated, made a good recovery. Injection in the case of the women and children was not resorted to. The experiment however was not confined to the sepoys of the Regi- ment who were attacked, but was repeated on some patients in the civil hospital, and, as I think, with not unfavourable results. I believe that the successful treatment of cholera will be found sooner or later in the use of remedies which will prevent the arrest of the urinary secretion. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General T. B. BEATTY. My annual inspection was made on the 26th November 1878. The lines, which are exceptionally good, have now been occupied since May 1877, and are found to meet, as regards accommodation, ventilation, and drainage, all requirements for Native Troops. The defective latrine conservancy referred to by the Medical Officer should be improved through communication with the Officer Commanding the Regiment, to whom the question has been referred. The water supply is perfect and requires no remark.The general health of the Regiment improved by the change from Satara to Poona. At the former station, during the months of August and September, the men suffered severely from the effects of fever produced and aggravated in a great degree by their being compelled to live in huts Which Surgeon Major Ross has very properly described as "not fit human dwellings." The remarks of the Medical Officer in respect to doing away with compensation on account of dearness of provisions, under the head of food and clothing, are worthy of note. Similar views are, I am aware, held by the Medical Officer of the 11th Regiment N. I., who attributed in a great measure, to voluntary starvation, the inefficient condition of the men of the Regiment on its arrival at Poona from Bhuj. The books and instruments were in admirable order, and the diaries of cases carefully kept. The entire hospital management showed that great care had been exercised on the part of the medical officer in charge and his subordinates. H. M.30 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The lines and their surround- ings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines consist for the most part of open barrack rooms with a cookhouse and latrine at the back of each. Number of blocks of pendals 8. Aspect S. W., central street 180 feet broad, side street 50 feet. Height of plinth unequal, even in the same pendal, by nature of the ground. Roof is composed of rafters, bamboos, whole and split, date matting, and mud daubing. Conservancy. 3. There are eight latrines to the rear of the lines. From companies A and B they are respectively 145 and 275 feet off. Distance from other com- panies 226 and 406 feet. The filth is carried away by bhungees to a distance of about 1½ miles. There are receptacles for bathing water, which are emptied into the filth cart. There are bathing places in the huts of married men. The conservancy of the lines is daily attended to by a Native officer, and is inspected once by a European officer. There are eight sweepers, paid partly by Government, and one filth cart. The Go- vernment allow for the sweepers 48 Rupees, and grain compensation as for public followers is paid to each. The Regimental cess is half an anna per mensem for each man, fighting men, and followers. The cart driver is allowed a filth cart, but he supplies bullocks and other necessaries. His pay is 22 Rupees monthly, without compensation for dearness of grain. Water supply. 4. The water supply is abundant, by underground stream. No analysis known. Water is drawn by hand with leathern buckets or jars of earth or metal; distribution is by mussuck or puckal. The well is open, and percolation, lateral, without doubt takes place from waste of waters of bathers and surface drainage during the rain. 5. The clothing is good and sufficient for rains and cold weather, but during the hot weather there should be some regulation permitting of loose white clothing being worn, and that those employed as orderlies be not required to carry coat or pouch (cartouche box). The food is from a large market, so the men have an ample choice for variety and price. General health and physique. 6. The health of the Regiment has been fair; the men are over the average in physique, but as a rule the pay is insufficient, for those who have families, to provide them with a proper amount of nutritive food. Ailments commonly the result of under feeding are frequent amongst the men, who often crowd the hospital. To maintain the physique and proper strength of the men, it is necessary they should consume a certain quantity of wholesome food. To ensure this, a number of caste messes should be maintained for the unmarried men. Influence of climate or local circumstances. 7. The climate here is so different to that of the Deccan, that of course the men will suffer somewhat from chills by the damp moist atmosphere of the sea. There has been in 1878 a large fall of rain for Sind, and therefore sooner or later there is sure to be an epidemic of fever or cholera. From what I can learn, the water here is less brackish, and wells more numerous. The increase of water has produced more malaria, as is also the case in Bombay, Poona and other native towns into which water has been introduced, and to me the solution of the problem is obvious, because there is no drainage system to carry off waste water. 629 cases of ague are entered as having been treated during the year, against 553 in 1877 and 779 in 1876. There were 13 cases of rheumatism. Syphilis is not a fruitful source of disease, thanks to Government for starting the lock hospitals, which if worked properly ought to reduce that disease to a minimum. During the year under review there have been 12 cases of syphilis and 4 of gonorrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 31 Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1875 Poona 200.1 4.1 0.4 1876 Do. 191.6 4.1 0.2 1877 Do. 155.7 3.8 0.9 1878 Average 182.5 4.0 0.5 Poona 226.0 6.2 1.3 Locality and movements. 1. The Regiment was stationed at Poona until the 6th Nevember, when the head- quarters and 427 rank and file marched for Satara, about 70 miles distant, which it reached on the 13th of that month having made it in seven marches and one halt, made on the 10th (Sunday), to give the men and families a rest. Nothing particular occurred during the march. On the 31st October a detachment of one officer and 139 rank and file went to Bombay for garrison duty, and on the 2nd November a detachment of one officer and 131 rank and file left Poona for duty at Asirgarh fort. Lines and surroundings. 2. The lines at this station are not at all good, as has been reported by the medical officers in charge of the Troops stationed here for some years back. They are not built of brick and stone, but of wattle and clay, and are not at all in a good state of repair. New lines for a full Regiment are I believe sanctioned by Government, and will be built on a site near the present ones, which is a very good one. The lines are to be built by the Public Works Department and not by the sepoys of the Regiment, as has hitherto been the case. The close proximity of the Sadder Bazaar to the lines is in every way objectionable, and the new ones will be situated farther away. The huts have an average of 850 cubic feet inside, which is rather small. The drainage is natural, and fair of its kind when properly looked after. Gutters run down the sides and middle of the streets to carry off the storm water and sullage from the bathing places; but as the gutters are not lined with brick or stone, the ground gets saturated. The huts have no verandahs and no proper bathing places. There are no cells for keeping pri- soners in; at present the Quarter Guard room is used for that purpose. There is no regi- mental bazaar for supplying food, and the men get supplies from the city and Sudder Bazaar. Conservancy. 3. The lines are kept as clean as possible, under the superintendence of the Quarter Master. The latrines are on the trench system, but are not in very good repair. There is one for the males and one for females, of four or five seats each, and they are screened by bamboo matting on wooden poles; they are much too small for the number of people who have to use them, and the consequence is that a great many go to the fields for the purposes of nature. The trenches are looked after by the Regimental sweepers, and the night-soil is buried in pits dug near the trenches. New and larger latrines are much required, which should be built on a better system than the present ones. Water supply. 4. The water is taken from wells and a nullah which runs near the lines; it is of fair quality, according to an analysis made a year or two ago, but contains carbonate of lime, and also sometimes vegetable matter. Some of the wells contain water which is too brackish for drinking purposes, and the sepoys only use it for washing. The water would be the better of being boiled and filtered before drinking. The wells dry up considerably during the hot weather, and water has sometimes to be brought from the river Yenna, about a mile off. A better supply of water is much needed for the city and camp, and a scheme for bringing it in from a distance is under consideration. Food and clothing. 5. Food has been dear this last year or two on account of the want of rain, and still continues high in price, though plenty is to be got in the bazaars. Rates at this station are much the same as at Poona; some articles are dearer, as wood, wheaten flour, sugar, &c.; and others as rice, ghee, mutton, much the same as at other places. No change has been made in the clothing of the sepoy since last report; the boots still prove a cause of many admissions on the sick list, from
32 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. causing shoe bites. Socks might do something to prevent sore feet if the men could be got to wear them regularly. English-made boots have been got for this regiment, but whether they will fit better than native-made ones remains to be seen. Warm under clothing in the cold weather would also do something to prevent the men suffering from bronchial affections and rheumatism. Duties, exercises, amuse- ments. 6. The duties are of the usual kind33 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. dyspepsia 21, all discharged; boils 30, and 27 discharged; itch 25, and 21 discharged; con- junctivitis of a mild character 14; muscular rheumatism 14; chronic rheumatism 21, and 20 discharged; primary syphilis 17, and 14 discharged. Of acute hepatitis 5 cases, and 4 dis- charged; burns and scalds 6, which were of a mild character and all discharged. Only 1 case of cholera occurred, which was fatal. The average number of cases of ague in the months of June, July, and August, was about 100 under treatment for each month. The average daily number of sick was 37.2, against 24.3 for the year 1877. On many occasions the sick list rose as high as 58 or 60. The rate per cent. of admissions to average strength was 226.0, the rate per cent. of daily sick to average strength 6.4, and the rate per cent. of deaths in hospital to average strength 1.3. Mortality and its causes. 11. The number of deaths which took place was 8; of which 4 were caused by remittent fever, 3 from acute and chronic bronchitis, and 1 from cholera. Epidemics 12. There has been no epidemic in the regiment during the year. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. This has been attended to as much as possible, a good many of the families left the regiment and went to their villages for a time, and on this account a smaller number of children are shown on the list; 30 being the number successfully done in the course of the year. Invaliding and its causes. 14. The total number invalided for discharge was 34. The causes were, general debility 8, ague and worn out 9, ague and rheumatism 1, chronic bronchitis 2, palpitation and worn out 5, inguinal hernia 2, bronchial catarrh 2, chronic rheumatism 2, defective eyesight 2, and deafness Twenty-three men were discharged with gratuity. Requirements and recommend- ations. 15. As will be seen from what has been previously stated, the general condition of the lines, hospital, and the buildings connected therewith, new ones are much required, and have, I believe, been sanctioned for a full Regiment, instead of a strong wing as hitherto; they are to be built by the Public Works Department and not by the men of the regiment, as has been the case previously. A new hospital is also much required, as the present building is not at all suitable in many ways, as has often been reported. Special observations. 16. Nothing particular under this head more than has been already stated. The usual. class of diseases has been under treatment. Quinidine and cinchonidine have been used in the treatment of the greater number of cases of ague, but except in the very mild cases, it is not to be compared with quinine, which in many cases has ultimately to be depended on. inspection by Deputy Surgeon General BEATTY. The hospital and lines were frequently inspected during the time the regiment was located at Poona, and again at Satara on the 6th March 1879. The lines occupied by the Regiment at the latter station are extremely bad, and have repeatedly been reported as unfit for the sepoys to live in. The huts should be removed and replaced by new ones, having plinths and better ventilation. The old site being on an elevation is unobjectionable, and possesses excellent natural drainage. Conservancy is carefully attended to, and the latrines, which are on the trench system, are kept clean. Water supply is always deficient in the hot season. The general health of the regiment has been fair, but the physique of many of the men in the regiment is below the usual standard. The arrangements for hospital accommo- dation are bad, what is used for the purpose being a small, hired, ill ventilated building in the middle of the Sudder Bazaar. A new hospital is absolutely necessary. The present building is wholly unfitted for the accommodation of sick, and were an epidemic to occur, the medical officer would have no place to treat them. The hospital books and records were very carefully kept. H. M.'s 12th Regiment N. I. DHARWAR.34 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1875 Dharwar 52.9 2.7 0.5 1876 Do. 47.1 2.1 0.6 1877 Do. 80.3 2.2 0.9 Average 60.1 2.3 0.7 1878 Dharwar 100.8 2.6 1.1 Location and movement. 1. The regiment was stationary up to December, when it received orders to march to Rujkot; three companies leaving on 10th December and the head-quarters on the 24th. One detachment, consisting of 54 men, was sent on duty to Dhopdall near Gokak to guard some prisoners there. It returned to head-quarters on the 26th June 1878. The lines and their surround- ings. 2. The lines have been fully described in previous reports. They were clean and well kept, the surface drains being in good repair. The houses are well ventilated and have a small garden in front of each, with a sufficient number of trees planted to absorb any stagnant water. The regimental bazar, situated to the rear of the lines, has been satisfactory in every respect, and was kept in a proper sanitary condition. Conservancy. 3. The trench system was the one in use, and was found to answer very well. The improvements introduced last year have been found of great benefit. Crops of vegetables were grown over the site of the latrines. The working of the establishment has been carefully attended to. Water supply. 4. The water supply is ample. It is obtained from four wells, the Purwarees having one, the Hindoos and Mussulmans a second, a third being prin- cipally used by the Hospital Establishment and the European Officers. The water from all the wells is good and abundant with the exception of the one built last year near the hospital, which, in consequence of its not being sufficiently deep, runs dry in the hot season. Food and clothing. 5. Grain food was abundant but dear, vegetables plentiful and cheap. The highest grain compensation was in the month of July, when it reached Rs. 6-2-7, and the lowest in the month of December, when it was Rs. 1-15-10. The clothing of the men seems to be quite sufficient. Duties, exercises, and amuse- ments; their effect. 6. The duties of the men do not seem to be too heavy. The average consecutive nights in bed were 7¾ for the year. There is a good gymnasium which they resort to. They have also a very good workshop where, when not otherwise employed, they are occupied at tailoring, boot making, and carpentry, &c. For some years past they have obtained prizes at the exhibition held in Poona. Hospital and its immediate surroundings. 7. The hospital has been fully described in previous reports. It has been kept clean and neat, and its conservancy arrangements have been very carefully carried out. The well that was made near the hospital last year is found not to be sufficiently deep, and consequently does not yield a proper amount of water for the hospital establishment. This has been brought to the notice of the Executive Engineer, and I believe steps are being taken to have it deepened. General health and physique. 8. During the year the general health of the men has been very fair. Their physical condition is good. Notwithstanding the number of Mahrattas, Purwarries, Mochies, &c. in the regiment, I believe it can compare very favourably with any other in the Bombay Presidency. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. There is a very marked increase in the number of admissions into hospital as compared with the year previous. 708 cases altogether were admitted, compared with 482 for 1877. This I think is accounted for by the dearness and insufficiency of food owing to the famine, as well as to the variableness of the weather.
35 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Details of treated. 10. Out of 708 cases admitted, 333 were for quotidian ague, 42 for chronic rheumatism, 35 for syphilis, and 82 for injuries, principally contusions of the lower extremities. Diseases of the digestive system gave 53 admissions, 27 of the number being for dysentery, and 6 for diarrh36 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Detachments during 1878. Place. Strength. Period From To Yeola/> 18 1st January 24th May. Niphad 18 Do. Do Sinuare 18 Do. 1st June. Nandgaon 18 1st February 24th May. Sattana 18 15th March Do. Chandward 20 29th do Do. The head quarters and right wing marched from Malegaon on 21st November 1878, en route to Mhow. The march had no special effect on the health of the men, the camps were good, and healthy, and water and provisions good and plentiful. Twenty-one shoe bites occurred, and two deaths, one from fatty heart in a very fat elderly man, who was not equal to the exertion of marching; he died suddenly and unexpectedly, not having previously complained. The other was from pneumonia supervening on ague in a delicate badly nourished recruit. The weather was unusually hot during the greater portion of the march, the last few days only being somewhat cold. Lines and their surroundings. 2. These have been fully described previously, and no alterations have been made during the year under consideration. The lines were kept in a good state of repair, and cleanliness was carefully attended to. The bazaar, which is close to the lines, was also kept clean; there was some over-crowd- ing, but this produced no ill effects. Conservancy. 3. Trench latrines were used, and were most satisfactory. When they were closed up, the ground over them was culti- vated, and new trenches dug close by. Water supply. 4. Previous to the monsoon the supply of drinking water in the wells was small but sufficient, as a sentry was placed over each well to prevent its being used for bathing or washing, for which purposes water was available in the river Moosum, which flows close to the lines. The drinking water is of good quality. Food. 5. Food was of fair quality though dear and somewhat scarce on account of the famine, until after the monsoon, when it became cheaper. This had no appreciable effect, on the health of the regiment, but I think it is most probable that married sepoys must have deteriorated in strength and energy for want of sufficient food, as some of these sepoys have several children to provide for. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6.These consisted of the usual routine duties of a cantonment, and had no special effect on the health of the sepoys. There is, a good well-conducted gymnasium attached to the regiment, where the sepoys are taught various exercises, and all recruits have to go through a course. Hospital and its immediate surroundings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. These have previously been described. They were kept ingood repair, and clean. The hospital is too small for a regiment, and if there was much sickness there would not be room for the sick. Two new rooms have been built for 1st and 2nd Class Hospital Assistants, and, four for 2nd class servants, also a new guard room is in course of construction. General health and physique. 8. The general health and physique of the regiment was good. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The heavy monsoon, viz. 32 inches and 56 cents, seems to have caused an increase in ague, as 258 cases were treated, against 202 in 1877. No other special effect was observed. Details of treated. 10. The total number of cases admitted during the year was 703, against 662 in the previous year, showing an increase of 41 over 1877. The chief diseases were the following, arranged in the order of their frequency. ague258,blisters of the feet47,contusion lower extremities 40,venereal diseases
37 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 38 (of which 31 were syphilis primary and 7 gonorrh38 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Lines and their surroundings. 2. The lines occupied by the left wing, the huts are clean and are in excellent sanitary condition, and in good repair. The sanitary condition of the bazaar is well looked after. Conservancy. 3. The trench system of latrines is in use, and works most satisfactorily. One sweeper was left with the left wing hospital after the departure of head-quarters. Water supply. 4. The supply of water is generally sufficient and of good quality. General health and physique. 5. The general health and physique of the wing was good. Details of treated. 6. The total number of cases treated from 21st November 1878 to 31st december 1878 is 39. The chief diseases were the following, arranged in the order of their frequency:39 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Duties, exercises, and amuse- ments. 6. Ordinary parades and guards at head - quarters, and occasional escort in charge of treasure, commissariat stores, &c. The amusements of the men are racing, wrestling, gymnastics, jumping and single stick. A number of the younger men have taken kindly to cricket. The duties during the past year have had no prejudicial effect on the health of the men, and the exercises in which they voluntarily engage have done much to improve their physique. Hospital and its surroundings. 7. The principal drawbacks to the hospital, which have been often described, are40 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Water-supply. 4. Water-supply is good and sufficient, and is derived from the river close by, there being no wells in the vicinity of the lines. Food and clothing. 5.Food at -present is good, abundant and cheap, but during the rains it was not so cheap. The present prices are:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 41 Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1875 Ahmednagar 85.0 2.4 0.3 1876 Do. 67.8 3.3 0.7 1877 Do. 101.3 2.9 1.2 Average 84.7 2.9 0.7 1878 Ahmednagar 124.3 3.5 2.2 Location. 1. The whole regiment was at Ahmednagar (where it had been stationary for the previous two years,) until June, when the lett wing was detach- ed to Poona. This wing remained in Poona until the 23rd November, when it moved by rail to Ahmedabad, arriving on the 26th. The head quarters left Ahmednagar on the 16th December and arrived on the 19th. The regiment occupies the lines previously tenanted by the 1st Grenadiers. Lines. 2. The lines at Ahmednagar were in a fair state of repair and clean and well drained. Conservancy. 3.The conservancy of the lines was considered fair. The regimental latrines well situated and kept clean, but were complained of by the men as too far from the lines (280 -yards). Men were often found polluting the ground in front of their huts, and in the immediate neighbourhood of the hos- pital and lines, and the erection of urinals in convenient places was recommended to obviate this. The hospital latrine was kept clean. Dry earth was used, but the system could not be perfectly carried out, no means of separating the urine and f42 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Details of treated. 10. The number of admissions for the whole regiment during the year was 853; the deaths 16. These numbers contrast unfavourably with those of the previous year, when the total of sick was 593, and the deaths 7. Of the deaths during the past year however 8 were accidental; if these be omitted, the percentage of deaths from sickness is less than shown in 1877. At the head-quarters at Ahmednagar the cases treated were reported to be generally of no special interest; they consisted chiefly of intermittent fever and a few of fever of a remit- tent type. One of the latter died, and post-mortem examination disclosed nothing characteristic of typhoid. Venereal affections were noted to be rather prevalent. Sixteen rank and file and 6 followers were badly burned by a fire which occurred in a theatre in May. Of these 8 men and 5 followers died from shock and the extent of their injuries; the remainder recovered, but the cicatrices caused one sepoy of 32 years' service to be invalided. In the wing in Poona between the 1st June and 23rd November, out of an average strength of 200, there were 262 admissions into hospital, 193 of which were from intermittent fever. Dysentery also appears to have been somewhat prevalent there, 14 cases with one death having been returned under this head. A fatal case of cholera also occurred there in August. Some of the cases of intermittent fever appear to have been of an intractable nature; nine men having been sent on sick leave for this cause. The wing for some time during the rains encamped in tents near the gymkhana ground. Mortality. 11. Total number of deaths 16; 8 the result of a fire as above mentioned, 2 cholera (1 at Ahmednagar and 1 at Poona), 2 dysentery (1 also at each station), 1 remittent fever, 1 pneumonia, 1 from renal calculi (uræmia), and one death occurred on sick leave from anæmia. Epidemics. 12. There were no epidemic diseases. Vaccination. 13. Vaccination from arm to arm was maintained at the hospital throughout the year, all children born in the lines and the regimental bazaar being vaccinated at an average age of two months. New recruits whose marks were considered unsatisfactory were re-vaccinated. Invaliding. 14. Forty-one men were invalided. Of these 38 were Hindoos, and 3 Mahomedans; 11 were above 32 years in service, and 30 had served for above 20, and under 23 years. Requirements and recommend- ations. 15. The recommendations made in the previous year's report have not been carried out: they are still considered necessary. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General WYLLIE. Inspected January 24th, 1879. Arrived by wings in November and December last, from Poona and Ahmednagar; located in the lines lately vacated by the 1st Grenadiers, which are in satisfactory order, and afford better accommodation than average. Hospital suitable, ordinarily ample, but in need of repairs. There is no contagious ward here as elsewhere, a want that should be supplied, and one building of two rooms would answer for both native corps close as the hospitals are. I realized thorough efficiency in all the arrangements and details of this hospital, which has a much better establishment than usual, and am well satisfied with the careful treatment and attention bestowed on the sick.
43 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. NORTHERN DIVISION. Average Strength Present during the year 8,204 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength Present 5.0 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength Present 1.6 H. M.44 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY Epidemics. 11. At Deesa amongst the families and followers mild small-pox was prevalent in March,April, and May. Total admissions amounted to 22, as follows:45 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Location and movements. 1. Two squadrons constituted the bead-quarters at Neemuch. Another one goes to Nusseerabad and is changed every two years. The whole Regiment marched in four detachments for Deesa at the end of the year, where it arrived safely. The lines and their surround- ings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The system of building in those lines is, as usual, the abominable one of " back to back." Miserably small and low huts, court-yards with private latrines for high caste families (a very bad system); dunghills formed in consequence, on the flanks, where sweepings are thrown. All cesspools for bathing water, &c. have been ordered to be filled in and the water led to trees planted, at my own expense, on the system of Deputy Surgeon General Wylie, outside the court-yards (vide 3, conservancy). The latrines * are much too close to the wells. New ones are sanctioned (vide 4, water). The site of the lines is to east of cantonment. Number of blocks, 10. Aspect north and south. Width of central and cross streets as follows: one centre street 819 feet, four parallel ones 65 feet, and six of 21 feet width, not raised on plinths. Ventilation through tiled roof. There are great differences between the size of the different houses and court-yards. There no verandahs, but court-yards which measure, on an average, 12 by 11 feet, much too small. Conservancy. 3. Very insufficient. Filth is collected from the houses of married people and thrown into a maidan, but not all removed till long after noon. Private latrines still exist in married people's court-yards. All cesspools, which still remain, are to be opened up and filled in, after the cholera ceases. They are now not used, as the water, &c., is diverted to the trees outside. There were no funds available for planting these. I had to do it myself. Not nearly enough sweepers' carts nor bullocks are available. Since the old latrines were condemned and removed, two formerly frequented masonry ones (which are far too close to the wells) have been again used. I protested against this, and another large one at a proper distance has been sanc- tioned. When this is done, I recommend that the present ones (close to wells) be bricked up. In the meanwhile a matted enclosure is used by the soldiers. Water supply. 4. Good, but old latrines (masonry lately resumed for use), too close to the wells46 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The rainfall (viz. about 47 inches), though heavier than last year's, was not much above the average (about 35 inches). Nevertheless fever was prevalent, remarkably so in the other corps stationed here, but not quite so much in the cavalry, who are much further away from the tank. Thus every man in the Royal Artillery had fever without exception. Out of 329 cavalry soldiers, 292 only were attacked. Details of treated. 10. There were 449 admissions from fever. They were treated almost exclusively with 20 to 30 grains of quinine every morning. This I purchased, to supplement that allowed by Government. There were very few re-admissions, viz. 81 had the fever twice, 74 three times, and only 40 more than three times, out of 292 individuals attacked; the rest (97) were cured without a return of the disease. In the other regiments, although the cases were hardly more numerous, every man was re- admitted over and over again. The fever, as is usual in Neemuch, was not at all of a lethal type. It was worst during the rains, and was four times more frequent in its attacks than usual. Dysentery and lung diseases show no increase to speak of47 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY Special observations, new experiences in treatment,sanita- tion,&c. 16.The cinchona alkaloids were given to the grooms and followers generally, and in the form of pills seemed to cause less vomiting than in solution, and to be of some use in preventing returns of the fever; some- times they caused much nausea and vomiting and had to be laid aside, but the fever was cured in about one-half of these cases (followers). Nitrate of amyl inhalation succeeded in relieving symptoms in some cases, but utterly failed in my own person. With regard to the etiology of the fever various surmises can be made48 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Lines and their surroundings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines are built on the standard plan, they are clean, properly ventilated, roomy, and in excellent repair. The drainage is all surface, the bathing and refuse water from the huts passes through narrow channels, covered over with tiles, to the roots of trees which are planted and are flourishing close to each house. The ground around the lines is kept very clean and in good order. They are the most comfortable lines I have seen. Conservancy. 3. The native officers have latrines in their own huts, and in them the dry earth system is adopted; these private latrines are occasionally inspected and have always been found clean and in good order. Two stone built latrines, about 140 yards from the lines, are used49 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. An extraordinary heavy rainfall, the largest on record here, has, there is little doubt, been the great cause of the increased sickness in the corps. The civil population of the province also suffered most severely from a similar cause. Details of treated. 10.The admissions from all causes during the entire year under review amounted to 287, and if to this number be added 3 cases which remained on the 1st January 1878, the total treated will be 290, which compares most unfavourably with the previous year, in which the number treated was only 75. For the first eight months of the year the standard of health was very good, the register for that period showing only 69 admissions from all causes. Mortality. 11.Two deaths took place in hospital50 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1875 Poona 123.7 3.9 0.4 1876 Ahmedabad 124.1 4.2 1.5 1877 Do. 94.3 3.3 0.8 Average 114.0 3.8 0.9 1878 Ahmedabad 171.3 3.7 2.2 NOTE.51 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Location and movements. 1. The head-quarters of H. M.'s 6th Regiment N. I. arrived in Mhow from Aden on the 27th December 1877; the second detachment on the 21st January 1878; the third on the 17th February 1878; and the fourth on the 7th April 1878. The Right Half Battalion marched to Indore on the 13th May 1878, and has been located there since. The lines, &c. 2. There have been no changes during the year. The same defects are to be observed in them as before. They are built on a plain, the soil being blank " cotton_" and retentive of moisture. The streets run with north and south, and are therefore not ventilated properly by the prevailing wind. The huts are low, single tiled, and without plinths, and built of mud and sunburnt bricks, hence they are very damp during and after the rains, which circumstance predisposes the inmates to attacks of malarious fevers and chest affections. There are no windows at the back; there is no roof ventilation except through the crevices between tiles, and the door- way is not high enough; hence ventilation is defective. The cubic space is deficient. Most of the married men and some of the bachelors were induced by the Officer Commanding and by myself to lay out little gardens in front of the huts, in order to utilize the waste water. The rain water was carried off from near the huts down a slope on the streets, a gutter in the middle, and by which it was carried into the nuliahs. Conservancy. 3. The trench latrine system was in use from the beginning of the year up to the setting in of the rains. The ground is limited in extent and therefore likely soon to be injurious if not allowed rest. Urinals ought to be built near the huts. This suggestion was made to me by Deputy Surgeon General. Wyllie, and I entirely agree with him as to their utility. The permanent latrines have been in use since the rains. They were kept perfectly clean and dry earth was used for disinfec- tion. The night soil was carted away to a distance of about three miles and buried in trenches. The only drawback to these latrines is that they are too far from the lines. The native officers have separate latrines in rear of their huts, which were also kept clean. Water supply. 4 This was derived from three wells. The supply threatened to fall short of the demand during the hot weather, but the copious tall of rain we had removed all anxiety on that score. One of the three wells, which is used by "Mochees," is very near the latrines of the 13th Regiment N. I.; another, which is used by " Purwarees," is near the hospital latrine. Food and clothing. 5. Provisions were scarce and dear and vegetables particularly so. The men, coming. from Aden, where they were in the habit of getting Govern- ment rations in addition to their uav, felt this very much. even though compensation was allowed. Their children and dependents consumed the greater part of their pay. The recent order of Government not to allow more than a certain number of dependents in the lines, and to prohibit the pensioners from living in the lines, was a very wise one, and will no doubt benefit the sepoy considerably. Duties. 6. Duties consisted of parades, musketry instruction, drills, guards, &c., and in the months of April and May, tile-turning and hut repairing. There were no amusements of any kind, as the men had no time or inclination for them. Hospital building. 7. There were no changes made in this. Accommodation, ventilation and sanitary condition were excellent. The wards were very cold during the rains and the cold weather owing to excessive ventilation. White-washing, and hero and there sundry plastering to the walls and floor, were the only repairs done. The surroundings of the hospital were in a good sanitary condition. The hospital latrine was kept clean and disinfected by McDougal's powder and carbolic acid. The water supply for the hospital was good and abundant, and was derived from the best regimental well. The Hospital Assistant's quarters are not properly ventilated; otherwise they were in excellent condition. General health and physique. 8 and 9. The physique of the men could hardly be said to be good. Most of the men, though not positively ill, seemed to me to be anæmic, scorbutic and possessed of low vitality. Surgeon Major Rogers often remarked their feeble power of resisting the inroads of disease. I believe all this to be due to the combined result of the enervating effects of the climate of Aden, where they late- ly were stationed, and of the dearness of provisions here. Moreover, I respectfully submit it as my opinion, that for a regiment coming from Aden, the climate of Mhow, characterized as it is by dryness of air and excessive changes of temperature, is hardly well suited. Out of 32 men under fifteen years' service who volunteered for active service, 17 were rejected, principally because they had scorbutic taint, feeble hearts, and general debility, and presumed inability to stand the trying climate of the north; and only 15 were thought fit by a Special Medical Board assembled for the purpose of examining them. Most of the deaths that
52 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. occurred were not so much due to the severity of the disease as to the feeble power of resistance. Latterly, however, the Regiment has been fast improving in health, and I trust will soon reach the normal standard. Details of treated. 10. The diseases that furnished the greater number of admissions are53 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. variety and ran a mild course. Both cases recovered. One case of chicken-pox occurred in a private and ran its usual course to recovery. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. They were carefully and thoroughly done as far as possible. From the 1st January 1878 to 31st December 1878 there were54 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1875 Rajkot and Dwarka 105.9 2.8 1.4 1876 Do. do. 129.5 3.8 0.6 1877 Do. do. 71.8 2.5 1.2 Average 102.4 3.0 1.1 1878 Rajkot 193.3 4.9 1.5 Location and movements. 1. The Head-quarter Wing H. M.'s 7th Regiment N. I. has been at Rajkot for the past six years. A detachment consisting of 106 men left Rajkot for Bhuj to relieve H. M.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 55 both years was the prevailing disease. The number treated from this cause alone during the year under report exceeded that of the previous one by 942 cases. During July, August, September and October the admissions from ague numbered 29, 36, 90, and 266 respectively. Scurvy only furnished 6 admissions, while syphilis gave 14. Mortality and its causes. 11. Five deaths took place during the year at Raikot, two from cholera, two from diarrh56 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. 1. The head-quarters were stationed at Neemach throughout the year, several escort parties having been sent along the Nusseerabad and Mhow roads. The lines and their surround- ings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. Continue much the same as in former reports: they are kept clean and in good order, but are originally defective as to general construction, space, light, ventilation, and a total absence of plinths. These lines are however placed on a slight elevation favourable to general drainage, and there have been no water lodgments observed. Conservancy. 3. Remains as described in former reports. The lock up rooms and cells and Quarter Guard. Similar to last report, with exception of the two solitary cells which have been raised four feet. Lock up rooms are low and deficient in sanitary respects as to space, light, and proper ventilation, and found overheat- ed during the hot weather. Water supply. 4. Owing to a very indifferent rainfall in 1877 (18.68 inches), the supply was scarce during the first half but was abundant during the remainder of the year, the rainfall of 1878 having proved favourable and somewhat beyond the average. As previously mentioned, the wells throughout cantonment were deepened, others sunk, and temporary "bunds," with good effect, thrown across the lateral water nullahs skirting camp. Food and clothing. 5. Generally throughout the whole year the grain food supplies have been scarce and dear, and in many instances found of inferior quality, especially the rice, wheat, dhall, and ghee. Bajree was found dearer than wheat, and sometimes not even to be had. The scarcity of vegetable food has also been considerable, prices ranging quite beyond the sepoy's means. Potatoes for instance rose to 8 annas a seer and at times were not to be had; onions 3 to 4 annas a seer, and bhajee 4 to 8 annas a seer when procurable. The regimental garden, only lately established as described in former reports, has been found unequal to meet the emergency, owing in a great measure to excess of demands and the highly unfavourable season, though about 125 Rupees' worth of vegetables were sold to sepoys at considerably cheaper rates than those prevailing in the bazaar. The advantage of dieting the sepoy both when well in lines as well as when sick in hospital is again earnestly brought to notice. It is a well-known fact that many sepoys seriously suffer in health and physique by what may be called a slow process of semi-starvation, many denying themselves the common necessaries of life for the sake of supplying their relations or friends with monthly instalments from their small pittances of pay which are barely sufficient for their personal wants. This is a most serious evil and can only be checked through daily authoritative inspections (made by men of competent castes) of the diet and rations which sepoy should, like soldiers, daily receive, however " impracticable" the suggestion may at first appear. The clothing is the same as last report, in addition 1 pair of socks per man has as yet been supplied with a warm blanket to nearly all, and a " doputta" to 2 companies; the remainder will be distributed as they come to hand. I need scarcely say that this amount of clothing is inadequate to meet the demands and wants of this climate, and the want of warm flannel inside clothing is a fertile source of much fever and illness and invaliding. Duties, exercises and amuse- ment; their effects on health. 6. As in last report. As regards the duties generally these have been (as recom- mended) considerably curtailed owing to the general sickness and debility prevailing, especially after the monsoons, all which measures have contributed in sanitary respects towards the general health and well being of the Regiment. The average number of nights in bed has been as follows: Native officers 11 1/4, havildars 4 1/4, naiks and lance naiks 5 7/12, buglers 5 1/6, privates 6 1/6 total 6 1/5. This average however includes all men told off for the various duties of the regiment, such as bandsmen, tailors, shoemakers, book-binders, carpenters, armourers, schoolmasters, &c. Hospital and its immediate surroundings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. As last report. Owing to excess of sick, and in order to avoid as far as practicable overcrowding, the two hospital blocks as last year described were supplemented with a similar building adjoining (used as a school, tailoring, and band room) which was vacated and given over for the use of the hospital, in addition to which were two pall tents, the whole affording shelter for 250 sick; these latter " palls" however being found cold and uncomfortable, were soon returned as circumstances admitted. Owing to excess of sick (occasionally over 250), and the demand for cots exceeding the barrack supply, men were accommodated each with a thick dry grass bedding laid. on the flagged floors, which during the cold weather and with a scanty supply of clothing and bedding were found most serviceable and agreeable to the comforts and expectations of the men, the
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 57 generality ultimately preferring this arrangement to the cots themselves, which latter, with- out adequate bedding, appear uncomfortable to sepoys in the trying cold weather here. The infectious disease ward referred to in former reports has not yet been formed, but plans and estimates have gone in to Government. When required, one ward of the adjoining hospital block was used for this purpose, and in case of small-pox "unserviceable" tents and grass huts were used. A vacant building for a "dead house" has been altered by the addition of a few glazed windows, &c, and taken over during the year, and a hospital guard room on standard plan was built, and has been in use since April last, thus doing away with the former inconvenience of quartering the guard in the hospital verandah, an arrangement which in both sanitary and other respects was objectionable. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the Regiment has considerably suffered during the past try- ing malarious season, which, in addition to malarial disposition previously engendered both at this station and at Mehidpur, have contributed largely to flood the hospital especially during and after the recent mon- soons with a severe and most unusual sick list of malarious fevers (vide the table of sickness below). It is doubtful whether the Regiment will readily be in a fit state for active service for some time to come without a change to a more suitable climate, for it may be here added that out of about 70 men "volunteering" during the year for active service, about 51 per cent. were declared unfit by the Medical Board. Average height 5 feet 7¼ inches, average round the chest 34½ inches. The general physique is good, but there has been little room for improvement owing to the general indisposition and illness of the Regiment. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Owing to the general unhealthiness of the past year, the climate cannot be said to have exerted other than a most injurious effect on the general health, especially after the monsoon, when malarious fevers after the heavy rainfull were endemic and of a more or less severe and persistent form, attended with frequent recurrences (average about from three to four times in the same individual) leading on to various complications, gastric, hepatic, or splenic, and considerable general debility and anæmia, for which chiefly upwards of 30 men, in addition to 15 in first part of year, had during that unfavourable season to be sent away for change of air. This latter alternative has no doubt contributed much towards the decrease of mortality and the speedy reduction, in some notable degree, of our sick list and daily average number of sick which otherwise, it is feared, would have been much greater, had these constant sickly inmates of the hospital been detained there any longer. It may be added that though the number of invalids recommended for change was by no means on. a par strictly with actual medical requirements, but at the suggestion of the Officer Com- manding many other weakly and predisposed men were detained in the hope that time alone with approaching cold weather might work a favourable change, the men being wanted, if possible, for the many imperative duties of the Station, Regiment, &c. Many of these men will however have eventually to proceed on medical certificate as early as practicable, prior to any favourable result in health being apparent. Details of treated. 10. Details of treated in Neemuch:58 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. duty, excepting 50 men returned in column "otherwise," 72 remaining under treatment at the end of the year; of those men discharged in column "otherwise," 45 were sent for change of air to their respective countries, 4 short service men were discharged the service as physically unfit (vide para. 14), and one man for " dementia" was sent to the Lunatic Asylum, Colaba. Of the total treated, the largest figure by far as usual appears under the heading general diseases, especially malarious fevers, of which 1,717 were treated; of these 1,445 were quotidian, 102 tertian, and 170 remittent; percentage of fevers treated to average strength being 264.96, percentage of fevers treated to total diseases treated 85.89. These fevers were characterised generally throughout by strong febrile paroxysms accom- panied in almost every case more or less with gastro intestinal complications, usually bilious vomiting or purging, one or both with frequent severe cephalagia and occa- sional complications of spleen, liver, or lungs, followed by anorexia for a few days, together with general debility and not unfrequently a tendency to a recurrence of the fever followed by scorbutus, &c c. The treatment with the cinchona alkaloids was used nearly in all cases, and in the milder forms with some degree of success, but in the more severe and protracted fevers (especially the bad quotidian and remittent) quinine either by mouth in large doses or hypodermically (170 cases were injected) had to be administered in order to check the return of the paroxysms. As useful adjuvants for other remedies and antiperiodics, or even if given alone in mild cases, these drugs are certainly useful, but I do not for a moment think that they can ever be made to take the place wholly of quinine, as far as this station and its fevers during the past year were concerned. Of the remaining 45 cases under the head of general diseases, 2 of chicken-pox and 3 of measles occurred; all were isolated in a separate ward, were mild and tractable, but the measles were complicated with strong bronchitic affections, yielding however to treatment. Two cases of malignant cholera in June, both recovered under ordinary treatment; 1 erysipelas simple was treated and discharged, 19 cases of rheumatism, of which 4 were acute and 15 chronic, with 8 of lumbago, are recorded. Most of them were more or less of a mild form, but the acute were treated with full doses of salicylic acid and bicarbonate of soda, with good and immediate effect. 10 of syphilis, viz. 6 primary and 4 secondary, were treated (contracted originally on escort duty or from milk and cooly women or others, who enter cantonments for the ostensible purposes of trade and work, &c c.) All were discharged well to duty, except- ing 3 and 1 remaining, viz. as follows, 2 of short service had to be invalided and discharged, 1 man discharged otherwise was sent on sick leave, and 1 man recently admitted for secondary eruptions in December last, is still remaining under treatment. Nervous system, shaking palsy 1, the same case as mentioned last year, sent on medical certificate, who having now only a few more months to get through for pension, has been kept on in the hope that he may live to obtain it; but as his case was complicated during the past malarious season with a severe attack of remittent fever, there are but little hopes, it is feared, of his living to enjoy this favour very long, and as he is perfectly useless in the Regiment, will be shortly sent away for further change to the seacoast, from which without rejoining the Regiment he can, if necessary, be invalided in Bombay or elsewhere. Neuralgia 2, and pleurodynia 1, mild, were treated; dementia 1. This was the case mentioned in last year's report, who was sent to the Lunatic Asylum, Colaba, in January last. Conjunc- tivitis, 24 cases treated (1 remaining); all were chiefly of the ordinary mild catarrhal form. One case however admitted on the 27th October was rather unmanageable, having been complicated with considerable debility and anæmia from previous attacks of malarious fever. The case has since slowly done well and was discharged on the 15th December last to duty, having been 1 month and 20 days in hospital. Hordeolum 2, with 2 mild cases of inflamma- tion of ear (external meatus), treated. Respiratory system, 17 cases treated, 1 coryza, 2 bronchial catarrh, 11 chronic bronchitis, 2 pneumonia, and 1 pleurisy. The above were of the ordinary kind, and generally amenable to treatment; 2 of chronic bronchitis, however, were sent for change of air, one of whom it appears from over exposure while travelling died shortly after reaching home; the other was returned well to duty. Digestive system 49 cases treated; of these chiefly dysentery 13, diarrh59 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. mild form, with the exception of one case of psoriasis, affecting chiefly the extre- mities, which had to be sent to the seacoast for change of air, and quite recovered. General debility, 3 cases, of which 1 unfit was twice admitted, and the third case, compli- cated with enteric fever, died from exhaustion during excessive diarrh60 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Special observations, new experiences in treatment, sani- tation. 16. The same as given in former reports. It is strongly recommended that at this station where malarious fevers assume, especially during and after the rains, at times a somewhat protracted and dangerous type, that the supply of quinine should be larger and more liberal, so as to co-operate with, if not entirely supersede, (in from about one-half to three-fourths of the cases treated,) the administration of the cinchona alkaloids, as, though the latter in some mild cases are useful, they cannot practically, in my opinion, with safety be expected to act as efficiently and take the place of quinine to so large an extent at least at this station as that of "three fourths," laid down in circulars for guid- ance. I can safely say that almost every protracted or severe case of malarious fever which came under observation had sooner or later to be treated with quinine in full doses, i.e. 20 to 30 grains or more daily, as required. 170 were also injected hypodermically with the neutral sulphate 5 to 7½ grs. dissolved in citric acid, water, heated glycerine, and carefully filtered; these solutions were generally effectual and well borne. Not a single case of sloughing or other inconvenience occurred. The first, second or third days were marked with slight pyrexia, resolving itself into speedy convalescence, when within from ten to twelve days the average injected were discharged from hospital, but though the fevers in many cases were checked, general debility and. anæmia succeeded in some, who had finally to be sent away for change of air. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General WYLLIE. At inspection (December 10th, 1878) there was the large number of 191 sick (182 cases of ague) distributed in four contiguous barracks, one of which is used as the ordinary hospital. The accommodation is fairly good and ample, with sufficient supplementary buildings, the only drawback at this season being the stone flagged floor. Straw however has been laid down for some 40 patients, for whom no cots are available. I found all orderly and clean, general arrangements good, and the service efficiently and creditably discharged, the large amount of duty devolving on the establishment considered. There has been much complaint in this charge (where the daily sick from ague at one time exceeded 250) of want of quinine. The sanctioned quantity was necessarily inadequate, although supplemented, as at Nusseera- bad, from private sources. Alkaloid remedies proved ineffectual, as many of the cases were unusually severe, the more so that gastric irritability was a common feature and thus several passed into remittent, three eventuating fatally. I concur with the local military and medical authorities in considering it unfortunate that absolute restrictions should have been put on the supply of an essential drug at a time when excessive sickness demanded its free employment. The men's lines are in as good. order as feasible, the radical defects of want of sufficient cubage considered; and I fully realize that the local authorities have done all within their power to lessen the incidence of sickness, and to properly meet its requirements. H. M.'s 11th Regiment N. I. BHUJ.61 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Location and movements. 1. The Regiment was stationed in Bhooj during ten months of the year, and left on 3rd November for Poona. The lines, &c. 2. The lines are situated to the east of the city of Poona and the Sadder Bazaar, being the middle set of three, those of the 4th Rifles N. I. being on the North and of the 18th Regiment N. I. on the South, and the large expanse of the parade ground is to the East. They slope down to a nullah on the West, which is kept as clean as possible, and is occasionally flushed from the Kurruckwasla water works; the huts are in fair condition. Conservancy. 3. There are two latrines (one for the males, the other for the females) about 200 yards to the west of the line: the filth is removed in the morning by carts to a long distance. Water supply. 4. The water supply is excellent both in quantity and quality; its composition, accord- ing to a recent analysis by the chemical analyser, being, total solids per gallon 5.85, chlorine 0.42, free ammonia.04, albuminoid ammonia.06. Food and clothing. 5. The grain market is well supplied and is generally fairly cheap, though prices have not fallen yet to what they were before the famine. Vegetables are plentiful and cheap. The clothing does not seem suited to the natives of a tropical climate, in which when on duty they perspire, and coming off, at once throw it off for their own cotton clothing. This sudden change is I think prejudicial to health. The recruits are frequently insufficiently clothed to protect them during the prevalence of the easterly winds of the cool season, and this may to a certain extent account for so many of them proportionately being on the sick list. Duties, &c. 6. The duties in the last station were very light, and will be very much heavier here, but the men were excused from some of the duties on first arrival, owing to the general low state of health of the Regiment. Hospital, &c. 7. The hospital is situated about 1/4 mile from the lines, and consists of two separate buildings, the smaller having two yards, which are found con- venient in the treatment of disease; it is on the whole good, except the earth floors, which are difficult to keep neat. Asphalte would be preferable for reasons of cleanliness, comfort and economy. The number of sick since the arrival of the Regiment here has been so great that six routies have been pitched in the compound, which is spacious aud in good order, with water laid on it. There are two latrines with earth floors, which get saturated with urine. General health and physique. 8. The general state of health of the Regiment is wretchedly low, owing to malarial cachexy acquired in Bhooj; most of the men treated in hospi- tal have enlarged spleens. The physique of many of those enlisted within the last five or six years strikes me as being very poor. Influence of climate, &c. 9. As above stated, the influence of the climate of Bhooj, where the Regiment was stationed for five years, has had a most prejudicial effect on the health of the Regiment. Details of treated. 10. The prevailing disease was ague, for which there were 1,686 admissions, chiefly in the months of September, October, November, and December, and in some was of a severe type. Admissions for diseases of the respiratory organs were 79, of the digestive organs 106. Mortality and its causes. 11. Fourteen deaths occurred in hospital, from the following causes, 1 dysentery, 2 bronchitis, 1 pneumonia, 1 valvular disease of the heart, 1 general dropsy, 1 remittent fever, 5 ague, 2 diarrh62 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General BEATTY. The 11th Regiment N. I., which had been quartered at Bhuj since 1873, arrived at Poona on the 10th of November 1878, and occupied the lines vacated by the 26th Regiment N. I. My annual inspection was held on the 18th of the same month. On that date 145 patients were in hospital on account of fever. The sanitary state of the lines is carefully attended to, and the water supply excellent. The general health of the men has been extremely bad. Owing to a lengthened residence in Bhuj during an exceptionally unhealthy season, fever alone, of a pernicious type, was the cause of 1,686 admissions. These occurred chiefly during the months of September, October, November, and December. The general wasting of the body, and sickly appearance of many of the men on arrival, were strongly indicative of their having suffered not only from malarious influences, but voluntary starvation, and though considerable improvement in the general health has taken place since their first arrival at Poona, the low physique of many of them has continued unimproved. The hospi- tal is sufficiently commodious to accommodate 30 patients. The walls and beddings were covered with dust, which owing to the defects of mud-flooring, it is found impossible to avoid. Neither the hospital records, nor diaries of cases had been carefully kept. This neglect has been rectified by the officer at present in medical charge. H. M.'s 16th Regiment N. I. NUSSEERABAD.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 63 Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. These are the same as given in former reports, and have proved not otherwise than beneficial to the general health of the men. Hospital and its immediate surroundings. 7. The regimental hospital is well placed on high ground, and is clean, well ventilated, and in good repair. As there are no wards or separate build- ings for the cases of infectious diseases, temporary grass huts are built for such cases when they occur, and destroyed when no longer required. General health and physique. 8. The health of the corps for the year under report contrasts most unfavourably with that of the previous one. There were 1,990 admissions and twelve deaths in hospital in the year 1878, against 686 admis- sions and three deaths in 1877. The men suffered considerably from ague; repeated attacks of which have weakened a large number of them, and rendered them liable to the invasion of disease on the least unusual exertion, change of weather, diet, &c. The regiment contains a large number of good physique. Influence of climate, or local circumstances on health. 9. The season was a very trying one, and the heat was very great during the months of March, April, and May. The rainfall, which was 19.40 inches against 11.48 inches in the previous year, had great influence in causing this unusual sickness. Details of treated. 10. The total number of admissions into hospital from all causes was 1,990, of which 1,454 were re-admissions. The prevailing diseases were, ma- larious fevers 1,400, lung diseases 62, muscular rheumatism 69, conjunctivitis 64, bowel complaints 58. Owing to the scarcity of vegetables at Nusseerabad, 46 cases of scurvy were admitted into hospital daring the year under review. There were three cases of enteric fever, all of which proved fatal. Mortality and its causes. 11. There were twelve deaths in hospital, four from intermittent fever, three from enteric fever, and one each from cholera, pneumonia, asthma, heart disease, and scurvy. Two deaths occurred out of hospital; one died in Sind, while on a recruiting party, and the other in Bombay while on sick leave. Epidemics. 12. There was only one case of malignant cholera, which terminated fatally. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. The total number of primary vaccinations was 32, and all were successful. There were 54 re-vaccinations; of this 39 were successful and 15 unsuccessful. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Thirty-nine men were invalided, for the following causes64 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 18th Regiment N. I. DEESA.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 65 Details of treated. 10. There were 481 admissions into hospital, including 7 re-admissions, being 92 more than the previous year. There were six deaths in hospital. Six men were sent on medical certificate for change to their own country, three for repeated attacks of ague and three for general debility. There were 209 admissions from ague (intermittent fever), being 111 in excess of the previous year. Of these 156 were admitted in the five months between July and November inclusive, the great- est number being in October, when 71 were admitted. Fortunately none of the cases were very severe and for the most part were free from complications. Of the remainder, 33 were from eye diseases, principally conjunctivitis and tarsal ophthalmia, from cutaneous diseases 32, from various forms of rheumatism 25, intestinal complaints 14, diarrh66 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 20th Regiment N. I. BARODA.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 67 Food. 5. The ordinary articles of food, such as the native soldiery require, are dearer in Baroda than in Bombay, where the regiment was previously stationed, and their quality is stated to be inferior. The average grain compensation to fighting men for the past year has been a few pies less than Rs. 4 per month. Vegetables are said to have been dear and very scarce in the hot weather, but from enquiries I have lately made in the bazaar, they appear to be now both abundant and cheap; and following my usual custom, I have done my best to impress upon the men the importance of eating fresh vegetables whenever they can be procured, and also of vary- ing their usually monotonous diet more than, when not prompted on the subject, they are disposed to do. Duties, exercise and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The duties of a regiment stationed at Baroda are comparatively light, the guards being but few; the ordinary parades have of course been held as usual; and during a portion of the year the men were busily employed in carrying out the repairs and improvements of the lines they now occupy; the duties performed do not appear to have had any prejudicial effect on the health of the regiment. Since the regiment has been at Baroda, the talim-khana, a time-honoured regimental institution which had been discontinued in Bombay for want of leisure, has been re-instituted. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital used by the regiment is the same as reported on last year; it is a fairly suitable building affording sufficient accommodation without overcrowding for about 24 men inside, and 12 or more in the verandah. The roof is out of repair, and the floor (formed of red bricks set edge-ways) is very uneven and difficult (indeed, almost dangerous) to walk upon. I brought the latter to the notice of the Major-General Commanding the Northern Division at his recent inspection of the hospital, and I have hopes that the expenditure necessary for its repair will be sanctioned. The hospital is clean and well ventilated; it is not surrounded by any compound, but its immediate vicinity is in a good sanitary condition. The village of Gowleepoora (within a few yards of the hospital) was found objectionable from the number of cattle kept there, the tom-tomming at night, &c., and on a representation to that effect being made to the agent to the Governor General, it was ordered to be cleared of its inhabitants; this is a great boon to any man seriously sick in hospital, a quiet night being (under the old system) out of the question during any native holidays or on other festive occasions. In my report for last year I stated that the quarters for medical subordinates were very inferior; I should have said that there were absolutely none, for the quarters at present standing are I believe only intended for the second class servants; and I am therefore obliged to permit the medical subordinates to occupy two of the four corner rooms of the hospital, which ought properly to be retained as isolation wards for ophthalmic cases, &c. Application has been made for hutting-allowance for the one Hospital Assistant at present attached to the regiment. I hear that the regulation allowance (90 rupees) has been sanctioned, and that the subordinate in question will be accommodated with quarters before the hot weather. For latrine accommodation, the inmates of the hospital are permitted to use a portion of one of the permanent latrines which is partitioned off for their use: this is kept in a good sanitary condition by the hospital sweepers. The hospital has no bathing room, or dead-house. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the regiment may now (at the beginning of the year 1879) be pronounced good; it is true that some of the men show traces of a scorbutic tendency, but I question very much whether a native regiment is ever (except perhaps after some months' active service, when they have been drawing Government rations) entirely free from the disease, as there is always a certain proportion of men who from motives of economy habitually under-feed themselves, in order to provide for the daily wants of their families; and of course when high prices prevail the temptation to do so is increased, the higher rate of grain compensation given at such times being calculated on the daily requirements of one man only, and not on those of a family. Speaking generally however I am of opinion that the regiment is quite as fit for active service as any corps in the Bombay army, while as regards physique, owing to the great care taken in recruiting of late years, and in weeding out old and useless men, I think there can be little doubt that the regiment is in that respect superior to most others. Details of treated. 9. The total admissions into hospital were 1,050, and the average daily number of sick (for the whole year) 22.5. The highest monthly average daily sick was 37.2 (in October) and the lowest 12.2 (in June). Of the total admissions 458 were due to malarial fever, of which 6 only were registered as "remittent." The admissions for ague were very numerous during the last four months of the year, amounting to 329 for that period; but the cases do not appear to have been very severe in type, as the average daily sick for the same period was only 27.9, the men, for
68 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. the most part, remaining only a few days in hospital. 186 cases were registered as febricula. Four cases of cholera were admitted, one in June who died, and three in August, all of whom recovered. Six cases of small-pox occurred; all recovered, Dysentery and diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 69 Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1875 Nusseerabad 105.7 2.8 0.1 1876 Mhow and Indore 140.4 5.6 0.6 1877 Do. do. 123.4 3.5 0.6 Average 123.2 4.0 0.4 1878 Mhow 158.9 4.2 1.0 Location and movements. 1. The head-Quarters of the Regiment were stationed at Mhow up to 14th November, when they left for Ahmednagar, arriving on the 14th Decem- ber. The Right Half Battalion was stationed at Indore up to 12th May, when it rejoined head-quarters. The Left Half Battalion remained at Mhow until the 15th December, when it left for Ahmed70 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality and its causes. 11. Ten deaths occurred during the year, seven in hospital and three out of hospital. The seven were from epilepsy, cholera, ague, bronchitis, and small-pox. Epidemics. 12. There has been no epidemic in the Regiment during the year. Vaccination and re-vaccina- tion. 13. Vaccination and re-vaccination have been carried on among the recruits and children. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Forty-three men were invalided during the year, of which 31 were aged and worn out men, two from lung disease, two from defective eye sight, one from aneurism, one disease of hip joint, one from hernia. Requirements and recommend- ations. 15. The only recommendation that I have to make is that quarters be built for the Native Medical Pupils attached, as at present they have none. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General BEATTY. The head-quarters of the Regiment arrived at Ahmednagar on the 14th of December 1878; my inspection was made on the 23rd of the same month. The lines, which are built on an elevated site, have good surface drainage, and are kept perfectly clean. The bathing arrangements in the verandahs of the married men's quarters have been completed since last report. Regimental latrines are in use, as owing to the rocky nature of the soil, the trench system is found impracticable. Water supply is excellent both as regards quantity and quality. The hospital, which is well situated, was in good repair, and the books, instruments, &c. were carefully kept. H. M.'s 24th Regiment N. I. MEHIDPUR.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 71 another site is selected and new lines constructed on the standard plan, the present high rate of sickness may be expected to continue. Conservancy. 3. Conservancy is well attended to. The trench system is in force during the dry season. From a sanitary point of view it seems to answer pretty well, but the distance of the trenches from the lines being 370 yards, and the fact that the system is not in favour by the men and their women, are disadvantages. In the Monsoon of 1875 temporary latrines were introduced, and have been in use during the rainy seasons since, but as these places are rudely constructed, they are both insanitary and uncomfortable. The only masonry work in their construction is the horse-shoe shaped recesses for holding the pans. The flooring is liable to become soaked with urine and the water used in ablution. At the annual meeting of the Committee for reporting on station buildings, new permanent latrines were applied for, and they are really urgently required. Water supply. 4. A constant supply of good water is still a desideratum. The existing conditions as regards water supply may be briefly stated as follows:72 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. duties are by no means excessive, and with the exception of guard duty, have a beneficial effect upon health. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The large building is estimated to accommodate 20 patients, exclusive of two veran- dahs, which can also be used as wards in case of need. The subsidiary building erected in 1875 has space for 16 beds, and the contagious ward for 4. During the year under review 56 was the largest number of patients in hospital any day; at that time the verandahs had to be used as wards. In anticipation of a still greater number of patients the boysNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 73 Caste. Christian. Mussulman. Jain. Hindoo. TOTAL. Average strength 16.2 47.6 7.1 303.5 374.4 Admitted from all causes 16 130 8 814 968 Not admitted 8 ...... 4 26 38 Once admitted 2 13 1 82 98 Twice 74 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality and its causes. 11. Excluding cholera, from which there were 3 deaths in hospital and 1 out of hospital, the mortality from other causes has not been high, there having been only 3 deaths, viz. 1 from pneumonia, 1 bronchitis and 1 scurvy. In the last named cause scurvy was the primary affection, but death resulted from complications arising out of the scorbutic diathesis, heart disease and general dropsy having supervened, and where the immediate cause of death was clearly shown from the post mortem examination. Epidemics. 12. Eleven cases of cholera occurred in the lines and were treated, some in the conta- gious hospital and others in a provisional hut erected for the purpose to leeward, and at a distance of 300 yards from the lines. The circumstances in connection with each case were minutely investigated at the time of its occurrence, and all available precautions taken to prevent the spread of the disease. The first two cases occurred, 1 on the 30th March and 1 on the 25th May, when Surgeon Howell was in medical charge, but no satisfactory evidence could be adduced as to the source of contagion in either case. On the 7th June a death from cholera occurred midway between Mehidpur and Oojein, in an escort party returning from Oojein, where cholera was then raging. When the remaining men of the escort arrived at Mehidpur on the 8th, they were not allow- ed to go into the lines, but were put under canvas at some distance off, and every precaution taken to prevent communication with the lines. Two days after their arrival, and when they were still in quarantine, a woman was attacked with cholera, but from a thorough investiga- -tion it appears that she had no personal communication with the men of the escort. The next case occurred 12 days later, namely on the 22nd June. The patient was the wife of a Subedar and, as in the last case, no reliable evidence could be found pointing to the source of contagion, although it is likely that the case had some connection with the preceding. Next day this woman's child was attacked, and here the source of contagion was evident. Four days later another case occurred, the patient being a private, and in this also it was affirmed on all sides that no personal communication had taken place with either of the last two cases, and no other source of contagion could be discovered. Seven days later two more cases occurred, equally devoid of proof as to personal communication with an affected person or place. On the 8th of July, four days after the occurrence of the last two cases, a child was attacked, and 3 days later a private's wife. In neither case was there any evidence of communication with an affected person or place. The last case occurred on the 25th September, and in this instance too great an interval of time had elapsed to justify an inference that it had any connection with the preceding. Of the eleven cases which occurred five were fatal. It is exceeding difficult to obtain any trustworthy information relative to the occurrence of cases of cholera in the native town; during the past year I did not hear of a single case having occurred there. Four cases of small-pox occurred, three in February and one in April. In one case the patient was a woman and in another a child. They had all been previously successfully vaccinated, and, except in the case of the woman, the disease was of the discrete form. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Eighteen persons were primarily successfully vaccinat- ed, and of 197 re-vaccinatios, 100 were successful. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Eight men were invalided during the past year, i. e. 2.14 per cent. to strength. The causes were one each for emphysema, defective vision from old age, defective vision from amaurosis, varicose veins, general tuberculosis, caries of right tarsus, and two for general debility. In none of these cases was influence of the climate of Mehidpur the immediate cause. Recommendations and require- ments. 15. A dead-house and post mortem dissecting table should be provided for the hospital. There is no filter at the hospital, and as the quality of the water is frequently very bad, a filter should be supplied. Special observations, new ex- periences in treatment, sanitation, &c. &c. 16. From what has already been said, it will be seen that the year under observation has not been an exceptionally unhealthy one for the station, although the amount of sickness has been very considerable. With the exception of last year, the average daily number of sick has been lower than in any year since 1870 in this station. From what I can discover from former reports, it does not appear that the amount of rainfall has so decided an influence on the sick rate as might be supposed. Thus in 1873 the 25th Regiment had an average daily sick of 10.2 per cent. to strength and the rainfall was 35.45 inches, and there is no mention of flooding having occurred. In 1875 the rainfall was 40 inches, while the daily average sick per cent. to strength of the 10th N. J. was 6.6. In 1876 the site of the lines was inundated during the rains, still the amount of sickness from malarious fevers was only slightly above the average. In the year under observation the rainfall was above the average, viz. 36.95 inches, the amount of sickness from malarious fever was below the average. I believe that much of the comparative healthiness which the Right Wing of the 24th N. I. has enjoyed during the last two years it has been stationed here,
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 75 has resulted from the adoption of cots for the men to sleep on, and from the care that has been bestowed in keeping the lines dry and clean. The Left Wing, stationed at Augar during the year, has only had about one-fourth of the sickness, and as the Right Wing has been almost two years stationed at Mehidpur, a change of Wings is now highly desirable. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon, General WYLLIE. Inspected December 16th, 1878. No change in hospital buildings, which are in good order and sufficient, a dead-house alone being wanting. Water supply much augmented since last visit, by clearing out and deepening wells. Lines in fair repair, cantonment trim, and cleanliness with efficient conservancy duly enforced. Health was well maintained up to October, when ague became prevalent; admissions in Hospital to date fully a half more than in previous year, the excess accounted for under that head; but the daily average sick has only advanced from 13·7 to 17 at date, the cases having been relatively of short duration. Mortality, excepting 3 deaths from imported cholera, (in March, June, and September,) was very moderate, and there has been no casualty from malarious fever. Looking at results as above, and particularly in relation to the ordinary malarious influences of a large rainfall (36 inches 3 cents as against 20·8 in previous year), the position taken in my letter No. 169 of 1878, advising a further trial of the hitherto sickly station, appears to be fully justified, for undeniably unfavourable as local conditions are, it is to be remembered that up to 1857 the station had been fairly sanitary, and that ill-health dates from a flood that then deposited a large amount of silt, the effects of which, as respects the subsoil water, may be expected to gradually disappear. Meanwhile local ameliorations are in progress, drainage extended, and the dampness of the lines mitigated by raising floors. But of these improvements none, as I believe, has been so much in the interests of health as Colonel Henderson's forethought in providing each of his men with a cot, as noticed last year. Left Wing 24th Regiment N. I. AUGAR.76 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. of inferior quality. The various articles of the sepoyNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 77 The soil is composed of a loose, dark loam, and in various sites there is iron, which predomi- nates in the immediate vicinity of these cantonments, which seem to be built on a bed of ferruginous clay. The drainage of the station is very good, and in various places advantage seems to have been taken of the natural features, in order to afford facility to the draining of rain water. The close proximity to the native town and some villages (which like most others are very defective in sanitary arrangements) is one of the main drawbacks. I believe that the ferruginous nature of the soil here accounts in a great measure for the marked immunity of the troops from epidemics of cholera. The climate of Augar is on the whole good, and seems to have agreed with the men. Details of treated. 10. During the year there were 293 cases under treatment, 3 having remained on 1st January 1878, and 290 fresh admissions; out of these 7 terminat- ed fatally. As usual, throughout India, paroxysmal fevers head the list of diseases, with 197 treated against only 43 of the previous year. Out of these cases of malarial fevers, there were but 2 cases of remittent, 25 of the tertian, and the rest of the quotidian, types. Venereal diseases (syphilis and gonorrh78 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. 16 primary vaccine operations were performed during the year, and 17 re-vaccinations; the results were most satis- factory. Invaliding and its causes. 14. 1 subedar, 2 jemedars, 1 naique, and 3 privates took their pension, under provisions of G. G. O. No. 98 of 1878. Requirements and recommend- ations. 15. I have little else to offer beyond the points alluded to already under the foregoing headings. The hospital and its establishments are complete and satisfactory. Special observations and new experiments in treatment, sanita- tion, &c. &c. 16. Under this important and interesting heading I may observe that in the majority of cases of mild, uncomplicated, intermittents, the margosa or neem bark answers fairly well. I am in the habit of using the decoction of this costless indigenous drug by taking 4 ounces of the inner layer of the bark, boiling it in a pint and a half of water, and then straining. This must be freshly prepared in order to be efficacious. It is also a very good vegetable stomachic, and I very frequently give it in combination with ferruginous and mineral acid tonic remedies. I prescribe the sulphate of cinchonidine also, and after a somewhat extended trial of both, I consider the latter in doses varying from 10 to 20 grains more efficacious. In severe cases of the remittent or continued type, I generally resort to quinine by mouth, per rectum, and subcutaneously, in accordance with indications of the particular case under treatment. The new preparations of salicis cortex or willow bark, salicylic acid and its salts, namely salicylate of soda and potash are, as far as my own somewhat limited experience goes, very valuable medicinal agents for the reduction of high temperatures, which they do very satisfactorily, whether the pyrexia be of malarial or inflammatory affections. Beyond this they do not possess any antiperiodic virtues. The sulphate of atropia administered hypodermically in one-hundredth part of a grain, reduces hyperpyrexia. In a case of severe remittent I found the cold bath and affusion very useful in reducing the high temperature which menaces life: in this case the baths had to be repeated several times in the twenty-four hours and for eight days. Directly the temperature was lowered to the normal degree, quinine was perseveringly employed by mouth and through the skin, with the happy result that the case terminated in recovery. In cases of dysentery, more especially of a scorbutic nature, I beg to remark, that bael is a very useful remedy. I found that the fruit as supplied from the stores was two dry and did not answer so well as fresher samples obtained from the jungles. Recently in Augur, I had the opportunity of treating a case of severe tetanus (in the person of a young peon) with cannabis Indica administered through the lungs, by making the patient smoke, in doses of from 15 to 20 grains, of the powdered leaves with about three times its bulk of ordinary tobacco. The patient was continuously kept under its influence with very favourable results and the termi- nation of the case in recovery. I believe that opium, belladonna, and other anti-spasmodic drugs, would likewise prove of much greater avail when thus administered. The reason of this belief is further strengthened from the fact that one of the ways, indeed the commonest, in which death takes place is by sudden apn79 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. H. M.80 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPOTE OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. General health and physique. 8. The general physique of the men is as a rule good. Some old and unfit sepoys exist in the regiment, but they will be invalided in due course. The general health of the regiment has not been so good as last year. In 1877 there were 377 admissions; in 1878 there were 1,542 admissions. Influences of climate or local circumstances on health. The extreme dryness of last year was succeeded by an excessive rainfall (50 inches 35 cents), which raised the subsoil water to the surface, the wells being mostly all full to the brim, then the rapid fall of the subsoil water after the rain ceased gave rise to malarious fever, which raged like an epidemic amongst the civil as well as the military portion of the community. Details of treated. 10. Of 1,542 admissions, ague gave the largest number, viz., 1,119, next in order febricula gave 36, dysentery 35, diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 81 Conservancy. 3. The conservancy is effectually carried out. There are two well-built latrines situated about 150 yards to the North-East of the lines. One of these is for the males and has nineteen seats; the other is for the females and has eight seats. They are washed and cleaned three times a day. Dry earth is used as a deodorant and disinfectant. The solid excreta, and dirty water, which is kept separate from the solid excreta, and collected in receptacles made for the purpose, are carted away out of the limits of the cantonment, and buried in pits. The Native officers' latrines are situated westward of their quarters, and are kept very clean. Water supply. 4. The water supply is very abundant, and is derived from two wells in the vicinity of the lines. The wells have been cleaned out and deepened since last report. One of them is about 10 yards from the South end of the lines, is 48 feet deep, and has 12 feet of water. The other is near the hospital, is 46 feet deep, and has 13 feet of water. The water appears to be of good quality, but no analysis has been made for want of apparatus. Foot and clothing. 5. Vegetables are very scarce and dear here. The prices of the principal articles of consumption are almost the same as reported last year. On account of the continued dearness of provisions, some of the married men are suffering from the effects of insufficiency of proper food. There were many applicants for shoe-leave during the year, on account of bites caused by ill-fitting boots. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The duties are lighter here than at head-quarters. There has been only one large guard at night, and that is over the jail. The men get 4/2 5/9 nights in bed during the week. The duties do not produce any ill effects. There is no gymnasium here, which is greatly required. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic or otherwise. 7. The hospital is situated about 80 yards to the North of the lines. As it is construct- ed to hold only eight patients, it is too small to accommodate all the sick of the detachment. During the month of October last, the accommodation was hardly sufficient, even after utilizing the verandahs, store and bath-rooms, and the cook- rooms. Ventilation is natural and good, but is liable to become defective in the cold weather if the doors be closed to avoid draughts on the patients, as there are no ventilators. There is a small latrine attached to the hospital, carbolic acid and McDougall's powder are used to disinfect the excreta, which are subsequently removed and disposed of in the same manner as stated of the line latrines. As there are no wards or separate buildings for the isolation of the sick attacked with contagious diseases, a tent is required to be pitched for such cases when they occur. There are no quarters for the Native Medical Pupil and hospital sweeper. General health and physique. 8. The general health and physique of the men of the Wing 23rd Regiment N. L. I. was good. The same cannot be said of the Wing 6th Regi- ment N. I. that is at present stationed here, as eight deaths have occurred from cholera, and the men have suffered considerably from ague. As cholera was prevalent round about Mhow and Indore, the men probably caught it whilst on the march from Mhow to Indore, the change from the climate of Aden to this malarious locality, the arrival of the Wing a month before the setting in of the rainy season, and thus the men being subjected to the anti-hygienic conditions arising from the influence of the unusual and excessive rainfall on this soft cotton soil, have been important factors in the causation of the unsatisfactory results as regards the health of this Wing. Many of the men show signs of a scorbutic taint, which they seem to have acquired while at Aden. With some few exceptions the men of this Wing do not appear to be fit for active service, particularly in a cold climate. Influence of climate. 9. The total rainfall during the year under report was 49 inches and 49 cents, against 22 inches and 96 cents in the preceding year. The influence of this enormous rainfall on the health of the troops stationed here has been very bad. The European detachment that was stationed here also suffered from cholera and fever to such an extent as to necessitate its removal to Assirgurh. Details of treated. 10. The total number of admissions into the hospital from all causes in both detach- ments was 411, against 268 admissions during the year 1877. Malarious fevers were more prevalent than during the previous year, and furnished, as usual, the largest number of admissions. The total number of ague cases in both Wings was 245. The largest number of cases occurred in the months of June, September, and October. There was only one admission from remittent fever. The case was complicated with head symptoms and ended fatally. Bowel complaints come next in the order of frequency. Diarrh82 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality and its causes. 11. The total number of deaths during the year was twelve, against one in the previous year. The Wing 23rd N. L. I. lost two men, one from small- pox, and one from chronic bronchitis. Ten deaths occurred in the Wing 6th Regiment N. I. The following are the causes of mortalitySIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 83 SIND DIVISION. Average Strength Present during the year 3,952 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength Present. 4.3 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength Present 1.2 H. M.84 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. in the cold weather uniforms, which are questionable as to their utility. The alkhalac has been shortened and is now worn tighter; so that it looks somewhat like a tunic. The consequence is that the men are unable to increase their under-clothing when necessary, and the thigh is not, as formerly, protected from rain, &c. A coarse canvas-like material (double khadi) has been substituted for the dark green cloths of which the trowsers were originally made. The former is insufficiently close in texture to resist the piercing cold wind expe- rienced in Katch and Khorassan. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The duties during the last couple of years have been very arduous, owing to the large numbers of men at the outposts and on escort. Some of the men play polo and others join their officers in hog spearing expeditions, &c. A gymnasium with a trained in- structor is a desideratum. Hospital and its immediate surroundings. 7. The old ward. like most buildings in the place, is exceedingly damp, the brick flooring crumbling away, and the walls for three or four feet from the ground look as if they had been standing in water of that depth for some time. The servants85 SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1875 Jacobabad 116.0 3.4 1.0 1876 Do. 117.3 3.4 0.5 1877 Do. 97.1 4.0 1.4 Average 106.8 3.6 1.0 1878 Jacobabad 122.6 4.0 1.5 Location and movements. 1.The regiment returned to Jacobabad from Mittri on the 7th April 1878. Since its return, the head-quarters have not moved from Jacobabad. A Detachment of 134 sabres proceeded to Quetta as escort to the Governor General86 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Invaliding and its causes. 10. Twenty-three were invalided during the year, for the following causes87 SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Details of treated. 4. The number of admissions and deaths have been considerably less this year. The only increase in admissions has been for scorbutus88 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 89 during and after the rainy weather. The scorbutic taint that was noticed in several cases admitted during the last few months, may be attributed to the sepoy's inability to procure vegetables at a cheap rate. Since the first apprehension of the present Affghan war, cereals have increased in price. This has no doubt affected, though slightly, the food supply of the sepoy. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments, &c. 6.The duties were not heavy. They consisted of furnishing guards, garrison and regimental duties. The exercise consisted of parades, running drill, and sword exercise. The recruits on joining are put through a course of gymnasium. This very useful course was started by the Adjutant of the Regiment about five months ago. Talimkhana sports are held Weekly; and once a month, and on native festive days particularly, there is a grand display of native sports, in which all officers take interest. At the garrison sports in Sep- tember last several sepoys were noticed to have taken a prominent part, and even distin- guished themselves. General health and physique. 7. Considering the bad state of health in which the Regiment left Sholapore, and the short time in which the sick list was reduced on arrival at Kurrachee, the change may be said to have proved highly beneficial. There are cases, however, wherein the change has not apparently done much good, for I have found men suffer from ague with the same severity with which I saw them suffer at Sholapore during the few days that I was there. The health of the Regiment may be said to have been generally good until the Regiment sent out a detachment to Hydrabad. At this station, the severity with which the men were attacked may be termed almost epidemic. It is not possible to determine to what precise cause the unusually large number of admissions at Hydrabad were due90 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality and its causes. 11.There were 11 deaths at the Head-quarters and 1 at Hydrabad. Eight of these occurred during the last quarter. The causes of death may be classified under one of the three following heads91 SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Sick leave. 1875 Hydrabad 92.6 4.1 0.1 1876 Do 137.4 5.8 1.0 1877 Do 99.8 4.2 0.6 Average 109.9 4.7 0.6 1878 Hydrabad 151.6 4.4 1.1 Location and movements. 1.The 1st Belooch Regiment L. I. was stationed at Hydrabad from the 1st of January until the 9th of October,upon which date it embarked for Sukkur en route for Jacobabad on board the S. S. Cranborne, and arrived there on the 16th idem. They then marched to Jacobabad and occupied the lines of the 30th Regiment N. I., proceeded on service. On the 22nd of November a detachment of 216 left for Sungsila, in the Booghti hills, where they remained at the close of the year. The men enjoyed excellent health and suffered very little from shoe bite, considering the length of the marches, and the sandy, heavy, and in some places rocky nature of the soil. The lines and their surround- ings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines are composed of 48 detached flat roofed mud buildings, having a South- Westerly aspect. The buildings are not raised on plinths, but surrounding each pendal is a platform 6 inches in height and 4 feet broad. Ventilation is procured by 3 fixed cowls on the roof of each pendal and by lateral openings. The lines are in good repair and their hygienic condition carefully attended to. Conservancy. 3. The dry earth system was in use. In addition to the usual difficulties of keeping the fluids from the solid excreta and preventing the saturation of the floors of the latrines with urine, there was another, viz. that earth not of a sandy nature was very difficult to obtain. Latterly however earth more suitable for the purpose was procured. Water supply. 4. For the first three months of the year, the supply was the same as in previous years. In April the Hydrabad water works were opened, and from that time the lines were supplied by six hydrants. The water is drawn from them and distributed by hand bheesties. The supply is from the river Indus, and is of excellent quality and free from all contamination. Food and clothing. 5. Food was plentiful but dear throughout the year. Men with large families suffered In consequence. The uniform of the Regiment is in my opinion a most suitable one for native troops. It consists of a loose coat, knickerbockers with gaiters, and a substantial pugree. It is loose and roomy, at the same time smart and soldierlike. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The duties were not excessive and had no injurious effect on the health of the men. The men were in the habit of meeting once a week for the purpose of wrestling and gymnastics. This practice was en- couraged and the meetings were very popular. Hospital and its surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7.The hospital is a long flat roofed mud building situated to the rear of the lines, built on a six inch plinth and surrounded on three sides by a verandah 10 feet wide and 14 feet high. It is divided into three wards. The Hospital Assistant92 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The rainfall this year was very large for Sind, and the inundations so great that a considerable part, of the coutry was under water for some time. Malaria was in consequence very prevalent. The men suffered more as they travelled from Hydrabad to Jacobabad when the country was in this condition, and it was with difficulty that a dry encamping ground between Shikarpore and Jacobabad could be procured. Even after their arrival the men came to hospital in large numbers daily suffering from this complaint. Details of treated. 10. Out of the total number of 1,027 treated during the year, 605, considerably more than half, were admitted suffering from ague, owing greatly, as before mentioned, to the men being so much exposed to malarious poison. There has also been an increase in the number of admissions from vene- real disease; 53 were admitted during the past as compared with 43 in the previous year. Admissions from diseases of the lungs and rheumatic affections are much the same as in 1877. A considerable increase in the admissions for diseases of the digestive system have also occurred; 69 were treated as compared with 43 of the previous year. There were 107 cases of injuries; this includes contusions, burns, and shoe-bites. Mortality and its causes. 11. There were 11 deaths during the year; 7 occurred in hospital and 3 while absent on sick leave and 1 while travelling from the depôt to head- quarters. The causes of the deaths in hospital were 4 from ague, 1 from coryza and heart disease, 1 from gun-shot wound, 1 from cystitis, 1 from hepatic abscess. Epidemics. 12. No epidemic occurred during the year. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. 16 children were vaccinated during the year, 12 of which were successful. There were 48 re-vaccinations, of which 37 proved successful. Invaliding and its causes. 14. 18 men were invalided during the year, 11 from debility and old age and being unable to double on parade, 2 from chronic bronchitis, 1 from aneurism of abdominal aorta, 1 from convergent strabismus with myopia, 1 from chronic rheumatism, 1 from loss of finger, 1 from asthma. Four men were discharged with gratuity. H. M.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 93 Effects of climate. 4. The climate of Quetta is said to be malarious with a damp soil, and that of Dera Gazi Khan and Mittri are hot; there was a serious inundation at Dera Gazi Khan, which, besides other damage, was produc- tive of much fever. Lines available space. 5. Space appears to have been satisfactory. Conservancy, sanitary arrange- ments. 6. The arrangements seem to have, been very inferior at Dera Gazi Khan, no regular system being carried out. No latrines were permitted within cantonment limits; the men were obliged to go to the jungle outside. At Mittri, Quetta, and elsewhere the usual trenches were dug and attended to. Water supply. 7. From various sources; generally considered good. Food, quality, and whether abundant and cheap. 8. Good and abundant, but said to have been rather dear. Clothing. 9. Winter clothing is heavy, warm, and comfortable, and that for the hot weather a light, cool, and suitable serge. Duties and their effect on health. 10. Duty is not considered to have been at any time excessive or prejudicial to health. Exercise, amusements, and oc- cupation. 11. The men appear to keep up their amusements and exercise well, and generally give a good account of themselves when they meet their brethren from other regiments at such feats as running, wrestling, &c. Lock-up rooms and cells. 12. These were not good at Dera Gazi Khan. Marches 13. The regiment marched from Mittri to Dera Gazi Khan, and subsequently from the latter to Southern Afghanistan. The year closed upon it in the Pishin Valley. Hospital and its surroundings. 14. Nothing to complain of under this heading. Ventilation. 15. Good. Overcrowding. 16. None. Accommodation. 17. There was always sufficient accommodation. Conservancy. 18. This was carried out by the usual hospital establish- ment. Hospital water supply. 19. From the same sources as that of the regiment. The general health appears to have been good, except after the inundation in Dera Gazi Khan, when there was serious manifestation of malarious affections. Sickness, mortality and invalid- ing. 20. There were 989 admissions to hospital, 13 deaths, and 18 cases invalided during the year. One case was granted leave on certificate for change of air. Principal causes of sickness. 21. Malarious affections, pneumonia, and bowel complaints. Principal causes of mortality. 22. Bowel complaints and chest affections were the lead- ing causes of mortality. Mortality according to race. 23. One Hindoo and two Sikhs died during the period under report, while the remain- ing deaths were among Mussulmans. Influence of rainfall. 24. Nothing traceable to it, no regular record having been kept. Epidemics. 25. No epidemic manifestation. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 26. There was Do opportunity of carrying out vaccination, but fortunately the regiment is well protected. General health and physique of the men. 27. Physique considered excellent, general health fair. Treatment of disease when special. 28. Nothing special. Special observations. 29. None. Resume of the whole. 30. The present return and report, such as they are, are completed under special difficul- ties of a rather exceptional nature. As many of the records from which they should have been compiled were lost during the march, on one occasion owing to the breakdown of a lot of camels during a night march, a 24 m
94 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. great many things appear to have been broken and stolen or fallen into the hands of the enemy during the night, and among those things many of the hospital records went. Then as I did not serve with the regiment till some time after the end of the year, I have little or no knowledge of what I have been trying to get into some sort of tangible form. It will be observed that many of the diseases are grouped together, but this is owing to there being no records, except the Morning State, for many months of the year; however I have tried to make the best of the material at my disposal. H. M.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 95 General health and physique. 8. Indifferent, especially among the Sindhees. Mala- rious cachexia prevalent amongst the older sepoys. Influence and climate. 9. Apparently very debilitating. Details of treated. 10. Fevers 570, dysentery 179. I am unable to give any details of the fever and dysentery cases which form so large a proportion of those treated. Mortality and its causes. 11. In hospital three, one dysentery, one pneumonia, and one from valvular disease of heart (variety unknown) followed by general dropsy. Out of hospital twelve, eleven of which occurred among men on furlough or sick leave, and one at head quarters at Quetta for valvular disease of heart. The patient dropped down dead in the lines. Epidemics. 12. None. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Attended to. Invaliding and its causes. 14. There were 17 cases invalided; 1 for ague, 1 for dysentery, 1 secondary syphilis, 1 asthma, 1 abscess, 5 debility and old age, 3 chronic rheu- matism, 1 cystitis, 1 scurvy, 1 enlarged spleen.
STATEMENT. 25 m
98 STATEMENT Showing the SICKNESS, MORTALITY and INVALIDING in the N.B.No. 1. 99 NATIVE ARMY of BOMBAY, for the Year 1878. in the Army List on the 1st of July 1878. Invalided. Constitution of the Regiment. Strength remaining on rolls on 31st December 1878. Average number of consecutive nights in bed. Number of Recruits joined during the year. REMARKS. Hindus. Mahomedans. Chris- tians. Others. Invalided for discharge. Discharged for physical disability. For change of climate. Strength. Died during the year. Strength. Died during the year. Strength. Died during the year. Strength. Died during the year. AND BOMBAY MARINE. 30 2 7 297 2 154 3 8 ... ... ... 459 13.5 22 1 3 4 37 1 63 ... ... ... ... ... 100 5.7 6 63 1 13 540 8 97 1 12 ... ... ... 649 4.5 38 22 4 24 592 7 75 ... 17 1 9 ... 693 5.3 57 34 13 12 460 12 200 3 21 ... ... ... 681 19.6 52 73 5 27 527 4 94 1 15 ... ... ... 636 5.0 105 10 2 9 571 5 97 ... 5 ... 8 ... 681 3.7 3 Includes Det. at Perim. 50 4 21 496 14 131 2 14 ... 5 ... 646 7.2 50 283 34 117 3,520 53 911 10 93 1 22 ... 4,545 8.0 333 DIVISION. 26 2 4 198 2 296 4 1 ... ... ... 495 14.7 39 52 1 7 370 4 82 1 1 ... ... 1 453 10.2 50 Includes Company at Aden. 38 1 14 538 8 77 ... 17 ... 21 ... 653 4.7 37 35 ... 7 556 11 127 2 2 ... ... ... 685 7.2 49 Includes Det. at Sholapur. 24 1 25 572 10 92 1 8 ... ... ... 672 11.1 70 Do. Det. at Bombay and Assirghar. 32 1 7 586 5 114 1 7 ... ... ... 707 4.4 85 34 23 13 558 10 101 ... 19 ... 25 ... 703 4.3 97 13 4 6 559 7 117 1 15 1 29 1 720 7.8 51 49 5 8 552 8 92 1 8 ... ... ... 652 8.1 34 29 1 16 536 17 58 2 95 ... ... ... 689 7.1 50 Includes Det. at Maligaum. 41 ... 21 587 13 73 3 13 ... 8 ... 681 5.4 52 373 39 128 5,612 95 1,229 16 186 1 83 2 7,110 7.7 614 DIVISION. 17 2 4 276 3 193 3 6 ... ... ... 475 6.0 27 Includes Squadrons at Rajkote and Poona. 35 1 12 295 2 160 ... 3 ... ... ... 458 8.6 2 Do. do. Nassirabad. 5 2 ... 101 3 20 ... 1 ... ... ... 122 6.5 14 27 11 13 570 16 84 1 17 2 ... ... 671 3.9 78 Do. Det. at Sadra. 45 1 15 548 19 89 2 14 1 7 ... 658 9.1 90 Do. Det. at Indore. 38 6 7 535 12 101 2 17 ... 7 ... 660 4.1 44 Do. Right Wing at Tanna. 24 4 45 539 11 112 1 12 ... 14 ... 677 6.3 37 64 ... 21 562 17 71 4 ... ... 3 ... 636 7.2 39 39 1 28 593 13 82 2 11 ... 9 ... 695 5.4 46 56 3 6 570 11 90 1 11 ... ... ... 671 6.7 32 30 5 20 598 12 77 1 13 ... ... ... 688 5.2 51 41 2 18 548 8 127 1 22 ... 10 1 707 5.5 38 Includes Det. at Indore. 19 2 1 591 12 95 2 21 ... 18 ... 725 6.7 54 Do. Det. at Agar. 15 3 35 585 23 71 1 11 ... 12 ... 679 5.2 44 Do. Det. at Dwarka. 455 43 225 6,911 162 1,372 21 159 3 80 1 8,522 6.2 664 DIVISION. 23 ... 13 47 ... 430 6 ... ... 1 ... 478 5.3 25 23 ... 10 103 10 372 4 5 ... ... ... 480 4.0 40 16 2 15 114 3 376 6 5 ... ... ... 495 3.9 40 19 ... 4 116 1 61 ... ... ... ... ... 177 5.4 21 25 1 4 596 11 85 1 17 ... 10 ... 708 * 90 18 4 5 165 2 521 9 ... ... ... ... 686 5.7 72 18 ... 1 84 3 589 20 1 ... 3 ... 677 * 45 17 ... 23 315 8 391 7 ... ... ... ... 706 6.2 57 159 7 75 1,540 38 2,825 53 28 ... 14 ... 4,407 5.1 390 1,270 123 545 17,583 348 6,337 100 465 5 199 3 24,584 6.7 2,001 *Information not obtainable.
100 Summary of the Statistics for the Year 1878 and Eight previous Years. Years. Average Daily Strength Present. Admissions into Hospitals Ratio per cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Average Daily Sick per cent. to Average Strength. Deaths in Hospitals. Ratio of Deaths in Hospitals per cent. to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths in Hospitals per cent. to Admis- sions. Deaths out of and on Leave. Total Deaths in and out of Hospitals. Ratio per cent. to Strength of Hindus who died in and out of Hospitals and on Leave. Ratio per cent. to Strength of Mahomedans who died in and out of Hospitals and on Leave. Ratio per cent. to Strength in- valided for discharge the Service. Ratio per cent. to Strength in- valided for change of climate. 1878 23,671 40,012 169.03 4.40 305 1.28 0.77 151 456 1.91 1.56 5.51 2.17 1877 22,561 25,130 111.38 3.49 215 0.95 0.85 95 310 1.39 1.22 4.51 2.03 1876 22,583 22,918 119.20 3.79 247 1.09 0.90 49 296 1.14 1.57 4.27 2.17 1875 22,819 25,475 111.63 3.38 213 0.93 0.83 66 279 1.30 1.18 4.27 1.83 1874 22,750 26,601 116.92 3.68 176 0.77 0.66 72 248 0.99 1.12 4.60 1.73 1873 22,967 29,035 126.86 3.82 165 0.71 0.56 81 246 ...... ...... 4.35 2.11 1872 22,903 36,209 158.09 4.54 226 0.98 0.62 95 321 3.98 2.13 1871 22,959 29,733 129.50 4.31 236 1.03 0.79 97 333 3.12 2.10 1870 22,715 28,380 139.08 4.33 191 0.84 0.68 95 286 3.71 2.33
fication and Nomenclature. REGIMENT. INJURIES. Abscess, 819; and elsewhere accord- ing to site. Ulcers, 859. Skin Diseases, 827 to 901. Other Diseases of this Class. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. Injuries, 992 to 1146, and Blistered Feet, 1148. Punishment, 1147. TOTAL. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. 1st Regt., N.L.C.or Lanrs 2 ... 4 ... 26 ... 15 ... 9 ... ... ... 93 ... 1 ... 1,039 2 2nd do. 7 ... 7 ... 33 ... 3 ... 3 ... 1 ... 66 ... ... ... 487 3 3rd do. 1 ... 1 ... 66 ... 14 ... ... ... ... ... 125 ... ... ... 992 1 1st Sind Horse 1 ... 25 ... 49 ... 4 ... ... .. 1 ... 53 ... ... ... 480 1 2nd do. 15 ... 46 ... 62 ... 12 ... 5 1 1 ... 55 ... 1 ... 570 7 3rd do. 5 ... 28 64 ... 7 ... 2 ... 1 1 64 ... ... ... 489 5 Poona Horse 4 ... 2 .. 11 ... 11 ... 5 ... ... ... 44 ... ... ... 352 5 Sappers and miners 8 ... 16 ... 68 ... 5 ... 46 2 ... ... 111 ... ... ... 1,279 6 No. 1, Mountain Battery. ... ... ... ... 8 ... 4 ... 2 ... 1 ... 14 ... ... ... 287 2 No. 2 do. 2 ... 12 .. 19 ... 1 ... 2 ... ... ... 27 ... ... ... 354 1 1st Regiment, N. I. 10 ... 4 .. 49 ... 24 ... 31 ... 1 ... 77 ... ... .. 1,158 15 2nd do. 2 .. 8 ... 52 ... 14 ... 3 ... ... ... 47 ... ... ... 508 3 3rd do. 7 ... 6 ... 30 1 74 ... 21 ... ... ... 46 ... ... ... 1,309 9 4th do. 1 ... 4 .. 46 ... 29 .. ... ... ... .. 74 ... ... ... 850 10 5th do. 18 ... 9 .. 42 ... 17 ... 3 ... 1 ... 77 ... ... ... 975 4 6th do. 2 ... 7 ... 21 ... 15 ... 6 ... ... ... 55 ... ... ... 795 16 7th do. 5 ... 2 ... 23 ... 20 ... 9 ... ... ... 42 ... ... ... 1,251 10 8th do. 5 ... 3 ... 58 ... 20 ... ... ... ... ... 93 ... ... ... 1,345 8 9th do. 6 ... 3 ... 57 ... 35 ... 16 .. ... ... 54 ... ... ... 842 7 10th do. 3 ... 4 ... 34 ... 17 ... 3 1 ... ... 78 .. ... ... 1,981 8 11th do. 8 ... 11 ... 29 ... 37 ... 12 ... 1 ... 94 ... ... ... 2,184 14 12th do. 9 ... 14 ... 7 ... 40 ... 16 ... ... ... 82 ... ... ... 708 8 13th do. 6 .. ... ... 26 ... 36 ... ... ... ... .. 110 ... ... ... 703 4 14th do. 10 ... 11 ... 21 ... 25 ... 16 ... ... ... 39 1 ... ... 726 16 15th do. 5 . 2 ... 35 ... 26 1 1 ... 2 .. 51 8 ... ... 853 15 16th do. 5 ... 15 .. 78 ... 33 ... 9 ... ... ... 74 ... ... ... 1,990 12 17th do. 13 .. 49 ... 22 ... 12 ... 16 ... 2 ... 30 ... ... ... 1,130 5 18th do. 3 ... 1 ... 31 ... 16 ... 18 ... 4 ... 52 1 ... ... 481 6 19th do. 11 ... 5 ... 38 .. 65 1 11 ... 4 ... 57 1 ... ... 1,244 12 20th do. 5 ... 5 ... 33 .. 15 ... 27 3 . ... 82 ... ... ... 1,050 9 21st do. 15 ... 9 ... 33 ... 29 1 7 ... ... ... 48 ... ... ... 1,042 9 22nd do. 13 ... 3 ... 92 ... 6 ... 7 ... ... ... 192 ... ... ... 1,323 3 23rd do. 3 ... 4 ... 14 ... 62 ... 1 ... ... ... 137 ... 1 ... 1,084 7 24th do. 2 ... ... ... 24 ... 24 ... 6 ... 2 ... 61 1 ... ... 1,258 13 25th do. 6 ... 6 ... 63 ... 16 ... 14 ... ... ... 51 ... ... ... 593 2 26th do. 3 ... 17 ... 39 ... 34 ... 5 ... ... ... 40 ... ... ... 1,279 9 27th do. 3 ... 7 ... 48 ... 29 1 9 ... 2 ... 107 1 2 .. 993 7 28th do. 26 1 6 ... 20 ... 13 ... 12 ... 4 ... 35 ... ... ... 1,542 15 29th do. 4 ... 25 ... 42 ... 291 ... 4 ... ... ... 18 .. ... ... 989 13 30th do. 9 ... 20 .. 118 ... 23 ... 4 ... 3 ... 79 ... ... ... 1,305 3 Aden Troop 6 ... 2 ... 11 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... 20 .. ... ... 192 ... 269 1 403 ... 1,642 1 1,178 4 361 7 31 ... 2,754 13 5 ... 40,012 305 26 m
101 STATEMENT No. 2, Exhibiting the Sick of H. M.'s Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency for the Year 1878, arranged according to authorized Classification and Nomenclature. REGIMENT. STATION. Average Strength Present. Average Daily Sick. 1878. CLASSES OF DISEASES. GENERAL DISEASES. LOCAL DISEASES. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. TOTAL. Sub-Division A. Sub-Division B. Diseases of the Nervous System, 59 to 104. Insanity, 105 to 110. Diseases of the Eye, 111 to 185. Diseases of the Heart, 219 to 244, and 250 to 258. Diseases of the Lungs, 290 to 337. Diseases of the Sto- mach and Intestines, 449 to 500. Diseases of the Liver, 501 to 520. Diseases of the Spleen, 524 to 530. GonorrhBOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
