IP/13/AF.3 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT ON THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1877- FRAMED ON THE MONTHLY AND ANNUAL RETURNS, ON THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND ON THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY SURGEONS GENERAL. WITH STATISTICAL TABLES. Compiled in the Office of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75006175.tif] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1878.
MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT ON THE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75006187.tif] NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1877- FRAMED ON THE MONTHLY AND ANNUAL RETURNS, ON THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND ON THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY SURGEONS GENERAL. WITH STATISTICAL TABLES. Compiled in the Office of the Surgeon General, Indian Medical, Department. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75006187.tif] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1878.
No. S. B./ 208 OF 1878. FROM THE SURGEON-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, MILITARY DEPARTMENT. Bombay, July 1st, 1878. SIR,ii Presidency Division and Aden. Years. Average strength. Average daily sick. Admis- sions. Deaths. 1872 3,297 144.0 4,731 33 1873 3,358 140.2 4,513 28 1874 3,343 133.4 3,861 32 1875 3,288.5 125.4 3,551 36 1876 3,207 128.7 3,363 45 1877 3,196.4 104.2 3,547 40 5. The average daily strength of the army in the Presidency Division was 3196.4, or 10.6 less than in 1876. The average daily sick has diminished by 24.5. The number of admissions has, however, been greater by 184. The percentage of admissions to strength was 110.9 as compared with one of 104.8 for the previous year. Forty deaths occurred, equal to 1.1 per cent. on the total treated. Poona Division. Years. Average strength. Average daily sick. Admis- sions. Deaths. 1872 8,577 319.7 10,703 51 1873 8,209 250.4 7,334 35 1874 8,197 241.2 6,855 36 1875 8,145.9 224.2 7,607 40 1876 7,448.6 220.4 7,249 42 1877 7,771.6 261.2 8,671 72 6. In the Poona Division the average daily strength was 7771.6, or an increase of 323 on that of the preceding year. The average daily sick has risen from 220.4 to 261.2, and the admissions during the past twelve months have been more frequent than in 1876 by 1422. This increased sickness must be attributed chiefly to the greater preva- lence of malarious fevers and, to a less degree, of bowel disorders. The per- centage of admissions to strength was 111.5, while for the previous year it was 97.3. The deaths numbered 72, or 30 more than last year, and 32.7 in excess of the average of the three preceding years. The increased mortality is princi- pally due to remittent fever, cholera, and diarrhiii of health than it has done since 1872. The regiments at Sholapore, Dharwar, and Satara suffered very severely from the malarious fever which decimated the Deccan population after the famine. Syphilis and, more especially, bowel diseases have also told adversely on the health of the troops in this Division. Malarious Fevers. 10. The principal diseases which swell the returns are, as usual, malarious fevers. The total treated for these disorders during the period under review amounted to 11,240, as compared with 12,528 in the previous yeariv another severe epidemic visited the civil population in most parts of the Presidency during the past year. Seven cases occurred in the Presidency Divi- sion, all amongst the troops stationed in Bombay. In the Poona Division there were 13 cases in the 1st L. C. and the 5th and 8th regiments at Poona, 4 in the 15th at Ahmednagar, 5 in the 13th N. I. at Malligaum, 7 in the 19th at Sholapore, 4 in the 12th at Dharwar, and 3 each in the 14th at Belgaum and the detachment at Kaladgi. No deaths occurred either in this or in the Presidency Division. In the Northern Division there were 15 cases, with one death, in the 22nd N. I. at Baroda, and 4 in the 9th Regiment at the same station. Ten cases with 2 deaths occurred in the 25th N. I. at Mhow, and 7 cases in the 23rd. There were 3 cases each in the 1st Grenadiers at Ahmedabad, the 3rd L. C. and 10th N. I. at Neemuch, and the 16th at Nusseerabad. In the 11th at Bhuj and in the wing at Agar there was one case each. In Sind there were 4 cases, with one death, in the 27th at Hyderabad, and one case in the 29th at Kurrachee. At both the latter stations the disease was particularly virulent amongst the civil population. Cholera. 12. There has been no cholera in Sind this year. In 1876, however, there were no less than 68 cases, all amongst the troops of the Frontier Field Force. Leaving Sind, therefore, out of consideration, there have been 67 cases in the other three Divisions during the past as compared with 44 in the preceding year. In the Presidency Division the number has been the same for both periodsV now under review was 632; in 1876 it was 506, or a percentage of treated to total average strength, for both years, of 2.8 and 2.2 respectively. For the Presidency Division the percentage of treated to strength for the past year was 2.1, for Poona 4.4, for the Northern Division 1.4, and for Sind 3.0. The corresponding percentages for the preceding year were 3.0, 2.5, 1.5, and 2.4. The regiments of the Presidency Division which were most affected were of course those stationed in Bombay; these have, however, suffered to a much less extent than in 1876, the cases in the 21st N. I., for example, having diminished more than one-half. The frequency of the disease amongst the troops stationed at Poona continues nearly the samevi causes which appear to have produced this greater prevalence of bowel diseases amongst the troops stationed in the Deccan will be discussed further on. In the Northern Division there has been a marked and general falling off in the frequency of admissions for diarrhvii only incapable of being drained, but is liable to inundations during the rainy season. It is no matter for surprise, then, if, notwithstanding the various so-called improvements which have been effected in the cantonment within the last few years, the amount of sickness from malaria has in no way abated; on the contrary, it tends to increase. A regiment which is unfortunate enough to remain there more than eighteen months comes away enfeebled to such a degree that nothing but a prolonged residence in a salubrious station will suffice to restore the shattered health of the men. The present condition of the 10th N. I., recorded at p. 76, is a case in point. If Mehidpore is to be retained as a military station, no time should be lost in removing the camp from its present position to the site at the old cavalry lines, as recommended by Deputy Surgeon- General Wyllie at p. 71 of this report. Experience has shown the futility of at- tempting to effect any improvement at this station so long as the existing site con- tinues to be occupied. I beg also to draw attention to the extreme unhealthiness of the cantonment at Surat; last year it was even worse than Mehidpore. This can only be attributed to wet subsoil and defective drainageviii Water Supply. 23. Water is said to have been, with few exceptions, good and abundant. At Mehidpore and Neemuch, however, it has been scarce, and at the former station of indifferent quality. At Kurrachee and Jacobabad the water, though sufficient in quantity, is far from pure. Notwithstanding the short rainfall of 1876, none of the medical officers in the Poona Division complain of any particular deficiency of supply having occurred, even during the hot weather. Although the wells may not have dried up, except in very few instances, they must, in the nature of things, have been lower than usual, and it can hardly be doubted that this circumstance was in some way concerned with the greater prevalence of guinea-worm amongst the troops in the Poona Division. The measures about to be taken for the improvement of the water supply at Asseerghur will, I trust, result in the final settlement of a matter which for some years past has given rise to a vast deal of trouble. Food. 24. Although the cost of food was everywhere much greater than usual, reaching famine rates in the Deccan stations, there has in no instance been any difficulty in obtaining a suffi- cient supply. The quality has been good, except in the Poona Division, where large quantities of damaged grain were brought on the market. Here, in spite of the large amount of grain compensation allowed, men with large families were more or less pinched; and in consequence of this, and from the sepoys having been induced, by the lower rate at which it was offered, to purchase the spoiled and inferior grain to a considerable extent, bowel diseases, especially diarrhix Epidemics. 28. The regiments at Ahmedabad and Baroda are always liable to be at- tacked by cholera, which appears to be endemic amongst the civil population of those cities and of the surrounding villages. The past year has been no exception. An account of the epidemic in the 9th N.I.at Baroda in October will be found at pages 52 and 53 of this report, and at page 55 is a note on the outbreak in the detachment of the 22nd Regiment on its march from Ahmedabad to Sadra. Both cases, as well as that of the lst Grenadiers at Ahmedabad, are instructive as manifestations of the facility with which the disease may be carried about from infected centres. Cholera had existed in Guzerat during the greater part of the year, but in October many towns and villages were visited by a most severe epidemic, the infection of which it is nearly certain was conveyed by the pilgrims from Dakor, a town situated halfway between Baroda and Ahmedabad, where a large assemblage had gathered after the rains were over, and amongst whom the disease existed. The recruiting party and men on leave from the 9th N. I. mentioned by Surgeon Roberts may possibly have brought the seeds of the disease with them from. Dakor, but it seems more probable that it was communicated from Baroda itself. At Ahmedabad cholera was already present in the city when the troops at that station were attacked, and it is far from unlikely that the disease was, in some eases at least, contracted in the city by one or more of the numerous jail and treasury guards, and carried thence to the cantonment. It is always essential to bear in mind the possibility of such a mode of introduction, as in the majority of instances where regiments suffer from an outbreak of cholera it will be found that the disease had previously made its appearance in the neighbouring town. Such cases as this, and others of a similar nature, must, in spite of every care, continue to occur from time to time; and that they do not occur oftener speaks favourably for the precautionary measures adopted, more especially when we consider the frequency with which cholera has of late years visited the cities and towns of this Presidency. The fact that cholera, introduced from without in various ways, has in no instance spread to any particular extent is sufficient evidence that the general sanitary condition and conservancy of the cantonments have been carefully attended to. It is impossible, however, that those who are responsible for the duty can be too frequently reminded of the absolute necessity which exists for invariably maintaining the cantonment and its vicinity in a state of the utmost practicable cleanliness. They should ever remember that epidemic cholera is liable at any moment to occur in localities contiguous to, and in communication with, the cantonment, and that a constant state of preparedness is the best security they possess against an invasion of this terrible disease. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, W. G. HUNTER, M.D., Surgeon-General. c m
INDEX. [The Regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1877.] PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. PAGE 20th Regiment N. I., Bombay ... ... ... .. 1 21st do. do. or Marine Battalion, Bombay ... .... ... .. 3 Right Wing, 7th Regiment N. I., Tanna ... ... ... ... 5 17th Regiment N. I., Surat ... ... ... ... 7 6th do. do. Aden ... ... ... ... 9 Aden Troop, Khor Maksar ... ... ... .. 12 Outpost, Perim ... ... ... ... 13 POONA DIVISION. 1st Regiment Light Cavalry, Poona ... ... ... ... 15 5th do. N. I., Poona ... ... ... ... 17 8th do. do. do ... ... ... ... 19 26th do. do. do ... ... ... ... 22 Sappers and Miners, Kirkee ... ... ... ... 25 Poona Horse, Sirur ... ... ... ... 27 15th Regiment N. I., Ahmednagar ... ... .. ... 29 13th do. do. Malligaum ... ... ... ... 32 Detachment, 4th Rifles N. I., Asirgarh ... ... ... ... 34 4th Rifles N. I., Satara ... ... ... ... 37 2nd. (Prince of Wales' Own) Regiment N. I. (Grenadiers) ... ... ... ... 39 14th Regiment N. I., Belgaum ... ... ... ... 41 3rd do. do. Kolhapur ... ... ... ... 43 19th do. do. Sholapur ... ... ... ... 45 12th do. do. Dharwar ... ... .... ... 46 NORTHERN DIVISION. 1st Regiment N. I. (Grenadiers), Ahmedabad ... ... ... ... 49 9th do. do. Baroda ... ... ... ... 51 22nd do. do. do. ... ... ... ... 54 No. 1 Mountain Battery, Rajkot ... ... ... ... 56 7th Regiment N. I., Rajkot ... ... ... ... 57 28th do. do. do. ... ... ... ... 59 11th do. do. Bhuj ... .... .... .... 61 2nd do. Light Cavalry, Deesa ... ... ... ... 63 18th do. N. I., Deesa ... .... .... ... 64 23rd do. do. Mhow ... ... ... ... 66 25th do. do. do ... ... ... ... 68 24th do. do.Mehidpur ... ... ... ... 69 Left Wing, 24th Regiment N. I., Agar ... ... ... ... 71 3rd (Queen's Own) Regiment Light Cavalry, Neemuch ... ... ... ... 73 10th Regiment N. I., Neemuch ... ... ... ... 75 16th do. do. Nusseerabad ... ... ... ... 77 SIND DIVISION. 29th Regiment N. I., Kurrachee ... ... ... ... 80 27th do. do. Hyderabad ... .... ... ... 82 1st Sind Horse, Jacobabad ... ... ... ... 84 2nd. do. do. do ... ... ... ... 85 3rd do. do. do ... ... ... ... 88
( xii ) SIND DIVISIONMEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1877. (The regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1877.) PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Average Strength Present during the year 3,196.4 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength 3.2 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength 1.2 H. M.'s 20th Regiment N. I. BOMBAY.2 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The Lines and their surround- ings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. Since the 1st of December the regiment has occupied the lines previously tenanted by the 9th Regiment N. I. at Baroda;*they consist of a number of pendals with tiled roofs, the walls being of bamboo plastered inside with mud; those occupied by married men are divided into rooms, while those occupied by single men are not so divided, except in some instances by low partitions made by the sepoys themselves; they are fairly well ventilated, but the space afforded per man is much less than that sanctioned by the Government of India (namely, 70 superficial feet for each single man, and 120 for each family), and the men are as uncomfortable and discontented as they can well be. The lines are situate at the N.E. corner of the general parade-ground, in a spot well open to the breeze, but devoid of shade and infested by white ants, and are not to be compared in respect of comfort and individual privacy with those formerly occupied by the 22nd Regiment N. I. while at this station, but now vacant. The drainage of the lines and cantonment and their general sanitary condition are fairly good, and the sanitary condition of the bazaar is satis- factory. The quarter-guard occupied by the regiment is that previously occupied by the 22nd Regiment N. I., and is a very suitable building; it contains two solitary cells, which in respect of cubic space and ventilation are all that can be desired. Conservancy. 3. The system pursued in Bombay was the same as in former years. In Baroda the trench system of latrines is established, two enclosures (for men and women respectively) being situated to the north of the lines: this arrangement is much disliked by the men, and I think must always be practically more or less a failure, as many of the men, sooner than use them, wander into the surrounding country after dusk and defile the ground in the neighbourhood of camp. I believe it is arranged that the permanent latrines (which are now used by the inmates of the hospital only) shall be used by the regiment generally during the rains. Water supply. 4. In Bombay good and sufficient, from Vehar Lake. At Baroda there are four wells in the lines, which at present yield a sufficiency, but, the rainfall having been very scanty, it is expected that there will be a scarcity in the hot weather: the water is slightly brackish. Food. 5. Food was abundant in Bombay, but dearer than in former years. At Baroda supplies are dear compared with Bombay, and of inferior quality. Duties, exercise, and, amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The work performed by the regiment in Bombay was the same as in former years, and does not appear to have had any special effect upon the health of the men: they had an average of little over three consecutive nights in bed. At Baroda the duties are lighter; the Residency and Rewa Kanta Jail guards are the only large ones furnished, and the average number of consecutive nights in bed is four and three-quarters. For exercise the men have their ordinary parades, with running drill in the cold weather. No regular amusements (such as a talimkana ) appear to have been kept up during the year, but sports have occasionally been got up for the men. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital at Baroda consists of one large well-raised pendal near the eastern limit of camp, and close to the Guicowaree village of Gowlee Poora: it is about ninety feet long by twenty broad, capable of holding comfortably about twenty-four beds, and having wide verandahs, which can be utilised for extra accommodation. The hospital is clean, well ventilated, and in good repair, and its general hygienic con- dition good. The quarters for medical subordinates are very inferior, being cutcha -built, deficient in. space, and badly ventilated; the senior hospital assistant has only one small room and a little cookroom, and there are no quarters for any other medical subordinate. General health and physique. 8. Fairly good. Details of treated. 9. The total admissions into hospital were 568, the average daily number of sick 23.5. Of the total admissions 206 were due to fevers, chiefly malarial, of which 13 only were remittent in type. Five cases of small- pox occurred: all recovered. Rheumatism., syphilis, bowel complaints, and contusions fur- *A description of the lines, hospital, &c. &c.occupied by the regiment while stationed at Bombay will be found in the report of the 9th N. I.
PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 3 nished their usual quota. Four cases of cholera occurred in Bombay; of these three died, the other was transferred to the Goculdass Tejpall Hospital, where he also died. Thirty-two men were granted sick leave to their own country for periods varying from two to six months. Mortality and its causes. 10. Five deaths occurred in hospital: of these three were due to cholera, one to locomotor ataxy, and one to asphyxia (suicidal). Vaccination and re-vaccination. 11. These were duly attended to; the records show 41 successful primary operations, and 21 successful re-vaccinations. Invaliding and its causes. 12. Forty-four men were invalided, their disabilities being as follows:4 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. The head-quarters and main body of the regiment has been stationed in Bombay throughout the year, besides furnishing the usual detachments in course of annual relief to the Persian Gulf and Indian Government steam vessels, as per subjoined details:PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 5 Mortality and its causes. 10. During the year under report there have been eight deaths, five more than last year. Two deaths from remittent fever complicated with pneumonia, one from cholera, one from acute rheumatism, one from dropsy of the heart, one from bronchitis, one from double pneumonia, and one from hepatitis. Epidemics. 11. Although there have been many cases of cholera during the year in the Native Town, only two sepoys were infected, but they were not seized with the attack in the regimental lines. One case occurred in June, and one in September. Both cases were fatal. Besides these there were three cases among the families in June and July. There was one case of small-pox, in March. The subject was a female who had no marks of previous vaccination, though stated to have been vaccinated. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 12. 97 children have been primarily vaccinated. Of these 95 cases were successful and 2 unsuccessful. Of the latter one child was successfully re- vaccinated. Invaliding and its causes. 13. Fifteen men were invalided by the Annual Invaliding Committee held in November last. Of these twelve were recommended by the commanding officer of the regiment as being old and worn-out men, unfit for further service. The rest were presented by me. Two were invalided for paralysis, and one for scorbutic affections. Of the two paralytic invalids one suffered from hemiplegia, and the other from paraplegia. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General MOORE. I inspected the lines and hospital of the 21st Regiment on the 28th of December, and when in Bombay have visited the hospital weekly, and the lines on various occasions. The lines are now perhaps in as good order as the circumstances and the nature of the locality admit. Some much-required improvement has been effected to the drainage. The latrines used by the regiment are a long distance away, owing to the locality; this is unavoidable. Some complaints were made of an insufficient supply of Vehar water during the year. It may be here noticed that since this water was first supplied, in 1865, until last year, no case of cholera occured in these lines. There is no gymnasium, but the men sometimes practise wrestling and club exercise. Wards for contagious diseases are a desideratum for the regimental hospitals in Bombay, the present plan of using tents when epidemic disease occurs being almost impracticable during the rainy season. Right Wing, H. M. 's7th Regiment N. I. TANNA.6 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The Lines and their surround- ings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. The lines, which may be divided into the old and new ranges, have been built to accommodate four companies, and are bounded on the north by the jail and the parade-grounds, on the south by a row of private houses, on the east by the creek, and on the west by the European Civil Lines. The new range of lines, which is separated from the old but improved ones by a road 56 feet in breadth, is arranged in five rows but variously-sized sections. Ventilation is effected in the old lines through the doors and eaves of the huts. The huts in the newly erected sections have, in addition to the former method, ridge ventilation; and the rooms situated at the extreme east and west are furnished each with a window. Drainage and conservancy. 2. The drains run freely, and are always clean and in good condition. There are two pucka -built latrines,PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 7 Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General MOORE. The hospital and lines of the Right Wing, 7th Regiment N. I., were inspected by me on the 25th of September. The lines were in a very cleanly condition, and their structure, relative position, and appearance generally are satisfactory. The drainage also is good, both naturally and by made drains. The regimental latrines were in good order. The hospital is one of a range of buildings used as the regimental, police, and civil hospitals. The regimental hospital is calculated to contain sixteen patients, and is in good repair. As mentioned by the medical officer, the hospital is too closely surrounded and closed in by buildings, which somewhat impede thorough perflation. The hospital assistant's quarters are also unsatisfactory. H. M.'s 17th Regiment N. I. SURAT.8 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effect on health. 6. The duties at this station are very light, and the amusements of the men are principally of their own invention. The Hospital and its immedi- ate surroundings, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The regimental hospital is situated to the west of the lines, about 150 yards from the river Taptee. It is an upper-storied building, roomy and well ventilated; the wards of the hospital afford accommoda- tion for 22 patients, and the spacious and roomy verandahs above and below afford room for as many more. I have had as many as 80 men in hospital, which perhaps was a little overcrowded, but the ventilation is good, principally from the doors and windows. The native village of Utava lies at the back of the.hospital, about 150 yards distant,PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 9 Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General MOORE. I inspected the hospital and lines of H.M.'s 17th Regiment N.I. at Surat on the 14th of November, going carefully through the lines in company with the Commanding Officer and the Surgeon. There are twenty rows of double lines, not favourably situated with re- ference-to the prevailing breezes. The lines are, fortunately, a considerable distance apart, and there are numerous trees affording shade, but, owing to position, while one face of the lines, to the S.W., obtains perflation, the other sides, looking the opposite direction, are close and unventilated. The men therefore lie outside, to which practice may be attributed a considerable proportion of the fever and bronchitis they suffer from. In front of all the houses is a mud wall, which, while securing privacy, impedes ventilation, and renders the interiors very dark. The floors are scarcely raised from the level of the ground, although there is an attempt at plinth outside. This is made of mud, and instead of rendering the interior dry must conduce to an opposite result. The washing-water used inside, and prob- ably urine, is conducted by a " kutcha" drain from each house into the central street, or to an adjacent tree. But it is frequently absorbed by the earth before reaching its destination, and, percolating through the ground, must also tend to render the interiors damp. The drainage of the central streets is merely a slope of the ground; and the drainage, such as it is, passes to a long drain running at right angles the whole length of the lines. From the centre, where the ground is a little lower, a barrel drain leads to the Taptee. But when rain floods the river the water rises in this drain, rendering the central part of the lines very wet, and sometimes flooded. To the absence of proper ventilation; to the position of the lines facing away from the prevailing breeze, thus inducing the men to sleep outside; to the bad drainage from the houses, and to the vicinity of the Taptee and the floods therefrom, may therefore be attributed much of the febrile malady from which the men suffer. The lines are in good order and repair; the whole locality was very clean, and no overcrowding in the huts,10 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. H. M.'s 6th Regiment Bombay N.I. has been located at Aden since November 1875, and whilst quartered there it has furnished the usual detachments both to the island of Perim and to the isthmus; the detachments were relieved about every two months. During the period of 1877 now under reviewPRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 11 General health and physique. 8. Considering that the regiment has been two years at Aden, considering the depress- ing and peculiarly enervating climate of the place, and the arduous duties which the men have had to perform, I am of opinion that the general health of the regiment may be considered good, though very few of the men are entirely free from a scorbutic taint. Influences of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The remarks made in the preceding paragraph, respecting the health and physique of the men, apply here to a great degree. Climate, excessive work, bad water, a scanty supply of inferior vegetables and other food, all aid in undermining the constitution, lowering the vital power, and thereby rendering the individual liable to the invasion of disease12 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. on the side of the hill. Owing partly to leakage, partly to the carelessness of those resorting thither, and partly to the slope of the floor from the interior not being sufficient, much water lodges within and without these latrines. This defective condition was brought to the notice of the Brigadier-General Commanding, and the remedial means indicated. The hospital is a well-built, airy, spacious structure with broad verandahs and asphalte flooring. There is space for 67 patients. There are all the necessary out-buildings, and the locality was clean, and the conservancy satisfactory,PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 13 of the earthen flooring, which was much cut up, rendering the place very dusty, thus tending to the excitement or aggravation of ophthalmic maladies, already sufficiently common at Aden from unavoidable causes. There are two latrines attached to the hospital, both unfortunately placed,14 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The number of admissions and daily attendance in November 1877 exceeded those of corresponding months for some years past, and this increase was due to the change in the climate, by the setting in of the south-easterly chilly and strong winds which prevail at this part of the year, and the detachment then stationed here seemed to suffer more than any other at that period. The average daily sick in hospital during the year (from 1st January to 7th December 1877) have been 0.9, and the average daily attendance from colic, diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 15 POONA DIVISION. Average Strength Present during the year 7771.6 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength 3.3 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength 0.9 H. M.'s 1st Regiment Light Cavalry. POONA.16 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Water supply. 4. Is very abundant, and is received direct from the Kurruckwasla waterworks through pipes; the water is not clean, but is reported to be wholesome. There is a good supply of pure well water also, but the sowars and families for the most part prefer the former. Food. 5. The supply of provisions in the bazaar is good and plentiful, and vegetables are easily procured; owing to the late famine, the prices are generally high. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effect on health. 6. The duty is for the most part light, the men getting on an average 5½ nights in bed. There is a gymnasium, where a few of the men exercise them- selves, and the effect on the health of those who practise gym- nastics appears to be beneficial. Hospital and its surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is an excellent one, and was very fully described in the report for the year 1874; it will accommodate 29 patients within the walls, but more accommodation has been required during the last month of the year, owing to the number of ague cases admitted: the excess have been placed in the verandahs. The greatest num- ber at one time in hospital was 37. The dry-earth system has been carried out in the hospital latrine. General health and physique. 8. The health of the regiment was good up to the end of September. The physical condition of the men appears to be good, for the most part. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The influence of the Deccan climate on the regiment during the past 6¾ years appears to have been favourable, and sickness and mortality have been low. Details of treated. 10. Including the figures for the squadron at Baroda, there were 289 admissions for fevers, of which 4 were of the remittent type; there were 2 cases of small-pox, both in men protected by vaccination. Of other diseases 152 cases were admitted, none of which were, however, of any particular inter- est; and of trifling injuries there were 72 cases. Mortality and its causes. 11. There were two deaths during the yearPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 17 H. M.'s 5th Regiment N. I. POONA.18 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ment; their effects on health. 6. During the first half of the year, before the 8th Regi- ment N. I. had finished their lines, the duties were very heavy. The men have used the gymnasium freely, and no doubt much to the benefit of their muscular development. No accidents of any consequence have occurred. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings: present condition, hy- gienic and otherwise. 7. There has been no alteration in the hospital and its surroundings; its present condition is very good. General health and physique. 8. The general health may be pronounced fair perhaps, but has been much impaired by the great number of cases of ague, conducing to splenic cachexia. Insufficient food, no doubt, this year has been a factor in reducing the standard of health. I do not consider that the physique of the men is what t should be; age is telling on many, who no doubt are much older than is stated. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. There is a very general opinion prevailing that the increased irrigation consequent on the making of the Kurruckwasla Canal has the effect of making the station less healthy; perhaps this may be so, but I am unable to compare the present time with the past in this respect. Details of treated. 10. Ague.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 19 Special observations, new ex- periences in treatment, sanitation, &c. &c. 16. During this year I have tried the application of cold, with some success, in fever cases. Finding that great terror of the cold bath existed, I had the men put instead on an empty cot and cold wet sheets ap- plied: I found it easy in this way to reduce the temperature three or four degrees. I have used boracic acid lotion in the treatment of wounds. I find that, unlike carbolic acid, it does not hinder cicatrization; it is a very useful application for foul ulcers. During the rains I taught a small class Physiology and the Practice of Medicine and Surgery20 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Lines and surroundings, &c. 2. The new lines were finished in the month of April, and the old ones were then vacated by the two companies of sepoys who continued to occupy them till the huts for them were finished in the present lines. The new lines are situated on the western edge of the elevated plateau forming the military parade-ground, and form a continuation of the lines of the two other Native Infantry regiments stationed here. The ground on which they are built is sufficiently sloped to ensure efficient surface drainage. The site is a little to the north of the other lines, and is quite open and exposed to the breeze, and no fault can be found as regards the ventilation. The huts are built according to a standard plan sanctioned by Government in 1874. The drainage of the lines is altogether surface. The ground slopes considerably towards a nullah to the rear of the lines, into which the water is carried by means of open drains and gutters running down the sides of the different streets. It would be a great improvement if the bottoms of the gutters were laid with tiles, as the water would then run off much quicker, and there would not be so much danger of the ground, which in some parts is chiefly black soil lying on a bed of "moorum", getting water-logged during the rains. The regimental bazaar is situated to the rear of the lines at a little distance from the huts, and consists of two blocks of buildings, which are each divided into six shops. The lines, bazaar, and cells are kept clean and in very good repair. Conservancy. 3. This is carefully looked after, and the streets and latrines are kept as clean and sweet as possible. There are two latrines situated to the rear towards the north side of the lines, and at a distance of about 250 yards. One is for the males, and has fifty-six compartments, and one for the females, with twenty-four compartments. The seats are separated from each other by bamboo parti- tions, and the night-soil is received into an iron pan which slopes towards the back of the latrine, where is placed a zinc pail to receive the urine, and which, therefore, is not mixed with the solid excrement. I believe this is a new system introduced lately, and seems to answer. The latrines, however, have no roof over them, and as the part on which the sepoys stand or sit is made of iron it gets very hot during the day, especially in the hot season, and complaints are made, I believe, of the heated iron hurting their feet while standing on it. The night-soil and urine are removed twice a day, and carried to a distance by iron-tank carts and buried in a deep trench. The sweepers use plenty of water in cleaning the latrines, and quicklime is also freely sprinkled about. Water supply. 4. The water is supplied from the Kurruckwasla water-works, and is generally of good quality, and the supply sufficient. Sometimes after a fall of rain it is very muddy, and has to be filtered before using it for cooking or drinking purposes. The water, from flowing a long distance along an open canal, is liable to receive impurities from various causes, and more especially during the monsoon, when a good deal of surface water must run into it; otherwise I am not aware of any other likely sources of impurity. During the past year the grain used by the men has been scarcer and much higher in price. The sepoy, having usually a family or several friends to support besides himself, has suffered considerably in the way of diet, as his pay, although he gets some compensation- money on account of the dearness of provisions, is not largo enough to provide proper food for others besides himself, and many of the men are at present suffering from complaints arising. I believe, in many cases from there not having a sufficiency of proper food. Duties, exercises, and amuse- ments, &c. 6. The sepoys of this regiment have been employed for nearly three years back in building the new regimental lines, which not being the regular duty of the sepoy, and the work being of an entirely different kind to what they have been accustomed to, many of the men have become considerably weakened and broken down, and seem more liable to attacks of fever, &c., than they would otherwise have been. This, together with the prices of provisions, has had a bad effect generally on their physique. The ordinary duties are rather heavy at this station, as, besides the regular regimental and brigade parades, they are employed in furnish- ing guards to the different jails, and in performing the different orderly duties of the station. A good many cases of fever and bowel complaints are sent from the jail guards, caused, I believe, by the men not having shelter enough from the cold winds at night, and from their not getting their food so regularly as they do in their own lines. The exercises and amusements are of the usual sort for natives. There is at present no regimental gymnasium, but the men usually attend the meetings at the station gymkhana,
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 21 and practise running, leaping, &c., and small prizes are given to the most successful. Some of them also make articles of clothing, furniture, and fancy articles for the annual Soldiers' Exhibition; and there are schools, which are well attended by the boys and girls of the regi- ment. Such amusements have a good effect generally on the health of the men, and prevent numbers of them from loafing about in the bazaars, and getting into bad habits. Hospital and surroundings, &c. 7. The hospital is well built, and raised on a plinth about two feet from the ground, has a very good stone floor, and is roofed with double tiles. It consists of two wards, with a surgery and office room between, is very well lighted and airy, affords accommodation for about thirty-five beds, and is provided with a very good cook-room and store-room. The hospital compound is very small, and immediately adjacent to the Staff lines, and also to a row of small houses which are occupied by conductors and other Government officials and their families, and which is a bad arrangement both for the patients in hospital and the occupants of the houses. The hospital was originally built, I believe, for a store-room, and was condemned a year or two ago, and a site for a new building settled on, but as yet nothing has been done; but, now that the new lines are finished, the building of the new hospital should be at once begun. The present quarters for the servants are not pucka -built, but temporary, and always require repairs, and there is no dead-house or separate ward for contagious diseases; there is also no guard-room for the hospital guard, who during the cold and rainy seasons have to sleep either in the verandah or in the hospital. In the case of any contagious disease break- ing out tents have to be applied for. The ventilation is very good. There is generally no overcrowding, but lately the number of fever cases has increased, and some of the milder cases are treated in a tent. The conservancy of the hospital is well looked after. In front of the hospital is a small flower-garden, which affords an agreeable lounge for convalescents. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the regiment has been very fair during the year. A good many of the men have suffered, as previously stated, from the dear- ness of provisions, and from their having been employed in building the lines. The physique of the regiment is also fair, but a good many are men who were enlisted during the Mutiny of 1857, and, having been considerably over the usual age when enlisted, are now beginning to show signs of old age and general breaking up. Influence of climate, &c., on health. 9. As to the influence of climate on health there is no- thing particular to remark. Details of treated. 10. The total number of cases treated during the year was 961, of which 951 were admitted from the 1st January to the 31st December, which, compared with those treated in 1876, shows a decrease of 376, the number treated for that year being 1,337. The decrease seems chiefly to have occurred in the smaller number of cases of ague, rheumatic affections, diarrh22 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Requirements and recom- mendations. 15. As the Present hospital was condemned some time ago, I would beg to recommend that the new one should be built as soon as possible. The site chosen is a very good one, and much more convenient than the present, which, as before stated, is too near the Staff quarters and too far from the lines. Special observations. 16. I have nothing particular to remark under this head. The ordinary class of diseases has been under treatment, and nothing new has occurred. The ordinary malarious fevers have been treated with quinetum, which seems to be efficient in the milder cases, as also is the sulphate of cinchonidine, but in the more severe eases quinine has to be fallen back on. With the conduct and acquirements of the hospital assistants I have every reason to be satisfied. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The new lines, which are situated on the western edge of the plateau joining the parade- ground, and in continuation of the lines of the two other Native Infantry regiments, were completed in April last. The site has been well chosen, and good surface drainage with sufficient ventilation ensured. The huts are built in accordance with Government standard plan, and are kept scrupulously clean. Conservancy is carefully looked after, the night-soil and urine are removed twice daily, and the latrines kept clean by being washed constantly with a plentiful supply of water. The general health of the regiment has been fair, but the medical officer considers that a good many of the men have suffered from their having been engaged for nearly three years in building their lines, a description of work to which they were hitherto unaccustomed. The dearness of provisions, and the impoverished condition of system occasioned thereby, have likewise contributed to create an injurious effect on the men's health. The present hospital having been condemned some time ago, it appears unnecessary to give any further description of the building. The site for the new one has been judiciously selected, being much nearer the lines than the present one. At the time of inspection the hospital, which has been frequently visited, was found remarkably clean, the books written up to date, and the organization of the establishment all that could be desired. H. M.'s 26th Regiment N. I. POONA.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 23 Location and movements. The regiment was stationed at Poona during the whole year 1877. There were no movements beyond small detachments to Nassick, Dindoree, Peint Sowsthan, and a large detachment of 134 men to Sholapoor. The Lines and their surround- ings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines occupied by the regiment are bounded on the north by the lines of the 8th Regiment N.I., which being in close proximity do not admit of that free ventilation which is desirable in that direc- tion; on the south they are bounded by the lines of the 5th Regiment N.I.; on the east by the general parade-ground, a large open plain; a24 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. urine, great difficulty is experienced in keeping the latrines clean. The earthen pots intended to hold urine repeatedly tumble down, and tend to keep the floor always damp, which is most objectionable. The hospital has a large and spacious compound. There is no proper direct road between the lines and hospital. General health and physique. 8. During the first three months of the year the general health of the men was report- ed good, and ague was less prevalent than in the correspond- ing months of the previous year; but afterwards, as the weather became hotter, sickness increased, and the health of the regiment was only pronounced fair. The men were employed on work in the linesPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 25 Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The lines being situated on elevated ground sloping towards the western nullah every facility is afforded in the way of natural drainage for the escape of rain-water. Ventilation is excellent, and the sanitary arrangements are all that can be desired. The hospital, which has been frequently visited, was, at the time of inspection, found to be in a state of efficiency, but the medical officer particularly brought to notice the condition of the roofing and the objectionable mud flooring. H. M.'s Sappers and Miners. KIRKEE.26 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings: present condition, hy- gienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is built on the standard plan, with a bathroom and privy at each end, but quite distinct and separated from the wards, and also from the verandahs. The building is placed on sloping ground about five hundred yards from the Deccan College,POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 27 H. M.'s Poona Horse. SIRUR.28 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The duties of the men are not excessive. Polo is played three times a week, and, be- sides being a healthy exercise, it teaches the boys and Oomed- wars of the regiment to ride. There is a regular gymnastic course now for all recruits and men who have recently joined, men having been sent to Poona to learn the course, and these in turn acting as instructors to the regiment. On the whole the regiment may be said to be very healthy, the percentage of average daily sick having been only 24. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital has already been reported on unfavourably by the Deputy Surgeon- General, the Sanitary Commissioner, and every Surgeon since 1873. It is situated badly, being to windward of the lines and leeward of the parade-ground, from which at certain seasons clouds of dust envelop the building. There is not half accom- modation enough, there being only sufficient for twelve patients, and there are no quarters for the hospital subordinates. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the troops is decidedly good. Many cases of syphilis do not make their appearance, unless in the late secondary or tertiary forms, but often Oomedwars and recruits, nearly all sons of men in the regiment, are found to have had or to have it. This existence of disease in the regiment is undoubtedly greatly due to the fact that Sirur lies just between Poona and Ahmednagar, two towns in which the Contagious Diseases Act is in force; hence if women are not passed in either of these places they in some cases make a move to Sirur with a view of evading the Act,POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 29 Special observations, new ex- periences in treatment, sanita- tion, &c. 16. Special observations in accordance with Memo. No. 1202 of April 1877 from the Deputy Surgeon-General were carried out with reference to the effects of cinchona mixed alkaloid (quinetum) in malarious fever, depressing nausea having been one of the chief objec- tions to its use in previous experiments. In all, 50 cases were treated from 16th June to 4th September 1877. It was administered in two-grain doses every two hours in the fever interval, and six grains just before the accession. In seven cases nausea was produced30 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location. The regiment has been stationary at Ahmednagar since December 1875. During the past year several small detachments were furnished to the talukas. No special sickness occurred amongst the men engaged in these duties. Lines. 2. The lines are in good habitable condition throughout. The surface drainage has been well attended to, and the surrounding ground generally is open, clean, and well drained. The desirability of improving the ventilation of the huts by ridge ventilation was remarked last year. Bathing-places of pucka brick and chunam are being constructed in the verandahs of the married men's quarters, which will improve the sanitary condition of the dwellings, by preventing all soakage within them. Conservancy. 3. The conservancy of the lines is good. The regimental latrines are kept very clean. The hospital latrine is connected with the main building by a covered way. Dry earth is plentifully supplied to the iron pans, the contents of which after use are regularly transferred by the sweepers to iron receptacles and removed early in the morning by the conservancy cart. The latrine should be better ventilated and dammered. Iron pans should be supplied for use in front of the chulas to collect urine and ablution-water, much of which at present runs on to the stone pavement. Water sunnly. 4. The water from the Kapurwarree aqueduct, which supplies the lines, has been of good quality, but was not sufficiently abundant during the hot months and the early part of the monsoon. Food and clothing. 5. Owing to the general scarcity throughout the district, food of all kinds has been at famine prices. A few samples of the grain forming the staple food of the sepoysPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 31 Details of treated. 10. The returns contrast unfavourably with those of the previous year. The admissions into hospital from all causes in 1876 numbered 396, of which 100 were re-admissions. In the past year the admissions have been 593, the re-admissions 201. In comparing the monthly returns for the two years, the increase is seen to have occurred chiefly under the headings of febricula and conjunctivitis. Cases of remittent fever have been of more frequent occurrence, numbering sixteen, against eight in the previous year. They were most common in May, when six were admitted. The cases occurring later, however, were of more severe form, two out of the three admitted in September terminating fatally, one in eighteen, the other in twenty-five days. Of the 201 cases of febricula treated, 120 were admitted during the latter part of May and in June. In the majority of these cases the fever lasted four to five days only. In a few the normal tempera- ture was not reached until the tenth or twelfth day; in four cases the fever returned after an interval of a week's convalescence. Headache was a prominent symptom in all. There were 85 cases of ague, against 110 in the previous year. Two cases of mumps occurred, one in March, the other in May. Three cases of acute and four of chronic rheumatism came under treatment,32 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 13th Regiment N. I. MALLIGAUM.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 33 General health and physique. 8. The general health and physique of the regiment may be considered good. The average height of the regiment is 5 feet 7½ inches. The recruits who joined this year are, with a few exceptions, very promising. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The season has been a very trying one, especially to Europeans. The heat was very great during the months of March, April, and May. During the months of November and December there was a good deal of variation of temperature, which was the cause of much fever amongst the natives. Details of treated. 10. Including the sick of the detachments at Ahmedabad and Sadra, the total number of cases admitted during the year was 662, which with 12 cases remaining from 1876 gives a total of 674 treated. The prevailing diseases were34 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Detachment H.M.'s 4th Rifles N.I. ASIRGARH.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 35 The analysis above shows that the water is a very fair sample of potable water, and I think that seeing such may be obtained at the well it ought to be made much deeper, and capable of holding more water. This may be used as a reserve stock in case of failure of the supply from other sources. The well is to be covered in. Two samples of water, marked respectively A and B, were sent to the Chemical Analyser for analysis last January. The water was obtained from the Suckur well previous to the last rains. That marked A was water from the well filtered once through a "Spencer's magnetic carbide filter;" that marked B unfiltered water from the well. The following is the result:36 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. this scheme with the exception of making a large reservoir instead of the covered well. The Suckur tank and well have also been ordered to be cleaned out during the year 1878. This I sincerely trust will end the vexed question of the water supply. In concluding these remarks on the water supply of the fort I may mention that no injurious effects have been attributable to the drinking water from the present available sources of supply, and this I think is very much in its favour, although the albuminoid ammonia may be in excess of the prescribed standard, and I believe that the potable water here would compare favourably with that of most of the other stations with regard to its purity. Food. 5. The food as supplied here is of fair quality, but higher prices were paid in conse- quence of the famine. There is, as usual, a great want of green vegetable food during the hot months, owing to the scarcity of water for irrigation purposes. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments. 6. The duties for the year have been excessively heavy; owing to the removal of the Europeans, all the guard duties have fallen on native troops; and I have no doubt that this has been the cause of the greater number of admissions into hospital in this as compared with last year. Hospital, &c. 7. The hospital, with the buildings attached, forms a long line of buildings extending for about fifty yards along the south-eastern wall. It is in the same sanitary condition as described in my last report. The new hospital will not be built this year (1878). General health and physique. 8. The general health has been very fair, when we con- sider the hard duty the men have had. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The climate is very healthy. The greater number of the fever cases have been admitted during the latter portion of the year, and the admissions for rheumatism and diseases of the respiratory system have been more during the months of January and February. The average amount of daily sick is more this year, being 7.3 as compared with 5.5 of last year. The healthiest months are March, April, May, and June. Details of treated. 10. There were in all 230 cases admitted into hospital: of these there were 113 admitted for malarious fever; 28 for wounds and accidents, chiefly shoe- bites; 20 for eye diseases, chiefly acute ophthalmia; 9 for rheu- matism; 7 for respiratory diseases; 7 for dysentery; 2 for remittent fever; 2 for diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 37 H. M.'s 4th Rifles. SATARA.38 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. men was reported good except in November, when it was pronounced "tolerably good." Since last report a talimkhana has been instituted, and gymnastic exercises are in favour with the younger soldiers of the regiment. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings: present condition, hy- gienic and otherwise. 7. The regimental hospital is still a hired bungalow in the Sadar Bazaar. As stated in former reports, a properly appointed hospital out of the bazaar is urgently needed. The building itself is weather-proof, for the bungalow is a new one, but its position in the bazaar ought to condemn it. General health and physique. 8. In the monthly return for December I thus wrote (having recently returned from furlough):POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 39 H. M.'s 2nd (Prince of Wales' Own) Regiment N. I. (Grenadiers). BELGAUM.40 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The building is in good condition; but it has only accommodation for twenty patients. This number has been frequently exceeded during the past year; but when the number reached above twenty-one the excess of patients were treated either in tents or in the spare hospital assistant's room, one hospital assistant having been absent on famine duty almost the whole year. General health and physique. 8. The scorbutic taint which some of the men acquired in Aden still manifests itself during exhausting attacks of illness, and a good many of the men had a tendency to it during the famine. Four men have been invalided on account of scurvy. The men have not made as steady a progress in health as was expected after their return from. Aden, owing to the unhealthy season succeeding a year of famine. Influence of climate or local circumstances. 9. In consequence of the unusually dry weather extending over about eight months, from September 1876 to May 1877, succeeded by heavy rains, Belgaum and the surrounding districts have been unusually unhealthy, cholera having prevailed during the hot months; and with the rains, when this epidemic began to abate, remittent fever, in some cases re- sembling typhoid fever, broke out, and continued till the end of the rains, when intermittent fever began to rage, and still prevails. Details of treated. 10. There were 356 admissions, of whom 261 were the actual number of persons treated during the year; the others (95) were re-admissions. There were 19 remaining at the beginning of the year: making the total treated 375, against 410 of last year. The principal causes of sickness were malarious fevers,POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 41 Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The lines are in good condition. The latrines required repair, but a requisition had been made on the Barrack Department to have them put in proper order. At the time of inspection the hospital was found to be in excellent order, the beds clean., patients well attended to, and the books and records written up to date. Surgeon Peters par- ticularly noticed the want of a filter, especially for dispensary purposes, and no doubt this means of supplying pure drinking water should be provided for every hospital in the service. H. M.'s 14th Regiment N. I. BELGAUM.42 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. with success, poor people to purchase it. In consequence of there being no rain from Sep- tember 1876 to April 1877, there was almost no grazing for animals; their flesh was very lean and deficient in nourishment. A short time ago a chicken could not be obtained in the bazaar, even on market days. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The duties of the regiment at head-quarters have been those of ordinary parades and guards. Escort parties have proceeded to the districts in charge of treasure and gangs of convicts. The average number of consecutive nights in bed has been 3.71. Some of the men, when off duty, have amused themselves in gardening. There is a cricket club in the regiment, and some of the men play twice a week. Some of them train for foot races, and have taken prizes at the Gymkhana meetings. There is no gymnasium in the lines of this regiment, but I believe some of the men avail themselves of that in the lines of the other native regiment. The men practise a good deal with clubs, at wrestling, &c. Hospital and its immediate surroundings. 7. The building is in good condition, but it is too small,having accommodation for only eighteen patients. Tents have been frequently pitched in the hospital compound for the treatment of ordinary cases of sick- ness, because there was not room in the hospital. General health and physique. 8. These may, I think, be considered satisfactory. At the close of the year fifteen men remained in hospital, but eleven of them were cases of a slight nature. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Belgaum and the surrounding districts have been very unhealthy; this may be attri- buted to the long period of dry weather during the last four months of 1876 and the first four or five months of 1877, fol- lowed by heavy rain. Cholera prevailed during the hot months. Remittent fever of a severe type prevailed till the rains were over, since which time intermittent fever has prevailed to a great extent all over the districts. So great has been the demand for quinine for sale in the districts that at one time I was unable to meet the demand at the Civil Hospital. Details of treated. 10. The total number of treated during the year was 453; of these 439 were admissions. There were 34 re-admissions, so that the total number of per- sons treated was 419. Ague gave 134 of the total number of admissions, and there were 18 from remittent fever. Respiratory diseases gave 28 admissions; the largest number (6) was in the month of November. There were no admissions in August and December. There were 27 admissions from diarrh43 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The lines are kept in good order, but are unfavourably situated at the south-east end of the cantonment. Conservancy and sanitary arrangements are attended to, and the latrines kept clean. The dry-earth trench system might be introduced with benefit. The water supply is abundant and pure. It is obtained from five wells which are covered, and are far removed from cesspools or other sources of contamination. Although a better site not only for this hospital, but also for that of H.M.'s 2nd Grenadier Regiment, might have been selected, there is nothing objectionable in the building itself. The medical officer strongly advises the introduction of good filters for purifying the water used in dispensing medicines, in which suggestion I entirely concur. H. M.'s 3rd Regiment N. I. KOLAPUR.44 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food and clothing. 5. Food was neither abundant nor of good quality throughout the greatest portion of the year, but has materially improved of late. Prices also, which were at first very high, are now much more moderate. The men should wear more under-clothing when on night guards at this season of the year, but their tunics seem too small to admit of this. Their shoes also fit very badly, and occasion numerous shoe-bites. Beyond this, and the increase of cases of pulmonary disorders at this season from the cold, I cannot trace any ill consequences to deficient or badly fitting clothes. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. During most of the year two companies had been at Kaladgi, and, as most of the Kolapur infantry (State regiment) had been out in the dis- tricts on famine duty, our sepoys were more than sufficiently occupied, having to supply guards which the Kolapur infantry usually supplied. The two Kaladgi companies have since rejoined head-quarters, and, as the Kolapur infantry had mostly come in from the districts, the work would have been lighter but that the left wing has left for Sholapur, which again throws a great amount of work on those that remain. Nights in bed average three per week. The sepoys amuse themselves a good deal at native gymnastics. Neither duty nor exercise seems to affect their health injuriously; on the other hand, one can at once distinguish the gymnast (of whom there are several amongst them) by his appearance and the condition of his muscles. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. There are two detached hospital buildings, one larger than the other, and each excellent. Only one of these is generally occupied by patients, the other being reserved for women; and only once since I joined the regiment in March was I under the necessity of putting sepoys in this smaller building. This was during the rains, when the number of patients was greater than usual. Both buildings are well ventilated and are kept in excellent order. General health and physique. 8. The physique of the men is pretty good, but there are a number of puny fellows among them, not worth anything on active service, and whom the regiment would be much better quit of. Details of treated. 9. Including the sick of the wings at Kaladgi and Sholapur, the total treated num- bered 727. The chief diseases were malarious fevers, which gave 273 admissions, rheumatic affections 35, syphilis 23, diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 45 The hospital, which was originally built for a European regiment, is admirably con- structed for the accommodation of sick. It was found to be in a state of perfect cleanliness and efficiency, and the books and records were neatly written up to date. H. M.'s 19th Regiment N. I. SHOLAPUR.46 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon,-General JOYNT. This corps, just arrived from Sholapur, presented a sick list of over 15 per cent. of fighting strength, chiefly made up of syphilitic and fever cases, for which the hospital accommodation was quite inadequate. Within a few days, however, Surgeon Henderson, me- dical officer in charge, reported a considerable decrease in the number of sick, and a suffi- ciency of hospital accommodation. The present sanitary condition of the lines and hospital. is most satisfactory. H. M.'s 12th Regiment N. I. DHARWAR.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 47 Water supply. 4. The water supply is obtained in sufficient quantity from three wells48 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Requirements and recommend- ations. 15. I think it would be a great improvement if the windows on the south-west side of the hospital were fitted with shutters to keep out the glare of the sun., One small room, which is used for ophthalmic cases, especially requires them. To guard against the contamination of the wells by surface water, &c., I have suggested that they should be covered, and the ground drained and paved around them. Special observations. 16.I have no special observations to make, with the exception that the jail authorities have ordered a new burial-ground, about four hundred yards to the south-east and in rear of the officers' quarters, and just outside the cantonment limits. I look upon it as too close to the lines, especially as the east wind blows at this season continually over the place in the direction of the cantonment. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The site for the lines has been well chosen. There is excellent surface drainage, and a free ventilation through the streets between the huts. The water supply, which is derived. from three wells, is sufficient in quantity, and of good quality. The general health of the men has been good. The present state of the hospital, which is a model of cleanliness, was found to be highly satisfactory. It is well ventilated, and its conservancy arrangements carefully attended to. A dead-house, situated about thirty yards to the north of the hospital, has been added since last report. The medical officer brought to notice the inconvenience experienced by the dust rising from the mud floors, and suggested its being replaced by either a stone or wooden one.
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 49 NORTHERN DIVISION. Average Strength Present during the year 8,601.3 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength 3.4 Ratio of Mortality to the Average Strength 0.7 H. M.'s 1st Regiment N. I. (Grenadiers.) AHMEDABAD.50 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. taut three miles, is sometimes complained of by the men furnishing the guard. The veran- dah asked for last year has been granted, and they are now well protected from the sun. All recruits practise gymnastics, chiefly on the horizontal and parallel bars, under the super- vision of a subedar. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. In March last, in consequence of, the removal of the European hospital to another situation, the ward given up to the sick of another regiment was returned to the Grenadiers. Taken together, the two wards now available give accommodation for thirty patients. Ventilation is accomplished. by opposite doors and windows, and an upward current is provided for by vertical shafts passing out at the roof. The floor is well pavedNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 51 vomiting and purging, and on arrival at hospital was almost moribund. Death resulted in a few hours. The huts which had contained cholera cases were thoroughly disinfected, and, along with those immediately adjoining, vacated for the time. As there was plenty of spare accommodation in the lines, and no evidence of a localized infected area, it was not thought necessary to move any part of the regiment under canvas. No fresh outbreak occurred in the families removed. There were six cases of modified small-pox of a very mild character, five between 26th January and 16th April, and one in December; all had been previously vaccinated with success. The probable source of infection was a neighbouring village where the disease was present for the greater part of the year. All precautions were taken to pre- vent its spread. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Vaccination was performed 34 times, and the quality of the lymph was good. There were 84 primary and 118 re-vaccinations; 78 of the former and 86 of the latter were successful. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Forty-nine men were returned unfit by the annual Invaliding Committee, and a case of gunshot wound of the hand was invalided subsequent- ly. The causes were as follows:52 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. The 9th Regiment remained during the year in Baroda until the 29th November, when they proceeded by rail to Bombay, relieving the 20th Regiment. The Lines and their surround- ings present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines*are situated between the Crawford Market and the Carnac Bunder, about ten minutes' walk from the hospital. The vicinity is thickly populated on the north side, but on the south there are prin- cipally sheds and buildings connected with the G. I. P. Railway. On the east is the Carnac Bunder, on the west the Crawford Market. The lines have recently been undergoing a revision as to drainage, and the work is now approaching completion. Conservancy. 3. The latrines are situated in the north-east corner. They are surrounded by a high brick wall which is fenced off by wooden palings about two feet from it, and the latrines themselves are made of iron with iron divisions and roofs. The refuse is removed daily by the conservancy carts. The latrines are too few, the men state, for the number of inhabitants of the lines, which with the ad- dition of the detachment 4th Rifles cannot be well under 2,000 men, women, and children. Water supply. 4. The men obtain water from four iron tanks which are supplied by Vehar water. The water can be drawn off by numerous taps fixed in these tanks. Food. 5. Food is abundant but somewhat dear. During the months of June, July, and August grain was at an extremely high price in Baroda, but then the men received the usual compensation. Duties, &c. 6. The duties in Baroda were light, and the additional work here has only been for so short a time that it is not possible to express any opinion. Hospital. 7. This has been described and reported upon at pages 2 and 3, Army Medical Report for 1876. General health and physique. 8. The health of the men, and their physique, is very fair. Within the last two years upwards of 70 of the oldest and most worn-out men have been invalided, and the recruits are a very fine body of men. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The health of the regiment was certainly not improving in Baroda, and the change to Bombay is a beneficial one. Details of treated. 10. The principal causes of sickness were 177 admissions from ague, 28 from rheuma- tism, diseases of the lungs 36, dysentery 22, small-pox 4, diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 53 ing party had been, or some men had been there on leave; it was known, at any rate, that within three or four weeks of the outbreak sepoys had arrived from Dakoor. The only other supposition which could be made had very slender grounds for support: it was that the men, under the expected orders to march shortly to Bombay, had been turning out all their old kit and household goods, which consisted (as was seen when the families moved, and who suffered most) of the most dirty, foul-smelling collection of all sorts of rags that could well be brought together. As there had been an epidemic in 1875, it was possible that some cholera germs lying hidden in those rags became developed and diffused on their exposure to the air. The regiment moved out under canvas on the 13th October, to as good a site as could be chosen at the time of the year, when all crops were standing high. The direction was then to east of camp. The season was termed the north-east monsoon, but the wind veered daily 16 points. In a few days several cases occurred amongst the women and children, but only one sepoy was admitted between this and the 20th. The families belonging to the right half-battalion were separated, and removed from where they had ensconced themselves, near a hedge and beneath some trees, to a more airy spot, and here they remained free for seven days. The families of the left half-battalion were then attacked, and these too were removed to a distance; finally the regiment itself marched to a spot some three and a half miles from the first camp, and to the westward of Baroda. Here they were only encamped one day, as complaints were made that the tents were in too close proximity to the road where H. H. the Gaekwar took his evening drive. The regiment then moved about two miles to northwards, and here the admissions decidedly increased and deaths occurred rapidly. On the next day but one the regiment again moved one mile to the eastward, where the epidemic eventually disappeared. In the mean while, after a lapse of seven days, cholera broke out in the families of the right half-battalion, whilst it still continued in the left, so that both wings were moved to a spot about two miles to the north-east. There was great difficulty in selecting grounds for encamping: either the crops were high, or the ground was low, with marshy strips here and there, or there was no water supply near at hand. Cases still continuing to be admitted, the families were again moved about three miles to the northwards, when the outbreak ceased. The total number of attacked was 45 men, women, children, and followers. The deaths were 8 sepoys, 9 women, 5 children, and 2 followers. In one family, that of the havildar Ram Sawunt, three children were attacked, with the interval of a week between each attack, but nothing special could be traced as to cooking-pots or the grain used by them. Of the two followers, one was a dhooly-bearer, and the other a sweeper. These five cases point to con- tagion; but, taking the remaining cases as a whole, the men and others attacked were not by any means crowded together, or, indeed, in any close proximity. The attacks were sprinkled generally over the camp in an arbitrary manner. The caste which suffered most, as might be reasonably expected, was the Purwaree. The treatment was various54 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. damp and in a foul conditionNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 55 Water supply. 4. The water supply is obtained from numerous wells near the lines. These wells are free from any source of contamination. The water contains a quantity of chlorides, but its quality is, in the majority of the wells, considered wholesome. During the hot season some of the wells run dry. Food. 5. The food consists of meat of fair quality, fish, and ordinary country vegetables and fruits. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. Parades, guard-mounting, picquet duty. They do not exert any bad effects on health. Average number of nights in bed56 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. then, and had been for two or three days previously, south-east. The detachment had, how- ever, marched in from that direction. A day after, another case occurred in the same house; and then cholera began to spread in a south-easterly direction for about a week, being en- tirely confined to the village, the wind being all this while north-east; then it followed a north-easterly course, though still prevailing in the first direction; and by the end of Octo- ber cholera had travelled again near the lines through the bazaar, the direction being west. It seemed at times to travel with, and at times against, the wind. Before the arrival of the detachment it appears, from inquiries made by the Political Agent, Mahi Banta, that not a single case of cholera had occurred, nor was there any unusual prevalence of diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 57 Details of treated. 9. The chief causes of admission into hospital were ague, chronic rheumatism, diseases of the respiratory system, and affections of the liver. Mortality and its causes. 10. One death occurred in hospital from remittent fever, in August. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 11. Twenty-five children were vaccinated (primary); sixteen of the operations were suc- cessful. Twenty-nine re-vaccinations took place, twenty-one being successful. Invaliding and its causes 12. One gunner and one trumpeter passed the annual Invaliding Committee at Ah- medabad for chronic rheumatism with sciatica, and general debility, respectively. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General WYLLIE. Inspected 19th February: health good throughout, and only one casualty in past year. Lines on standard plan, clean, properly ventilated, and roomy, with adequate arrangements for the disposal of sewage. The sick have suitable and sufficient room in the hospital wing 7th Regiment, the least satisfactory feature of which is the floor (here of earth, as at Deesa and Bhuj), involving much trouble to keep it tidy. Asphalt should be substituted, for reasons of cleanliness, comfort, and economy. H. M.'s 7th Regiment N. I. RAJKOT.58 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. been well covered over with dry earth, into iron receptacles. The latter are conveyed by carts to some distance from camp, and their contents buried in pits. The rubbish, collected twice daily from the lines, is also emptied into the pits dug for the reception of the latrine accumulations. The bathing-places are situated in the verandahs of the huts. The bath- water is allowed to flow from the vicinity of the huts through kutcha-built surface drains. Water supply. 4. Drinking water is obtained chiefly from the well situated about three hundred yards to. the north of the lines. This supply is ample; every man is allowed to draw as much as he requires. The high brick surrounding wall, and the absence of drains from the immediate vicinity of the well, account in great part for the excellent quality of the water. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 5. The duties consist chiefly of parade and guard duty. Under the head of exercise are included morning and evening parades, running drill dur- ing the cold season, wrestling, and sword exercise. Music and singing are the principal amusements. The duties are by no means injurious to the health of the men. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 6. The hospital is a large well-ventilated building. The latrine is in close proximity to the well which supplies the hospital and several of the officers at camp with drinking water. The condition of the earth in and around the latrine is bad, and may prove injurious here- after. The soil is thoroughly saturated with bowel and kidney excretions, and, unless precautionary measures are adopted to prevent contamination of the hospital well water, specific bowel complaints may result. General health and physique. 7. The health of the corps for the past year contrasts most favourably with that of the previous one; this is due in a great measure to the withdrawal of the detachment from the unhealthy outpost, Burda Chowkey. There was a decrease of 154 in the number treated during the past year as compared with that of the previous one, the average strength of the corps being almost the same during the two years. The physique of the men is about the average. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 8. I doubt whether the climate of Rajkot has, to any extent, been prejudicial to the health of the men. Under the head of 'local circumstances' I think. I might venture the opinion that the want of good sub- stantial food, such as good fresh vegetables, a variety of new grain, fair mutton, fish, &c., for a continuous period of five years, has helped greatly to affect the general health and physique of the men. Details of treatment. 9. During the year 1876, with an average strength of 280, the total number treated was 384; while during the past year, with an average strength of 306, the total number treated was only 230. Ague in both years was the prevailing disease; the number treated from this cause during 1876 exceeded that of the past year by 75 cases. Scurvy only gave eight treated,. of whom four remained from the previous year. Mortality and its causes. 10. Two deaths occurred during the year, one from debil- ity, the other from pneumonia. Epidemics. 11. There was no epidemic disease. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 12. Vaccination and re-vaccination have been carried on assiduously; 32 primary and 30 successful re-vaccinations took place. The lymph was good. Invaliding and its causes. 13. Fifteen men passed the annual Invaliding Committee at Ahmedabad, principally for general debility, chronic rheumatism, and impaired vision. Requirements and recommenda- tions. 14. There is no place of residence attached to the hospital for the native medical pupil. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General WYLLIE. Inspected 19th February. There was much less sickness than in the previous year, and, as in the case of the 28th Regiment, the improvement dates from the abandonment of the unhealthy and malarious outpost of Burda Chowkey, and is largely shown in the decrease under ague and scurvy, as well as in cases of debilityNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 59 clean and very tidy. Permanent latrines, common to artillery and cavalry, in use throughout, owing to rocky ground; but in the case of the wing they are much out of the way, being at the very inconvenient distance of 563 yards from the lines. The objectionable proximity (75 feet) of the hospital latrine to the well60 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food. 5. Suitable compensation is allotted to each fighting man when the price of grain exceeds a certain fixed rate. The want of fresh vegetables is still felt, these being both scarce and expensive. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. I have in some cases traced the origin of acute bronchial and pulmonic lesions to exposure while on night duty during the cold weather. I at once recommended the adoption of greatcoats as an article of wearing apparel on such occasions, with good results. " Kneel- ing drill" in the case of recruits just joined from the Deccan has given rise to vague lesions of the knee-joint; out of a batch of sixteen, five were admitted into hospital soon after this drill began,NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 31 Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General WYLLIE. Inspected February 20th. The sanitary state of this corps has undergone great improvement since the date of last report, the ratio of treated to strength having declined from 103.74 in 1876 to 56.26 in the past year. Health was thus particularly good, and only surpassed in the wing of the 24th Regiment at Agar; while mortality was also exception- ally low. This favourable change has been in progress since the withdrawal of the detach- ment, in November 1876, from the sickly outpost at Burda Chowkey, and is chiefly shown under the heads of ague, scurvy, rheumatism, and bowel complaints, due notably to the gradual disappearance of the scorbutic taint with which much of the previous excess of such cases was connected. Hospital suitable, with ample room, but deficient in out-offices: arrangements all properly ordered, and duties carefully conducted. Lines excellent, huts roomy and well ventilated, and conservancy efficient, trench latrines being in use during the fair season. H. M.'S 11th Regiment N. I. BHUJ.62 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The duties consist of parades and guards, musketry in the season, and occasional escort duty to Ahmedabad or Mandvie. Amusements are chiefly shooting. Hospital and its surroundings: present condition, hygienic or otherwise. 7. The hospital is one of the best in the Bombay Presidency, situate on high ground, well exposed to every good wind, but sheltered from the N.E. winds by a long range of hills. It is well ventilated by three ridge ventilators, and has two capital verandahs, each capable of accommodating sixteen beds. There is a store, bathing, and spare room for special cases, lately made under the southern verandah, and a capital dispen- sary and surgery in the northern verandah. The hospital is at present in very good repair. General health and physique. 8. The general health and physique of the men has considerably deteriorated from the date of arrival of the regiment from Satara, four years ago. The men have lost flesh and spirits. They are very liable to have scurvy, and unable to undergo any prolonged or great exertion. The death rate is about 13.15 per thousand per year, and the invaliding about 36.54. The chief disease is intermittent fever, which certainly weakens the men a good deal. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The climate of Bhuj is a trying one in the summer months; fearful dust-storms come from the west, and, the soil being sandy, there is no vegetation or grass on it to check the storm. The redeeming feature is the cool nights, due to the sea breeze from the Gulf of Cutch. After the rains, which this year were very heavy for Catch (15 inches), we get north-east and easterly winds from the Runn, which bring fever into camp. Details of treated. 10. The chief disease here is intermittent fever, from which cause alone there were 297 cases treated in hospital last year; of scurvy there were 10 cases, bronchitis 29, muscular rheumatism and lumbago 34, primary syphilis 10, and chronic rheumatism 8. Of bronchial catarrh there were 44, of gonorrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 63 till towards the close of the year, and at this date malarious fevers have declined to the normal level. Hospital accommodation adequate and excellent, and all its arrangements well- ordered. Lines clean, and in fair repair, but old; huts wanting, beyond all, in cubage64 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. Hospital excellent in every way. Surroundings very favourable, and its present condition leaves nothing to be desired. General health and physique. 8. General health has been very good. Physique rather above the average. Great attention is paid to selecting able-bodied recruits with good chest capacity, no man being passed who is less than 32 inches chest circumference over the nipple line at rest. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Although the rainfall was less than half the average, malarial disease gave six more admissions than in 1876. Details of treated. 10. Including the figures of the squadron at Rajkote, the chief causes of inefficiency were, as usual, contusions and ague, the former amounting to 70, the latter to 69 cases. There was only one case of remit- tent fever. The following are the remaining cases, in the order of frequency, viz., rheuma- tism 24, colic 14, conjunctivitis 12, dysentery 14 (all mild), bronchitis 7, and sprains 5. Mortality and its causes. 11. Only one death occurred at head-quarters, from diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 65 Location and movements. The regiment has been stationed in Deesa since the end of 1873 and commence- ment of 1874. A detachment of 42 of all ranks arrived at head- quarters from Mount Abu in the month of January. The Lines and their surround- ings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines are old, dilapidated, and past repair. The huts are not built on plinths; on the contrary, the floors are for the most part below the level of the surrounding ground. The roofs are tiled. Many of them leak, and the huts are in consequence damp during the rains. The ventilation is through the doors and roofs. The drainage of the lines and of the cantonment is surface drainage. The huts are shaded by numerous fine trees. The bazaar is about 300 yards distant, and its sanitary condition is satisfactory. New lines are much needed. Conservancy. 3. The trench system of latrine is used. The latrines, two in number, one for each sex, are situated in the sandy bed of the river in the dry weather, and on the river bank in the wet weather. This system seems tolerably well suited to the locality. The lines are kept clean. Water supply. 4. There are six wells in the lines, and one in the hospital compound. The supply is sufficient, and quality fairly good. Food and clothing. 5. Owing to the deficient rainfall (only 12 inches and 90 cents for the year), all articles of consumption have risen in price, and will yet become dearer. The men, as a rule, appear to me under-fed. As regards cloth- ing, a lighter dress for the hot weather would be, as I remarked in my last annual report, of real benefit to the sepoy. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The ordinary garrison duties and escort parties, parades and drills, give the men abundant exercise. There is no gymnasium, but the men occasionally compete for prizes in running, jumping, &c.; nei- ther their duties nor exercise seem to affect the health of the men prejudicially, whilst athletic amusements in moderation do good. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings: present condition, hy- gienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is well situated, clean, and in excellent repair. Its immediate sur- roundings are the subsidiary buildings for the hospital estab- lishment and subordinate medical department, two contagious diseases wards, a dead-house, and a latrine. The latter is built of masonry, and is kept clean by the hospital Sweepers, who remove the excreta into covered receptacles, which are taken away at night in the conservancy carts. There is ample accommodation in the wards, and there has been no overcrowding. Ventilation is secured through apertures in the roof and near the ground, as also through the doors and windows. The water supply, obtained from a well in the compound, is sufficient, and its quality fairly good. General health and physique. 8. The general health has been very good. The physique of the men is not what I could wish; 57 recruits have joined during the year, and cer- tainly I cannot call them fine men, nor likely to become so66 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 12. Carefully and uniformly carried out according to existing regulations. Invaliding and its causes. 13. Twenty-three men were invalidedNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 67 Location and movements. The head-quarters of the regiment have been stationed at Mhow during the year; the left half-battalion was stationed at Indore up to June, when it rejoined the head-quarters; in October the wing again left for Indore. The Lines and their surround- ings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines are situated at the north end of the camp, on a black soil plain; they are in the usual style of single-tiled huts, with no special arrangement for ventilation, and are in the rainy season damp and scarcely fit for habitation, as they are not raised on a plinth of any kind, and are only kept habitable by constant repair. The streets are narrow; and, as they run north and south instead of east and west, they do not get the benefit of the prevailing winds, thus rendering their ventilation very defective. Conservancy. 3. During the rainy season the covered-in permanent latrines are used; at other times the trench latrines are opened. Both are placed too far from the lines. An annual crop of vegetables is grown. after use of the trench latrines. Water supply. 4. Water, from wells at the north end of the lines, is as a rule good and plentiful, but scarcely so towards the end of the hot months. Food. 5. A good and plentiful supply of food is always to be got in the bazaar at this station. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The duties consist of parades, guards, and ordinary garrison duty with frequent; escort duty. There is a gymnastic instructor in the regiment, and a good many of the young sepoys and boys take advantage of his teaching; there are some who indulge in other athletic exercises, such as wrestling and clubs; these men are the healthiest in the regiment. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is in every way suited for the treatment of the sick of a Native Infantry regiment. General health and physique. 8. The health of the regiment has been good during the year. The physique of the men is good, and the recruits have been up to the average. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The climate of Mhow has had a beneficial effect on the health of the regiment after being so long in Rajpootana. The duties at this station are not heavy, and the men have a fair average of nights in bed. Details of treated 10. Of the admissions into hospital for the year, malarious fever stands highest, giving 290. Injuries come next, chiefly from shoe-bites caused by ill-fitting boots. Skin diseases stand high; nearly all, how- ever, come under boils and ulcers. Rheumatic affections, including lumbago, have contributed a large share. Of diseases of the stomach and bowels diarrh68 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General WYLLIE. Health has been tolerably good throughout, showing improvement on previous year. Hos- pital has ample and excellent accommodation, and is complete in subsidiary offices. My in- spection, 25th December, was fully satisfactory, unless as respects the lines, the defects of which remain as formerly reported; and the rocky nature of the ground offers an obstacle to tree-planting, in improvement of sullage drainage, as involving much labour. The trench latrines have been brought more conveniently near since last visit; the distant permanent ones are only used in the rains. H. M.'s 25th Regiment N. I. MHOW.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 69 Vaccination and re-vaccination. 6. There were 74 vaccinations during the year; of these 42 were males, and 32 females; 18 were over, and 56 under 1 year; 70 cases were successful, and 4 unsuccessful. There were also 18 re-vaccinations during the year; of these 11 were successful, and 7 unsuccessful. Invaliding and its causes. 7. There were 10 men invalided during the year. The chief causes of invaliding were the effects of repeated attacks of ague, ending in debility and blood deterioration, long-continued bronchitis, and chronic rheumatism. One man was invalided for extreme debility caused by a combination of con- ditions all due to syphilis. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General WYLLIE. Inspected 25th December. This charge is at present a weak wing under orders for Aden, and separated from head-quarters only since the 21st ultimo. There has been no sickness worth mentioning in the interval. The hospital is excellent, with complete out- buildings, and the arrangements are satisfactory. Lines adjoin and are similar to those of the 23rd, but lying lower they are even more defective. H. M's 24th Regiment N. I. MEHIDPUR.70 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food. 5. This year the price of food has risen considerably, although there has been no famine. There is always a great dearth of vegetables. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. Parade three times a week, musketry practice in the cold season, and guards. There is a gymnasium, at which all recruits and young soldiers attend; and some of the men fish and shoot. Duties have not exercised an unfavourable influence on health. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings: present condition, hy- gienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is situated 60 yards to the north of the lines. The roof has been thoroughly repaired, and the want of light and ventilation remedied. There has been no overcrowding. The flooring is in very bad repair; this I trust will soon be remedied. General health and physique. 8. The men were in very good health on their arrival from Delhi, but have to a certain extent deteriorated since. Being chiefly composed of Hindus (Mahrattas), they are not of very good physique. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The cantonment of Mehidpur has been always considered one of the unhealthiest stations to which a Native Infantry regiment is liable to be sent. Its low situation, proximity to the native town,NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 71 Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Twenty-nine primary and twelve re-vaccinations were performed: four of each were unsuccessful. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Twenty-three men were sent up: 18 have been pensioned, 1 discharged with a gratuity, and 4 returned to duty. They were invalided for the following disorders:72 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Water supply. 4. The water supply is derived from wells. Except in three of the wells in the lines, the quality of the water is good, and the supply plentiful. The three line wells excepted are now undergoing repairs, as they were found to be too shallow, and the masonry work was defective. It was on this account that the water in them was muddy and brackish. Food. 5. Fresh vegetables are supplied to the men occasionally from the regimental garden. The price of grain is low. Duties, exercise, and amusements. 6. The duties are the usual routine work of parades, musketry, and sentry duty, and are by no means excessive. The average weekly number of nights in bed during the year was 6½. There is no gymna- sium for athletic exercise, nor is there any substitute. The men, as a rule, take no more exercise than they can help. There is much need for some incentive to healthy physical exercise, and no doubt a very simply constructed gymnasium would be a great boon in aiding the physical development of many of the sepoys. Hospital and its surroundings: present condition, hygienic or otherwise. 7. The hospital is well situated and well ventilated, clean, in good repair, and has ample accommodation. Conser- vancy is carefully attended to. General health and physique. 8. Judging from the relatively few admissions into hospital, as well as from the ap- pearance and testimony of the sepoys themselves, the general health of the wing during its stay at Agar has been all that could be desired. The general physique of the majority of the men is, however, only middling. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The climate of Agar is undoubtedly good, and conducive to the health of native troops; there are no local circumstances which appear to have any deleterious effect upon health. Details of treated. 10. The average daily strength of the wing from the 8th of March was 245.2; the admissions into hospital were 109. The greatest number of patients in hospital on any day during the year was nine, on the 26th May. The months of March and October give the greatest number of admissions; in the first, probably on account of the fatigue after the march from Delhi; in the second, from an excess of fever cases. The chief cause of admission was intermittent fever, which gives 43 admissions, or 39 per cent. of the whole, and in the ratio of 17.5 per cent. to the average strength of the wing. The average period under treatment in hospital of all cases of intermittent fever was five days. Second in frequency come venereal diseases, which give nine admissionsNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 73 H. M.'s 3rd (Queen's Own) Regiment Light Cavalry. NEEMUCH.74 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Sediments:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 75 Requirements and recommen- dations. 15. The total abolition of all secret cesspools in the courtyards of the huts; good saucer stone gutters are required instead of the earthen ones running down in front of the huts; also a new masonry latrine, neither too close to the lines, nor so far as the present one. Low parapets round the draw-holes of flat covered wells are needed. I have had this done in the case of the hospital well, as the washings ran in. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General WYLLIE. Inspected 8th December. Health to date very satisfactory. The present hospital, occupied in April last, was formerly that of the Royal Artillery. It has sufficient and suit- able room, and there are ample subsidiary buildings; but the situation is inconvenient by distance, and open to some objection as lying between the regimental bazaar and grass- cutters' lines. For these reasons one of the vacated Artillery barracks near to the Cavalry lines is being got in readiness as an hospital, and it will afford superior accommodation, with all needful out-offices. I found the lines fairly clean and in tolerable repair, but noticed the existence of cess- pools in some of the family enclosures. These, I understand, will now be removed. H. M.'s 10th Regiment N. L. I. NEEMUCH.76 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Water supply. 4. The same as previously described; owing to the slight rainfall the supply has been somewhat scarce, most of the wells having rapidly dried up. Food. 5. The food supplies, during the latter half of the year especially, have been not only dear, but scarce; the green food and vegetables, owing to the protracted hot weather, and insufficient rainfall, have also been very scarce. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. These are substantially as given in former reports, and have proved not otherwise than beneficial to the general health. One recruit of rather weakly frame and slender fibre, while going through his ath- letics in the gymnasium, met with an accident causing rupture of the tendo Achillis of the left leg, from which he had ultimately to be discharged the service, owing to permanent lameness. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital block previously occupied by the 3rd (Q. 0.) Light Cavalry and staff and details having been vacated was taken over during the year; it is in good order, clean, and well ventilated; there has been no overcrowding. The subsidiary buildings are suffi- cient and conveniently situated. During the year efforts have been made, with good effect, to plant a few shady trees round the hospital. The hospital well ran dry in November last, when fortunately it was in part replenished by a propitious fall of rain. General health and physique. 8. The health of the regiment, though improving gradually, cannot be pronounced satisfactory, owing chiefly to persistent malarial cachexia con- tracted at Mehidpur, many sent on sick leave suffering severely, and being still liable to recurrences of fever on the least unusual exertion, change of weather, season, diet, clothing, &c. The physique of the men generally is satisfactory. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The change to Neemuch from Mehidpur has proved, on the whole, beneficial to the general health of the regiment. Details of treated 10. Of the total treated, 1,277, the largest proportion of admissions was due to malarious fevers, giving a ratio of 72.3 per cent. of fevers to all diseases treated, and 144.8 per cent. of fevers to the average strength. The general character of these fevers, though for the most part quotidian or tertian, was marked by frequent recurrences, and occasional complications of the internal organs, followed in many cases by general debility and more or less anæmia. Of the several cases of malarious fever recorded, many (33) had to be sent away for change of air, owing to extreme general debility engendered by protracted illness and convalescence. Most of the cases invalided were also, directly or otherwise; due to malarial fevers or secondary influences contracted at Mehidpur. Large doses of quinineNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 77 Invaliding and its causes. 14. There were in all 22 invalided, of whom 19 were Hindus and 3 Musalmans. For malarious fever 6, lung diseases 3, hernia 1, old age and debi- lity 10, secondary syphilis 1, and injury to tendo Achillis I. Requirements and recommen- dations. 15. A contagious diseases ward and dead-house are much required. The present lines should be abolished, and new lines built on standard plans, with adequate space, plinths, drainage, &c. The wells should be deepened, and reservoirs to retain water constructed, and the adjoining nullahs so bunded as to raise the water level. Inspection, by Deputy Surgeon-General WYLLIE. Inspected 8th and 9th December. Health unsatisfactory, but materially better than in the previous year, when the regiment was at Mehidpur. During the past eleven months, in an average daily strength of 598, there have been 1,051 admissions into hospital, of which 815 were due to malarious fevers. In April the number of such cases received was 124, and in May as high as 227. It is noteworthy that the same exceptional result happened in the case of the 25th Regiment after removal to Mhow in 1874, of an excess of ague in the summer months as the outcome of malarious saturation acquired during two years' residence at Mehidpur. Apart from this exceptional feature the admissions have been relatively few, and mortality very small. Hospital consists of two old barracks, and has ample and fairly suitable accommodation. with sufficient subsidiary buildings, excepting a dead-house. I found all well ordered. Lines clean and in tolerable repair; huts more defective than average. Two urinals have lately been constructed: a hollow perforated stone slab raised some 18 inches and adequately screened with an iron receptacle below, removable from outside, is the arrangement; it is more troublesome than that at Nusseerabad, but sand is not procurable. Permanent latrine:, are constantly in use, but here, as elsewhere in the Mhow command, inconveniently distant from the lines. H. M.'s 16th Regiment N. I. NUSSEERABAD.78 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The Lines and their surround- ings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines are according to the standard plan, the roof is single-tiled, and the plinth is low. The huts are in good repair. During the year, how- ever, they have been very much improved. The ground has been properly drained by surface trenches, so that it is now im- possible for water to lodge. All cesspools have been abolished. A small open surface drain conducts from the bathroom all the water, &c. of the household to trees planted in front of the huts in the married quarters. Another vast improvement is the erection of urinals; this prevents a nuisance which has always hitherto existed, namely, the saturation of the ground in the vicinity of the huts by urine. These improvements have, in my opinion, made the lines as healthy as it is possible to make lines for native soldiers. The cantonment and lines are well drained, and the huts in the lines are clean and well ventilated. The bazaar attached to the lines is always kept clean and in good repair. Conservancy. 3. There are permanent latrines which are used by the women and children, but the men use trenches; these after being filled in are ploughed over, and a crop of grain is grown on them. The lines are swept daily. Water supply. 4. Four large casks of water are brought in daily for the use of the regiment from Dilwara; this is enough for about two companies, and as a rule the men in the regirneat do not use it. The favourite water with the men is that from the Mahadeo well, situated in a grove of trees near the railway station. The hospital well and another are also used by them. With the exception of Dilwara, the water in all the wells is more or less brackish. The wells do not run dry in the hot season. Food. 5. Food is very dear, owing to the failure of the usual rains. Vegetables are always scarce in this station. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The regiment supplies several guards. Constant drill is their only exercise. They are encouraged in gymnastics, but very few take to it. Their duties are not excessive, and do not seem in any way to impair their health. Hospital and its immediatt surroundings. 7. The hospital is placed in an open plain on high ground without a tree near it; the consequence is that in the hot season it is a perfect oven, while in the cold weather its wards are exceedingly cold. To remedy this I indented on the Barrack Department for jhamps for the front and back verandahs, which answer the purpose well, and I also obtained a grant from the Cantonment Committee which enabled me to plant trees in front of the wards. The hospital itself is well built and ventilated and in good repair. General health and physique. 8. There has been a great improvement in the health of the men as compared with the previous year; still there are a great number of men with a tendency to scurvy. The daily average of sick was 22.2 while in the previous year it was 39.24. As a body, I should say, the regiment is in a very fairly healthy condition, and. contains a large number of mea of good physique. Influences of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. There are two influences which I cannot help thinking have greatly tended to produce these good results in the health of the men this year,NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 79 Mortality and its causes. 11. There were three deaths in hospital80 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. SIND DIVISION. Average Strength Present during the year... ... 2291.7 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength ... 4.2 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength... ... 1.2 H. M.'s 29th Regiment N. I. KURRACHEE.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 81 jerked out, as is so noxiously apparent now; the dividing partition would strengthen the sides of the receptacles, and the addition of four small wheels to run in and out would be a great improvement, possessing the combined advantages of economy and of more perfect conservancy, in preventing the wearing away of the bottom, and in facilitating the with- drawal of the contents without spilling. Water supply. 4. The water of Kurrachee is noted for its inferior quality, being largely charged with saline, and in a lesser degree with organic impurities. The supply is derived from wells, and for whatever length of time the scheme for bringing pure water into Kurrachee may be delayed, so long will the inhabitants be deprived of one of the greatest necessities of life. Food and clothing. 5. An excellent and varied supply of meat, fish, grain, and vegetables is always to be found in the Kurrachee markets. Every description of food is procurable at moderate cost. The clothing with which the men provide themselves is only suited to the mild climate of Lower Sind. I have had occasion to represent the urgent necessity of supplying the Mittri Field Force with warm clothing, the general health of the force having considerably deteriorated from the want thereof, owing to sudden vicissitudes of temperature. The thermometric range varies considerably in a few hours, and in consequence the climate is much more trying than a colder and a more equable one. The clothing of the men is sufficient on still warm days, but wholly insufficient to pre- serve health when the temperature suddenly falls; and the cold is intensified by the occasional prevalence of a strong penetrating wind from the neighbouring snow-clad hills. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The duties were of the ordinary parade and guard nature, with occasional escort duty, and had no injurious effects on health. The exercises were those common only to natives of very active habits, and practised at weekly regimental sports and amusements, in which the men of all castes eagerly compete, and which give a tone and vigour to the men scarcely to be equalled in other regiments. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is a commodious stone building, well situated, and contains two large wards and four isolated rooms. The ventilation, both lateral and ridge, is good; and a broad verandah runs the whole length in front and rear. Its plan and structure are excellent, and it is kept in thorough repair. Its immediate surroundings, especially that portion which lies within civil limits, are not as satisfactory hygienically as I could wish; but no sanitary evil, calling urgently for remedy, exists. General health. 8. The general health of the regiment compares favourably with that for 1876. The general physique, chest formation, and muscular development are such as constitute thoroughly efficient soldiers, with physical powers capable of bearing great and prolonged fatigue under privations which so often prove fatal on active field service. Influences of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. I cannot say, from an experience of several years, that the climate of Kurrachee exer- cises an injurious effect on the health of soldiers. Extremes of heat and cold are very rare. The local circumstances are not as favourable, sanitarily speaking, as they should be, particularly in the Sadar bazaar, the native city, detached native quarters, and in the vicinity of tanks. It is to be regretted that the Sadar bazaar now lies within civil jurisdiction (though formerly embraced within camp limits), and that the Cantonment Committee should be powerless to mitigate the sanitary evils which everywhere abound therein. Situated as it is, so close to the Staff and 83rd Regimental Lines, I felt it my duty to call the attention of the civil authori- ties to the subject, through the Cantonment Magistrate, but with what result I am unable to state. Details of treated. 10. The total number treated in hospital was 436, against 616 in 1876, of which 25 remained from the previous year. The total discharged to duty was 413, and otherwise 7. The total number of deaths in hospital was 3, out of hospital 2; 7 men proceeded for change of air, and 15 were invalided and discharged. The average daily sick was 17.1, against 18.08 in 1876. The percentage of treated to strength was 70.8, against 98.4 in 1876; that of deaths to strength 0.4, Against 0.8; and of deaths to treated 0.6 against 0.8. The percentage of daily average of sick to strength was 2.7 against 2.9. Paroxysmal fevers were, as usual, the prevailing diseases, but the decrease in admissions from the. preceding year was most marked, standing in the proportion of 337 in 1876 to 200 in the year under review. 21 m
82 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality and its causes. 11. Two deaths from pneumonia occurred in January, and were the result of the cold prevalent throughout that month. One casualty arose from enteritis in February, and possibly was occasioned by the ingestion of an irritant. The deaths out of hospital were two; but, as the men were on leave, I am not in a position to state of what diseases they died. Epidemics. 12. There was no epidemic in the regiment, though small-pox was prevalent in the city and bazaars, yet only one case occurred in the regimental lines, and that in the person of a sepoy of the 1st Belooch Re- giment, temporarily attached for duty. The usual precautions to stay the spread of the disease were taken, and were attended with perfect success. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Vaccination and re-vaccination received the most careful attention, with successful results. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Fifteen men were invalided for the following diseasesSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 83 Location and movements. The head-quarters of the regiment were stationed in Hyderabad during the year 1877; but a detachment of 179 strong, consisting of two companies under a European officer, went to Kurrachee on the 18th Octo- ber, where it remained until the 18th of November, when it returned to Hyderabad. On the 17th of November an escort party (62 strong) left to accompany the Governor of Bombay on tour, and on the 29th idem another escort party of 14 left to accompany the Commis- sioner of Sind on tour. The Lines and their surround- ings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. These have been exhaustively described in my annual report for 1875, and no alteration has been made since. They are in good repair, and their hygienic condition is fair. Conservancy. 3. The conservancy is the same as last year. It has been most carefully attended to, and the working of the establishment made as effective as possible. Water supply. 4. This has already been fully described. The recommendation made last year to pre- vent the surface drainage (consisting of rainfall) from flow- ing into the tank which acts as a reservoir to supply Belooch wells, has not been carried out. Food. 5. Food was good and abundant, but very expensive; grain compensation made up the increase in price in the case of unmarried men, but married men with large families felt it severely. Duties. 6. Duties consisted of the usual parades, guards, and escorts. Hospital and its immediate surroundings: present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. These were fully described in 1875, and no change has occurred since. The new hospital, which was reported as under consideration in 1875, has not been built, and is much required. General health and physique. 8. Good: only 635 sick admitted this year, against 900 last year. Details of treated. 9. There were 696 cases treated during the year, against 932 in last year. The chief diseases admitted were the following, arranged in the order of their frequency:84 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF TEE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 1st Sind Horse. JACOBABAD.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 85 Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The district is highly malarious. The effect on health is very marked, and is par- ticularly apparent in foreigners. Debility and premature old age, as the annual Invaliding Committee testifies, is frequently seen; numbers of, comparatively speaking, young men have to be invalided yearly as "worn out" from premature old age86 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. The head-quarters of the regiment remained at Jacobabad until the 27th October, on which date they marched upon Mittri, in Beloochistan, accom- plishing the journey in six marches. Thirty-one sabres, under command of a European officer, proceeded to Quetta from Mittri in charge of treasure on the 4th of December, and returned on the 22nd. The Lines and their surroundings. 2. The permanent lines at Jacobabad have been described in previous reports. The standing camp at Mittri is pitched on a level piece of ground on the right bank of the river Nara, and about three-quarters of a mile to the north of the village of Mittri. The surrounding country is almost a dead level, with very scanty vegetation, such as is usually met with in the frontier districts of Upper Sind. The troops are living under canvas. There are sixteen tents for the native officers,SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 87 Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings. 7. The hospital at Mittri consists of the regulation number of tents, viz., one sepoy of two pâls each, which at present affords sufficient accommo- dation, but another tent is wanted for the hospital establishment and stores; this has been indented for. If troops are to be per- manently stationed at Mittri, it would be advisable to build a hospital for the accommodation 'of the more serious cases, as tents do not afford sufficient protection against the cold when a gale of wind blows, as it frequently does, from the north-west, in which direction lies the snow-capped range of the Murree hills. General health and physique. 8. The general health and physique of the men is fair. The climate of Mittri from November to March is comparatively well suited to improve the general health of the men, for malaria is not rife here as at Jacobabad, and the surrounding circumstances are favourable, provided the men are well clad. With this proviso, there is every reason to hope that a periodical change such as this to the troops at Jacobabad will be attended with benefit to their general health. Influence of climate or local cir- cumstances on health. 9. The influence of climate on health must be considered chiefly with reference to the extreme cold in the Linter months, which is the only time of the year that troops could conveniently be stationed at Mittri. The intense cold of December gave rise to congestion and functional derangement of the abdominal organs, and this was a fruitful source of dysen- tery during that month. Of the escort party which proceeded to Quetta, referred to in para. 1, five men were admitted into hospital on their return on account of slight frost-bite of their feet, indicating the extreme cold they were exposed to on the march, and the neces- sity of providing the men with warm socks for the future. During the hot months, from April to October, the extreme heat, and probably the scarcity of water and its liability to contamination, will render Mittri uninhabitable for any large body of troops. It will be re- membered that the epidemic of cholera last year amongst the troops in Beloochistan broke out in the beginning of the hot weather, and has been attributed by Surgeon MacRury, then in charge of the 3rd Sind Horse, to contamination of the drinking water obtained from the river Nara, which is the source of water supply at Mittri. Dr. MacRury states that all the villages on the river suffered from the disease, which must have been conveyed and com- municated from one to another from Seehee downwards through Cutchee by means of the drinking water from the river bed, as there are no wells, as a rule, in or near the villages. The water supply in the hot weather being scanty becomes easily contaminated, and epide- mics spread with extreme rapidity. Details of treated. 10. The total number treated was 290. Amongst these there were 105 cases of ague, 11 of rheumatism, 14 of syphilis, and 19 of dysentery; 31 cases of injury were treated. Mortality and its causes. 11. Two deaths from pneumonia occurred in January, and one death from ague. The latter was a severe case of malarious poisoning accompanied with extreme anæmia, in the person of a non-commissioned officer who had recently joined the head-quarters at Mittri from the outpost at Tooj. The case was complicated latterly with diarrhoea, brought on by the severe cold of December. One other death occurred after fracture of the leg. Epidemics. 12. None. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Primary vaccinations 41, and re-vaccinations 251,88 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 3rd Sind Horse. JACOBABAD.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 89 Details of treated. 9. The admissions for the year numbered 551. The prevailing diseases were90 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings. 7. The old hospital is closed; the sick are at present in tents to the east of the 3rd Sind Horse Hospital. A new hospital with out-buildings is nearly completed. General health and physique. 8. There seem to be two classes of men, those who are always coming to hospital and those who never come; the latter are very sturdy-looking men, and are capable, I should say, of standing any climate, whereas the former are anæmic and cachectic-looking; many of those who have been only a short time in the service belong to this class. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The anæmia, which is common both in European and native, seems to be entirely due to the continual attacks of fever, the consequence of malarial poisoning. Details of treated. 10. The total treated numbered 905. The prevailing diseases wereSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 91 Lines, &c. 2. The permanent lines at Jacobabad have been described in previous reports. At Mittri the men are living under canvas, like the other troops composing the force at that place. For information on the system of conservancy adopted in camp, the water supply, the quantity and quality of the food, &c., I beg to refer to my report on the 2nd Sind Horse. Details of treated. 3. The total number of cases treated during the year in the right half of the battery amounted to 228, the majority being cases of malarious fever, and the next in order of frequency being cases of bowel com- plaints, contusions, ulcers, and rheumatic affections. Mortality. 4. There was one casualty in hospital from pneumonia. Invaliding. 5. Thirty-three Men were invalided, chiefly on account of chronic rheumatism and general debility in men who had been worn out by long service. Clothing. 6. The remarks in my regimental report, 2nd Sind Horse, with reference to the inade- quacy of warm clothing when on service in Beloochistan during the winter, apply equally to the men of this battery. 7. The left half of the battery, 60 strong, left Jacobabad on the 23rd March on escort duty to Beloochistan, and arrived at Nall on the 19th April, where they encamped until the 12th of May. On the 13th May they left for Khelat, which place they reached on the 23rd May. They remained at Khelat until the 29th July, on which date they marched to Quetta, where they remained until the 6th of November. They left Quetta on the 7th November, and returned to Khelat on the 23rd November. Having remained at Khelat about six days they marched to Mittri, and rejoined the head-quarters on the 10th December. General health and physique. 8. The health of the men suffered considerably at Quetta from attacks of fever and bowel complaints, so much so that a great number of them still remain in hospital. 9. The admissions into hospital during the year amounted to 291, of which 144 were from ague, and 61 from dysentery and diarrh92 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Water supply. 2.The water both for drinking and irrigating purposes is exclusively derived from two sources-springs issuing superficially from the foot of the surrounding hills, and from "karazes." The "karazes" are peculiar in their construction. A shaft is sunk sometimes as deep as thirty or forty feet, generally at the foot of a hill; when water is thus found another is sunk at a distance varying from five to twenty yards from the first, and both are connected by a tunnel; another and another are sunk in like manner, till at length an underground aqueduct three or four miles long is formed, and water brought in the proper direction, till it is raised to a level with the surrounding ground. The water of the "karazes" is not as sparkling as that in the springs, but is, I think, softer; it was preferred to the latter by the men. Both waters contain large quantities of lime salts. Food. 3. Most articles of food were plentiful, and some exceedingly cheap. Wheaten flour was to be had at the rate of from forty to fifty pounds for a rupee; meat one anna per pound, ghee four pounds for a rupee. But condiments, milk, and firewood were expensive; sometimes milk was not even obtainable. Clothing. 4. The want of stockings amongst a few of the men was felt extremely while on guard duty at night, but the majority possessed them. Stockings and gloves of a thick woollen material are absolutely necessary for men serving at Khelat during the colder months. The trowsers, being made of coarse cotton material, are not at all sufficiently warm for the climate in which the men have served during the last nine months, the cloth ones they formerly wore being preferable. The men who had brought the latter with them on the march were allowed to wear them on night duty. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 5. Some of the men joined the officers in games got up in Khelat by the latter, but these were the exception, as there seems to be a prejudice in the regiment against foot games of any sort. Though the duties on the march were sometimes severe, I cannot say that any ill effect was caused thereby. The average number of consecutive nights in bed was six. Hospital. 6. One tent is utterly insufficient for the use of the wing of a cavalry regiment, especially on the march, and had not the officer commanding the escort lent me a tent from the lines I should have been obliged to treat some of the men in their own tents, which would have been unsatisfactory. For the use of dhooly-bearers a tent of some description ought to be always provided when they accompany troops into Beloochistan. In a standing camp they are generally able to construct huts for themselves, but while marching they have no protection during the might. Several of those who accompanied us on our last march were attacked with fever, bronchitis, &c., on account of being exposed to the intense cold at night. General health and physique. 7. Taking into consideration the facts that the men have been in tents for nine months and a half, that during that time they have been subjected to sudden and great changes of climate, that they have marched about twelve hundred miles, and that now only four men out of one hundred and ninety are in hospital, I can come to no other conclusion but that their general health is excellent. The men are almost all Hindustanis, so that they are characterized more by length of limb and activity than by large chest capacity or size of muscle. Climate. 8. The climate of Khelat is peculiarly antagonistic to life under canvas, both on account of the great variation between the daily and nightly temperature, and the power of the direct rays of the sun. The amount of moisture in the air is almost always very small. This excessive dryness, and the presence of a strong wind from the north-west (its prevailing direction), rendered the men very liable to chills, when they returned heated from parade and took off their warm clothing. The fol- lowing are the averages of monthly temperature and rainfall from June to November:SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 93 Details of treated. 9. There were altogether 303 admissions since the 17th of March, to which ague contributed 151. A great number of those suffering from this disease were attacked by bronchitis and congestion of the lungs, and three by pneumonia. This was most particularly the case in the months of October and November, when the cold at nights was intense. The uncomplicated cases yielded readily to cinchonidine or quinine; so mild were some of them, that I am of opinion that they were brought on rather by chills acting on men who had previously suffered from ague, than from any particular malarial poison. A peculiar fact about the attacks of ague is that, with few exceptions, the type amongst the men of this wing was of the quotidian variety, while the Panjab troops almost always were attacked by the tertian or quartan. For diseases of the alimentary canal 57 were admitted into hospital, and a great number of others treated in the lines; in fact I believe that there was not a man in the wing who did not suffer more or less from diarrhSTATEMENT. 25 m
96 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. STATEMENT showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE N.B.STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1877. 97 TROOPS serving in, the BOMBAY PRESIDENCY daring the Year 1877. in the Army List on the 1st of July 1877. Hindus. Mahomedans. Strength present on 31st December 1877. Regiment. Average number of consecutive nights in bed. Number of Recruits joined during the year. CASTES Remarks. Christians. Hindus. Mahome- dans. Others. Europeans. Eurasians. Natives. Strength. Died per cent. to strength in and out of hospital, and on leave. Strength. Died per cent. to strength in and out of hospital, and on leave. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. AND BOMBAY MARINE. 112 1.8 16 12.5 130 Detachment, 4th Regiment N.I. 3.3 1 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... 1.0 ... ... 114.0 1 1 17.0 1 1 2.0 ... ... 541 1.3 74 4.0 634 20th Regiment N. I. 4.7 164 6.6 ... ... ... ... ... 17.9 1 1 487.7 3 4 73.8 1 2 ... ... ... 390 1.8 164 1.8 576 21st do. 5.2 44 7.0 ... ... ... ... ... 17.0 ... 1 402.0 4 3 141.0 2 1 3.0 ... ... 90 7.7 7 ...... 106 Details attached to 21st Regi- ment N. i. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.8 ... ... 25.3 7 ... 3.0 ... ... 0.6 ... ... 281 1.4 24 4 1 311 Wing, 7th Regiment N. I. 4.7 ... 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... 2.0 ... ... 266.0 4 ... 22 0 1 ... 3.0 ... ... 577 1.7 63 ...... 659 17th Regiment N. I 4.1 48 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 10.0 ... ... 562.4 6 4 55.0 ... ... 8.5 ... ... 17 ...... ...... ...... 17 Detachment,20th Regiment N.I. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 16.8 ... ... 0.2 ... ... ... ... ... 12 8.1 4 ...... 16 Detachment, 21st Regiment N.I. 0.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11.1 1 ... 3.5 ... ... 1.2 ... ... 10 ...... 2 ...... 12 Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 9.7 ... ... 2.3 ... ... ... ... ... 5 ...... 5 ...... 10 Do. 3.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... 5.0 ... ... 5.0 ... ... ... ... ... 6 ...... 2 ...... 8 Do. Every 2nd night. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.0 ... ... 2.0 ... ... ... ... ... 8 ...... ...... ...... 8 Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 5.8 ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... 5 ...... 3 ...... 8 Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 4.6 ... ... 3.4 ... ... ... ... ... 6 16.6 2 ...... 8 Do ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 6.5 1 ... 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... 2,060 1.9 366 2.4 2,503 ... 257 22.1 ... ... ... ... ... 49.7 1 2 1922.9 27 12 331.7 5 4 18.3 ... ... 604 1.7 60 ...... 681 6th Regiment N. I. 4.0 14 6.4 ... ... ... ... ... 9.8 ... ... 549.0 7 4 79.3 ... ... 6.3 ... ... 88 1.1 9 ...... 99 4th and 1st Co., Sappers and Miners 7.8 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... 0.2 ... ... 78.1 ... 1 16.6 ... ... 0.2 ... ... 29 ...... 63 ...... 92 Aden Troop 5.0 4 0.8 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 28.0 ... ... 59.7 ...... ... ... ... ... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... Detachment, 6th Regiment N. I. 4.0 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 41.6 ... ... 5.0 ... ... ... ... ... 721 1.6 132 ...... 872 ... 18 9.2 ... ... ... ... ... 10.0 ... ... 696 7 7 5 160 6 ... ... 6.5 ... ... 2,781 1.8 493 1.7 3,375 ... 275 31.3 ... ... ... ... ... 59.7 1 2 2619.6 34 17 492.3 5 4 24.8 ... ... DIVISION. 284 0.7 158 0 6 451 1st Regiment, L. C. 5.3 23 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 8.0 ... ... 175 0 2 ... 116.0 ... ...1 ... ... ... 544 0.9 98 ...... 661 5th Regiment N. I. 4.7 72 7.0 ... ... ... ... ... 7.0 ... ... 492.0 5 ... 95.0 ... ... 12.0 ... ... 436 1.1 76 1.3 587 8th do. 4.2 68 5.5 ... ... ... ... ... 17.3 ... ... 476.8 5 ... 80.5 1 ... 37.0 ... ... 572 0.8 73 ...... 662 26th do. 3.7 80 6.0 ... ... 04 ... ... 13.4 ... ... 490.2 4 1 73.4 ... ... 3.6 ... ... 330 1.8 73 ...... 400 Sappers and Miners 3.0 27 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 0.8 ... ... 313.0 5 1 58.0 ... ... 3.2 ... ... 22 4.5 85 1.1 107 Detachment, Poona Horse 10.2 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 21.0 1 ... 84 0 1 ... ... ... ... 563 1.2 76 ...... 658 15th Regiment N. I. 3.9 36 8.0 ... ... ... ... 9.4 ... ... 503.4 7 ... 66.6 ... ... 5.6 ... ... 536 0.7 78 2.5 623 13th do. 10 9 64 7.7 ... ... 0 7 1 ... 8.7 ... ... 463.3 2 2 80.3 1 1 65.0 ... ... 129 1.5 22 ...... 357 4th Rifles 3.5 58 4.2 ... ... ... ... ... 9.6 ... ... 142.6 2 ... 30.8 ... ... 191.4 ... ... 568 1.4 87 2.3 691 2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I. 3.5 58 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 12.0 ... ... 523.0 7 1 74.0 2 ... 22.0 ... ... 449 1.7 78 2.5 674 14th Regiment N. I. 3 8 35 6.4 ... ... 2.6 ... ... 73.2 ... 1 385.1 4 4 72 6 ... 2 59.6 ... 2 66 ...... 284 1.5 351 Poona Horse 8.0 33 5.7 ... ... 0.9 ... ... ...... ... ... 61.1 1 ... 257.1 1 ... ... ... ... 505 0.2 114 ...... 669 3rd Regiment N.I. 3.0 30 5.4 ... ... ... ... ... 2.2 ... ... 369.1 1 ... 104.3 ... ... 50.0 ... .... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... Detachment. do. 3 0 ... 0.3 ... ... ... ... ... 0.3 ... ... 92.7 3 ... 15.4 ... ... 2.8 ... ... 555 1.4 82 1.2 687 19th Regiment N. I. 4.0 27 5.6 ... ..... ... ... ... 4.2 ... ... 490.4 8 ... 74.0 1 ... 44.5 ... ... 536 1.1 118 ...... 697 12th do. 4.6 46 5.2 ... ... 2.0 .... ... 12.3 .... .... 497.1 6 ... 111.9 .... ..... 25.4 .... .... 108 0.9 21 0.4 165 Detachment, 4th Regiment N.I. 3 2 .... 1.0 .... .... ... .... .... ...... ... .... 97 2 .... 1 18.7 1 .... 33.3 ... .... 6,203 1.1 1,523 0 7 8,446 .. 657 87.0 ... .... 6.6 1 ... 183.4 .. 1 5,593.6 163 10 1412.6 8 4 575.4 .... 2
98 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. STATEMENT showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE Regiment. Station. Movement during the year. Average daily sick. Average daily strength present during the year. Remained on 1st January 1877. Admitted during the year. Total treated. Discharged cured. Discharged otherwise. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Remaining. Average daily sick per cent. to average strength. Ratio per cent. of admissions to average strength. RATIO PER CENT. OF DEATHS. Invalid- ed. In Hospital. Out of Hospital. To treated. To average strength. To treated. To average strength. For discharge the service. For change of climate. NORTHERN 1st Grenadier Regiment N.I. Ahmedabad None. 22.1 666.9 17 629 646 610 17 6 6 13 3.3 94.3 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 50 41 Squadron, 1st Regiment L.C. Baroda From Baroda to Poona in December. 3.1 133.7 ... 114 114 111 3 ... ... ... 2.2 85.0 ... ... ... ... 3 3 9th Regiment N. I. Do. Proceeded to Bombay in November. 15.2 671.3 8 478 486 433 18 13 5 22 2.2 71.2 2.6 1.9 1.0 0.7 27 12 22nd do. Do. Left Baroda for Ahmeda- bad in November. 36.3 645.6 20 794 814 727 50 15 ... 22 5.6 122.9 1.8 2.3 ... ... 58 28 Squadron, 2nd Regiment L.C. Rajkot None. 4.5 141.0 3 91 94 83 7 2 1 2 4.1 64.5 1.0 0.7 1.0 0.7 6 2 No. 1 Mountain Battery Do. None. 2.8 117.0 3 72 75 64 7 1 ... 3 2.6 63.1 1.3 0 ... ... 2 1 Head Quarters, 7th Regt. N. I. Do. None. 8.9 306.0 18 212 230 195 27 2 5 6 2.9 69.2 0.8 0.6 2.1 1.6 15 7 28th Regiment N. I. Do. None. 15.0 622.0 151 377 392 340 34 4 1 14 2.4 60.5 1.0 0.6 0.8 0.1 25 13 11th do. Bhuj None. 29.7 684.1 26 738 764 689 37 5 4 53 4.3 107.8 0.6 0.7 0.5 0.5 25 11 2nd Regiment L. C. Deesa None. 7.4 318 0 4 210 214 210 3 1 ... ... 2.2 66.0 0.4 0.3 ... ... 13 1 18th do. Do. None. 11.8 611.1 6 389 395 372 14 ... 3 9 1.9 63.6 ... ... 0.7 0.4 23 3 23rd do. Mhow Left Wing left Indore and joined the Head Quarters in June. 23.1 651.4 13 804 817 774 23 4 2 16 3.5 123.5 0.4 0.6 0.2 0.3 23 12 25th do. Do. Left, for Aden in Novem- ber, & a Wing march- ed to Indore in June. 24.5 633.5 17 844 861 814 33 2 1 12 3.7 133.2 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 10 9 24th do. Mehidpur A Wing proceeded to Agar, and the Head Quarters arrived at Agar from Neemuch in March. 16.5 649.6 20 722 742 682 41 8 6 11 2.4 111.0 1.0 1.2 0.8 0.9 19 5 3rd Regiment L. C. Neemuch None. 9.8 329.8 3 343 346 331 6 ... ... 9 3.0 103.9 ... ... ... ... 11 4 10th Regiment N. I. Do. Left Wing joined the Head Quarters in Feb- ruary. 38.7 637.7 66 1211 1277 1215 43 1 3 18 6.1 189.9 0 1 0.1 ... 0.4 22 33 16th do. Nusseerabad None. 22.2 668.0 83 831 914 794 107 3 1 10 3.2 124.4 0.3 0.4 0.1 0.1 29 6 Squadron,3rd Regiment L. C. Do. None. 2.8 114.0 4 118 122 116 4 ... 1 2 2.6 103.5 ... ... 0.8 0.8 2 2 Total, Northern Division 294.4 8601.3 326 8977 9303 8540 474 67 39 222 3.4 104.3 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.4 363 166 SIND 29th Regiment N. I. Kurrachee None. 17.1 615.2 25 411 436 413 7 3 2 13 2.7 66.8 0.6 0.4 0 4 0.3 15 7 27th do. Hyderabad None. 27.0 636.2 61 635 696 637 21 4 1 34 4.2 99.8 0.5 0.6 0.1 0 1 49 12 30th do. Jacobabad Wing left Mittree and joined the Head Quar- ters in June. 25.4 610.0 55 850 995 854 15 13 ... 23 4.1 139.3 1.4 2.1 ... ... 20 14 1st Sind Horse Do. Left Wing marched to Khelat in March. 19.2 358.9 20 709 729 695 17 3 5 14 5.2 197.5 0.4 0.8 0.6 1.3 10 18 2nd do. Do. Proceeded to Mittree in October, leaving a part at Jacobabad. 11.5 284.0 14 276 290 246 16 4 4 24 4.0 97.1 1.3 1.4 1.3 1.4 10 10 3rd do. Do. Marched from Mittree and arrived at Jacoba- bad on 18th April. 12.1 332.4 20 551 571 534 16 7 4 14 3.6 165.9 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.2 20 6 No. 2 Mountain Battery Do Proceeded to Mittree on 26th October, keeping half Battery on escort duty from March. 16.2 155.0 16 503 519 480 16 2 ... 21 10.3 324.5 0.3 1.2 ... ... 33 4 Total, Sind Division 128.5 2991.7 211 3935 4146 3859 108 36 16 143 4.2 131.5 0 8 1.2 0 4 0.5 157 71 Grand Total 788.3 22561.0 790 25130 25920 23886 1039 215 95 780 3.4 111.3 0.8 0.9 0 3 0.4 1057 476
STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1877. 99 TROOPS serving in the BOMBAY PRESIDENCY daring the Year 1877. Hindus. Mahomedans. Strength present on 31st December 1877. Regiment. Average number of consecutive nights in bed. Number of recruits joined during the year. CASTES. Remarks. Christians. Hindus. Mahome- dans. Other. Europeans Eurasians Natives. Strength. Died percent to strength in and out of hospital and on leave. Strength. Died per cent to strength in and out of hospital and on leave. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital Died in out of hospital Average daily strength. Died in hospital Died out of hospital. Average daily strength Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital Died out of hospital. DIVISION. 552 1.8 76 1.2 646 1st Grenadier Regiment N. I. 5.3 83 5.1 ... ... ... ... ... 17.2 ... ... 574.6 4 6 74.1 2 ... 1.0 ... ... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... Squadron, 1st Regiment L. C. 6.2 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 94.6 ... ... 39.1 ... ... ... ... ... 583 2.4 78 3.8 676 9th Regiment N. I. 6.0 50 65 ... ... 2.0 ... ... 11.7 1 ... 577.9 9 5 77.7 3 ... 20 ... ... 525 2.8 80 ..... 629 22nd do. 7.5 47 6.3 ... ... 0.2 ... ... 15.6 ... ... 542.7 15 ... 79.5 ... ... 7 6 ... ... 61 4.9 48 ...... 130 Squadron, 2nd Regiment L.C. 9.3 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... 2.0 ... ... 61.0 2 1 57.0 ... ... 21.0 ... ... 92 1.0 19 ...... 120 No. 1 Mountain Battery 4.0 13 2 0 ... ... ... ... ... 1.0 ... ..... 89.0 1 ... 19.0 ... ... 8.0 ... ... 181 2.7 22 4.0 251 Head Quarters, 7th Regt. N. I. 6.0 52 5.0 ... ... ... ... ... 13.0 ... 1 239.0 2 3 50.0 ... 1 4.0 ... ...... 488 0.6 83 2.4 595 28th Regiment N. I. 11.1 35 6.5 ... ... ... ... ... 10.7 ... ... 518.2 3 ... 83.1 1 1 10.6 ... ... Includes the numbers of the Det. at Dwarka. 619 0.8 74 ...... 697 11th Regiment N. I. 7.9 21 6.4 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 609.5 5 4 70.0 ... ... 4.6 ... ... 202 0.4 127 ...... 332 2nd Regiment L. C. 7.0 19 5.0 ... ... 3.0 ... ... ...... ... ... 191.0 1 ... 124.0 ... ... ... ... ... 565 0.5 83 ...... 647 18th Regiment N. I. 4.1 57 6.2 ... ... 1.9 ... ... 8.5 ... ... 520.0 ... 3 80.7 ... ... ... ...... ... 537 0.7 116 1.7 687 23rd do. 5.5 56 8.7 ... ... 3.8 ... ... 19.8 ... ... 511.3 3 1 106.2. 1 1 10.3 ... ... 476 0.6 59 ...... 545 25th do. 10.1 48 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 4.6 ... ... 532.7 2 1 89.8 ... ... 6.4 ... ... 567 2.2 84 1.1 685 24th do. 11.5 52 8.3 ... ... ... ... ... 16.9 ... ... 540.2 8 5 78.4 ... 1 14.1 ... ... 213 ...... 132 ...... 346 3rd Regiment L. C. 3.4 28 4.9 ... ... ... ... ... 1.0 ... ... 202.9 ... ... 125.9 ... ... ... ... ... 525 0.5 106 ...... 656 10th Regiment N. I. 4.5 35 7.4 ... ... ... ... ... 12.1 ... ... 470.7 1 2 115.8 ... 1 39.7 ... ... 559 0.7 102 ...... 685 16th Regiment N. I. 16.4 39 7.8 ... ... ... ... ... 11.0 ... ... 555.1 3 1 89.9 ... ...... 12.0 ... ... 95 ...... 40 2.5 138 Squadron, 3rd Regiment L. C. 5.3 1 1.7 ... ... ... ... ... 2.7 ... ... 76.9 ... ... 34.4 ... 1 ... ... ... 6,830 1.3 1,329 0.9 8,465 ... 636 95.9 ... ... 10.9 ... ... 147.8 1 1 6906.7 59 32 1394.6 7 6 141.3 ... ... DIVISION 76 ...... 521 0.9 600 29th Regiment N. I. 5.7 43 6.1 ... ... ... ... ... 2.0 ... ...... 82.9 ... ... 527 3 3 2 3.0 ... ... 117 0.8 516 0.7 645 27th do. 4.0 51 5.1 ... ... ... ... ...... 2.5 ... ... 129.4 1 ... 502.3 3 1 2.0 ... ...... 263 2.7 365 1.6 628 30th do. 8.3 63 3.1 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 264.9 7 ... 345.1 6 ... ... ... ... 36 2.7 370 1.9 406 1st Sind Horse 5.3 20 6.6 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 35.7 1 323.2 2 5 ... ... ... 77 2.6 341 1.7 427 2nd do. 5.0 28 5.2 ... ... ... ... ... 5.0 ... ... 548 1 1 224.2 3 3 ... ... ... 67 4.4 210 3.8 282 3rd do. 4.1 33 4.5 ... ... ... .... ... 5.0 ... ... 54.9 ... 3 272.5 7 1 ... ... ... 106 1.8 59 ...... 166 No. 2 Mountain Battery 5.8 55 2.0 ... ... ... ... ...... ...... ... ... 110.0 2 ... 44 0 ... 1.0 ... ...... 742 2.1 2.386 1.5 3,154 ... 293 32 6 ... ... ... ... ... 14.5 ... ... 732.6 12 4 2,238.6 24 12 6.0 ... ... 16,556 1.4 5,736 1.2 23,440 ... 1,861 246.8 ... ... 17.5 1 ... 405 4 2 4 15,852.5 168 63 5,538.1 44 26 747.5 ... 2 26 m
100 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Summary of the Statistics for the Year 1877 and seven previous years. Years. Average Daily Strength Present. Admissions into Hospitals Ratio per cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Average Daily Sick per cent. to Average Strength. Deaths in Hospitals. Ratio of Deaths in Hospitals per cent. to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths in Hospitals per cent. to Admis- sions. Deaths out of Hospitals and On Leave. Total Deaths in and out of Hospitals. Ratio per cent. of Total Deaths to the Average Strength. Ratio per cent. to Strength of Hindus who died in and out of Hospitals and on Leave. Ratio per cent. to Strength of Mahomedans who died in and out of Hospitals and on Leave. Ratio per cent. to Strength in- valided for discharge the Service. Ratio per cent. to Strength in- valided for change of climate. 1877 22,561.0 25,130 111.38 3.49 215 0.95 0.85 95 310 1.37 1.39 1.22 4.51 2.03 1876 22,583.3 26,918 119.20 3.79 247 1.09 0.90 49 296 1.31 1.14 1.57 4.27 2.17 1875 22,819.0 25,475 111.63 3.38 213 0.93 0.83 66 279 1.22 1.30 1.18 4.27 1.83 1874 22,750.0 26,601 116.92 3.68 176 0.77 0.66 79 248 1.09 0.99 1.12 4.60 1.73 1873 22,967.0 29,035 126.86 3.82 165 0.71 0.56 81 246 1.07 ...... ...... 4.35 2.11 1872 22,903.0 36,209 158.09 4.54 226 0.98 0.62 95 821 1.40 3.98 2.13 1871 22,959.0 29,733 129.50 4.31 236 1.03 0.79 97 333 1.45 3.12 2.10 1870 22,715.0 28,380 139.08 4.33 191 0.84 0.68 95 286 1.26 3.71 2.33
101 APPENDIX I. ANNUAL GENERAL RETURN exhibiting the Sick of H. M.'s Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency for the Year1877,as compared with 1976, arranged according to authorized Classification and Nomenclature. REGIMENT. STATION. Average Strength Present. Average Daily Sick. 1877. STATION. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. 1876. CLASS OF DISEASES. CLASS OF DISEASES. GENERAL DISEASES. LOCAL DISEASES. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. TOTAL. SURGICAL OPERA- TIONS. GENERAL DISEASES. LOCAL DISEASES. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. TOTAL. SURGICAL OPERA- TIONS. Sub-Division A. Sub-Division B. Diseases of the Nervous System, 59 to 104. Insanity, 105 to 110. Diseases of the Eye, 111 to 185. Diseases of the Heart, 219 to 244, and 250 to 258. Diseases of Lungs, 290 to 337. Diseases of the Sto- mach and Intestines, 449 to 500. Diseases of the Liver, 501 to 520. Diseases of the Spleen, 524 to 530. Gonorrh102 APPENDIX II. APPENDIX II. RETURN showing the Admissions and Deaths, &c., amongst the Native Troops of the Bombay Presidency at the several Stations for the Year 1877 as compared with 1876. 1877. 1876. Division. Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital Regiment. Station. Average Srength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital Presidency Division, Aden and Bombay Marine. Detachment 4th Regt. N.I. Bombay 134.0 5.7 128 2 Detachment, 4th Regt. N.I. Bombay 136.0 5.6 100 2 20th Regiment N.I. Do. 579.4 23.1 550 5 20th Regiment N.I Do. 594.5 42.7 722 13 21st do. Do. 563.0 11.5 285 6 21st do. Do. 568.5 12.5 283 3 Details attached to 21st Regiment N.I. Do. 30.7 1.8 29 7 Details attached to 21st Regiment N.I. Do. 28.0 1.9 16 5 Right Wing, 7th Regt. N.I. Tanna 293.0 6.3 218 5 Right Wing, 7th Regt. N.I. Tanna 276.0 4.2 171 2 17th Regiment N.I Surat 635.9 29.8 1,501 6 17th Regiment N.I Surat 631.6 35.0 1,194 15 Detachment,20thRegt.N.I. Janjira 17.0 0.4 18 ... Detachment,20th Regt. N.I. Janjira 17.0 0.1 6 ... Detachment,21st Regt. N.I. Bushire 15.8 0.6 7 1 Detachment, 21st Regt. N.I. Bushire 16.0 0.7 18 ... Do. do. Bassadore 12.0 3.0 200 ... Do. do. Bassadore 12.0. 2.7 198 ... Do. do. Bagdad 10.0 0.4 8 ... Do. do. On board the Steamship "Dalhousie." 8.0 0.2 17 ... Do. do. On board the Steamship "Dalhousie." 8.0 0.2 10 ... Do. do. On board the "Magdala." 8.0 ... ... ... Do. do. On board the "Magdala." 8.0 ... ... ... Do. do. On board the "Abyssinia." 8.0 ... ... ... Do. do. On board the "Abyssinia." 8.0 ... 2 ... Do. do. On board the "Quangtung 7.8 0.2 7 1 Do. do. On board the "Quangtung" 8.0 ... ... ... 6th Regiment N.I. Aden 644.4 14.6 346 7 6th Regiment N.I. Aden 642.6 14.3. 425 4 4th and 1st Co., Sappers and Miners. Do. 95.1 1.4 41 ... 4th and 5th Co., Sappers and Miners. Do. 104.2 2.2 48 ... Aden Troop Kharmaksar 87.7 4.3 159 ... Aden Troop Kharmaksar 89.5 6.1 158 1 Detachment, 6th Regt. N.I. Perim 46.6 0.9 33 ... Detachment, 6th. Regt. N.I. Perim 50.0 0.3 9 ... Do. 21st do. On board the Steamship "Hugh Rose" 9.1 0.2 3 ... Total. 3,196.4 104.2 3,547 40 Total. 3,207.0 128.7 3,363 45 28 m
103 APPENDIX II. 1877. 1876. Division. Regiment Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital Poona Division. 1st Regiment N. L. C.... Poona... 299.0 12.9 410 2 1st Regiment N. L. C.... Poona... 291.0 10.4 282 3 5th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 606.0 18.8 847 5 5th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 589.0 22.1 1,106 ... 8th do.... Do.... 631.6 24.3 951 6 8th do.... Do.... 684.0 28.1 1,311 2 26th do.... Do.... 581.0 23.5 780 4 26th do.... Do.... 598.0 30.2 793 5 Sappers and Miners... Kirkee... 375.0 15.3 411 5 Sappers and Miners... Kirkee... 360.3 7.3 169 3 Detachment, Poona Horse.... Dhulia... 105.0 2.3 52 2 Detachment, Poona Horse.... Dhulia... 102.0 3.1 41 1 15th Regiment N. I.... Ahmednagar... 585.0 17.3 593 7 15th Regiment N. I.... Ahmednagar... 584.0 13.6 396 4 13th do.... Malegaon... 618.0 15.7 662 4 Hd.-qrs., 13th Regt. N. I.... Malegaon... 348.3 7.7 309 2 4th do.... Satara... 374.4 11.4 489 2 4th Regiment N. I.... Satara... 322.6 6.7 363 2 2nd Grenadier Regt. N. I.... Belgaum... 631.0 19.3 356 9 2nd Grenadier Regt. N. I.... Belgaum... 630.0 16.7 402 5 14th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 598.1 20.9 439 4 14th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 569.1 17.4 466 5 Poona Horse... Sirur... 319.1 7.9 174 2 Poona Horse... Sirur... 314.5 10.1 247 1 3rd Regiment N. I.... Kolhapur... 526.2 14.4 585 1 3rd Regiment N. I.... Kolhapur 547.0 16.0 544 2 Detachment, 3rd Regt.N. I. Kaladgi... 111.2 3.7 128 3 Detachment, 3rd Regt. N.I. Kaladgi... 89.8 1.2 63 ... 19th Regiment N. I.... Sholapur... 613.1 32.1 1,043 9 19th Regiment N. I.... Sholapur... 631.5 10.7 326 3 12th do.... Dharwar... 648.7 14.1 521 6 12th do.... Dharwar... 642.8 13.6 303 4 Detachment, 4th Regt. N. I. Asirghur... 149.2 7.3 230 1 Detachment, 4th Regt. N. I. Asirghur... 144.7 5.5 128 ... Total... 7,771.6 261.2 8,671 72 Total... 7,448.6 220.4 7,249 42 Division. 1st Grenadier Regt. N. I... Ahmedabad and Sadra. 666.9 22.1 629 6 1st Grenadier Regt. N. I... Regt. Ahmedabad and Sadra. 693.0 29.3 861 11 Squadron, lst Regt. N.L.C. Baroda... 133.7 3.1 114 ... Wing, 13th Regt. N. I.... Ahmedabad... 291.2 12.5 434 3 Squadron, 1st Regt. N.L.C. Baroda... 144.8 6.6 205 ... 9th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 671.3 15.2 478 13 9th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 662.0 11.9 452 2 22nd do.... Do.... 645.6 36.3 794 15 22nd do.... Do.... 647.6 22.1 634 6 Squadron, 2nd Regt. N.L.C. Rajkot... 141.0 4.5 91 2 Squadron, 2nd Regt.N.L.C. Rajkot... 145.0 3.9 98 1 No. 1 Mountain Battery... Do.... 117.0 2.8 72 1 No. 1 Mountain Battery... Do.... 120.0 3.0 84 1 Hd.-qrs., 7th Regt. N. I.... Do.... 306.0 8.9 212 2 7th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 280.0 12.5 375 1 28th Regiment N. I.... Do. &Dwarka 622.6 15.0 377 4 28th do.... Do. & Dwarka 612.6 23.3 677 13 11th do.... Bhuj... 684.1 29.7 738 5 11th do.... Bhuj... 678.2 19.2 485 2 2nd Regiment N. L. C.... Deesa... 318.0 7.4 210 1 2nd Regiment N. L. C.... Deesa... 315.4 7.4 246 1 18th Regiment N. T.... Do.... 611.1 11.8 389 ... 18th Regiment N.J.... Do.... 627.0 16.2 508 3 23rd do.... Mhow & Indore... 651.4 23.1 804 4 23rd do.... Mhow & Indore 639.5 36.1 898 4
APPENDIX II. 104 Northern 25th do.... Mhow & Indore. 633.5 24.5 844 2 25th do.... Mhow & Indore. 631.9 32.5 824 1 24th do.... Mehidpur... 649.6 16.5 722 8 10th do.... Mehidpur... 378.0 33.2 1,074 3 3rd Regiment N. L. C.... Neemuch... 329.8 9.8 343 ... 3rd Regiment N. L. C.... Neemuch... 333.8 10.2 412 1 10th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 637.7 38.7 1,211 1 24th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 651.6 18.6 787 7 16th do.... Nusseeabad... 668.0 22.2 831 3 16th do.... Nusseerabad... 653.1 39.2 1,309 4 Squadron, 3rd Regt.N.L.C. Do.... 114.0 2.8 118 ... Squadron, 3rd Regt.N.L.C. Do.... 106.4 5.2 177 1 Detachment, 13th Regt.N.I. Sadra... 16.0 0.3 16 ... Wing, 10th Regt, N. I.... Agar... 243.0 14.9 360 2 Detachment, 7th Regt.N.I. Burdachoky... 67.2 7.4 261 1 Total... 8,601.3 294.4 8,977 67 Total... 8,937.3 365.5 11,177 68 Sind District. 29th Regiment N. I.... Kurrachee... 615.2 17.1 411 3 29th Regiment N. I.... Kurrachee... 627.2 18.0 597 5 27th do.... Hyderabad... 636.2 27.0 635 4 27th do.... Hyderabad... 655.0 33.0 900 7 30th do.... Jacobabad... 610.0 25.4 850 13 30th do.... Jacobabad... 577.9 34.8 1,433 42 1st Sind Horse... Do.... 358.9 19.2 709 3 1st Sind Horse... Do.... 325.2 14.3 687 5 2nd do.... Do.... 284.0 11.5 276 4 2nd do.... Do.... 340.0 11.8 399 2 3rd do.... Do.... 332.4 12.1 551 7 3rd do.... Do.... 369.7 17.7 809 21 No. 2 Mountain Battery... Do... 155.0 16.2 503 2 No. 2 Mountain Battery... Do.... 95.4 7.6 299 10 Total... 2,991.7 128.5 3,935 36 Total... 2,990.4 142.2 5,129 92 Grand Total... 22,561.0 788.3 25,130 215 Grand Total... 22,583.3 856.8 26,918 247
105 APPENDIX III. APPENDIX III. COMPARATIVE STATEMENT showing the Health of the Native Troops in the Four Divisions of the Bombay Presidency. 1877. 1876. Average Strength. Admissions Deaths. Average Daily Sick. Ratio per cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths per cent. Average Daily Sick per cent. to Average Strength Average Strength. Admis- sions. Deaths. Average Daily Sick. Ratio per cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths per cent. Average Daily Sick per cent. to Average Strength. In Hospital. In Hospital. To Ad- missions To Strength To Ad- missions To Strength Presidency Division. Bombay Circle... 2,322.6 2,968 33 83.0 127.8 1.1 1.4 3.6 2,320.7 2,723 40 105.8 117.3 1.4 1.6 4.5 Aden... 873.8 579 7 21.2 66.2 1.2 0.8 2.4 886.3 640 5 22.9 72.2 0.7 0.5 2.5 Poona Division... 7,771.6 8,671 72 261.2 111.5 0.8 0.9 3.3 7,448.6 7,249 42 220.4 97.3 0.5 0.5 2.9 Northern Division... 8,601.3 8,977 67 294.4 104.3 0.7 0.7 3.4 8,937.3 11,177 68 365.5 125.1 0.6 0.7 4.1 Sind Division... 2,991.7 3,935 36 128.5 131.5 0.9 1.2 4.2 2,990.4 5,129 92 142.2 171.5 1.7 3.1 4.7 Total... 22,561.0 25,130 215 788.3 111.3 0.8 0.9 3.4 22,583.3 26,918 247 856.8 119.2 0.9 1.0 3.7 BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
