IP/13/AF3 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT ON THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1879. FRAMED ON THE WEEKLY AND ANNUAL RETURNS, ON THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND ON THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY SURGEONS GENERAL. WITH STATISTICAL TABLES. Compiled in the office of the Surgeon General, Her M.'s Forces. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996457.tif] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1880.
MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT ON THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1879. FRAMED ON THE WEEKLY AND ANNUAL RETURNS, ON THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND ON THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY SURGEONS GENERAL. WITH STATISTICAL TABLES. Compiled in the Office of the Surgeon General, Her M.'s Forces. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996469.tif] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1880.
No. N. A./1167 OF 1880. FROM THE SURGEON-GENERAL, HER MAJESTYii Table B.iii The ratio of admissions to average strength was also highest in the Northern Circle, where it reached 200.5, against 200.1 the year previous; in the Poona Circle the ratio was lowest, being 121.2. The ratio per cent. of deaths in hospital was lowest in the Poona Circle, being only 0.9 compared with 1.3 last year. In the Presidency, Northern, and Sind Circles the ratio is 1.2, 1.1, and 1.8, respectively. As regards regiments, the 19th N. I. in the Bolan Pass has had the heaviest mortality, the ratio per cent. of deaths to average strength present being 8.2; in the 3rd Sind Horse at Khoosh-dil-Khan it was 8.0; in the 30th N. I. at Quetta 6.0; in the 1st Grenadiers, who were also in Afghanistan at various stations, 5.8; whilst of those which remained behind in the Presidency, the 16th at Malegaum suffered most, its mortality being 3.6; in the 22nd at Belgaum and 3rd Light Cavalry at Deesa it was only 0.4 in each, as is seen in Table C. Table C. Serial Number. Corps. Station. Ratio of Deaths in and out of Hospital per cent. to Average Strength present and absent. 1 19th Regiment N. I. Bolan Pass 8.2 2 3rd Sind Horse Khoosh-dil-K han 8.0 3 30th Regiment N. I. Quetta 6.0 4 1st Gr. Regiment N. I. Afghanistan 5.8 5 16th iv 5. Table D (page v) shows the total number of men invalided for discharge and physical disability is 1,214. Of these 167 were discharged from the Presidency Circle, 362 from the Poona Circle, 420 from the Mhow Circle, 144 from Sind, and 121 from the regiments on Field Service. Of the total 1,214, there were 672, or rather more than half, discharged for old age and debility, 89 for rheumatic affections, 65 for diseases of the eye, 36 for syphilitic disease, 28 for scorbutic affections, and 324 for various other complaints. It is worthy of note that of these last only 13 were for malarial fever, which is a very small proportion, consider- ing the large number of admissions into hospital for this disease. It would seem, however, that this does not cause so much permanent disability as rheumatic and other affections mentioned above; nevertheless itV TABLE D. Invalided for discharge and Physical disability. CLASSES OF DISEASES. (N.B.vi TABLE E. Sick Leave. CLASSES OF DISEASES. (N.B.vii Rheumatism. 9. There were 1,220 cases (or 3.1 per cent. of total admissions) of rheuma- tism during the year, with only 6 deaths; and in 1878 there were 1,368 cases, or 3.4 per cent., with 6 deaths. 437 of these cases, or 2.8 per cent., occurred in the Northern Division. At Rajkote, Baroda, and Bhooj there were 82, 52, and 50 cases, respectively; at Nusseerabad there were only 13 cases. Lung diseases. 10. Of these there were 1,360 cases, or 3.5 per cent. of total admissions, with 92 deaths, against 1,190, or 2.9 per cent., last year, with only 52 deaths. At Quetta there were 100 cases with 15 deaths, in the Bolan Pass 85 and 7 deaths, and at Malegaum there were 86 with 5 deaths. As regards the different Circles it will be noticed that in the Northern Circle, in which there are always so many cases of malarial fever, and where there is a great diurnal change, there are only 380 cases, or 2.5 per cent. of total admissions in the Circle, compared with 381, or 2.3 per cent., last year. This is a lower percentage than in any of the other Circles. In the Presidency, Poona, and Sind Circles there were 4.2, 4.5, and 2.7, respectively. Intestinal affections. 11. These were chiefly diarrhviii Small-pox. 15. There were only 11 cases of small-pox, whereas last year there were 63. This year there were no deaths from this disease. Cholera. 16. There were 100 cases of cholera throughout the year, being only 0.2 per cent. of the total admissions, against 86 cases, or 0.2 per cent., last year. Cholera, however, gave 68 deaths in the present year, whereas last year there were only 49. 17. There were 46 cases of chicken-pox and 15 cases of measles, but not a single case of enteric fever is reported amongst the troops. Climate. 18. As regards the influence of climate on both Europeans and Natives, it appears from the history of the past year that the stations in the Bombay Presidency, taken altogether, are fairly healthy for a tropical climate, those badly reported on being very few in number. At Nusseerabad the rainfall was 23.9 inches against 19.4 inches in the previous year. Malarial fevers were very prevalent, together with scurvyix Table F. Corps. Station. Serial Number. Ratio per cent of admissions to Average Strength present. Daily Sick per cent. to Average Strength present. 20th Regiment N. I Baroda 1 311.6 8.7 No. 1 Mountain Battery Rajkote 2 306.5 7.7 3rd Regiment N. I. Hydrabad 3 274.8 9.0 1st Grenadiers x built in 1875, but many stations are still badly in want of new lines. At Assirgarh new lines have been sanctioned, but the lines of the 13th N. I. at Mhow are reported as being so dilapidated that they are apparently about to fall. At Deesa, where the 26th were stationed, they are old, dilapidated, and past repair, and have been already condemned twice or thrice; they have no plinths, and the floor is below the level of the surrounding ground. The lines of the 7th N. I. at Bhooj are bad, but it is stated that orders have been issued for them to be rebuilt. The roofs of several of the lines leak in the rains, and those of the 20th N. I. at Baroda and the 2nd Light Cavalry at Poona were flooded in the rains, the former on account of the insufficient depth of the drain running from the north- west corner, and the latter owing to an insufficient fall to insure a flow in the drain. To remedy this the Officer Commanding (Colonel Macnaughten) had moorum laid down and a stone surface drain built with a small brick reservoir at the end, which was sunk below the ground level. As regards the cavalry lines, the small walled-in enclosures in front of each hut are universally condemned as being merely cloaks for dirty habits. It would seem advisable, if they cannot easily be dispensed with on account of the preju- dices of the particular caste of natives who enlist in these regiments, that they should at least be inspected and cleaned out once or twice a week, as is done in the Poona Horse. Drainage to prevent the sullage of the horses, which are picketed between the lines, soaking into the ground, would also be very beneficial, and might be carried out at a small expense. Conservancy. 20. The trench system is used in many of the native lines where it is possible, but latrines on the standard plan are far more common. In both, the distance the men have to go from their lines is a great drawback, as it is difficult to enforce the use of them on all occa- sions on the women and children, who frequently make use of the lines or their own huts. At night, too, it is well known that the men will not take the trouble to walk to the latrines. Dirty naturally in their habits and education, they cannot be expected to appreciate the benefits conferred on them by civilization. The nuisance that consequently follows in the lines might be partially prevented by having urinals in the lines, as has already been done at Nusseerabad, where the 2nd Grenadiers were stationed. The Medical Officer states that there are six urinals with masonry beds in the lines for the men; dry sand is used in these and changed twice daily. This is an excellent plan, and one that will not only improve the general conservancy of the line, but also contribute largely to the comfort of the men. The use of trenches is favourably reported on by all the Medical Officers of stations where they are in use, and it would appear that, when practicable, this is the best system to use, provided, however, that the trenches are supplemented by latrines to be used in the rains. At Ahmednugger the Medical Officer of the 23rd N. L. I. reports that "from the position of the lines and nature of the soil in camp it would be impossible to use trench latrines," and the Medical Officer of the 20th Regiment at Baroda states that in consequence of the scarcity of suitable ground the regiment has reverted to the use of pukha-built latrines, the expense having been defrayed during a portion of the year by contributions from the men themselves. The latrines themselves, which are built on what is known as the standard plan, are most objectionable. They are built of brickwork with partition of the same material and with an earthen rough stone floor raised a foot or more above the ground; in these are placed so many wooden or iron pans, generally of a square shape, which are drawn out through an opening in the back wall once or twice a day; the stone on which they are placed is rough, laid level, and without any drain in it, the consequence is that the urine, which men do not take the trouble to pass in the pan, together with the water which natives use for
xi the purpose of ablution (lota water), runs down over the floor through the opening the back of the wall and dribbles over the brickwork, which latter, in the course of a few months, becomes so completely saturated that it is impossible to keep the latrines in a proper state, so that with the slightest breeze from windward they become a constant nuisance to the camp. The 7th N. I. at Bhooj have pukha-built stone latrines; the stone, however, is not obtainable at all stations, but I think the nuisance might be diminished to a very considerable degree, as suggested by the Medical Officer of the 25th N. I. at Aden, by having a small drain leading from each of the stones on which the pans are placed to a large drain runing along the back of the latrine with a sufficient fall to empty itself into some receptacle placed at one end, which might be emptied daily. With reference to this point I would invite attention to the remarks on conservancy by Surgeon-Major Heffernan, 25th N. I. at Aden, and Surgeon-Major Barry, 2nd Light Cavalry, Poona. At Ahmedabad also the latrines of the 15th N. I. are reported to be unpaved. In the cavalry lines of the Poona Horse at Siroor "the system of shallow pits with drains leading off the fluid excreta in each house is still in vogue," and the fluid excreta from each house is run to the root of a tree planted outside each house enclosure, which enclosure, with its latrine and surface drainage, is inspected once a week. In the 2nd Sind Horse the dry-earth system is carried as far as possible. Water-supply. 21. Water-supply is mostly obtained from wells, Which are situated usually one between every two lines, and the reports of the water-supply are on the Whole satisfactory. The opinions of the Medical Officers; however, are not formed from any analyses of the water (except in the case of the water at Siroor, of which two analyses are to be found in Surgeon Stewart's report of the Poona Horse), but on the general appearance and taste. At Nusseerabad the wells yield slightly brackish water, and have to be supplemented by about 394 gallons from the Dilwarra well, three miles from the cantonment. The Medical Officer of the 8th Regiment N. I. reports that the water is hard and brackish, and in the hot weather, on account of the scarcity, it has to be brought from a well some distance. The water was analysed by the Government Travelling Analyst. At Mehidpoor the water is indifferent most of the year, and very bad in the hot weather; it is obtained from three wells and the River Sepra. The native infantry lines at Hydrabad are supplied by the river Indus, the water of which is pumped up to the cantonments by steam-power. At Jacobabad itself the water is good, but is bad at the outposts, causing dysentery and diarrhxii from Government for dearness of grain, which in Bombay, the Medical Officer of the 9th reports, reached at one time as much as Rs. 5. This is a matter of no importance to the unmarried men, but in the case of a man with a family means that out of his ordinary pay he has to pay for the additional price of grain for each member of his family at just the same rate, so that the higher the compen- sation allowance the poorer he becomes. To pay for his clothing and other neces- saries he saves the money which should be spent on his food, and being thus underfed, becomes thin and loses his physique. Many others underfeed themselves by trying to live on their additional allowance and to save all their pay. Several Medical Officers have therefore recommended that rations should be universally supplied to the Native Army, the only place in which this is done at present is Aden, where free rations are supplied by Government, which consist of wheaten flour 1 lb., rice 12 oz., ghee 2 ozs., salt ¾ oz., cocum 1 oz., curry stuff 1½ oz., vegetables 7 ozs., and firewood 3 lbs. The Medical Officer at Aden states: "The quantity here is sufficient, but there is a total absence of fresh meat, and the quality of the vegetables is as a rule very inferior, and the result is, a regiment suffering from scurvy. As a proof that the vegetable ration is very inferior, I may mention that during the few so-called cold months, when vegetables could be obtained in the bazaar at moderate rates and of good quality, there was a decided improvement in the health of the men with regard to scurvy. There can be no doubt that scurvy and scorbutic dysentery, which were the chief causes of serious illness during the year, were entirely due to the character of food issued to the men. Brinjals and bhendies were the chief vegetables issued, and these indeed contain very little anti-scorbutic properties." The Medical Officer suggests the issue of potatoes with radishes, bajee, and other vegetables of this description. Should this be carried out, however, it would be advisable to find some means of preventing the men from selling their rations. The Officer in medical charge of the 1st Light Cavalry states that the average quantity of food taken by both Mahrattas and Mussalmans isxiii certainly be more suitable, for besides being part of their native dress, it is more useful as a protection from the sun, because the native certainly must feel the heat of the sun, though not to so great an extent as a European; and though he cannot be so susceptible to its influence, yet it is a questionxiv urine from the very first must have affected it, and ever since caused it to con- tinually wear away. Nearly all the other hospitals have very good accommodation, and some of them are excellent buildings. General health and physique. 24. With few exceptions both the health and physique of the men in the Native Army are very moderately good, and in those cases where they are not quite up to the standard, a satisfactory explanation is given; and it may be fairly expected that when these regiments are placed under more favourable circumstances and go to more healthy stations, they will compare favourably with the other regiments in the Presidency, thus the health of the 2nd Grenadiers deteriorated on coming to Nusseerabad. The 15th Regiment suffered a great deal from fever, and many men were rendered unfit for anything but light duty whilst they were at Ahmedabad. In the 24th Regiment the physique of the men was good, but those at Mehidpoor were debili- tated from fever; whilst the men in the other wing stationed at Augar always enjoyed good health, with the exception of those who were transferred from Mehidpoor. The men of the 28th improved in health after their arrival at Surat, as also those of the 11th, whose station was changed from Bhooj to Poona. The health of the 1st Sind Horse became much deteriorated from exposure and work in the Bolan Pass, and the epidemics of cholera between Jacobabad and Dozan Nullah, and the outposts not being relieved sufficiently often. But of all the regi- ments the 25th at Aden appears to have been the most broken down as regards health, which is bad. This is due to scurvy, which is always more or less rife at Aden. This question is at present under consideration, but I would invite atten- tion to the remarks by the Medical Officer on the subject, and am of opinion that the recommendation first suggested by Deputy Surgeon General Johnstone, that the troop should be relieved after eighteen months' service, is worthy of trial. Though the health of the regiment was bad, the physique has not much deteriorated. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments. 25. Few of the duties of the sepoys appear to have had any injurious effect on their heath, with the exception of men on the frontier, where the work was necessarily heavy and somewhat trying for the men. At Aden the public guards' duties are heavy, but the ill health of the troops is attributed to other causes. But the Medical Officer of the 7th Regiment writes: "When the running drill was commenced in the beginning of November there was a very cold north-east wind blowing, and in two or three days the increase of admissions into the hospital was so great that I recommended the running drill should be stopped for some weeks. This was done, and when the running drill was resumed in January it was found to have no ill effect." The 15th Regiment at Ahmedabad had to perform the entire duties of the station, which were previously shared by two, the men at one time having less than two nights in bed. The Medical Officer says: "Such an amount of duty, involving exposure and want of rest during a season like the past, when malarious influence had been so prevalent, has told on the men's health, and many primary cases of intermittent fever and many more re-admissions from it have appeared as results." When the 3rd Light Cavalry were stationed at Deesa it was noticed that many men going on duty to Palunpoor returned with syphilis. In every regiment the sepoys are encouraged to join in various sports, as running, wrestling, &c., but the cavalry regiments have a great advantage in being able to vary their amusements more than the infantry. Some of the men, too, take great interest in musketry firing: the men of the Right Wing, 24th Regiment N. I., fired off no less than 16,317 rounds at their own expense before the annual course began. Gymnasia are common in the native lines, but the 2nd Sind Horse are reported to be greatly in want of gymnastic training for the recruits and young sowars of the regiment, and the Medical Officer states that this important subject "does not seem to have received the attention it deserves."
xv Cinchona febrifuge. 26. Sixteen Medical Officers have expressed theiropinions on the value of the cinchona alkaloids as an anti-periodic in malaria. Of these seven speak highly of it, one considers it most beneficial, and the remaining six consider it efficient, successful, and valuable; the other eight consider that it is only useful in the mild cases, but of no use in well marked malaria, and the Officer of the 15th Regiment states that it has failed in so large a proportion of cases in preventing recurrence of the paroxysm, that the year's experience does not enable him to report favourably on it as an anti- periodic. It is a question in the case of the mildest cases how far the change to hospital with warm clothing is beneficial in warding off the fever. Epidemics. 27. There were no epidemics among the troops during the year, but a few cases of small-pox occurred in the 6th and 12th Regi- ments, all of which recovered. One child was attacked in the 2nd Sind Horse. Two mild cases of cholera were admitted into the hospital of the 3rd N. L. I. during the epidemic at Sukker, both of which recovered, and the Medical Officer of the 1st Sind Horse states that whilst there was cholera along the route from Jacobabad to Kandahar, a great number of men stationed along the posts as far as the top of the Bolan were attacked.. 28. The printing of this report has been delayed in hopes of ultimately obtaining the reports from No. 2 Mountain Battery, 4th Regiment N. I., and 29th Regiment N. I., but I regret that even now the report is necessarily incomplete, owing to the above not having been received, and it is stated by the Medical Officers of the 4th N. I. and 29th N. I. that copies sent twice in the early part of the year were lost in transit by post, and a third copy could not be furnished, as all the records of the regiments were lost in Afghanistan. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, J. M. S. FOGO, Surgeon-General, Her Majesty's Forces in Bombay.
INDEX. [The Regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the lst July 1879.] PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. PAGE Aden Troop, Khor Maksar 1 9th Regiment N. I., Bombay 3 21st do. do. 5 25th do. Aden 6 28th do. Surat 11 No. 1 Company Sappers and Miners 13 POONA DIVISION. 2nd Regiment L. C., Poona 53 Poona Horse, Siroor 55 Sappers and Miners, Kirkee 57 8th Regiment N. I., Satara 58 11th do. Poona 61 14th do. Belgaum 63 16th do. Malegaum 65 17th do. Dharwar 69 18th do. Poona 71 22nd do. Belgaum 73 23rd do. Ahmednugger 75 NORTHERN DIVISION. 1st Regiment L. C., Neemuch 15 3rd (Queen's Own) Regiment L. C., Deesa 17 No. 1 Mountain Battery, Rajkote 19 2nd (Prince of Wales's Own) Regiment N. I., Grenadiers, Nusseerabad 21 6th Regiment N. I., Mhow 24 7th do. Bhooj 28 10th do. Neemuch 30 12th do. Rajkote 33 13th do. Mhow 35 15th do. Ahmedabad 38 20th do. Baroda 41 24th do. Mehidpoor 46 26th do. Deesa 50 SIND DIVISION. 1st Sind Horse, Jacobabad 77 2nd do. do. 79 3rd Regiment N. I., Hydrabad 81 5th do. N. L. I., Kurrachee 86 5m
( xviii ) CABUL EXPEDITION. Sappers and Miners, Afghanistan 90 3rd Sind Horse do. 91 1st Grenadiers Regiment N. I. do. 95 19th Regiment N. I., Bolan Pass 99 30th do. Quetta 103 STATISTICAL TABLE. Statement showing the sickness and mortality among the Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency during the year 110 Summary of do. do. 112 APPENDIX. Annual General Return exhibiting the sick of Her Majesty's Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency 113
MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1879. (The Regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st of 1879.) PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Average Strength present during the year 2,723 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength Present 4.6 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength Present 1.2 Aden Troop. KHOR MAKSAR.2 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. 1. The head-quarters has been in the interior four times on patrolling duty during the year, and small detachments from June to September in the plains, six. or seven miles distant from Khor Maksar, in consequence of rinderpest disease amongst the horses.. The lines and their surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines consist of two long (pucka) pendals, lying north and south, facing inward, with the horse lines (pucka), built during this year, between them. The lines are at the western side of the hospital. The site is good, and the whole have been in good repair during the year. The pendals are divided by bamboo partitions into rooms. The space between the two blocks of pendals is 228 feet; height of plinths is about .1½ feet. Roof composed of Zanzibar rafters and reeds; the matting is covered with stones and chunam. Ventilation good, by means of holes in the walls. Height to ridge of exter- nal wall is 3 feet 8 inches, of internal wall 8 feet 8 inches, and of doorway 7 feet 7 inches. Superficial area of single men's rooms, including verandah, is 126 feet, Cubic space per man is 648 feet. There are, besides, three Native officers' houses. The family quarters are temporary buildings erected by the married men at their own expense. Conservancy. 3. There is one permanent conveniently situated latrine attached to the hospital, which is kept clean; the night-soil is removed three times a day. The men and the male followers resort to the neighbouring sandy plain for natural purposes, and the small privies in the family lines are regularly cleaned by sweepers; no nuisance or injury to health is occasioned by this system. Water supply. 4. Fighting men received two gallons of condensed and three gallons of Shaik Oothman's (brackish) water a day; both are good of their kind, and the quantity is deemed sufficient. Food and clothing. 5. Rations are not issued to the men of the Aden Troop. Khakee or white clothing for the hot season, and cloth for the cold season, are well adapted for the climate. Duties, exercise and amuse-ments; their effect on health. 6. Ordinary guard duties and patrolling in the interior; they seem to have no injurious effect on the health of the men. The men exercise in playing polo, athletic sports, &c., and sword exercise, which appears to do them much good and to improve their health. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. An excellent hospital is in use, with accommodation for 12 patients; it gives a space for each patient of 3,212 cubic feet. The accommodation is good, and the surroundings are in very good order. General health and physique. 8 With the exception of the large number of admissions in the months of March and April, the general health during the year has been good and the troop is fit for active service. Influence of climate or local 9. During the year the rainfall consisted of only a few slight showers, which in no way affected the health of the Troop or exercised any influence on the state of the climate, which was said to have been cooler than usual. The climate of Aden is most enervating, and affects the system of those serving in it to such an extent that it renders them very subject to diseases peculiar to the station, notably fevers, bowel complaints, and bronchial affections. Details of treated. 10 The average strength of the year was 86·4 and the total number of admissions into hospital 180, out of which 161 were discharged, 16 transferred to the 25th Regiment N.L I. Hospital for treatment, 1 died, and 3 remained under treatment on the 3rd December 1879, making a total of 181 treated, including 1 remaining from previous year, being 14 cases less than in the preceding year. Ague, as usual, caused the largest number of admissions, and furnished 65 cases. The disease was of a mild type and occurred chiefly in the months of January, February, March, and April, soon after the Troop returned from the malarious country. The cases were all treated in the usual way with cinchona alkaloid, and quinine in the more severe ones. There were 11 cases of rheumatism, due in a great measure to exposure to vicissitudes of climate. There were 9 cases of bronchitis, acute and chronic, caused by exposure; one man sent on sick leave to Hindoostan for this complaint. There were 9 cases of splenitis treated; out of these, one proved fatal. The man recently returned from furlough and had been sent with a detachment into the interior on duty, where he contracted fever and an enormous spleen. The cases of wounds were mostly slight ones, and the remaining admissions require no comment. Mortality, and its causes. 11. One death occurred from enormous enlargement of the spleen, caused by long residence in Aden.
PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE.3 Epidemics. 12. There has been no epidemic disease in the Troop during the year, but in the town there was an outbreak of small-pox, imported by pilgrims returning from Mecca. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Eight children have been successfully vaccinated during the year; the lymph was good and the vesicles well formed and left good cicatrices. There was no re-vaccination carried out during the year. Invaliding, and itscauses. 14. One man was invalided for palpitation of heart and general debility. Requirements and recommend- ations. 15.There has been nothing particular to recommend or require. Specialobservations. 16. I have not followed any new plan of treatment since assuming charge of the Troop. 9th Regiment N. I. BOMBAY.4 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food and clothing 5. There is a capital market close at hand, from which all supplies can be obtained. Clothing is also easily procurable from the native town. The men have two suits of regimental clothing, one warm red serge cloth, and the other American drill for the summer. Food is dear in Bombay, but the men draw their usual grain compensation, which is Rs. 5 in addition to their pay every month. Duties and exercise, and their effects on health. 6. The duties in Bombay are rather hard, as the number of nights in bed is generally only 2, and there are generally two parades a week in the summer and.three or four in the cold season. There is a gymnasium in the lines, and the recruits are exercised at it. Hospital 7. The hospital is 200 feet long and 38 broad, consisting of four wards each 50 feet by 20, with verandahs on each side 8 feet wide. Each verandah has its door at the end of its ward, and when they are left open, they form either a walk for the patients, or a place for trying the stamina of recruits. At the end of the verandah there are four rooms at the four corners of the hospital, 10 feet by 10, two for patients, and two for the consulting and store room. The hospital stands in a compound 275 feet by 232, and faces the sea on the west side and the Marine Lines and Scotch burial ground (now unused) on the east. The north looks towards the city, and the south towards the officers' bungalows. The hospital can accommodate 50 beds without using the verandas, which in a case of emergency could accommodate 36 more, making a total of 86 beds. The hospital has not a dispensary in. the main building, which is a great defect, and plans were sent in both for that and a bath room, but the present state of the finances would not allow of their being made. The hospital is supplied with Toolsee water from two hydrants, and the water is of excellent quality. There is also a capital exercise ground in front of the hospital for the patients. General health and physique 8. The general health has been good since the Regiment came back from Malta; the physique of the men is good, most of them being over 5 feet 6, and over 32 inches chest measurement. Some of them are good gymnasts and wrestlers. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The climate of Bombay is very good, and always brings up the health of a Regiment if it was suffering from any disease or epidemic before its arrival. The daily average of sick this year is 25.0, a slight increase on last year, as there was a great deal of fever in May, June, and July, making the total of admissions for that disease 100 more than last year. The lines are very hot in the summer months, as there is no shade from trees, and being surrounded by buildings on three sides, the ventilation is not good, especially at night, when the wind fails. Details of treated. 10. There were 428 cases of malarious fever, an increase of 81 over last year. Remittent fever 2 cases, bowel complaints 49 cases, 21 dysentery and 28 diarrhoea, spleen disease 5, respiratory disease 60, consisting chiefly of bronchitis and bronchial catarrh, with 1 case of pneumonia, 7 cases of phthisis, 2 of dropsy, 19 cases of scurvy, rheumatism 32, venereal 8, and eye disease 17 (chiefly conjunctivitis), abscess and ulcers 14, wounds and accidents (including shoe-bites) 83, all other causes 170. Mortality, and its causes. 11. There were 6 deaths in hospital; their causes were, 1 from remittent fever (com- plicated with bronchitis), 1 from dysentery, 1 from scurvy of long standing, 2 from phthisis, and 1 from self-poisoning by opium. Epidemics. 12. There was no epidemic this year. Vaccination. 13. 27 children were primarily vaccinated, 18 boys and 9 girls; 83 recruits and 18 women were re-vaccinated. These vaccinations were all successful. Invaliding, and its causes. 14. 43 men were invalided in the year, 16 old and past service, 6 for chronic bronchitis, 4 for general debility, 5 for eye disease, 2 for vari- cose veins, 2 for chronic splenitis, 1 each for dysentery, chronic rheumatism, chronic orchitis, phthisis, secondary syphilis, local paralysis, heart disease, and cheloid cancer. Requirements and recommend- ations 15. A dispensary and bath room added to the main build- ing of the hospital on the side facing the sea at each corner. Special observations, new ex-perience in treatment. 16. Iodoform has been found very beneficial applied over indolent ulcers with lint, strapped over and excluded from air for two days. Salycilate of soda has also been found of great benefit in reducing the temperature in remittent fever, in doses of 10 or 15 grains in water every four hours.
PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE.5 21st Regiment N.I. BOMBAY.6 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The total number of patients treated at the head-quarters amounted to 566, including 15 last remaining; 676 were from various detachments. The following table gives the number of admissions at the head-quarters and detachments mentioned below:7 PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Location and movements. 1. The Regiment has been stationed at Aden during the year, furnishing a detachment of 50 men to the outpost on Perim island, which was relieved every two months. Lines and their surroundings. 2. The Native Infantry lines at Aden are situated in the lowest part of the Crater position, surrounded by hills and shut off from the influence of any sea breezes which may prevail. They are divided into two portions, which are separated from each other by the European officers' quarters and Mess house. Those on the south side are occupied by the unmarried men, and consist of six parallel rows, separated from each other by longitudinal and sub-divided by three cross streets into four pendals each. The twenty-four pendals thus formed are again sub-divided by a wall running through the centre of each. Each pendal has a superficial area of 1,452 square feet and a cubic space of 14,157 cubic feet. They are intended to accommodate 22 men, 11 in each room. The average cubic space to each man, after deducting all encroachments, is about 600 cubic feet, and the superficial area 65 square feet. The streets are very narrow, the longitudinal ones being only 13 feet from verandah to verandah, and the cross ones 17 feet from house to house. The married quarters consist of six pendals divided into 14 rooms each, and having the verandahs walled up to a certain height. Each room has a cubic space (exclusive of verandah) of 900 cubic feet, and a superficial area of 90 square feet. The verandahs are walled in, contain a bathing place, and have a superficial area of about 70 square feet each. The maximum number of occupants in the single men's rooms amounted to not more than eleven at any time during the year. I cannot speak positively about the married men's quarters, but I know there was no overcrowding. The ventilation of the lines is carried on by openings in the front walls above the verandah roof, of considerable size, and protected by bamboo trellis work, by covered venti- lators at the ridge, and by fourteen oblong shaped openings at either end of the pendals. There is no defect in the amount of space allowed for ventilation; but the situation of the lines, with their narrow streets and low and chunamed roofs, renders them close and unbearable in the hot weather. The bathing places alluded to as existing in the verandahs of the married men's houses, were the subject of much discussion towards the end of the year, as a very suspicious case of fever, supposed to be typhoid, was admitted from the family lines. On inspecting the house from which the patient was admitted, a bathing place was found in the verandah, which sloped outwards, and discharged its contents by a small drain into a covered cesspit placed immediately outside the outer wall of the house, in the open street. The effluvia from the cess-pit of.course found its way into the house, and as a consequence the inmates were living in an atmosphere polluted to a great extent. When on enquiry it was ascertained that these places were used for all the purposes of nature by the women and children, the foul smell emanating from them was easily accounted for. On my recommend- ation the cess-pits were dug out, and all the polluted and saturated soil removed and replac- ed by fresh earth. The drains now open on the free surface of the streets, over which the refuse water and other fluids are allowed to flow, pending some permanent arrangement for their disposal. Several remedies have been suggested for the removal of this dangerous nuisance, such as providing conservancy pans for the married men's houses, or making permanent masonry drains along the lines to carry off all fluids, or sinking receptacles in the streets, into which the bathing places could drain, and which could be emptied daily by sweepers; but none of these recommendations have been carried out, as their adoption would entail a certain amount of expense, which the authorities do not seem disposed to sanction at present. Conservancy. 3. There are three permanent latrines in use, and of these, one is allotted to the women. They are situated about three hundred yards from the lines, from which they are separated by the main road through the Crater position. They were noticed as defective in construction by the Deputy Surgeön General at his annual inspection, and also by me in my sanitary sheet of the Regiment for 1878; the defect complained of being that there is no means of carrying off the fluid excreta and washings, which do not fall into the privy pans. The stone pavement in front and rear of the seats is on a dead level, and as a consequence, the fluids remain stagnant on it, until a sufficient quantity collects to cause an overflow, when it trickles down the hill side towards the main road. This state of affairs gives rise to a foul smell, which in the hot months nothing can prevent, and which is very dangerous to the general health, and highly disagreeable, being so close to the main thoroughfare through camp. The state of these latrines has, I understand, been several times brought to notice by the Deputy Surgeon General, and a long correspondence on the subject with the authorities has also taken place, but no change or improvement seems to have resulted from either. A very moderate expenditure of public money would, in my opinion, remedy the evil. The stone pavement should be sloped from before backwards, and a water-tight drain of the same material carried along its posterior edge, to a small tank at one or either end,
8 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. where an ordinary iron filth receptacle could be placed for the reception of all fluids, excreta or otherwise. The latrines are cleaned twice daily and the pans emptied into covered receptacles, from which the excreta are removed nightly in a covered filth cart outside the fortifications to a place called Holket's Bay, and there buried. There are three urinals close to the lines. No bad effect on health has been attributed to the conservancy system carried out at Aden, but this is owing more to the absence of rain and the general dryness of all the surroundings, than to the excellency of the arrangement. Water supply 4. The water supply is very defective as regards quantity, particularly in the amount allowed to followers, whose families received none. The supply during the year was obtained from two sources, condensed and well water. Each fighting man receives two gallons of sweet or condensed water, and three of well or brackish water, and each follower one of condensed and two of well water. This allowance is ample for single men, but for married sepoys an increase of one gallon of each kind is certainly required. The followers' families have to provide themselves with water. An increase in the allowance of sweet water in the hot months was recommended by my predecessor, but the recommendation was not acted on. The quality of drinking water is of course pure, yet the sepoys attribute stomach derangement and bowel complaints to its use. There is no doubt but condensed water, when drunk freely, gives a feeling of weight about the epigastrium, and other symptoms of indigestion. Food and clothing 5. This has been the subject of much discussion, and very different opinions have been expressed on the matter, but one thing however is quite clear to all, and that is, the want of antiscorbutic properties in the free ration supplied by Government. The ration consists of 4 oz. dhall, 1 lb. wheaten flour, 12 oz. rice, 2 oz. ghee, ¾ oz. salt, 1 oz. cocum, 1½ oz. currystuff, and 7 oz. of vegetables, with 3 lbs. of firewood and the quantity of water already mentioned. The quantity here is suffi cient, but there is a total absence of fresh meat, and the quality of the vegetables is as a rule very inferior, and the result is, a regiment suffering from scurvy. As a proof that the vege- table ration is very inferior, I may mention that during the few so-called cold months, when vegetables could be obtained in the bazaar at moderate rates and of good quality, there was a decided improvement in the health of the men, with regard to scurvy. There can be no doubt that scurvy and scorbutic dysentery, which were the chief causes of serious illness during the year, were entirely due to the character of the food issued to the men. Brinjals and bendies were the chief vegetables issued, and these indeed contain very little antiscorbutic properties. Many of the cases of colic, dyspepsia and indigestion put down to condensed water and climate at Aden, are really caused by the men using dhall and other legumenosæ too largely as an article of diet. Rancid or old ghee may also have had a share in producing some of the bowel derangements. Succulent vegetables, such as potatoes, onions, Native radishes, bajee, and others of this description, which are really within the reach of Govern- ment, should be issued to the Native Troops at Aden. There could be no difficulty in procuring. a daily ration of potatoes for the sepoys, and the good which would result to the general health of the men, would more than repay the Government for the expense. Only those who have served with a Native Regiment for some years at bad stations, are aware of the great. expense thrown on the revenues of the country by pensioning men prematurely broken. down from bad food and exposure. Clothing.PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 9 to the climate of Aden. It has three principal wards for the reception of patients, and the inner verandah to the rear, which is walled in and furnished with doors and windows, can be also used for that purpose, when required. The main ward is designed to hold twenty-two patients, giving each a superficial area of about 100 square feet and a cubic space of 1,964 cubic feet. The two small wards accommodate eight patients each, allowing the same mea- -surements to the inmates. There are, in addition to the three wards mentioned, an office and surgery eighteen feet by twenty-four, and a dispensary twelve feet by twenty-four. There are also two small store rooms taken off the back, and a guard room off the verandah at the west end. The latrine was repaired and its construction in a measure improved during the year, and it is now in very good condition. The subordinates' and servants' quarters are sufficient and in a good state. The hospital is a new building, as are also all the out-offices, and both it and the general surroundings are very healthy. The building is isolated and situated on a dry stony site, with a well raised masonry plinth four feet high, floored with asphalte, thoroughly ventilated and exposed to the prevailing winds. There is no source of nuisance in the immediate vicinity. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the regiment during the greater part of the year was decidedly bad. This was chiefly due to the amount of scurvy which prevailed amongst the men. The cause of the great prevalence of this complaint, which was almost confined to the Native Infantry, is to be found in the deficiency of anti-scorbutic properties in the ration supplied from the Commissariat Department to the men. The actual number of men admitted into hospital under the head of scurvy will not convey the remotest idea of the extent to which the men's systems were saturated with the malady, as the impoverished state of the blood due to it, caused other com- -plaints of a more prominent nature, for which the men sought admission. The men at head- quarters were inspected weekly during the year, and the following percentages found tainted and had lime juice issued to them daily in the lines. In the month of February 5.75 per cent. were found tainted with scurvy, in March 3.67, in April 1.96, in May 7.34, in June 7.62, in July 22.10, in August 21.64, in September 25.29, in October 31.64, in November 33.89, and in December 32.20. From the above figures it will be seen that the lowest percentage of men affected with scurvy was found in April or at the end of the cold season. I attributed this, and I believe justly, to the comparative facility with which vegetables were obtained in the bazaar during the three previous cold months. Again, the great increase which took place in July, shows that the almost total absence of vegetables from the bazaar in the hot months, and the very inferior quality of those issued by the Commissariat, were the chief causes of the complaint, and that scurvy amongst the Native Troops at Aden is mainly due to an inferior vegetable ration. The low caste Purwaree from the Concan, and the grain feeding Hindoo from Hindustan, were the greatest sufferers. I believe Dr. Johnstone, a former Deputy Surgeon General of this Division, recommended that the Native Regiments at Aden should be relieved after eighteen months' service here, and the above percentages show the wisdom of this advice, as it was only during the last six months of the second year, that scurvy declared itself largely amongst the men and seriously affected the health of the Regiment. From what has been said on the subject of scurvy, it must be expected that the physique of the men has rather deteriorated during the past year. but it has not been so seriously affected as a person would be inclined to suppose, as the men are as a rule young, and will, with few exceptions, throw off the disease after a short time at a healthy Indian station. There are of course a few men irretrievably ruined in health, who will have to be discharged from the regiment, to eke out the remainder of their existence in their native villages as best they may. Influence of climate on health. 9. During the year the rainfall consisted of only a few slight showers, that in no way affected the health of the Troops, or exercised any influence on the state of the climate, which was said to have been cooler than usual. No doubt the climate of Aden is most enervating, and affects the systems of those serving in it to such an extent that it renders them very subject to the diseases peculiar to the station. One would be inclined to think, that there is some peculiarity in the atmos- -phere of Aden which favours the development of scurvy, but the fact that the Native Troops are almost the only sufferers from the malady, proves that it is chiefly due to the quality of the ration issued to the sepoys. The Aden ulcer and scorbutic ulceration are very common, and due to local and climatic influences. I have noticed that in most of the cases of the true Aden or chronic ulcer, there were no scorbutic symptoms, and firmly believe that they are due to a depraved state of the blood, from some other as yet undiscovered cause, perhaps to the presence of some of the lately discovered living organisms in that fluid. Bowel complaints (particularly scorbutic dysentery) were influenced prejudicially by climate. Colics, dyspepsia, and diarrh10 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Details of treated. 10. The average strength of the 25th Regiment N. L. I. at Aden and Perim during the year amounted to 644, the total number of admissions into hospital to 504, the daily average of sick to 35.84, the percent- age of treated to strength to 81.52, the percentage of admissions to strength to 76.01, and the perentage of deaths to strength to 1.5. The total number of admissions into hospital at head-quarters amounted to 457, and of these ague, as usual, furnished the lion's share. The ague at Aden is not as a rule of a severe or well marked type amongst the sepoys, who are not allowed into the interior. There can be no doubt, however, as far as my experience goes, of the presence of a certain amount of-local malaria in or around the settlement; but most of the cases which came under treatment during the year were relapses, occurring in men who had suffered from ague in India. There are two classes of men in the Regiment very liable to irregular attacks of intermittent fever on the slightest exposure to vicissitudes of climate or fatigue, and these are those who suffered severely from the disease at Mehidpoor, and others who have since joined, having their systems impregnated with malaria, before they left their native villages. In all 107 cases of ague were admitted at Aden, and 10 cases of simple continued fever. There were 11 admissions from ague in the Perim Detachment. The usual treatment was pursued, and except in well marked cases, the cinchonidine mixture was found sufficient to effect a cure. In well marked cases of ague, I cannot however agree with those who consider it a saving to the State to administer the cheap alkaloids instead of quinine. The length of time they take to cure an attack of ague, favours the development of malarial cachexia, which renders the subject an almost useless sepoy for the remainder of his service, and throws him on the pension list at an early age. Under diseases of the digestive system there were 78 cases of bowel complaints. These were 24 of dysentery, 25 of diarrhPRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 11 at Bombay a few days after his arrival in India. A second case of the complaint proved fatal in a recruit boy, but as he is only classed as a public follower, he is not shown in the Annual Return. Bright12 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1876 Rajkote 110.5 3.8 2.1 1877 Do. 60.5 2.4 0.6 1878 Do. 251.9 6.6 2.4 Average 140.8 4.3 1.7 1879 Surat 238.2 5.6 2.2 Location and movements. 1. The Regiment arrived at Surat on the 14th December 1878, where it has remained up to the end of the year. 2. The lines were inspected by the Deputy Surgeon General of the Division in September 1878, and condemned by him as badly ventilated, and badly constructed. On the arrival of the Regiment the floors of the huts, previous to their occupation, were dug up, and the walls all white-washed inside and outside. After they were thoroughly dry, they were occupied. 3. The latrines are situated to the east of the lines, and are kept scrupulously clean. The lines are always kept extremely clean. 4. The water supply is good and abundant. There are some brackish wells, but they are not in use. 5. The food is good and plentiful, and vegetables of sorts can always be had, which was not the case in Rajkot, and scurvy, which did so much there to injure the health of the men, has disappeared from the Regiment, the cases occurring in Surat having had their origin in Rajkot. A few men have suffered from the effects of insufficient quantity. There was one man admitted with ulcers which arose from shoe bite; sloughing and gangrenous ulcers followed on account of his being badly fed. Duties, exercise, and amuse-ments. 6. The same as last report. Hospital and its immediate surroundings. 7. The hospital is a large, upper storied bungalow, well built, well ventilated, and well situated; but there is a village close to windward, and its want of sanitation can be disagreeably felt from the upper story of the hospital. 8. The general health and physique of the men is good, and their health has much improved since last year. Although the admissions have nearly been as many, yet the fever was not of so severe a type; and incalculable benefit to the health of the men has been obtained from the change from Rajkot. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. There was a break in the rains after about ten inches had fallen: this was the most unhealthy period of the year, there were then as many as 94 sick. The diseases were principally ague, boils, and shoe bite. The former diseases were owing I think to the men wearing their thick uniform during the rains; and it is almost a wonder the shoe bites were so few, as the leather of the boots the men wear is not of a very first class quality, and when the boots have got once wet and dried and hardened, it seemed a hopeless task to attempt to try to soften them again. There can be, therefore, as the men do not as a rule wear socks, only one result. Details of treated. 10. The following table contrasts the causes of admission into hospital for 1878 with those of 1879:PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 13 11. Mortality, 19. Names of Diseases. Died in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. Ague, quotidian 6 ...... Acute rheumatism 1 ...... Remittent fever 1 ...... Dysentery 2 ...... Diarrh14 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Lines and their surroundings. 2. The lines occupied by the Company are situated close to the Main Pass, in the north- western extremity of the Crater Position. They are temporary constructions of mud and laths, with roofs covered with jowley, a species of reed, and sides of bamboo matting. They consist of four parallel rows, separated by three streets of unequal width. The first street is 29 feet wide, while the other two are only about 9 each. The huts are built without plinths, and have no openings for ventila- tion. Neither of these defects are, however, of much consequence, as the air circulates freely through the doors, walls, and roofs, and owing to the natural dryness of the surface, no plinth is required. The following measurements of the huts are about correctNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 15 NORTHERN DIVISION. Average Strength present during the year 7,379 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength present 5.8 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength present 1.1 1st Regiment Light Cavalry. NEEMUCH.16 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Meat is tolerably cheap throughout the year. The average quantity of food taken by the men daily; both Mahrattas and Mussalmans, is, rice 8 ozs., bread 1½ lbs., mutton 4 ozs., dhal 4 ozs. Mussalmans take more mutton, and Hindustani men, Brahmins, and Kshetryas, who do not eat rice, take more bread. The men wear on parade and at all mounted duty a blouse, which is loose and comfortable; at all stable and other duty a tight-fitting jacket; in other respects they are dressed in very much the same fashion as the Bengal Cavalry. Last year I pronounced the men's boots as unsatisfactory, and reported a large number of shoe-bite cases (42 admitted in hospital) which occurred on the march from Poona to Neémuch, incapacitating the men for work. A new and superior supply has since been obtained from Cawnpore, but there are still constant cases of shoe-bite occurring amongst the men, which either necessitates their being taken in hospital, or getting leave from riding parades. I am of opinion that this evil might to a great extent be remedied by making the men wear some kind of socks. Duties, exercise, amusements; their effect on health. 6. Duties not too heavy; nights in bed 9.4. Amusements of all kinds are supplied to the men, and I believe are most beneficial to their health. A good gymnasium has been erected in the lines during the year, and all recruits have to go through some eight or ten months' course of gymnastics on joining the regiment. Tent-pegging, polo, and native sports, such as wrestling, are encouraged. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings; present condition, hy- gienic, and otherwise. 7. The hospital, an old Royal Artillery barrack, is roomy and well ventilated, the roof has recently been repaired. The latrine is within fifty yards of the hospital. General health and physique. 8. The general health at head-quarters has been remarkably good. A scurvy taint prevailed amongst the men in the detachment at Nusseerabad, necessitating a large number of them taking lime juice daily. There have been 621 admissions into hospital during the year, including the admissions in the squadron at Nusseerabad, against 1039 for the year 1878. The large number of admissions for 1878 was due to the regiment being on service in Cyprus, where they suffered from the fever of the country (bilious remittent ?) and on return to Poona from general anæmia and malaria. The general physique of the regiment is excellent. Fifty-three recruits have been enlisted during the year, thirty-nine of whom were Hindus. Of this number (39), twenty-four were obtained from the Deccan by a recruiting party sent from the regiment. Most of these were considerably over regulation height (5 ft. 6 in.) and chest measurement (32 inches). Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The year has been a particularly healthy one with the regiment. No epidemic has occurred. The rainfall for the year, 28 inches 7 cents, is con- -siderably under the average, which, taking the last five years, is 36 inches 3 cents. Details of treated. 10. There have been 404 admissions for fever of all kinds during the year, the largest number for one month being in October. For dysentery and lung diseases 4 and 5, respectively. Injuries of all kinds admitted (60), considerably less than last year (93). Forty-four men were admitted for skin diseases, principally scabies and boils. For conjunctivitis 15, rheumatic affections of all kinds 18, and for nervous affections, such as neuralgia, tetanus, and vertigo, there were 6 admissions. Eleven cases of venereal diseases occurred during the year, primary syphilis 3, secondary syphilis 1, and gonorrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 17 off refuse water from the men's quarters is urgently required. I am of opinion that this might be most easily and satisfactorily carried out by means of stone or brick drains leading from the courtyards of each hut to a common drain outside, making each man pay for that portion of the common drain opposite his courtyard. The expense, I understand, would be from two to three rupees per man, or this expense might be borne by the regiment. Special observations, new expe- rience in treatment, sanitary, &c. 16. I believe cinchona mixed alkaloid, in doses of 15 to 20 grains, to be most bene- ficial in checking cases of intermittent and remittent fever: in but few instances does it produce vomiting or even nausea. I am in the habit of dissolving it in a small quantity of tartaric acid and adding a few drops of spirits of chloroform. For the last six months, alternate cases of fever admitted into hospital have been injected with neutral quinine, the others being treated with 15 grain doses of cinchona, the date of discharge of each patient being noted, and a record kept of dates of admissions and discharges. At present the cases recorded are too few to justify me in giving an opinion as to which of these is most efficacious in subduing the fever. Out of some 20 cases injected, ulceration at the point of puncture has occurred in three; all of these three cases were operated on by my Hospital Assistant, who was at the time a novice at using the hypodermic syringe. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General HEWLETT. Inspected 15th December 1879. The head-quarters of the regiment have been at Neemuch throughout the year, a squadron being stationed at Nusseerabad. The lines, where, however, cleanliness is strictly maintained, have the usual defects of native cavalry lines. All the married quarters have an enclosure in front of them, where bathing is performed, and where there is a latrine from which the urine and water soak into the ground. The huts are deficient in ventilation. There is no subsoil drainage. All sullage and stale of the horses sink into the ground. The wells are for the most part across the parade yard; two of them are in too close proximity to the latrines. This arrangement is objectionable, and new latrines are to be built on a better site. One well in the lines ought to be closed. The hospital was formerly a European barrack, and is quite sufficient for all purposes. It has been well managed by Surgeon Young, who was absent on privilege leave at the time of my inspection; but I found everything in good and satisfactory order. The general health of the regiment throughout the year was very good, and the men appear to have got over the fever they suffered from at Cyprus. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General HEWLETT (Squadron Nusseerabad ). Inspected 27th November 1879. The lines, like all native cavalry lines, are not good, as each married man's but has an enclosure in front of it, in which bathing operations are carried on, and where there is a latrine. All sullage soaks into the ground in the immediate vicinity of the huts. The ventilation of huts effected through roof tiles and doors. The lines are kept as clean as they can be, but all the urine of the horses sinks into the soil. There is no subsoil drainage, the surface drainage is sufficient to prevent the lodgment of storm waters. The water-supply is drawn from a well on a higher level than the lines. The new water-supply has not yet been introduced. The hospital is situated on rising ground, and is well exposed to the breeze. I was much pleased with the management and evident care bestowed on the sick by Surgeon Bull, who is in charge. The health of the men has on the whole been fair. 3rd (Queen's Own) Regiment Light Cavalry. DEESA.18 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Years. Stations. Ratio per cent. to Average Strength present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1876 Neemuch and Nusseerabad. 133.8 3.5 0.4 1877 Do. do. 103.8 2.8 ...... 1878 Neemuch 218.0 4.0 0.2 Average 151.9 3.4 0.2 1879 Deesa 150.4 3.9 ...... Location and movement. 1. The regiment marched from Neemuch to Deesa on January 8th, 1879, and arrived at Deesa on the 4th of February. One squadron is stationed at Rajcote, and fifteen sabres are stationed at Palunpur as escort to the Political Agent there. The lines and their surround- ings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The men's quarters consist of five blocks of buildings, containing in all 336 (three hundred and thirty-six) dwellings: the married quarters are not separated from the single men's. The Native officers' quarters are to the rear of these blocks. The dwellings for the syces are on the right flank, but outside the lines and in close proximity to the latrines: the dwellings for the bheesties and dhobies are on the left flank but inside the lines. Most of the married quarters have small courtyards surrounding the entrances; all these dwellings are without plinths. The refuse water from the bathing places is now being carried away by small surface channel reservoirs, which are emptied twice a day: trees are as rapidly as possible being planted in the site of these reservoirs, so as to do away with them. Conservancy. 3. There are three latrines, situated about 200 yards from the nearest block within the lines: each latrine contains twenty compartments. Two of these latrines are for the men and one for the women. Three sweepers are kept. Twice daily the sewage is carted away. Water-supply. 4. Good and plentiful; but nearly all the wells are over- hung with trees, and are not covered in. Food and clothing. 5. All kinds of cereals are fairly cheap and plentiful. As yet the new dress has not been adopted, but it doubtless will prove a great boon to the men, it having given every satisfaction to the Sind Horse during the Afghan expedition. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments: their effects on health. 6. The duties are light; and, with the exception that a great many men who go on duty to Palunpur return with syphilis, they do not seem to cause any injurious effect on the men. The hospital and its immediate surroundings. 7. The hospital consists of a large oblong building one hundred and fifteen (115) feet long and twenty-two (22) broad, giving a cubic space of thirty- five thousand, four hundred, and twenty feet (35,420), affording ample accommodation. At one end of the building is a contagious ward, and at the other end a store room and office. The sick of the staff are also attended in this hospital. The hospital latrine is situated far too near the road, and besides being an eyesore to the passengers and inhabitants of other bungalows, its plan and building is anything but satisfactory. A requisition for a new one has been sent in to the P. W. Department. General health and physique. 8. Health good, physique fair. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Under this heading I would beg to call the attention of the authorities to the great number of cases of syphilis, whose origin is to be traced to Palunpur or its vicinity.
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 19 Details of treated. 10. Intermittent fever, 371; rheumatic affections, 40; syphilitic affections, 34; diseases of the eye, 30; lung diseases, 9; affection of the heart, 1; diarrh20 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Years. Station. Rate per cent. to Average Strength present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hos- pital. 1876 Rajkot 70.0 2.5 .8 1877 Do. 61.5 2.4 .8 1878 Do. 239.1 7.4 1.7 Average 123.5 4.1 1.1 1879 Rajkot 306.5 7.7 .9 Location and movement. 1. The head-quarters of the Battery have been at Rajkot throughout the year. Seventy- three men were transferred to No. II. Battery, and left for Porebunder en route to Kurrachee on the 7th November. Lines and their surroundings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The general description of the lines has been given in former reports. They are clean, well ventilated, and in fair repair. The drainage is all surface. Conservancy. 3. No defects in the conservancy of either the lines or the latrines has been noticed. Water-supply. 4. The water-supply has been ample during the year under review, and apparently wholesome. Food and clothing. 5. Grain was very dear till after the monsoon; but now it is at a fair price. Vege- tables are expensive. No change has been made in the clothing since last report. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. The gunners' duties are necessarily heavy, but not apparently prejudicial to the health of the men. The men are given to taking exercise and amusing themselves in various ways. Hospital and its immediate surroundings, present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The defects in the hospital buildings were pointed out in last report, and nothing has been done to remedy them yet. The hospital itself is in good repair, well ventilated, and clean. General health and physique. 8. The general health during the year under review compares unfavourably with that of the year 1878, there being 328 admissions during the year 1879as compared with 287 during the year 1878. The majority of the gunners are fine, big men, and the drivers, though smaller in build, are not deficient in physique. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The great prevalence of intermittent fever during the year was doubtless owing to the heavy rainfall of the year 1878. Details of treatment. 10. The following diseases gave the greatest number of admissions during the year:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 21 Special observations, new ex- periences in treatment, &c. 16. In my hands the cinchona febrifuge has proved successful in the treatment of the majority of cases of intermittent fever occurring in the men of the battery. Remarks by Deputy Surgeon-General HEWLETT. Marched from Rajkot before my arrival at the station, so that I had no opportunity of inspecting it. H. M.'s 2nd Prince of Wales Own Regiment N. I. (Grenadiers). NUSSEERABAD.22 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The quarter guard and cells (of which there are four) are built of stone masonry, and are roomy and in good order. They are placed to the west of the lines. The only piece of cultivated ground near the lines is that used for the trench latrines. A crop of grain is grown there annually. Conservancy. 3. Trench latrines placed 230 yards to the south-west of the lines are provided for the men. The latter use them freely, and the system works admirably. A crop of grain is grown on the ground every year. The women are accommodated with two latrines on the standard plan, 130 yards to the south of the lines. There are also six urinals with masonry beds in the lines for the men. Dry sand is used in these, and changed twice daily. They are a great boon, as by their use the ground in the immediate vicinity of the huts is kept quite pure and free from nuisance. The filth from the women's latrines and urinals is carted away and buried at the other side of the station. Water-supply. 4. Drinking water is obtained from three wells in the vicinity of the lines. It is slightly brackish, but otherwise appears of fair quality. It is augmented by a daily supply of 394 gallons of first class water from the Dilwarra well, situated about three miles from cantonment. This allows about five pints per man, which is not sufficient. Fountains have lately been erected, which will yield a plentiful supply of good water from a reservoir in the hills five miles from camp. But as the necessary arrangements have not yet been completed, the bulk of the supply is still furnished by the brackish water from the wells. The latter never run dry during the summer, so the supply, such as it is, is unlimited. They are uncovered, and the water is consequently liable to pollution from debris of various kinds carried in by the wind. Water of inferior quality is obtained for washing purposes from five wells in the lines. Food and clothing. 5. The supply of grain has been plentiful and of good quality, but fresh vegetables were scarce and dear during the summer months. Knickerbockers and gaiters would be a great improvement on the trowsers now worn. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The duties, which consist of the usual guards, parades, musketry course, and occasional escort parties are not excessive, and do not appear to exert a prejudicial effect. The average number of nights in bed has been 4.8 During the prevalence of ague in the latter part of the year, the men were relieved of some of their guard duties by a detachment of the Mheirwarra Battalion from Ajmere. All the recruits go through a six months' course of gymnastics, which improves their physique wonderfully. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings; present condition, hy- gienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital, which faces north and south, is situated on high ground to the south- east of the lines. It is built of stone and roofed with stone slabs. The floor is well raised from the ground, and the build- ing is dry, well ventilated, and comfortable. There are two wards, each 115 feet long and 22 feet broad, in each of which 30 patients can be accommodated with a cubic space of 1,348 feet per man. It is surrounded by a spacious verandah, one-half of which is supplied with moveable jhamps, and is utilized as a ward during the unhealthy season, when the admissions are high. The latrines are on the standard plan, and are kept as clean and free from odour as possible by the use of carbolic acid solution and MacDougall's powder. In the centre of the building, between the wards, are seven rooms, used as follows:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 23 The physique of the men is on the whole good, and that of the majority of the recruits enlisted this year excellent. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Prior to the monsoon the heat was greatly felt. The rainfall of 23.94 inches was considerably in excess of previous years, that for 1877 being 11.48 inches and for 1878 19.4 inches. To this cause may be attributed much of the malarious fevers which occurred. Owing to the scarcity and high price of fresh vegetables during the hot months, the want of this article of diet was much felt, and served to re-develop the scorbutic taint which was originally contracted by residence in Aden. Much of the ague and lung affections from which the men suffered may be attributed to the fact of their not being provided with cots, coupled with the dampness of the huts on account of the lowness of the plinths. Details of treated. 10. There were 1,423 admissions, which, with 22 remaining from the previous year, gives a total of 1,445 treated. Of the admissions, 1,178 were for ague. Most of the cases of this affection were not severe, and yielded to cinchona mixed alkaloids, but some were very intractable, and with these the mixed alkaloid had to be replaced by quinine. Many were complicated with bronchial catarrh and gastric irritability. Remittent fever furnished three severe cases, which were followed by protracted con- valescence. There were 51 admissions for diseases of the respiratory system, including 22 for bronchitis, with one death; 9 for pneumonia, with 3 deaths, and 16 for bronchial catarrh. Dysentery gave 7 admissions, which all recovered under the ipecacuanha treatment. Five cases of syphilis were treated (2 primary and 3 secondary). There were also 4 cases of scurvy (2 of which were severe), 2 of phthisis pulmonalis, 15 of diarrh24 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Special observations, new ex- periences in treatment, sanitation, &c. 15. The mild cases of ague yielded to cinchona mixed alkaloids, administered in doses of from 5 to 10 grains three times daily; but in severe cases, although 45 grains were given daily, the cinchona failed to arrest or modify the attacks. Many of the latter cases were successfully treated by the hypodermic injection of the neutral sulphate of quinine. During the month of December, when ague was prevalent, as many of the men in hospital as were fit to be moved were sent into camp for a change, and. speedily recovered. It will be seen by the following table that the sickness and mortality amongst Hindoos were much greater than amongst Mussulmans:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 25 the cubic capacity of the married and single men's quarters, which ought to be great, is very small, if, indeed, there be any; and if the single men complain of want of sufficient ground space, the married men must feel the want threefold, and so they do, even though no distant relations or dependants are now allowed to live in the lines. Conservancy. 3. The same as reported last year. The permanent latrines are very far from the lines both at Mhow and Neemuch. At the latter station the latrine has no roof, and this circumstance,I believe, adds to the general dislike of the men and their wives to use them. It would be a very inconvenient arrangement during the rains, and I have no doubt the women and children would use their own huts for the purpose rather than be drenched in the rain, especially during the night. I repeat my conviction, which I mentioned in my last report, of the necessity of urinals for the men and women, of some sort or other, near the lines, if hut and its surroundings' contamination is to be prevented. Water-supply. 4. At Mhow the supply was abundant, the water being of good quality in every way. The well which was reported by me last time as being near the latrines of the 13th Regiment N. I. has not been in use during the year, and has been abandoned. At Neemuch there are eight wells at the disposal of the regiment. None of them has any source of contamination near it. The water supply, though at present plentiful, threatens to fall short of the demand in the ensuing hot weather, for some of the wells are already beginning to dry up. Food and clothing. 5. At Mhow food was on the whole dear during the year. Rice was 9 seers the rupee, dal 10 seers, ghee 1¼ seers, wheat 10 seers, salt 9 seers, bajree 12 seers, potatoes 16 seers. At Neemuch the food is dearer still, and vegetables are still more scarce, potatoes particularly so. On inquiry I found that a single sepoy cannot live on less than from 5 to 7 rupees a month with grain compensation, which on an average for the year comes to about Rs. 2-12-6 per head, his pay comes to about Rs. 10-12-6, so that he has a balance of Rs. 3 per month for his clothing, for providing for his old age, and for saving for marches, &c. As, however, most of the men are married, at this rate the men are very badly fed, and their wives and children still more so. A sepoy when not wearing his uniform is very insufficiently and badly clothed for this climate. Used to the mild climate of the Deccan and Conkan, from which most of them come, he does not understand the necessity of warm clothing for himself or his wife and children. Hence he suffers in health, and his children especially suffer from the effects of vicissitudes of temperature. Just as there is a judicious order to adapt the quality and colour of the uniform to the necessities of the weather, so there ought to be for the sepoy's plain clothes. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. Duties were not bard and not injurious to health. A gymnasium was started during the year at Mhow, and all recruits had to go through a course of gymnastics for several months. This was much liked and had a decidedly beneficial effect on the health. Average number of consecutive nights in bed for the different ranks during the year:26 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. they were generally weak and anæmic and therefore unable to take a steady aim. Out of 103 men who volunteered for active service and for transport duty, 38 were found unfit to proceed owing to general debility. These were quite fit for garrison work, but they were not fit to stand the exposure and fatigue incidental to the work they would be called upon to do. The wives and children of the men are very weak and unhealthy. Most of the recruit boys at present in the service look weakly and unpromising. Hardly one of them would make a good soldier when he comes of age. The climate of Central India does not seem to me to suit the Deccanees and Conkanees. There are extremes of temperature here which these men are not used to in their native country. Details of treated. 10. The total number of admissions in the regiment for all ranks was 878. The daily sick were 19.4. The average strength 667. Average strength present 610. The diseases that furnished the greater number of admissions were in their order of frequency as follows:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 27 vaccination or by previous attack of small-pox. The first case of small-pox occurred in February and the last case in May. The largest number of admissions were in the month of March. There were three cases of chicken-pox in men and three in children, and there were three cases of measles in children. All these cases recovered. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Vaccination and re-vaccination were diligently and carefully performed. (a ) Primary vaccination Successful 87 Unsuccessful 7 Total 94 (b ) Re-vaccination Successful 22 Unsuccessful 22 Total 44 On the 31st December 1879 all the sepoys and recruits were protected by vaccination or by small-pox marks. Nearly all the children were also protected. Those that were left unprotected were either too ill or too young to be vaccinated. Invaliding and its causes. 14. In the whole regiment 58 men of all ranks were invalided for pension, six for discharge, and one for discharge with gratuity, by the Annual General Invaliding Committee. Seven more were pensioned independently of a Medical Board, as they were men of over 32 years' service. Three more were invalided by Special Invaliding Committees which assembled from time to time. And lastly, one man was sent to the Lunatic Asylum, Colaba. Chronic bronchitis and incipient phthisis pulmonalis, 1; old age and general debility, 45; varicose veins and general debility, 1; chronic rheumatism, 2; general debility, 15; acute dementia, 1; phthisis pulmonalis, 1; scorbutic ulcer and debility, 1; acute mania 2 (one of these sent to Colaba); long service, i.e. , over 32 years' service, 7. There were 18 men sent on sick leave suffering from28 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General HEWLETT. Inspected 27th December 1879. The head-quarters wing marched from Mhow en route to Neemuch on the 3rd December before my arrival, so that I had not the opportunity of inspecting the entire regiment. The right wing occupies one-half of the regimental lines. These are in a very dilapidated condition, and are, like those of the 13th N. I. adjoining them, almost the worst I have seen in the Bombay Presidency. They are not nearly as good as the new buildings provided for the Commissariat followers at Mhow. Some of the pendals appear to be on the point of falling down. The huts are of a very bad design. They have no plinths. The cubage is insufficient, and the huts are built across instead of parallel to the slope of the ground on which they stand, so that they must necessarily be damp. The hospital is a good one, and has good accommodation, but it is in too close proximity to the lines. The men were, at the date of my inspection, fairly healthy though many had suffered from ague. 7th Regiment N. I. BHUJ.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 29 Food and clothing. 5. Food is very expensive, the grain compensation at times amounting to Rs. 7-8-0. Fresh vegetables are very difficult to get for eight or nine months in the year. Mutton is cheap and good. Beef is not allowed to be killed in the neighbourhood of Cutch. Clothing is red uniform, except for four or five months in the hot weather, when the men wear white. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. The duties are not too heavy. When the running drill was commenced, however, in the beginning of November, there was a very cold north- east wind blowing, and in two or three days the increase of admissions into hospital was so great that I recommended the running drill should be stopped for some weeks. This was done, and when the running drill was resumed in January, it was found to have no ill effects. There is no gymnasium, the one left by the 11th Regiment having been sold for firewood and old iron. Carpet-making, basket-making, boot-making, carpentering, blacksmiths' work, tailoring, &c., are done by the sepoys. There is a native library. Native sports, and. other athletics, as hurdle and flat races, the tug-of-war, &c., are encouraged. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; hygienic or other- wise. 7. The hospital is all that can be desired: it affords accommodation for 28 patients without crowding, and 28 more can be put in the verandahs. The ventilation is good. The conservancy cart attends daily. There are two bheesties, who bring drinking water from a well three-fourths of a mile off; another well 120 paces to the rear of the hospital supplies ablution water. The second class hospital servants' quarters are very dilapidated, and most of them are unfit to live in. There is accommodation for one Hospital Assistant only. This, however, is of little con- sequence, as there is a deserted European hospital in the same compound, in one of the houses of which the Regimental Hospital Assistant and Kutch Agency Hospital Assistant live. General health and physique. 8. The health of the regiment seems very fair. The regiment came in a very debili- tated state from Rajkote and Tanna at the beginning of the year, and is now decidedly improved. The recruits and young soldiers seem very promising, but there are a large number of men over 20 years' service, who certainly ought to be pensioned. They can do their duty and keep off the sick list as long as the regiment is stationary, but they would be quite unfit for active service, or even for an ordinary march in time of peace30 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 1 rheumatism, and 1 valvular disease of the heart. Of the 6 who died out of hospital, 1 was dysentery, 1 was put down to general debility, 1 rheumatism, and in 3 the causes were unknown. Epidemics. 12. None. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Eleven children were primarily vaccinated, 10 successfully. There are at the present time 10 unprotected children; some of these are too young to be vaccinated, others are sickly, and some have lately joined the regiment. There were 39 recruits re-vaccinated, in whom there were 29 successful cases. One European officer was successfully re-vaccinated. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Twenty-three men were pensioned for rheumatism, 2 for general debility, 1 for quotidian ague and premature old age, 1 for cataract, 1 for asthma, 2 for varicose veins, 1 for dementia, and 8 were pen- sioned on account of having over 32 years' service. Requirements and recommenda- tions. 15. New lines have been recommended, and are urgently required. Considering the isolated situation of the camp as regards communication with other parts of India, I should certainly recommend that the regimental hospital be better supplied with instruments as an exceptional case; say, with as many as is usually supplied to a second rate civil hospital. The regiment has now been stationed at Bhuj for a year, and is certainly very much more healthy than when it arrived. Nevertheless I should strongly recommend its being sent to a Deccan station in December next, as by that time it will have been in this neighbourhood eight years, viz., six at Rajkot and two at Bhuj. The reason for my making this recommendation is as follows: the characteristic feature of the malarial fevers of Kutch is that they are not usually accompanied by severe paroxysms, and are not often fatal; but are so very persistent that men too often perform their duties irrespective of having fever on them. I have had many men come to hospital for medicine having been persuaded to do so by some officer who has seen them doing sentry and other duties with the perspiration running down their faces from fever, or has seen them shivering. I do not consider, therefore, that the number of admissions in the year to hospital is a fair criterion of the health of the regiment, but makes it appear rather better than it really is. Special observations, new ex- periences in treatment, sanitation, &c. 16. Nothing of interest. The cinchona alkaloids, although not usually causing gastric irritation, are almost useless in the treatment of the local Kutch ague. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon- General HEWLETT. Inspected 12th February 1880. The regiment was stationed at Bhuj throughout the year. It has improved in health since arrival at that station. Ague, which is endemic, commenced to increase in the month of October, when 138 men were admitted with it. No case of enteric fever occurred, and there were no epidemics among the native troops during the year. The lines have been, I am informed, condemned for years past. They are very bad both in design and construction. I recognise that everything is done that can be done by the military authorities to keep them clean and to improve their condition as much as possible, but they must always be bad and each year become worse, for as the sand drifts up. against the walls of the external enclosures outside each hut, the original floor level of the huts, which were built without plinths, becomes lower and lower. New lines, I am informed, have been sanctioned, but I think the site selected is too much exposed to the N. E. wind. The water-supply is derived from wells, and is said to be of fair quality. French latrines are in use, and answer very well. 10th Regiment N. L. I. NEEMUCH.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 31 Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1876 Mehidpoor and Agar 230.9 7.7 0.8 1877 Neemuch 189.9 6.1 0.1 1878 Do. 300.6 9.7 1.2 Average 240.5 7.8 0.7 1879 Neemuch 234.0 7.5 1.6 Location and movements. 1. The head-quarters were stationed at Neemuch during the year up to the 22nd December 1879, when the regiment was ordered to march to Bombay; several escort parties were sent along the Nusseerabad. and Mhow roads. The lines and their surround- ings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. Continue much the same as given in former reports; they are kept clean and in good order. Conservancy. 3. Good; remains as described in former reports. Water-supply. 4. Has been good and abundant this year, owing to the favourable rainfall. Food and clothing. 5. The food supplies, though dear, were not so scarce as the previous year, the quantity and quality of grain and vegetable supplies were generally good, the regimental garden contributing towards the latter to the extent of about 225 rupees' worth. The clothing is the same as last reports; in addition 2 pairs of socks, 1 doopetta, 1 warm blanket per each man were distributed. Warm flannel underclothing is still much required, the absence of which must engender fever, bowel complaints, much illness, and invaliding. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. Have proved not otherwise than beneficial to the general health. The average number of nights in bed has been as follows: native officers 111/12, havildars 6¼, naiks and lance naiks 81/12, buglers 4¾, privates 72/3, total 72/5. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygeienic and otherwise. 7. Much as described in former reports, excepting that owing to decrease of sick, but two blocks of buildings, accommodating 120 men, were made use of for the hospital accommodation instead of three blocks and two pall tents as in previous year. The infectious disease ward recommended in former reports, has not yet been built; in the meantime one ward of an adjoining building was available for any infectious or suspicious cases occurring in the regiment. General health and physique. 8. The general health, though unfavourable, has not been so to the extent as in the previous year. The general physique has been for the most part favourable, average height being 5 feet 7¼ inches, average round the chest 34½ inches. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. As stated in former reports, owing to the general unhealthiness of the regiment, the climate cannot be said to have exerted other than dete- riorating effect on the troops, and this was especially after the rains, when malarious fevers became endemic, with, however, less gastric, hepatic, splenic, or bronchial complications than were manifested during the previous year. During and after the rains may be considered the most trying portions of the year at this station, the remaining parts of the year, including the hot and cold weather, being comparatively milder and more healthy.
32 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Details of treated. 10. The details of treated are as follows:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 33 1 ague quotidian, complicated with perineal fistula. Out of hospital, 1 died from remittent fever on furlough; of the above, 8 were Hindoos, 2 Mussulmans, and 1 Christian. Epidemics. 12. None during the year. Vaccination and re-vaccina- tion. 13. Thirty-eight cases were vaccinated primarily, and 2 re-vaccinations were done in the regiment. The quality of lymph was good. The 6 unpro- tected were under one month, and unfit to undergo the opera- tion at the time of departure of the regiment. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Fifty-one cases were invalided; of these, 39 were Hindoos, 11 Mussulmans, and 1 Jew. Of the above, 7 were short service, and 44 of long service entitling to pension. Of the 44 abovementioned, 9 men were invalided after 32 years' service, 40 men invalided for ague and general debility, 4 for rheu- matism, 1 chronic synovitis, 1 h34 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The bulk of the regiment was stationary during the year; but the following detachments and escorts were furnished by it. Strength. Where proceeded. Date of Departure from head-quarters. Date of Return to head-quarters. (1) 84 Dwarka 20th January 22nd December. (2) 8 wudwan 3rd March 16th March. (3) 14 Kattywar Districts 11th do. 22nd do. (4) 5 Wudwan 22nd do. 2nd April. (5) 14 Kattywar Districts 4th April 14th June. (6) 17 Wudwan 31st May 12th do. (7) 5 Chotila 5th October 12th October. (8) 5 Do. 12th do. 17th do. (9) 14 Kattywar Districts 18th do. 22nd November. (10) 83 Dwarka 22nd November Still at Dwarka. The lines and their surround- ings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The general description of the lines has been given in the annual report of the 18th Regiment N. I. for the year 1874. They are sufficiently commo- dious, well ventilated, and clean; and have been kept in good repair. There is only the natural surface drainage down to the river; but, as there is a gentle slope in that direction, it is fairly complete. There is no Regimental bazaar. Conservancy. 3. Permanent latrines are used during the monsoon months, and the "trench system" during the rest of the year. No defects in the working of either have been noticed. Water supply. 4. The water supply has been ample during the year and apparently wholesome, as no affection traceable to this cause has occurred. Food and clothing. 5. The various grains were very expensive till after the monsoon, but now they are at a fair price. Suitable "grain compensation" has been given throughout the year. Vegetables are expensive. The white jacket of the recruit was found to be an insufficient protection during the cold. months, and a brown wadded one has been substituted. As a substitute for socks (which are too expensive for the sepoy) foot rags, of two different descriptions, are under trial. Duties, exercises, and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. The guard duties were a little heavy; but they do not appear to have influenced the general health unfavourably. There is a "talim-khana" in the lines; and the recruits are put through a course of gymnastics. The sepoys are given to taking exercise and amusing themselves in various ways. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is nicely situated, well ventilated, clean, and in good repair. There is no accommodation for the medical pupils, and that for the second class establishment is incomplete. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the regiment during the year under review compares very unfavourably with that during the year 1878; the number of admissions in the year 1879 being 1,846, and in the year 1878 only 708. Many of the men are much debilitated by repeated attacks of intermittent fever. Most of the newly enlisted recruits are of good physique. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The great prevalence of intermittent fever was doubtless owing to the heavy rainfall of the previous year. During the "cold season" bronchial and pulmonic affections were pretty frequent, owing to the severity of the weather. Details of treated. 10. The following diseases gave the greatest number of admissionsNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 35 Mortality and its causes. 11. Twelve deaths occurred during the year, 11 in and 1 out of hospital. Three were from ague quotidian, three from lobular pneumonia, one from acute bronchitis, one from dysentery, one from colic, one from sub-acute rheumatism, and one from debility. The death out of hospital was one by acci- dental drowning. Epidemics. 12. There were no epidemics during the year. Two sporadic cases of small-pox occur- red among the children. They were treated in the station "in- fectious ward." Both recovered. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Twenty-six primary vaccinations were performed and 24 were successful. Of fifty-three re-vaccinations performed, 29 were unsuccessful. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Thirty-four men were invalided for discharge, on the following grounds:36 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Year. Station. Rate per cent. to Average Strength Present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1876 Malegaon and Ahmedabad. 115.7 3.1 0.7 1877 Do. do. 107.1 2.5 0.6 1878 Malegaon 106.0 3.4 0.6 Average 109.6 3.0 0.6 1879 Mhow 118.0 2.2 0.6 Location and movement of troops. 1. The head-quarters and right wing were stationed here till 27th March, when this wing went to Indore, where it has been located till the 22nd December, when it came into Mhow and remained till the present. The left wing arrived here from Malegaon on 16th March, and has been here ever since. Lines and their surroundings. 2. The lines are built on a stoney plain, mixed with some black earth, situated on the northern extremity of the cantonment, having a slight slope towards the east; they are constructed according to the stand- ard plan of 3rd May 1864, but without plinth run almost perpendicularly north and south, are built of sun dried bricks faced externally only with burnt bricks, and single-tiled roof. The lines, from action of age, climate, and rats, are only in a very middling condition, and the roofs are undulating, and sagged considerably in several places from the sinking in of the wood-work. Ventilation is free through the doors and roofs; these latter leak in the rainy season, and the floors being worn down, the water is retained in the huts. The drainage is surface, and is fairly effective. They are bounded on the north and west by an open plain, on the east, at a distance of 100 feet, by the 6th N. I. lines, and on the south by the commence- ment of the cantonment. Conservancy. 3. The latrines are situated on the open plain about 300 yards to the north of the lines, are 3 in number, on the standard plan, containing 28 seats each; 2 are for males, and 1 for females. They are attended to by 3 male and 1 female sweepers, who are paid by Government. The ordure is collected from the pans into large covered iron receptacles, which are emptied into an iron tank cart, which attends morning and evening, and conveys the ordure to a distance, where it is buried. Trench latrines near the permanent ones were used from the 17th January till 21st June, when the permanent ones were again used. The trench latrines suited satisfactorily. The lines are cleansed by 1 sweeper per company, who is paid by the men. Water supply. 4. Good and sufficient water is drawn by leather and iron buckets, lotas, &c. from several wells conveniently situated near the lines, and are not exposed to any appreciable contamination. There are eight regimental bheesties, viz. one for each company, but these bheesties do not supply water to the men, only to the various guards and native officers; the men supply themselves. Food and clothing. 5. Food was plentiful and of fair quality, but rather dear; this was compensated for by grain allowance. It had not any special effect on the health of the men. The clothing seemed sufficient, but ought to be looser. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. These consisted of the usual routine duties of a cantonment, and had no special effect on the health of the sepoys. There is a good well- conducted gymnasium attached to the regiment, where the sepoys are taught various exercises, and all recruits have to go through a three months' course of training in it. Occasionally and on native holidays they wrestle, and during the gymkhana here they entered and won several of the sports. These had no special effect on the health of the men. The average number of consecutive nights in bed was 6. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is situated 50 yards to the east of the 6th N. I. lines, which intervene between the hospital and the 13th N. I. lines, so that the hospital is about 300 yards distance to the east of the 13th N. I. lines. On the north, at 70 yards distance, is the 6th N. I. Hospital; on the south, at 123 yards, is the 6th N. I.
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 37 regimental bazaar; and on the east is an open plain. The soil is stony, mixed with a little moorum. It is an oblong building running north and south, on a plinth of about 2 feet; it is very substantially built, with walls of great thickness, and arched masonry roofs; it has four doors in front, two of which are glazed; two glazed doors in rear, and two at each end. It contains two parallel wards, which communicate by four arches in the central wall; each ward is 98 feet long, 18 feet wide, 16 feet 9 inches high, with an arched masonry roof, and contains 8,676 square feet of floor, and 26,257 cubic feet, and is registered to accommodate 14 patients. In front and rear is a closed in verandah of the same length as the wards (and commu- nicating with them by four arches), 8 feet wide, 12 feet 8 inches high, with arched masonry roofs, containing 784 square feet of floor and 8,863 cubic feet. At each end of each ward is a partition wall 9 feet high with an arch in it, but without door, which communicates with the ward; thus four small wards for special cases are formed, 8 feet X 18 feet X 16 feet 9 inches; at each end of each verandah a few feet are partitioned off to form office, dispensary, godown, and orderly room: ventilation is provided by three ventilators in the roof of each ward 3 feet long X 2 feet wide, and by 10 loop holes (16 inches X 6) in front walls, 10 in the rear, and 4 each end, pierced at a height of 7 feet from floor of hospital. The medical subordinates' quarters are well built and comfortable, as also are the second class servants' quarters. There are two latrines on the standard plan, one for males containing six seats, and one for females containing three seats. They are carefully attended to by the hospital sweepers; the pans are emptied into an iron receptacle, which is emptied into an iron tank cart, which attends every evening, and conveys the ordure to a distance, where it is buried. At 150 yards to the left rear of the hospital is a pucka built contagious hospital; it is an oblong building 53 feet long, 17 feet wide, running parallel to the hospital, with an open verandah 9 feet wide all round; it is divided by a transverse wall into two equal sized wards 24 feet long, 14 feet wide, and 20 feet high, each ward containing 336 square feet of floor and 5,712 cubic feet. Each ward has two wooden doors in front and 2 in rear, and 1 glazed window in the end, with a double tiled roof and ridge ventilation; but it requires a small latrine, as there is not one at present. The present condition, hygienic and otherwise, of all these buildings is good. General health and physique. 8. These were fair. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The climate had no special effect, and there are no unusual local circumstances. Details of treated. 10. The total number of cases admitted during the year for the entire regiment was 747, showing an increase of 44 over last year. The cause of increase is owing to the large amount of malarious fever, which in 1878 gave only 258, while in 1879 it gave 424 cases, or an increase of 166 cases. One severe case of malarious remittent fever occurred, which was treated with tincture of aconite, Warburg's tincture, quinine, ice to the head, &c., and recovered satisfactorily. The ague was of a mild form and yielded to cinchona alkaloid, only a few cases requiring quinine. And there were no lung complications, as I have seen frequently in other places. The diseases treated were the following: malarious fever, 424; rheumatism, chronic, 34, no heart affection; contusion lower extremities, 36; boils, 31; blister of feet, 21; bronchitis, chronic, 18; primary syphilis, 22; contusion upper extremities, 13; conjunctivitis, 9; colic, 9; guinea worm, 7; itch, 8; bronchial catarrh, 7; diarrh38 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Thirty-seven men were invalided during the year. Of these, 5 were time expired (over 32 years' service), 21 were pensioned, 6 received gratuity, and 5 recruits (without gratuity) were discharged. Requirements and recommend- ations. 15. A small latrine for the contagious hospital, and a wall round hospital assistant's quarters. Special observations, new ex- periences in treatment, sanitation. 16. The head-quarters and left wing stationed at Mhow during the year presented no special peculiarities, but it is noteworthy that the native infantry stationed at the north end of the cantonment on the level of the plain suffered comparatively little from mild ague, while the Europeans at the south end, about two miles' distance on raised ground 80 to 100 feet above the level of the plain, suffered numerously from ague of a severe type during the autumn, though the conditions of the neighbouring surroundings are apparently the same. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General HEWLETT. The head-quarters and right wing was stationed at Mhow until the 27th March, when it marched to Indore, where it remained until the 22nd December when it returned to Mhow. The left wing arrived in Mhow from Malegaon on the 16th March 1879. Lines are old and very dilapidated, some of them are apparently about to fall, as the supports have given way and the eaves present an undulating appearance. The streets between the lines are much too narrow for efficient perflation. In the huts the only ventilation is through the roof, tiles, and doors, some of which were only 4 feet high. All sullage from married quarters sinks into the subsoil, which must be kept constantly damp and therefore become a fruitful source of malaria. The urgent necessity for subsoil drainage in native infantry lines impresses itself on me at every inspection I make. The hospital is in too close proximity to the lines lately occupied by the 6th Regiment, which intervene between the lines of the 13th and the hospital. It was fairly well organised. The diaries of cases are kept in the handwriting of the medical officer. The accommodation provided is sufficient in ordinary times. The health of the regiment has been fairly good, and the medical officer notices in his report the fact that whilst the European troops on the higher level at the south end of camp suffered severely from ague during the autumn, the sepoys in his regiment in the more sheltered positions of their lines were, comparatively speaking, free. 15th Regiment N. I. AHMEDABAD.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 39 the superintendence of the Executive Engineer, and, if still imperfect, it is at least an improvement on the pipe drain and cesspool system formerly in use in these lines. The work was completed before the rains. Conservancy. 3. Permanent latrines are alone in use. Their unpaved floors prevent their being kept in a good sanitary condition. Two are placed too near the lines. Water supply. 4. The water supplied by the line wells is always abundant, and I believe good. The river water is little used except for bathing and washing. Food and clothing. 5. There has been no scarcity of good provisions of any necessary kind. As, however, the supplies in the city markets are both cheaper and of better quality than in the cantonment bazaar, the greater number of the men obtain their supplies from there, spending much of the little leisure their duties permit for the purpose. This should not be. No alteration in the regulation dress has been made during the year. In the hot season light cotton clothing is worn for all duties. Duties. 6. The duties have been very heavy, this regiment since February having had to perform the entire duties of the station, which were previously shared by two. In September and October the men got but two consecutive nights in bed; during the latter part of October they had even less than this. Such an amount of duty involving exposure and want of rest during a season like the past, when malarious influences had been so prevalent, has told on the men's health, and many primary cases of intermittent fever and many more re-admissions from it have appeared as results. Hospital. 7. The hospitals for two Native Infantry corps stand in the same compound, with an interval of 20 yards between them. Since February, when the remaining wing of the 26th Regiment was moved to Deesa, both hospitals have been in use by this Regiment. This has prevented much crowding, and the necessity for the employment of tents. The hospital proper to this Regiment is in the same condition as reported last year. The hospital latrine is not good. With earthen floor, and bases of walls saturated with urine and washings, it is impossible to keep it as it should be. General health. 8. The general health of the men has decidedly deteriorated. The epidemic of malarious fever from which all ranks have so much suffered during the year, has left at its close very many of the men unfit for anything but light duty. Influence of climate, &c. 9. The level plain of light and most fertile soil on which this cantonment is placed renders its climate decidedly enervating and one in which those attacked with malarious fever or other illness do not readily recover health. Though the temperature of the hot season is not excessive, it is but little lowered by the rainfall, the monsoon breeze is little felt, and throughout the rains the nights as a rule are hot and unrefreshing. During the last year the rainfall has been about the average. The first heavy fall was on the 26th of June, the last on the 15th September. The temperatures in the table below were taken in the hospital ward:40 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Details of treated. 10. The admissions were 1,345, 22 remained sick at close of previous year, making the total treated 1,367. General diseases. The re-admissions numbered 701. Sub-Division A. Malarious fever was the chief cause of sickness, 78.2 per cent. of the total admissions being shown under this head. Of 1,052 admissions, 94 were cases of febricula, 913 of ague, and 45 of remittent fever. One ease of cholera occurred in September. B. The rheumatic affections were not numerous, 1.7 per cent. only of the total admissions. Syphilitic diseases contributed 1.4 per cent.; most of the cases were contracted on escort and detachment duties. 2 cases of scurvy occurred towards the end of the year. Both patients were men of long service; one was invalided, the other remains under treatment. Two cases of nervous disease have come under treatment, one of epilepsy in a young sepoy, the other of anæsthesia of the skin of lower extremity in a man of 22 years' service; both were invalided. Twenty-eight cases of catarrhal conjunctivitis were admitted, 24 of which occurred during the dry months of the year, the greatest number in one month being in March. There were four admissions from disease of the circulatory system, with one death from valvular disease of the heart. Diseases of the respiratory organs furnished 49 cases, being 3.6 per cent. of total admissions. Thirty-three cases of bronchitis and bronchial catarrh, 3 pleurisy, 4 pneumonia, and 9 asthma. The number of the last named referring to three patients only. Two were invalided and one remains under treatment. One case of pneumonia was fatal. The cases under head of digestive system numbered 71, a percentage of 5.2 to total admissions. They were chiefly of diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 41 Treatment of malarious fever with mixed alkaloid. The mixed cinchona alkaloid has been extensively used. I have not found irritability of stomach, headache, or other immediate unfavourable effects produced by its administration in doses of 10 to 20 grains. But though persistently given in most cases of apparently simple ague to the extent of 30 grains daily, it has failed in so large a proportion of them in preventing recurrence of the paroxysms, that the year's experience does not enable me to report favourably of its efficacy as an antiperiodic. In very many cases in which the mixed alkaloid failed to effect cure, the use of quinine by hypodermic injection was substituted, and generally with good results. The disadvantages of its use in this way in regimental practice are that, to be safe, the instrument must be a delicate one, which, in constant daily use in many cases, is very liable to gdt out of order; and, however carefully the injections are made, inflammation of the skin and subcutaneous tissue is sometimes caused, occasionally resulting in abscess and ulcer. Two instances of such misfortune have occurred during the year in this hospital. Neither case gave much trouble in the cure of the local injury, but kept the men in hospital more than a fortnight, when otherwise well and fit for duty. The injection used was quinine 2 grains, diluted sulphuric acid 1 minim, water 3 minims. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General HEWLETT. Inspected 28th January. The regiment has been quartered at Ahmedabad throughout the year. The lines are old and too near the bazaar; no plinths. Ventilation of huts defective. During the year half-tile drains have been laid from each married sepoy's hut to a central drain, which runs down the length of the lines, but at the further end the intercept- ing drain is so deep as to be in my opinion dangerous, and it abruptly ends in the earth, so that the sullage which has been conveyed by it stagnates and becomes offensive. The water supply is derived from wells; that for the Purwaries is the only one above the lines. All the remaining wells are situated between the lines and the bazaar. They ought all to be covered over, especially one beneath a large tree. The regimental privies are on the standard plan, and those on the south side are very inconveniently situated across a steep nullah, which is, as might be expected, fouled. The health of the regiment has not been good during the past year, there having been during the autumn an epidemic of malarial fever which has debili- tated and much weakened the physique of the men. Other causes have also operated in producing a lowered vitality among the men. The regiment had to perform all the duties of the station ordinarily shared by another Native Infantry Regiment. In September and October the men only got two consecutive nights in bed, and during the latter part of October even less. I was much pleased at my inspection at the efficient supervision main- tained by Surgeon Major Burrows over the hospital, &c. The number of sick was so large that for many mouths he was compelled to utilize the adjacent hospital in addition to his own. The hospital ceiling and flooring are in bad repair, and the hospital is too dark. The surgery is too small, and there is not sufficient light in it. The hospital privy is in bad order, and should in my opinion be removed and another one on a better plan be substituted for it. H. M.'s 20th Regiment N. I. BARODA.42 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. 1. The regiment has remained at Baroda throughout the year, a few escort parties and recruiting parties only having (as usual) been detached from head-quarters at different times. The lines and their surround- ings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. Having fully described the lines in a previous report, I refrain from doing so again. No alterations have been made, and the accommodation provid- ed is found sufficient; the only addition has been the building of two new solitary cells near the quarter-guard; these are according to the regulation plan, and are provided with raised sleeping boards and privies; they are in every respect suitable buildings. The general hygienic condition of the lines was good during the greater part of the year, but during the rains their north-west corner was frequently flooded. I inspected them myself constantly both during and after rain, and I found that although the water did not actually flow into the men's houses, the streets of the first four companies were always under water to the extent of one section during and for an hour or two after heavy rain. The reason of this was evidently the insufficient depth of the drain which runs from the north-west corner of the lines in a southward direction to the nullah which skirts the commissariat compound, and thus during heavy rain water falls faster than the drain can carry it off. I am satisfied that if the abovementioned faulty drain were deepened and furnished with a proper slope in its course southwards, the flooding of the lines might be avoided. The ground in the vicinity of the lines (outside cantonment limits) was under water during the rains, and a large hole, which exists immediately to the north-east of the lines, also collects a great deal of water; this of course is likely to give off unwholesome emana- tions while in process of drying up, and as the wind blows from that direction in the cold weather, must be objectionable. The lower branches of all trees in the lines were lopped during the hot weather to admit of the free perflation of air. At my frequent visits to the lines I made a point of noting, and reporting to the company officer, any of the drains leading from the inside bathing places which did not appear to flow freely, or were otherwise in an unsanitary condition, also inspecting them a day or two afterwards to see that the evil had been remedied. I am, however, fully sensible of the fact thatperfect sanitation cannot be looked for as long as bathing places of any description are allowed inside the huts or enclosed verandahs, as the drains leading from them not being paved (indeed the majority of them are merely cut in the bare earth, a few only being tiled) the bathing water must soak into the ground immediately in front of the hut, leaving it damp and unhealthy. At one time, when conjunctivitis was rather prevalent, I had reason to think that in several instances it could be traced to this cause, viz. a dirty drain containing black mud and the wind passing along this through the hole under the wall into the house. Speaking generally, however, the lines have been (except during the rains as abovementioned) in as fairly good a hygienic condition as cutcha-built lines can be kept. Conservancy. 3. In consequence of the scarcity of suitable ground available for trench latrines, the regiment has reverted to the use of the pucka-built ones, the expense having been defrayed during a portion of the year by contributions from the men themselves; but application has been made to the Baroda State authorities for permission to make use of a piece of ground to the rear of the lines (which is outside cantonment limits) for the construction of trench latrines. Water-supply. 4. Under this head there is nothing to add to my remarks of last year, the source and quality are the same as previously reported, and the quantity has been amply sufficient throughout the year; it is clear to look at, though that yielded by some of the wells is slightly brackish to the taste. Food. 5. The ordinary articles of food have been more abundant in the bazaar than during the previous year, but things are dearer here than in Bombay. Vegetables, which were very scarce during the hot weather of 1878, were fairly plentiful in 1879. The average monthly rate of grain compensation to fighting men for the year has been about four rupees six annas. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. No duties of any special character have been performed by the regiment, and the work has been much the same as usual, although of course when the sick-list was high the guard-duty was heavier for those not on the sick-list, who at one time had only 2½ nights in bed; but the average number of nights in bed for the whole year was 6¾. For exercise the men have had their usual parades, &c., and during the early part of the year and also at intervals during the rains, exhibitions of wrestling, leaping and other sports were held in the talimkhana, but latterly the sickness and prostration of the men have been such that they have but little strength or inclination for anything of the kind.
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 43 Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital in use is the same as that reported on last year; certain improvements have been made, the roof was thoroughly repaired before the rains, and the unevenness of the floor formerly complained of has been remedied by covering it all over with a layer of con- crete 3 inches deep, which answers very well. The accommo- dation provided was altogether inadequate during the last four months of the year, when the sick-rate was so high, and many men on the sick-list were therefore allowed to live in the lines. The hospital itself is clean and well-ventilated, and its immediate vicinity in a good sanitary condition. A portion of the permanent latrine near the hospital is set apart for the use of the patients, and is kept in good order by the hospital sweepers. A suitable house has recently been built for the senior hospital assistant, but the other subordinates being unprovided with quarters, occupy one of the corner-rooms of the hospital. The hospital still lacks a bathing-room and a dead-house. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the regiment now, at the end of the year 1879, cannot be described as otherwise than bad, although the number actually "remaining" on the sick list is only 58. During the first half of the year the sickness was only slightly in excess of that which obtained in 1878, but from July to December malarial fever, in many cases of a severe type, prevailed to an unprecedented extent, greatly impairing the efficiency of the regiment. Some idea of the helpless condition to which the regiment was reduced in the months of September and October may be formed when I state that the admissions during those two months alone amounted to 972, of which 859 were due to malarial fever. The highest monthly "average daily sick" was 158.8 (in September), and the lowest 15.2 (in May); the highest number on the sick-list on any one day was 243 (on the 22nd September). Many of the men who have returned to duty, present the, undoubted aspect of chronic malarial poisoning, the result of repeated attacks of ague, and still frequently apply at hospital for treatment; debility being, I think, the prevail- ing ailment, while congested spleen has of late become quite common in the regiment (many of the children even being affected with it). There is no doubt that many of these men require change of air, but I know that were I to begin to make a selection of cases requiring such change, I should be embarrassed by the conflicting claims of over 100 men. Under these circumstances I regret that I cannot speak so encouragingly of the general health and physique of the regiment as I was able to do last year. The standard for recruits having recently been lowered, a few of the recruits lately enlisted were hardly up to the general standard of the regiment, but all those passed have been carefully examined by myself, and I rejected many on account of defective vision and other disabilities. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. There is no doubt that the climate of Baroda during the year, the constant variations of temperature during the rains, and the cold nights and morn- ings towards the end of the year, the flooding of portions of the lines, and the inundation of the ground (outside cantonment limits) in their vicinity, have been. largely productive of admissions for fever, and my own belief is that the regiment will for some time to come feel the effects of the ordeal it has passed through. Details of treated. 10. The total admissions for the year were 2,097, and the average daily number of sick 58.8, giving an average daily percentage of sick to strength for the year of 8.7. It is worthy of mention, however, that the first half of the year furnished 382 admissions only, with an average daily sick of 24.1. Of the total admissions, 1,437 were due to malarial fever, in many instances of a severe type, being complicated with pneumonia, congestion of spleen, bronchial catarrh, anæmia, &c., and followed by great debility; of the above cases, 10 were registered as "remittent fever," and 1,427 as "ague," of which latter 1,137 were quotidian, 243 tertian, 1 quartan, and 46 irregular in type. Dysentery furnished 13 admissions, and diarrh44 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. interval (to improve the tone of the heart), besides soup and stimulants. The man gradually rallied, was sent on sick certificate to his own country for a time, and has since returned to duty. (b ) A fatal case of tetanus, following a slight contusion of the toe. The man died twelve hours after seizure, in spite of treatment, which consisted of chloral and belladonna, chloroform-inhalation, &c. (c ) A case of acute hepatitis, in which chloride of ammonium (given with the usual precautions as to the excretory functions, &c.) appeared to have no effect, but which rapidly improved under the influence of large doses of ipecacuanha. (d ) A case of pleurisy with effusion, in which I employed the aspirator with much advantage, withdrawing twenty-four ounces of fluid. The man recovered, and went away on sick certificate. He has since returned to duty, and the lung is now restored to its original position. (e ) A case of sudden death in a man in hospital for "diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 45 Operations. Successful. Unsuccessful. Vaccinations 57 54 3 Re-vaccinations 54 29 25 The persons re-vaccinated were mostly recruits, with a few recruit-boys. Invaliding and its causes. 14. Twenty-three men were invalided out of the service on gratuity or pension during the year; of these, eight were time-expired men (over 32 years' service.) Of the remainder, six were cases of general debility, two of chronic bronchitis, one physical disability, and one each of the following disabilities:46 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. being made to re-establish the trench system. The water-supply is obtained from wells; the water is said to be abundant and of fair quality. The health of the regiment has not been good, especially during the latter half of the year, when ague prevailed to a most unusual degree, so much so that the regiment was quite for the time prostrate. During the months of September and October there were 972 admissions into hospital, of which 889 were due to malarial fever. The highest number on the sick list on any one day was 243 on the 22nd September. I was extremely pleased with my inspection of the hospital, and I desire to bring to the special notice of the Surgeon-General, the excellent manner in which Surgeon- Major DeTatham has performed his duty. In every respect this hospital is quite one of the best managed I have ever seen. His diaries of cases were all in his own handwriting and carefully kept, and all his arrangements were excellent. The hospital, by a curious arrange- ment, has been built on the very confines of the cantonment. During the year an objection- able native village, Gowlipoora, complained of by my predecessor as being in the immediate vicinity of the hospital, has been removed. The want of a dead-house is much felt. Quarters have been erected for the hospital assistant, but there are none for the native medical pupils who are consequently obliged to use one of the verandah rooms of the hospital. There was of course great over-crowding in the hospital during the prevalence of the ague epidemic, which, although it has abated, has left the men much reduced in strength. 24th Regiment N. I. MEHIDPUR.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 47 Water-supply. 4. This is very indifferent the greater part of the year, and very bad in the hot weather. The supply is from three wells and the river Sipra. The men principally use the latter. During the cold and rainy seasons, when the river is high, the water is pretty good, especially if properly filtered. This opera- tion, however, one cannot expect a sepoy to do. In the hot months of the year, when the river is very low and sluggish, the water is very bad, well-water being then preferable. Food and clothing, 5. There has been no dearth of food; the men make use of the regimental bazaar, in which there is always a good stock of meat, grain of different kinds, and vegetables for sale. There is also a weekly bazaar held on Sunday, in the town of Mehidpur, which is also patronised. The bachelors, as a rule, live pretty well; married men with large families have to stint themselves. There has been no change in the clothing. Orderlies in the hot weather are allowed to go about in their native dress. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The duties have been the usual parades, guards, and musketry. Average number of nights in bed for all ranks was 7.7. The recruits have to attend a course of gymnastics, and some of the younger men join them. A few of the men fish and go out shooting. Duties have not been prejudicial to the health of the men. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 7. No change made to the buildings, which have so often been reported on. They have been kept clean by being thoroughly whitewashed twice during the year; and the accommodation has been sufficient; the ventilation is good. The out-houses are all complete and in good order; a dead-house is required. Conservancy is well attended to; the men are always warned not to soil the floor with water or urine, and are provided with pans for that purpose. The excreta is daily removed by the conservancy cart, and burned three miles from camp. Water-supply is from the river Sipra and a well near the lines. General health and physique. 8. The wretched climate of Mehidpur has considerably affected the health of the men, and although several of them are naturally of good physique, and will bear a favourable comparison with most of the Bombay regiments, yet the period of service (three years) at Mehidpur, notwithstanding change of wings to Augur, has considerably weakened them, and it is to be hoped that the approaching change to Mhow will prove beneficial. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. This has been freely dilated on by the different medical officers that have served at Mehidpur, and it is no doubt one of the unhealthiest stations in the Bombay Presidency. It is very depressing, and this together with malarial influence, renders life to both officers and men a wretched existence. Details of treated. 10. 1,623 cases were admitted during the year, compared with 1,258 the year previous, average daily sick being 2.87, compared with 26.3 for 1878. The increase of sick was due to a large amount of malarious fever, 1,316 being under this heading, 4 of which number were cases of remittent fever. The type was mostly quotidian, and was treated with the cinchona alkaloids, quinine being used in obstinate cases and in the remittent form. The cases of ague were generally uncom- plicated. Several of the men, however, have enlarged spleens from repeated attacks of fever. Malarious fever is most prevalent in October and November. There were 55 admissions from diarrh48 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The 13 cases invalided were for the following diseases:MAP OF THE MILITARY CANTONMENTS, AUGUR. Scale 1 Inch = 8 Chains. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996676.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996676.tif]
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 49 Conservancy. 3. The conservancy of the lines is very good, and they are always kept scrupulously clean. The only fault in the conservancy is the latrines, which, however, are to be given up shortly; they are old brick-work buildings, and have become saturated with the urine which the men pass at the side of the pans and then allow to dribble out behind. It is impossible now to keep these sweet and free from smell, and more than once they have been a source of annoyance when there has been a high wind, they being placed to windward of the lines on the other side of the parade ground. Water-supply. 4. All the water used is obtained from wells, of which there is one between each line; one near the hospital compound, and one between two of the officers' bungalows. The water is of good quality. Food and clothing. 5. The men have plenty of good food, obtainable from the bazaar at moderate rates; for, though it is not as cheap as it was, they receive compensation, so have no reason to deprive themselves of it. They often obtain flesh, either buying it from shikarees bringing it in, or sometimes killing it themselves, of which opportunity they are always eager to avail themselves. The clothing is good. Besides the Government clothing of uniform and great coat, they have their own undress clothing and good English blankets, which they have obtained for themselves. Every man, too, is ordered to obtain a cot, so that he should not sleep on the damp ground. Duties, exercise, amusements; their effects on health. 6. The duties of the men are light, but besides their regimental work, they furnish a guard to the jail here. Of late they have had rather more work owing to the drill season and musketry firing; they, however, take great interest in the latter, having fired off no less than 16,317 rounds at their own expense before the annual course began. The price of the ammunition, being obtained from the Regimental Rifle Association, was only one arena per four rounds. There is no gymnasium, but the men gladly join any excursion to beat for large or small game; they also work in the sepoys' garden. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condition, hygienic or otherwise. 7. The hospital, situated in the north-east corner of camp, is a double-sloping tiled-roof building, with covered verandah on each side, and two small rooms at each end, used respectively as office, dispensary, store- room, and spare room. The hospital is capable of accommo- dating twenty patients, with five feet space between each bed, and both it and the subsidiary buildings are in good repair, except the post-mortem house, which is very bad. The hospital is on a rising piece of ground, in the best spot in camp, and has open maidan all round. General health and physique. 8. The general health and physique of the wing altogether is good, though the men have suffered a good deal from fever, especially those who have come from Mehidpur. Several of the recruits who were transferred suffered badly from fever and splenitis, which consequently greatly weakened their constitution. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Augar is, I believe, a very healthy place for India, the heat is not excessive; there is a moderate rainfall; it is 1,600 feet above the sea level, and a good dry ferruginous soil, so that the men are under no injurious influence of climate whilst here, nor are there any local circumstances affecting their health beyond the risk of living near a dirty native city. This year, however, they have been free from any evil influence from that direction. Details of treated. 10. All the cases of fever have been treated at first with the Government cinchona febrifuge, grains ten to fifteen doses, and occasionally in larger doses. This was found sufficient in the mildest cases, but others required small doses of quinine, grains five to ten; large doses of grains twenty to thirty were given in one obstinate case; others, when the cinchona febrifuge failed, were given liquor arsenicalis, minims ten dose, carefully watched. This was very successful, though, like the other, it occasionally failed. For dysentery, rest, opium, ipecacuanha, grains twenty to thirty, fomentations, and sometimes brandy were used. The cases of guinea-worm were poulticed, and attempts carefully made every day to extract them; two, however, after exciting abscesses disappeared and were not extracted. Salicylic acid, grains fifteen dose, was used for a mild case of acute rheumatism. There were no other cases of importance. M
50 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality and its causes. 11. There were two cases of deaths in the early part of the year; one from intermittent fever and the other from remittent fever. Epidemics. 12. There were no epidemics. Vaccinations and Re-zaccina- tion. 13. There have been 19 primary vaccinations during the year, but no case of re-vacci- nation. Of the total present strength 275, 205 are protected by vaccination, and 70 by small-pox. Of the 81 women, 63 are protected by vaccination and 18 by small-pox. Of 112 children, 96 are protected by vaccination and 16 by small-pox, so that of the total men, women, and children, 468, the are 364 protected by vaccination and 104 by small-pox. Invaliding and its causes. 14. There was only one man invalided from the hospital, who had suffered from hepatitis, after long attacks of fever. Three other men were discharged for pension on account of long service, debility, and disability to perform their duties properly, but they were never in hospital. Requirements and recommen- dations. 15. None. Special observations, new expe- riences in treatment, sanitation, &c. 16. None. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon General HEWLETT. Inspected 22nd December 1879. The lines are on a good site, and are certainly above the average. The streets are wide and kept scrupulously clean. The huts, however, are defective from want of plinth and of efficient ventilation. Each man possesses a cot. The water supply is fairly good, and is derived from wells, the depth to the water being about 50 feet and the depth to the bottom about 20 feet more. The soil is laterite. There is an excellent sepoys' garden, which is managed by the officer in command, and which keeps the men sup- plied with excellent vegetables. The latrines are not good, but they are shortly to be pulled down and new ones erected in their place. I was much pleased with my inspection of the hospital, which stands high, and which has been well managed by Surgeon Lowdell, who has evinced great zeal and intelligence in carrying out his duties. Diaries of cases have been intelligently and well kept in the handwriting of the medical officer. The general health and physique of the men was good, though some of them who had come from Mehid- pur have suffered from fever; but on the whole Augar is a very healthy station. 26th Regiment N. I. DEESA.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 51 The lines and their surround- ings; present condition, hygienic and otherwise. 2. The lines have been already condemned two or three times by committees, as old, dilapidated, and past repair. The huts have no plinths, and the floors are below the level of the surrounding ground. The roofs are tiled, and many of them leak, and the huts were very damp during the rains. The ventilation is natural, viz. through doors and the roofs. The drainage of the lines and cantonment is surface. The huts are shaded by numerous fine trees. The bazaar is only about 300 yards distant from the lines; its sanitary condition is satisfactory. New lines are most urgently needed. Conservancy. 3. The trench system of latrine is used. The latrines are two in number, one for each sex; they are situated in the sandy bed of the river in the dry weather, and on the river bank in the wet weather. This sys- tem of conservancy seems well suited to the locality. The lines are always kept very clean. Water-supply. 4. There are six wells in the lines, one in the hospital compound; one of the wells in the lines, which is set aside for low caste men, is not covered in. This is very objectionable, as there is generally some organic matter undergoing decomposition in the water. The quantity and quality of water is abundant and good. Food and clothing. 5. The food is fairly cheap and good. As regards clothing, a lighter dress for the sepoy when on duty in the hot weather is very much needed; also some improvement I think ought to be made as regards their boots. Most of the sepoys wear no socks, their boots are ill-fitting, and the consequence is, that many men come into hospital suffering from shoe-bite. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effects on health. 6. The ordinary garrison duties and escort parties, parades, and drills give the men plenty of exercise; the men also go through a gymnastic course, and some also compete for prizes in running, &c. Neither the duties nor exercise appear to have any prejudicial effect on the men's health. Hospital and its immediate surroundings; present condi- tion, hygienic and otherwise. 7. The hospital is well situated, clean, and in fair repair; its immediate surroundings are the subsidiary buildings for the hospital establishment and Subordinate Medical Department, two contagious diseases wards, a dead-house, and a latrine. The latter is built of masonry and is kept clean by hospital sweepers, who remove the excreta into covered receptacles, which are taken away at night in conservancy carts, beyond camp limits. The hospital affords ample accommodation for the sick; there has been no over-crowding. Ventilation is secured through apertures in the roof and near the ground, as also through opposite doors and windows. The water-supply obtained from a well in the hospital compound is good and abundant. General health and physique. 8. The general health on the whole has been very fair; the physique of the men is fairly good. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Climatic influence on health will be seen by looking at the following table, made out from observations on temperature and rainfall recorded, and from the register of sick:52 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Details of treated. 10. There were 614 admissions under observation, including 56 re-admissions. There were 5 deaths in hospital. Six men were sent on medical certificate, three ague, two venereal disease, one phthisis. The principal diseases, in order of frequency were as follows:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 53 POONA DIVISION. Average Strength present during the year 6,025 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength present 3.9 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength present 0.9 H. M.'s 2nd Regiment L. C. POONA.54 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. daily, the earth gradually became polluted, and as the family bathed anywhere in these enclosures, the soil was almost continually damp and evaporating. On my recommendation, the Commandant has cleared away the earth to the depth of two feet, placed "moorhum" instead, and constructed chunam and stone floors for the bath- ing places and privies. To the east and south, within a distance of 112 paces from the front of the lines, the fields are constantly irrigated by the Kurruckwasla water. I fear this is one of the main causes of the continuance of malarial fever throughout the year. Conservancy. 3. The latrines are situated 150 yards distant on the left front of the lines towards the north. They require white-washing, the floors are out of repair, and the walls require pointing, the base bricks being decayed. At present the sowars void urine on the floors, causing an insanitary state. I have recom- mended that urine should be received separately into pans. Water supply. 4 Good. Kurruckwasla water through pipes. Some prefer to drink well water. Supply ample. Food and clothing. 5. Food indifferent. Supply ample. No change of clothing since last report. Duties, exercise and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. Exercise parades three or four times weekly; considerable orderly duty, cleaning horses and accoutrements. Average nights in bed, conse- cutive 9.5. Amusements are tilting at the ring, tent-pegging, sword exercises, such as lime-cutting on horseback at speed and polo, all having a capital effect. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings; present condition, hy- gienic or otherwise. 7. Turning to the hospital, the contrast is indeed striking. On the one hand, a series of hovels unfit for human habitation; on the other, a splendid building, perfect in all its parts. In former reports it has been fully described. Within thirty yards of the compound there are irrigation fields. The latrines are kept beautifully clean, and are in very good repair. The dry-earth system is not in use. General health and physique. 8. During the first four months of the year the general health was excellent; but the rainfall brought in its train malaria, which soon reduced health below par. The cold weather, however, has bad a most bracing effect; on the whole the physique of the Regiment is steadily improving, although great difficulty is experienced in obtaining able-bodied recruits with good chest development. Influences of climate or local Circumstance on health. 9. I am of opinion that bad drainage and proximity of irrigated fields have been the great factors in developing miasm, the agent exciting paroxysmal fevers and causing inefficiency. Details of treated. 10.The total admissions, out of the average present strength, amounted to 598. Of these, 354 were from quotidian ague, being an excess of 105 cases contrasted with last year. This was due to the change from the very dry climate of Deesa to the moist air of Poona; and also to the very bad state of drainage in the lines after the rains, besides the moist state of the ground kept up all the year by irrigation. The greatest number of admissions were in June, July, and August, when the daily sick amounted to 38. In most cases six grains of mixed cinchona alkaloids thrice daily were exhibited; but in severe cases always quinine in large doses were given with great effect. In one case of hyperpyrexia the patient became comatose, when quinine was administered hypodermically and ice applied to the head with a happy result. Of the remaining admissions, contusions gave 70, dysentery 27, syphilis 11, lumbago 10, rheumatism 9, brow ague 4, sciatica 1, conjunctivitis 5, inflammation of the ear 1, inflammation of the glands 1, gum boil 2, bronchitis 4, pneumonia 2, pleurisy 5, dyspepsia 1, diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 55 Mortality, and its causes. 11. Two deaths in hospital and one out of hospital. The two former were from pneumonia; the latter was that of a sowar serving with the 3rd Scinde Horse killed in action near Kabul. Epidemics. 12. None. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Twenty-one children were successfully primarily vac- cinated. No re-vaccinations. Invaliding, and its causes. 14. Invalided for discharge 44, as follows, viz:56 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. drainage, is inspected once a week. The night-soil is deposited some distance to leeward of camp, and is removed every morning before 8 A.M. by an iron conservancy cart, which attends regularly. As the cultivators in this part of the country do not seem to appreciate or know the benefits to be obtained from properly manuring their lands with the best manure, I proposed in a recent report to the Municipality of Siroor that the Mamlutdar should call a meeting of land-owners in the neighbourhood and explain matters to them properly, offering them the night-soil gratis at first. Having thus made the matter publicly known, I have little doubt but that it will subsequently be properly used up for purposes of culture, and not be simply thrown on barren and unproductive ground, as it is at present. Water supply. 4. The water-supply comes from the river Goreh, and is fairly good and plentiful. Two analyses were made during the year of the river and the mess well water. The following are the results:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 57 Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. The total number of primary vaccinations during the year were 148, all successful. There were seventeen children on the rolls unvaccinated, who were either too young or sickly. Invaliding, and its causes. 14. The number of invalids this year was unusually small, only ten, and this was partly due to all men not likely to stand service having been got rid of last year, when the Regiment was under expectation of active service. Of the men discharged, seven were for debility and ague, &c., one for varicose veins, one for palsy of the right arm, and one for physical disability. Requirements and recommen- dations. 15. None, except that some sorts of pans should be intro- duced into the latrine accommodation when funds permit. Special observations and expe- riences in treatment. 16. Seven cases of guinea-worm came under observation, but only three of these could be experimented upon in continuation of the previous experi- ments reported. The reason of this was principally that the worms were too small and thready, rendering the operation of stinging them with a scorpion a difficult task; the best mode of doing so, however, was found to be by making a hole in a card and drawing the worm through, then seizing the scorpion with a hankerchief nearly half an inch from the tail and allowing him to sting the worm, drawn tight, himself. The worm when stung can undoubt- edly be felt by the patient, as a peculiar thrilling and even very painful sensation is produced in the locality, which lasts for some time. The worm dies in a few days as a rule completely; but nearly always the next day about seven inches or so comes away quite dead and flat. In chronic and sub-acute cases of dysentery the following enema has been tried with remarkable results. It seems to be a course of treatment which has not been extensively or thoroughly tried, as the leading medical works refer only lightly to the subject, and mention only nitrate of silver and sulphate of zinc simply, or they pass over the subject altogether. The prescription used was the following:58 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality. 10. Two deaths occurred, one from nephritis, the other from suppression of urine. Epidemics. 11. None. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 12. Has been properly carried on. Invaliding. 13. Five men were invalided, one for syphilis, one for varicose veins, one for debility, one for chronic rheumatism; and one for debility from ague. Requirements and recommenda- tions. 14. None. H. M.'s 8th Regiment N. I. SATARA.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 59 temporary partitions of bamboo matting. I have no doubt a good many of the men prefer going a little way into the jungle, when they have time, instead of using the latrines. The number of sweepers employed in carrying out the conservancy work is eight, of whom four are regimental and four are employed by Government. Water supply. 4. The supply of water is generally sufficient and of fair quality. Some of the wells contain hard and brackish water, but these are only used for washing purposes. In the hot season there is often a scarcity of water, and it has to be brought from what is called the Rajah's Garden, where there is a well which has a supply of water all the year round. This is at a considerable distance from the lines, and not at all convenient for the men. The scheme for supplying Satara with water from Khas by constructing a dam on the hills across the source of the Urmori River has not as yet been carried out. The water of the wells used by the troops was lately analysed by the Government Travelling Analyser, but I have not as yet received his report as to their qualities. It is commonly considered good. Food and clothing. 5. The food used by the sepoys has been much the same as regards price as it has been for a year or two back. There is plenty to be got in the bazaars, but it does not seem to be much cheaper. The average price of gram has been about lbs. 12½ for the rupee; wheaten flour lbs. 10½, rice lbs. 9, bajree lbs. 13, dal lbs. 10½ ghee lbs2½ salt lbs. 15, firewood lbs. 120, mutton 1bs 6 per rupee; and the usual food of the sepoy consists of above, with fish, vegetables, and onions, chillies, &c. As this season has been a better one for crops generally, prices should now be lower. As regards clothing, it still remains of the same old pattern. I believe one or two regiments have been put into a sort of Zouave uniform, but this has not been generally done, which is a mistake, I think, as the Zouave dress would improve the general appearance of the sepoy. The boots are also still a source of trouble from causing shoe-bites, and thus filling the sick list with trifling cases. The men seem when off duty to wear the same sort of clothing all the year round, and if they were made to have warm under-vests for the rainy and cold season, it would prevent a good deal of sickness from chest and rheumatic com- plaints, They should also be made to sleep on a charpoy and not on the ground, as is the usual custom. As regards their food, I believe many half-starve themselves in order to save money to send to their relatives, and so render themselves liable to complaints, which, if pro- perly fed, they would not suffer from. Duties, exercises amusements, &c; 6. The duties are the ordinary ones. A good deal of extra duty was required during the year on account of small parties having to go out to the districts to aid the Civil authorities in hunting down the dacoits, who were very troublesome in this district. The men had on an average about four nights in bed out of the seven during the year, so I do not suppose the duties can be considered very heavy. The exercises and amusements are of the usual kind. There is a small, gymkhana for practising gymnastics, and some do work for the soldiers' exhibition, and there is a school for the instruction of the children, who do plain and fancy sewing work, as well as learn to read and write, &c. Hospital and surroundings. 7. The sick of the Regiment are still treated in an ordinary bungalow, as the regular hospital for sepoys is occupied, and has been for years, by the sick of the detachment of European troops stationed here. The present bungalow is better suited for an hospital than the one used last year, which was in the Sudder Bazaar. The sick were removed in October to this one, which is much better ventilated, has larger rooms, and houses for the hospital servants in the compound, as well as being much more convenient in every way, although it has of course some deficiencies, such as store-rooms, dead-house, and cook-room. The latrines are also not quite what they should be for a hospital, but certainly better than those formerly used. The building is quite open to the breeze, and there are no build- ings near to obstruct ventilation. There is still no separate room for the use of the hospital guard, and the men have to occupy a part of the verandah of the house, and also sleep there, which is very inconvenient and uncomfortable, both for the guard and the men under treatment. General health and physique. 8 The general health of the Regiment has been good during the year, there being a decrease in the number of malarial fevers and other diseases as compared with the previous year. There has been no epi- demic disease, and the deaths have been fewer in number. A good many of the worn-out and elderly men have been pensioned off, and young men of good physique have been enlisted in their place. The number of recruits joined during the year was 56, of whom 29 were Mahrattas, 17 Mahomedans, 8 Ramoosees, and 2 Brahmins. The number of men sent on sick leave was 24, of whom 14 belonged to the detachment at Bombay, 6 to the Asirgarh detachment, and 4 to the head-quarters at Satara.
60 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The diseases for which they got leave were ague 3, remittent fever 2, bronchitis 2, abscess 1, dysentery 1, debility 1, lumbago 1, mumps 1, nephritis 1, pemphigus 1, rheuma- tism 6, scurvy 1, sprain 1, synovitis 1, and syphilis 1. The physique of the men is generally good. They, differ in size considerably, according to their nationality, the Mahrattas being usually smaller men than those from the Punjaub and north of India. Of the different castes and religions, there are 23 Rajputs and Brahmins, 58 Sikhs, 1 Dogra, and 453 other Hindoos. Of Mahomedans there are 32 Punjaubi Mussul- mans, 3 Pathans, and 70 other Mahomedans. Of Native Christians there are 16, and 22 others of no caste. Influence of climate. 9. The climate seems to have had a beneficial effect on the men at Satara, as they have not suffered so much from malarial fevers as they did in Poona, their previous station. The duties there were much heavier, however, and that, I have no doubt, caused more disease. There was the greatest number of admissions for ague during, the months of August and September, which is the rainy season, and the men sleeping on the ground, as well as the damp state of their huts, tends to increase the amount of sickness. The climate of Satara is considered good, but during the cold season a nasty east wind often blows, which does not agree with every one, and causes rheumatic and neuralgic as well as respiratory complaints. The healthiest season of the year for the sepoys seems to be during the hot months of April and May. The season has been normal, and the rainfall about the average. Details of treated. 10. The total number of admissions numbered 752 against a total of 1,345 for 1878, which shows a decrease of 593. This has been chiefly in the number of malarial fevers, the total of that disease in 1878 having been 938 against 366 for the present year. The average daily sick for 1878 was 31.6 against 23.5. The total treated at Satara was 461, at Bombay 151, and at Asirgarh 140. The most prevalent diseases were ague 359 cases, of which 241 were at Satara, 52 at Bombay, and 66 at Asirgarh. Of remittent fever there were only 7, 6 at Satara and 1 at Bombay. Of acute rheumatism 5 at Satara and 1 at Bombay, total 6. There were 22 cases of primary syphilis at Satara, 4 at Bombay, and 1 at Asirgarh, total 27. This disease is rather common at Satara, there being no sort of check on the bazaar women, a Lock Hospital not having as yet been established. Of eye diseases there were 17 cases of conjunctivitis, 9 occurring at Satara, 2 at Bombay, and 6 at Asirgarh. Of bronchial catarrh 11, of which 5 at Satara and 6 at Bombay; and bronchitis 22, 5 at Satara, 3 at Bombay, and 14 at Asirgarh. Of diarrh61 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Special observations, &c. 16. The mixed alkaloids have been generally used in the treatment of ague, and seem to answer very well in the common run of cases, and I have not had many complaints of its causing headache; it is generally given in six-grain doses thrice a day. In cases of remittent fever I have always given quinine, and also in bad agues sometimes combined with liquor arsenicalis. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The head-quarters of the Regiment have been quartered at Satara during the year, whilst detachments have been supplied to Bombay, and have likewise been employed against dacoits in the Southern Maratha Country. Beyond reiterating the recommendation conveyed in previous reports, that the present huts should be removed and entirely rebuilt, any further remark regarding them appears unnecessary. There is no hospital proper for the use of the Regiment, the sick being treated in a bungalow hired for the purpose. The books and records were carefully written to date, and the arrangements for the sick, as far as they could possibly be, were satisfactorily carried out. The medical officer drew attention to the unusually large number (22) of venereal cases which had occurred amongst the men since arriving at Satara, and attributed the disease to the want of check of any description to its prevention. Thirty-one men were invalided during the year, but the general health of the Regiment was good, and a steady diminution in admissions on account of malarial and other diseases was observed compared with the previous year. H. M.'s 11th Regiment N. I. POONA.62 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food and clothing. 5. Food-grains were somewhat cheaper than in the preceding year, and the men appear altogether better nourished, though I believe there are some of the sepoys who still deny themselves a sufficiently good quality and quantity of food to keep them in a good state of health, and it would, if practi- cable, be a good arrangement for the State if regular rations were served out in sufficient quantity to keep the men in health, for which moderate payment might be required, and this would do away with the necessity for compensation for dearness of grain. I have no additional remarks to make on the clothing than were made last year, no change having taken place. Duties &c. 6. Have been rather heavy during the year, and the Regiment has been broken up a great deal in detachments out after dacoits, but the general health of the Regiment has not suffered therefrom. Hospital &c. 7. The hospital is situated about a quarter of a mile from the lines, and consists of two separate buildings, the smaller having two wards, which is found convenient in the treatment of diseases. It is on the whole good, except the earth floors, which are difficult to keep neat. Asphalte would be preferable for reasons of cleanliness, comfort, and economy. There are two latrines, also with earth floors, which get saturated with urine and water. General health and physique. The Regiment generally has much improved in health within the past twelve months, as the sick returns show, and the men are fast losing the cachectic aspect that they most of them bore on arrival here from Bhooj. They do not fall out of the ranks through debility, as they did, and the influence of the Deccan climate seems to have been most benefical to them. Details of treated. 8. The prevailing disease was as usual ague (quotidian and tertian), for which there were 497 admissions with one death. This is a great contrast to the preceding year, when there were 1,684 admissions with one death, and the cases have been of a much milder nature, with fewer complications. There were nine cases of remittent fever, in which for many days the temperature did not fall below 100°, and frequently ran up to 104°. In most of these cases there was some complica- tion, generally bronchitis, and large doses of quinine are absolutely required, in such cases cinchona alkaloid being no substitute. The cases of syphilis are rather numerous, occurring chiefly amongst the recruits: the number discharged from the Regiment on this account was 15. The two cases of general dropsy were due to diseased liver and spleen, with severe hæmatemesis in one case. Cases of disease of the lungs have been neither so numerous nor severe as in the preceding year, though the temperature during November and December was much lower in 1879. This I attribute to the improved health of the men generally. The same remark applies to dysentery. The sickness has been for the most part so mild during the year that no further special remarks are necessary. Epidemic. 9. None. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 10. Forty-four children were vaccinated, all successfully, vaccination being from arm to arm.There were 116 re-vaccinations amongst recruits, of which 40 were successful. Invaliding, its causes, &c. 11. There were 73 men invalided during the year, 15 of whom were for syphilis. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The Regiment has been stationed at Poona during the year, but several detachments were employed from time to time in the districts after dacoits. The lines and hospital were clean, and the books and records of the latter carefully kept to date. The Medical Officer complained of the difficulty of keeping the bedding clean in conse- quency of the mud flooring, the dust arising from which was a constant cause of annoyance to the patients. During the past twelve months a great improvement has taken place in the health of the Regiment, and the men are fast recovering from the cachectic appearance most of them bore on arrival from Bhooj.
63 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. H. M.'s 14th Regiment N. I. BELGAUM.64 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. last six months are almost without exception fine lads, and likely to turn out excellent sepoys. Influence of climate. 9. This has been a healthier year than the last, and the rainfall was slightly less. In 1878, 51 inches 25 cents were registered in the regimental hospital, and during the months of September, October, and November the admissions for ague were 62, 60, and 72, respectively. In 1879, a rainfall of 47 inches 8 cents was recorded, and in the above months there were 40, 45, and 37 admis- sons for ague. The influence of the neighbouring paddy fields on the health of the Left Wing has been commented on in para. 2. Details of treated. 10. From the number of admissions for guinea-worm (8), it might almost be thought that the disease was endemic in Belgaum. This, however, is not the case, as in every instance the sufferer was either a Konkani recruit or a man ascertained to have been on furlough about twelve months before the appearance of the parasite. The admissions for fever were 364, being less than in 1878 (422), but more than in 1877 (134). The admissions for dysentery were 14 in number, for diarrh65 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Some observations have been made on the emetic properties of pulvis calotropis, the powdered root bark of the C. Procera or C. Gigantea. In doses of grains xxxv given in half a tumblerful of warm water it is as effectual and trustworthy an emetic as pulvis ipecac., and has the advantage of almost invariably producing bilious purging as well as bilious vomit- ing. A reference to the cases of ague, the treatment of which has been commenced with the exhibition of calotropis, shows that, as a general rule, the patient "vomited thrice, was purged once." In one or two instances the powder proved quite inert; but this inertness was probably due to insufficient dilution. I have not yet tried it as a substitute for ipecac. in acute dysen- tery. nor have I made myself acauainted with its alleged alterative and tonic properties. Medical Pupils. 16. The medical pupils are regularly practised in dispensing under the supervision of the Hospital Assistant. They have also had lessons in elementary anatomy, medicine, and the treatment of emer- gencies from me. 16th Regiment N. I. MALEGAON.66 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. tilation. Exclusive of quarters for the Native Officers, there are 352 huts, each of them measuring about 960 cubic feet. The accommodation is sufficient for a wing. In the old artillery barracks and gunshed there are 189 dwellings, exclusive of the Native Officers' quarters. There has been some overcrowding in these barracks, as the accommodation is not sufficient for a wing. The arrangement for ventilation in all the huts is fairly good. The Native Officers' quarters are in good sanitary condition, and afford sufficient accommodation. Conservancy. 3. The trench system of latrines was in use from the beginning of the year up to the setting, in of the monsoon, when the Commanding Officer obtained permission to bring into use the permanent latrines situated to the rear of the lines, as the limited ground set apart for the trenches was impregnated with human excreta, and the soft soil, on becoming wet, was likely to cover the feet of people using these latrines with mud and filth. The only drawback to the trench latrines, which have hitherto worked well, is that they are situated on the parade ground close to the quarter-guard and solitary cells, and to windward of the barracks. When the permanent latrines were used, they were kept clean, and dry earth was used for disinfection. Water-supply. 4. The water-supply, derived from wells in the vicinity of the lines, is sufficient for drinking and cooking purposes, and is of good quality. For washing and bathing, the water of the river Moosum is used. Water from either source has not been analysed since the year 1874. Food and clothing. 5. A good and plentiful supply of food is always to be got in the bazaar at this station. Country vegetables are abundant and cheap. The following table gives the average prices of the ordinary articles of the sepoy's food for the year:67 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. of a whole regiment and the staff patients besides. It is efficiently ventilated by means of doors and windows and three large openings through the roof ridge. The latrine attached to the hospital is cleaned by the hospital sweepers twice a day, and the night-soil is carried away out of Cantonment limits. Carbolic acid and McDougall's powder are used for disinfection. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the Regiment, as deduced from the number of admissions in hospital, and the average daily sick, shows a marked improvement on the previous two years, and may now be pronounced good. The physique of most of the men is good. The average height of the sepoys is 5 feet 7½ inches, and their average chest measurement 33 inches. The tallest man in the ranks measures 6 feet 2¼ inches, and the shortest 5 feet ½ an inch. Some of the men have not yet got over the ill effects of the malarious cachexia and scorbutic taint acquired at Nusseerabad, and appear to be old and worn-out, though they have not been in the service more than twelve years. The recruits enlisted this year are very promising. This Regiment has been warned for active service since the last four months, and was carefully inspected by a Special Medical Board in September last, when out of a strength of 642, 21 men were invalided, 3 discharged for physical disability, and 68 pronounced unfit for active service, though fit for ordinary station duties. I still consider about 62 men unfit for active service in a trying climate like that of Afghanistan. On the whole, the Regiment is now quite as fit to take the field as any other Maharatta corps. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The change from the unhealthy climate of Nusseerabad (where the men suffered considerably from ague and scurvy during the previous year), to this comparatively very healthy station, has proved very beneficial to the health of the Regiment. Details of treated. 10. During the year under review the total number of treated was 840, against 2,000 in 1878 and 914 in 1877. There were 792 admissions, out of which 696 were discharged to duty, 22 died in hospital, 26 discharged otherwise, and 47 remaining under treatment at the end of the year. The daily average number of sick was 30.2; the rate per cent. of admissions to average strength, 126.7; the rate per cent. of daily sick to average strength, 4.6; and the rate per cent. of deaths in hospital to average strength, 3 8. The following tabular statement constrasts the cases of admissions into hospital for the years 1879 and 1878:68 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 1. Private Goordutsing, aged 20, occasionally using spirits-freely, came to hospital on the 17th March, complaining of pain in the abdomen and symptoms of indigestion. No organic disease being discovered at the time after a careful examination, his complaint was attributed to dyspepsia. About a month after admission, signs of ascites Were noticed, when I suspected that the symptoms were due to cirrhosis of the liver. As the enlargement of the abdomen went on increasing in spite of all treatment, and caused much dyspnPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 69 tents pitched near the old fort in the town; three of these proved fatal and one recovered. The sanitary condition of the town was very unsatisfactory. Drainage was defective, and the drinking water derived from the river was muddy and very impure. This was brought to the notice of the Commanding Officer, who immediately made arrangements for the supply of good well water to the men on the guard. From that time not a single case occurred amongst our men. though the disease was prevalent in the town for about a fortnight after that. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. The total number of primary vaccinations was 43, of which only one was unsuc- cessful. There were 93 re-vaccinations, of which 28 were successful. Invaliding, and its causes. 14. Twenty-six men were invalided for the following causes:70 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. on duty to Kaladgi, remaining there until the 11th December 1879, when, being relieved by the C Company, it returned to head-quarters. The latter company still remains at Kaladgi. The lines and surroundings; Present condition, hygienic or Otherwise. 2. The lines, which were built in 1875 on the standard plan, are everything that can be desired. The houses are well built on raised plinths; they are spacious, well ventilated,and are kept neat and clean; the surface drains are carefully looked after, and no water is allowed to stagnate. The regimental bazaar, situated about 200 yards to the south-west of the lines, has been kept during the past year in a very good sanitary condition. Conservancy. 3. The conservancy arrangements were well carried out. The trench system was the one used, and certainly during the cold and hot seasons nothing could have answered better; but during the rains this system suffers from many disadvantages. The latrines are situated about 250 yards to the south-west of the lines, and those using them were exposed during the monsoon to the incle- mency of the weather when proceeding there. In addition the ground becomes sloppy at this season, and it is almost impossible to procure dry earth, the deodorizing property of that used is consequently much lessened. Water-supply. 4. Capital water is obtained from four wells in camp. It is easily procured and in suffi- cient quantity. One well is for the Purwaries, another for the hospital establishment, which was built last year, but is not sufficiently deep, and consequently runs dry in the hot season; a third well is for Hindoos and Mussulmans, and the fourth is principally used by European officers. All the wells have a pucka built coping, and they have a paving for about 15 feet all round, which slopes down on the outside and ends in a surface drain, which carries away the surplus water. Food and clothing. 5. Both grain and vegetables were cheap during the year, though the latter were not very plentiful in the market. The highest grain compensation was given in the month of May, when it reached the sum of Rs. 3-4-0, and the lowest was in the month of November, when it was Rs. 2-13-6. The clothing of the men seems to be ample at present, though when they first arrived from Surat a 'great many suffered from the great change of temperature, and were quite unprepared with warmer clothing than they were accustomed to in the former station. Duties, exercises, and amuse- ments; their effect on helath. 6. The duties of the men are light. There is no workshop, and with the exception of a gymnasium, they have no means of amusement. I think this is very much to be regretted, as the men, not having any legitimate occupations between parades, ramble into the town, contracting irregular habits and swelling the number of admissions to hospital for syphilis. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings; present condition hy- gienic or otherwise. 7. The hospital has been so well described in former reports, that it is only necessary for me to say that it is kept neat and clean, that the conser- vancy arrangements are well carried out, and the lighting, ventilation, &c., are perfect. A stone floor has been sanc- tioned, and is now being laid down. This will be a great improvement. The only defect I see connected with the hospital is the absence of shutters for the windows of the Ophthalmic Ward. The windows at present are coated with blue paint, but this gradually gets worn away, or is scratched off by patients. General health and physique. 8. Since their arrival from Surat, the men have very much improved in physique. They suffered very much in that station from malaria, owing to the enervating climate, the impure water, and the badly constructed lines. Even yet a good many suffer from scorbutic taint, though, taking the Regiment as a whole, they are a fine able-bodied men. The recruits who have lately joined are beyond the average. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Nothing can better show the beneficial effect on the health of the Regiment pro- duced by their change to this bracing climate than the great decrease in sickness since its arrival here. In 1877 there were 1,501 admissions from all causes. In 1878 there were 1,130, whereas for the year under notice only 617 cases were admitted into hospital. Details of treated. 10. Of the 617 cases, as many as 254 were admitted for ague quotidian, only 11 for ague tertian, and there were only 6 cases of remittent fever. There were 46 cases of chronic rheumatism, 37 cases of primary, but only 3 of secondary, syphilis. Dysentery gave 34 admis- sions, and contusions, principally shoe-bites, 32. There were also 14 cases of sprains and 15 cases of bronchitis.
71 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Mortality, and its causes. 11. Three men died in hospital, one from fatty degeneration of the heart, one from lobular pneumonia, and one from chronic bronchitis. One man died out of hospital while on sick leave from ague. Epidemics. 12. No epidemics occurred during the year, not a single case of small-pox, cholera, or other contagious or infectious fever was admitted. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. Vaccination has been carried on during the year with great care and with success. The lymph has been good. At the close of the year, every one, both European and Native, was protected either by vaccination or by small-pox, with the exception of one European child and sixteen native children, all of whom were too young or too sickly to have the operation performed. Invaliding, and its causes. 14. The total number of men invalided during the year was 27. Of these 7 were invalided for general debility, 12 on account of their being old and worn-out, and 1 each for asthma, bronchitis, disease of the heart (valvular), loss of finger (middle, of right hand), chronic rheumatism, scurvy, and syphilis. Requirements and recommen- dations. 15. In reference to the hospital, I think it would be advisable to have shutters made for the Ophthalmic Ward. The laying down of a stone floor in the hospital is being proceeded with. The first stones laid down were roughened on their surface, but as I considered that this might be the means of retaining dirt and infectious matter, I recommended that all the stones afterwards laid down might have a smooth surface, as they could be cleaned much more easily. Special observations, new ex- periences in treatment, and sanita- tion. 16. The cinchona mixed alkaloid has been very largely used during the year, and I am of opinion that it is very suitable in most of the ordinary cases of uncomplicated ague. I have used it in doses of from 5 to 20 grains thrice a day in solution with mineral or vegetable acids. 1 have also used both salicylic acid and salicylate of soda in cases of rheumatism with very speedy relief to the patients. One patient suffering from neuralgia, who presented himself for admission, was speedily cured by the inhalation of three drops of nitrate of amyline on a sheet of blotting paper. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The Regiment has been stationed at Dharwar during the year, but has supplied detach- ments for duty at Kaladgi. The lines, which were built in 1875, are superior to any I have inspected in the Presi- dency. They are spacious, well situated, and thoroughly ventilated. Conservancy arrangements were well carried out, the trench system being the one in use. The hospital building is all that can be desired: it was in excellent order, and the venti- lation and conservancy arrangements perfect, the whole conduct of the hospital reflecting credit on the Medical Officer in charge. The health of the men had much improved since their arrival from Surat in 1878, where they suffered severely from malarious fever. The total number of men invalided during the year was 27. H. M.'s 18th Regiment N. I. POONA.72 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1876... Deesa... 81.1 2.5 0.4 1877... Do.... 63.6 1.9 ... 1878... Do.... 76.4 1.6 0.9 Average... 73.7 2.0 0.4 1879... Poona... 87.0 1.7 0.3 Location and movements. 1. The head-quarters and the Right Wing have been stationed at Poona since the 20th December 1878, the Left Wing arrived here on the 27th January 1879. The detachment of 103 men, which did jail guard duty at Tanna from 1st January to 31st December 1879, was relieved by a second detachment 102 strong during the year. Bodies of men were sent on duty to Tanna, Mahableshwur, Wai, Shirvell, Bhor, and Flying Columns to Saswad. The lines and their surround- ings. 2. The lines, which have been considered as ill suited for the accommodation of native soldiers, are still utilised by the men of the 18th. The venti- lation, which is effected through the tiled roof and doors, is considered very defective. The mud huts, which are without any plinths, leak freely73 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. "The death in the lines from gunshot wound was suicidal. The deceased appears to have seated himself on a raised earthen sleeping place with his back to the wall, and held the muzzle of the rifle with his left hand against the abdomen and pushed the trigger with his right toe. On entering his hut, about an hour after the event, the deceased was lying in a semi-recumbent position with his head supported by the right hand resting on the right shoulder. The left shoulder was resting against the wall, and the left arm, with the hand clenched, lying across the chest. The barrel of the rifle rested on the right thigh; the butt projected beyond the raised earth-work or sleeping place. The deceased's cotton jacket was much burnt in front. The wall against which the deceased was lying was broken as if by a heavy blow, which was doubtless the case, produced. by the bullet striking the spine about the 11th or 12th dorsal vertebræ, cutting it in two. There was no wound of exit. The integuments in the lower dorsal and upper lumbar regions were much ecchymosed. The deceased was removed to hospital and a post-mortem held in an empty ward. The skin from left nipple to umbilicus was severely scorched and abraded in two places. So also was the left wrist, which had one abrasion. The wound by which the bullet entered was situated about 1½ inch above the umbilicus and a little to the left of the median line. The splenic end of the stomach was perforated. The spleen itself was clean ruptured, and the left kidney disorganized and containing fragments of lead and splinters of bone near the 11th and 12th dorsal vertebræ. The bullet itself was found in the spinal canal of first and second lumbar vertebræ. The deceased had a syphilitic history, and having, as it is reported, lost his virility, made away with himself." Mortality, and its causes. 11. The mortality register notes altogether five deaths, i.e ., including one European officer. The causes are one from primary syphilis, one from pneumonia, one from gunshot wound of abdominal walls and viscera, and one is marked unknown. Epidemics. 12. No epidemics. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. The vaccination duties have been, I believe, carefully carried out. Nine males and six females were primarily vaccinated successfully. Thirty- eight recruits were vaccinated, but sixteen were failures. Invaliding, and its causes. 14. Thirty-two men were invalided. Of these, five were about 50 years of age, five between 40 and 50, one between 30 and 40, and 22 for physical disability. Requirements and recommen- dations. 15. As has been recommended periodically for the last three years, a latrine is required for the solitary cells used by the Regiment. Special observations and new experiences in treatment, sanita- tion, &c. 16. None. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The head-quarters of the Regiment has been stationed at Poona since December 1878; but during the year detachments have been constantly employed in the districts against dacoits. The lines are ill suited for the accommodation of sepoys, the ventilation is defective, and the huts, which are without any plinths, leak during the rainy season. The trench system of conservancy is used, and seems to answer satisfactorily. The hospital, which is admirably situated, was in good order, and the books written to date. The ventilation of the building is good, and the latrines and out-houses were kept scru- pulously clean. The general health of the Regiment was good, and the physique of the men generally compares favourably -with that of the other regiments stationed in Poona. Thirty-two men were invalided during the year. H. M.'s 22nd Regiment N. I. BELGAUM.74 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent to Average Strength present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1876... Baroda... 97.9 3.4 0.9 1877... Do.... 122.9 5.6 2.3 1878... Ahmedabad, Bombay, and Belgaum... 211.3 6.1 0.5 Average... 144.0 5.0 1.2 1879... Belgaum... 225.3 6.8 0.3 Location and movements. 1. The Regiment has been stationed in Belgaum during the past year. The lines, &c. 2. The lines have been described in previous reports. They are kept clean by doing away with covered drains and keeping down rank vegetation and thinning trees. The ventilation of the men's huts is good. Towards the east of the lines the ground is quite flat, and for some distance from them towards the Khanapur Road during the rains there was a perfect swamp, and in some places the ground was under water, the water reaching close to the latrines. Conservancy. 3. The same as last year. The latrines are kept clean, and McDougall's powder is freely used. Water-supply. 4. The water is obtained from several wells situated in and near the lines. The quality is fair, and there is always a plentiful supply through- out the year. Food and clothing. 5. Food is decidedly cheaper, and the price of grain is going down. The supply is good. Country vegetables are abundant in the bazaar. There is no change made in the clothing, except that two pairs of woollen socks have been issued to each sepoy. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments, &c. 6. The duties consist of the ordinary parades, guard mounting, and escort in charge of stores, treasure, &c. There is a "Talimkhana" in the lines. The duties have had no bad effect on the health of the men. The average number of nights in bed was during the past year 6.5. Hospital and its immediate sur- roundings, &c. 7. No changes have been made in the hospital and its surroundings. The single ward was often found to be insufficient, so that the front and back verandahs had to be utilised on several occasions. General health and phsique. 8. The general health of the Regiment showed no improvement on that of the previous year. The lowest number of sick at one time in hospital was 26 and the highest 60. The sickness can only be attributed to the heavy rainfall, viz., 53 inches during the year, to the before-mentioned swamp near the lines, which existed during and some time after the rains, and to the ground or subsoil water towards the east of the lines being so near the surface. With regard to the physique of the men it is on the whole good. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The geological formation of the station exercises a healthy effect on the climate. In most places the formation being "laterite," there is a ready escape of rain water. The atmosphere, however, is at times very chilly, and during the monsoon months it is damp and cold. About November until February an east wind prevails, giving rise to much sickness, viz., malarial fevers, rheumatism, neuralgia, liver and bowel complaints, and chest affections. Details of treated. 10. There were 1,343 admissions during the year. Of this number 659 were from malarial fevers, lung disease 69, venereal 52, scabies, which is very common in Belgaum, 40. There were only two cases of dysentery. There were two deaths in hospital, one from chronic diarrhPOONA DIVISION OP THE ARMY. 75 Epidemics. 11. There has been no epidemic in the Regiment, unless malarial fever may be said to have assumed the form of an epidemic during and immediately after the rains. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 12. Vaccination was carried out successfully: 29 children were vaccinated. There were no cases of re-vaccination. Invaliding, and its causes. 13. Sixty-one men were invalided for the following causes, viz., lung diseases 16, weak eye-sight 12, chronic rheumatism 6, general debility 6, perineal abscess 1, varicose veins 2, old and worn-out 15, deafness 1, hypertrophy of heart 1, and old dislocation 1. Requirements and recommen- dations 14. A separate ward for the treatment of special cases is required. The drainage of the site below and to the east of the lines should be attended to. Special observations, sanitation, &c. 15. I have no remarks to make under this heading. Inspection by Deputy Surgeon-General BEATTY. The hospital and lines were at time of inspection well kept, and the latrines carefully attended to. Both the Commanding and Medical Officers drew particular attention to the swampy nature of the ground to the east of the lines, which during the rains was in some places quite under water. It was owing to the malarious state of the ground in the vicinity of the lines that the want of improvement in the health of the Regiment generally was attributed. The number of sick in hospital throughout the year was never below 26 and reached as high as 60, the chief cause of admission being malarial fever. I was particularly struck with the splendid physique of the recruits who had lately been enlisted. 23rd Regiment N. L. I. AHMEDNAGAR.76 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. On the west side is the regimental bazaar; on the south-west and in close proximity is the city. Some of the pendals are raised on a plinth, others are not; but from the nature of the ground there is no soakage from below, and they are never damp. The married men's quarters are provided with bathing places of pucka brick and chunam; the water is collected in proper receptacles outside and at once removed. Conservancy. 3. The conservancy of the lines is good; the regimental latrines are kept clean, and are used throughout the year, as from the position of the lines and nature of the soil in camp it would be impossible to use trench latrines. Water-supply. 4. The lines are supplied from the Kapurwaree aqueduct. The water is of good quality and sufficient in quantity. Food 5. A good and plentiful supply is always to be had in the city or regimental bazaar, and although dear, the sepoy need not want, as he gets good grain compensation. Duties,exercise and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. The duties are ordinary regimental ones and guard on the jail and treasury. The gymnasium has now been opened, and a great many men and boys are exercised there. Hospital and its immediate Surroundings; present condition, hygienic or otherwise. 7. The hospital, situated to the south of the lines, is in good repair. The building runs north and south, and is built on a good plinth. It consists of one large ward, with a small separate ward by the verandah on the north side being closed in. There is a separate building in the compound, well suited for a contagious disease ward. The hospital affords sufficient room for the sick. The latrine is connected with the main buildings by a covered way, but is, I think, too near, and not on such a good plan as it might be. General health and physique. 8. The health of the Regiment has improved very much since its arrival at this station. The general physique of the men is good. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The climate of Ahmednagar, which is dry and free from malarial influence, has had a most beneficial effect on the health of the men after their long stay in Rajpootana and Central India. The climate is, I consider, favourable to the health of Europeans. In the hot weather, which lasts from March till June, there are some hot days, but as a rule the nights and mornings are cool and refreshing. During the rains the climate is all that could be wished for; the cold weather is also very pleasant, but to some trying, owing to the variations of temperature being frequent and great. Rainfall during the year was 27 inches 16 cents. Details of treated. 10. The returns for the year under report contrast favourably with those of former years. The admissions for the year were 696. Of these, 335 were for fevers, the months of August, September, and October giving the highest number. Venereal comes next. These diseases have been very prevalent in the Regiment at this station. Soon after the Regiment arrived, the Lock Hospital was closed, and the prostitutes of the city, who had been under supervision by the Contagious Diseases Act, became neglected, and venereal became very prevalent. These women were not taken on the register again till November. DiarrhSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 77 SIND DIVISION. Average Strength present during the year... 3,110 Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength present... 4.8 Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength present... 1.8 1st Sind Horse. JACOBABAD.78 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 1878. 1879. Flour 11 seers per rupee. 7 or 8 seers per rupee Ghee 1½ SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 79 secondary syphilis, and 2 of bubo were treated during the year. Scurvy caused 11 admis- sions, but this is no indication of the prevalence of the disease, as only those who suffer from a severe form of the complaint are admitted into hospital. Mortality, and its causes. 9. There were nine deaths from cholera amongst the men stationed at the posts between Jacobabad and Dozan Mullah, and one caused by diarrh80 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Conservancy. 3. The dry-earth system of conservancy is carried out. as far as practicable, and this is found to answer very well. Water-supply. 4. The water-supply is good. Food and clothing. 5. Food is plentiful, but dearer in price than in former years. Vegetables are plentiful during the season, but scurvy is at the same time a very com- mon complaint. This is due to the fact that some of the men, through motives of economy, do not live on a sufficiently liberal and varied diet. The cloth- ing is all that could be desired Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. In previous reports I have dwelt on the want of gymnastic training for the recruits and young sowars of this Regiment. This important subject, closely bearing on the physical improvement of the soldier, does not seem to have received that attention which it deserves. Hospital and its surroundings. 7. The hospital has been recently repaired, and affords sufficient accommodation throughout the year. The sanitary condition of the surround- ings is satisfactory. A mud building (of no great importance) situated in front of the hospital, and shutting out all the available breeze, should be demolished. General health and physique. 8. The general health of the Regiment is good. The physique of the rising genera- tion of the Sind horsemen will greatly improve if the systema- tic course of gymnastic training which I have over and over again recommended in my annual reports were adopted. Under existing circumstances, the physique must remain undeveloped. Influence of climate or local cir- cumstances on health. 9. This climate being highly malarious, and the Regiment being permanently located at this station, the men are constantly exposed to the ill effects of malaria. Details of treated. 10. The majority of cases under treatment were of a malarious nature, and the usual remedy employed in these cases was the mixed cinchona alkaloid. For neuralgia of a malarious nature, I have found the combination of bromide of potassium and liquor morphia with the quinine mixture to be most efficacious. Buboes are now never opened by me with a bistoury, as is usually the custom; for in these instances the wound which results takes a long time in healing, months instead of weeks, owing to the endemic constitution of the patients. I have experienced good results by treating the bubo in the suppurating stage by simply passing a few horse- hair with a suture needle, in the same way as a seton, in the long axis of the glands, and letting the matter draw through this; the bubo is then covered with lint soaked in carbolic oil, and the horse-hair drain is removed after a week or so, when a pad and bandage is applied for a few days, at the end of which time recovery is usually complete. Mortality, and its causes. 11. Four deaths from pneumonia, one from sunstroke, one from debility, one from stricture (chronic), two from cholera, two from drowning, one from diarrhSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 81 3rd Regiment N. I. HYDRABAD, SIND.82 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT FOR THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Water-supply. The water is pumped by steam power from the river Indus into a tank. From thence it passes along a covered aqueduct 2½miles in length, to be again pumped on to the Cantonment level. In this way the suspended matters83 SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. reasons. The Cantonment stands on a plateau, with a sudden but not very considerable drop to low ground covered with trees. During the height of the river, this ground is purposely swamped in order to nourish the trees. The river subsides, and this water gradually runs off. During the months Of September, October, and November ague prevailed almost as an epidemic. This season was divisable into three periods, merging into each: 1st. 84 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. From this it appears that the Mussulmans are generally less liable to disease than the Hindoos. The most noticeable points are their comparative immunity from ague, diseases of the alimentary canal, and particularly rheumatic affections, while the great preponderance of syphilitic affections over the Hindoo forms a marked contrast to this. No doubt these dif- ferences depend greatly on the religious observances of the Hindoos. Within 15 minutes after a parade which has thoroughly heated them, numbers of men may be seen pouring cold water over their naked bodies quite irrespective of any cold wind blowing. It is easy to see how such chills must predispose to ague and rheumatic affections. Again, after going twice to stool, it is necessary to wash the feet in cold water, a custom which must be exceedingly injurious to a man suffering from diarrhSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 85 Invaliding, and its causes. 14, Thirty-two men were invalided during the year. The causes were as follows:86 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. in such cases as were of formidable character: the fact that recurrences took place is not therefore to be wondered at:87 SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Years. Stations. Rate per cent. to Average Strength present of Admissions. Daily Sick. Deaths in Hospital. 1876... Belgaum... 187.7 3.7 ... 1877... Poona... 139.7 3.1 0.8 1878... Do.... 153.3 3.6 0.6 Average... 160.2 3.4 0.4 1879... Kurrachee... 138.0 3.0 1.2 Location and movements. 1. During 1879 the Regiment had been at Kurrachee. Detachments were sent (1) soon after arrival to Hydrabad; (2) a detachment with the Commissioner's Camp; (3) a large detachment to Sukkur; and (4) a detachment of 1½ companies to Jacobabad. There were also volunteers sent to the Transport Train. The lines and their surround- ings; present condition, hygienic or otherwise. 288 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 27th (or 1st Belooch) Regiment N. L. I. JACOBABAD.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 89 mortem, room has also been erected at a short distance. In addition, during the year, an isolated building adjacent to the hospital was used, by permission, for a case of small-pox, and is still retained for the reception of infectious cases. Instead of the usual plan of build- ing a mud hut or of having a tent pitched some distance from the hospital, the use of a suitable building adjacent to the hospital is much to be preferred. A stricter watch can thus be maintained to prevent communication between its occupants and outsiders: an extra guard is not necessary; the advantage to the sick is obvious; and, above all, it is always ready for the immediate reception of such cases. The hospital wards are heated by large iron stoves; the supply of wood-fuel being abundant, any temperature that is thought advisable can be maintained. This is an advan- tage of no small consideration in a climate where the contrasts of temperature are so great and sudden. General health and physique. 8. Appears to have been fair; but the average daily sick was 3.3 in excess of the pre- vious year. The men are well proportioned, of good physique, and about the average in height. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Rainfall slight; no floods; malaria comparatively decreased. Exposure on out- post duty caused a few cases of insolation. There are no civil arrangements for the suppression of contagious disease in Jacobabad. Details of treated. 10. Total number admitted 799, as compared with 993 in 1878, showing a decrease of nearly two hundred. This was entirely due to the lessened exposure to malaria, the admissions for 1878 showing the large figure of 605 cases of ague as compared with 340 of 1879. Flooding, which was universal in the former year, was absent in the latter. There was a slight increase in diseases of the respiratory system and for blistered feet. Digestive system parallel, and a very marked increase in diseases of the cutaneous system and abscess. The admissions for the three items, abscess, boils, and ulcer, were collectively 130, as against 51 in the previous report. A case of death was attributed to ulcer, but the records do not state its location or nature. Contu- sions show a decrease of nearly two-thirds. There were eight cases of sunstroke, none of which proved fatal. Admissions for pri- mary syphilis were double those of 1878. Those for secondary syphilis much less. In all twenty-seven primary and nine secondary were admitted during the year. Out of these it was found necessary to send six on sick leave. The admissions for gonorrh90 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. CABUL EXPEDITION. Average Strength present during the year... Average Daily Sick per cent. to the Average Strength present... Ratio of Mortality per cent. to the Average Strength present... Sappers and Miners. AFGHANISTAN.CABUL EXPEDITION. 91 I think in the hot and scorching months in Afghanistan, the red tunic and blue serge trousers are ill adapted to the requirements. Khakee, as it is in use in these parts, would be most useful, and if of a chocolate colour would not need washing often. In the winter the men should have warm clothes, bedding, &c. Duties, exercise, and amuse- ments; their effect on health. 6. In addition to the ordinary military duties, the men of Nos. 2 and 5 companies were employed during the year in making the roads and build- ings in the Bolan Pass. As for amusements there has been scarcely any. Hospital, &c. 7. None. General health and physique. 8. The general health is anything but good; about 50 per cent. are of poor stamina, weakly, and debilitated. The sick rate has been high, and the numbers to be invalided. for unfitness for further service will probably be great. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The circumstances which appear to act prejudicially on the health of the corps are: (a ) food; (b ) duties; (c ) quarters; (d ) dress; (e ) water, all of which have been alluded to in the preceding paragraphs. Details of treated. 10. The most prevalent diseases were ague, of which nearly three hundred. cases were treated. Diseases of the lung furnished 55 cases, contusions of the upper and lower extremities gave about 116 cases; mus- cular and chronic rheumatism, dysentery, and diarrh92 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. weather the openings are closed to a certain extent with salitas, &c. Detachments, &c., have as a rule been in tents. Conservancy. 3. The trench system of latrines has been used during the year, and answers very well; care is also taken that the men do not resort to the surrounding country. Rubbish is burnt. Water-supply. 4. At the halting places on the line of march the water varied in quality: at most of them it was very good and pure, while at some few others it was somewhat brackish. At Khooshdil Khan the water is obtained from water-courses, which run through the camp, and which have their origin some three or four miles distant. During the summer the diarrh93 CABUL EXPEDITION. The Regiment marched out of Quetta en route to the front on January 1st without a man in hospital, four only being left behind sick, and there were no admissions into hospital up to the time of the Regiment reaching Kandahar. On the arrival of the Regiment there it was medically inspected, and the inspecting Officer remarked "that it was the first Regiment he had ever inspected in which he had not sent men into hospital from the ranks." From the 1st January to 31st March, during which time the Regiment was continually on the march, and fought an action, and for two weeks during the period had only 4/5 5 and ½ 9/6 minimum nights in bed respectively, the rate per cent. of daily sick was 2.2 per cent. The chief causes of admissions during the period were fever, wounds received in action, and diseases of the respiratory system. From 1st April to 30th June the rate was 3.0 per cent. From 1st July to 30th September the rate was 5.1 per cent., and during the period fever, diarrh94 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The unhealthy months in Beluchistan and Afghanistan were July, August, September, and part of October. During these months fever, diarrh95 CABUL EXPEDITION. Horse was attacked, and the first case among the sowars occurred on 25th August. The Regiment was moved into cholera camp on the 24th August, six cases having occurred up to that date; after removal 21 cases occurred, the last case being on 1st September, making a total of 10 cases and 4 deaths among the fighting men, and a total of 17 cases and 10 deaths among the followers. The Regiment returned to its former quarters on the 16th September. Six cases and five deaths occurred among the men, and 3 cases and 3 deaths among the followers on detachment and outpost duty. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 13. As the Regiment has been on service during the year no vaccinations have been performed at head-quarters, but vaccination has been carried out at the depôt. Invaliding, and its causes. 14. Five men were invalided during the year; their diseases were as follows:96 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Location and movements. 1. Has been on service all the year. The head-quarters having left Jacobabad in February and the wing Sukkur in March, has been broken up into small detachments along the line of communications from Jacobabad to Quetta, with escort parties in movement all the year. Head-quarters were from April to end of June at Mach; then at Dozan till the end of September; in Quetta during October, and then back to Ser-i-Bolan for November and December. No account can be given of movement of detachments, as there was seldom more than 200 men with head-quarters, the remainder of the Regiment being employed at different parts of the Bolan and Kutchee, and always in movement. Food and clothing. 2. The quantity of rations issued to native troops during the present campaign has been fully ample, though in my opinion it should have been of better quality and more varied in character, more especially in the case of the men under my immediate notice, who are always accustomed to the consumption of meat, fish, and condiments. As it was, during the greater part of last year the Regiment was located in the Bolan Pass, where there were no facilities for the men to vary their diet from private resources, and consequently scorbutic affections were greatly prevalent. I would suggest that in place of the daily issue of 4 ozs. dhal, that 6 ozs. of meat should be given twice weekly and 6 ozs. of dried fish on one day. Also that a small quantity of native condiments should be allowed in the daily ration, and that some anti-scorbutic, such as tamarind, might be given, at least twice a week, in places where vegetables are unobtainable. If the ration sanctioned for Bombay troops serving at Aden had been issued to the troops in this campaign, I am fully convinced that their efficiency would have been greatly increased, for, putting on one side admissions into hospital from fever and ague, which one must always look to amongst native troops, more than a fourth of the other men admit- ted were with affections of scorbutic origin. I do not imagine that the Aden ration is much more expensive than the one issued to our men, for the quantity of each article is not so large. Altogether the total quantity in each case is about the same. I would also suggest that when native troops are largely employed on road-making and field works that a bi-weekly issue of rum or arrack should be made, as the improvement in the health of the Regiment during November and December, when this issue was made, was most marked. The present system of clothing the Bombay troops is, in my opinion, most faulty, the tight-fitting red tunic and cloth trousers being quite unfitted for the wear and tear of field service, putting out of the question the extra work it entails on the men to keep them in repair and clean. I would recommend that all troops serving in the field should have two suits of strong khakee or sail cloth, the coat to be made in the shape of a loose blouse and the trousers to be a modified form of knickerbocker, very loose about the hips and thighs, and to button tight from below the knee to the ankle. The advantages that may be claimed for having the clothes made loose are that the movements of the body are unimpaired, that they are cool in the hot weather, and permit of the wearer putting on all his warm under-clothing in the winter, which the present red coat does not without undue tightness over the chest. With regard to the different kinds of boots and shoes in use in the Native Army, I consider the English ammunition boots in a modified form to be the best, but I would suggest that a different system should be adopted in their make to suit the native foot, which is broader and lower in the instep than that of a European. I have noticed that those men who have had ammunition boots that fitted properly have suffered less from shoe-bite than any other, as the leather is so superior to any prepared in this country, that the boots do not become hard and unpliable, as those made of country leather do, both during the pre- valence of hot winds and wet weather. The warm clothing issued has been fully sufficient for any cold that has been experi- enced, but I think that an extra blanket per man should be carried by the Regiment in case of any necessity for camping out or very severe cold being experienced. With regard to the warm clothes issued to the followers, I would state the native cumblees which are given them are, in my opinion, utterly useless, as from the openness of the texture they cannot possibly either keep out the cold or prevent the natural heat of the body escaping. The same remarks also applying to the trousers with which many of the followers were supplied, as from being made of cumblee they were open to the same objections. The wadded coat and trousers were, however, all that could be desired. I would recommend that all followers should be supplied with stockings similar to the sepoy's, and that more care should be taken in the selection and fitting of the shoes issued, which were in most cases of the very poorest description, quite unfitted to withstand the wear of marching, and falling to pieces in a few days. To show how badly the followers have been treated with regard to the coverings for their feet, I may mention that 35 out of 40 dooly-
CABUL EXPEDITION. 97 bearers with a detachment were admitted into hospital, suffering from frost-bite in a more or less degree after three marches through snow, Government being thus put to the expense of paying and feeding these men, who are laid up for months, which a very small expenditure in the beginning would have avoided. Duties and exercise. 3. Mostly employed on escort duty, conveying stores, &c., from Jacobabad to Quetta, and furnishing the guards at the different posts in Kutchee and the Bolan Pass. About 300 men were employed in connection with the rest of the brigade in making the road through the Bolan, and opening up the surrounding country. The work the men have had to do has been very severe, more especially those on escort and at the small stations, where they had to do sentry duty daily: in fact the average nights in bed have been less than two per week during the year (for the whole Regiment). This amount of work in connection with the indifferent food they obtained has naturally rendered the Regiment very sickly, and the mortality has been very great, though not so large as many of the regiments on this campaign. General health and physique. 4. The physique of the Regiment itself is good, but unfortunately when proceeding on service 238 volunteers from other regiments were sent to make it up to a war footing. Of these some 50 were of very inferior physique, and quite unfitted for active service, and have, in fact, spent the greater part of the year in hospital and have been a very large factor in the number of admissions. The health of the Regiment has been bad, owing, as stated above, to the hard work and bad food, but has much improved during the last three months, since the work has been lighter and the quality of the rations improved. It is now, taken as a whole, in very fair condition, and if a fair supply of vegetables are obtainable in the spring, will most probably quite recover from the hardships of last year. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 5. The climate in the upper part of the Bolan is good, but at Mach below, the heat from April to October is intense, and is very trying to men obliged to live in tents. Since October the weather has been quite European. Details of treated. 6. Intermittent fever has naturally given the largest number of admissions, namely, 1,117; remittent fever shows 20, and tertian and quartan ague 2 and 5 respectively. Scurvy and its concomitants, ulcers, and Sind boils come next on the list with 242. Then dysentery, from which there have been 172 admissions and 9 deaths, and simple diarrh98 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. as there was only a medical subordinate at the station, and he had charge of the whole of the Transport and Commissariat followers, who were dying at the rate of twenty or thirty a day. There were seven deaths amongst the men of the Regiment at Dadur and the neighbour- hood, and one at head-quarters at Mach and two at Abigoom, about seven miles away. The man who died at head-quarters, and who was the only man attacked, had only rejoined from Dadur the very day that the disease broke out there. The two cases at Abigoom occurred amongst part of the detachment which had been at Dadur, and which was being moved slowly up the Pass, the number of men there having been reduced as much as possible. It was a most wonderful thing that the Regiment had so few cases, as the disease was raging to a fearful extent amongst the Transport Train followers all along the line of com- munication, and our men were travelling with the daily train of carts and also guarding the stages where the train halted, so that they were in continual danger of being infected. When the disease broke out at Dadur, I was ordered down the Pass to look after the Transport people, and do what I could for them; but as I had no establishment and no cholera medicines of any kind, in fact hardly any, I could do very little, and as there were strict orders that the daily train of carts with supplies for the front was to move at any cost, it was an impossiblity to prevent the disease reaching Quetta and subsequently Kandahar, where its ravages were tremendous. Requirements and recommen- dations. 9. I would beg to call attention here to the almost useless character of the sick carriage of a Bombay regiment. When leaving Sukkur the regiment received 10 per cent. of so-called dandies and dooly-bearers. The dandies are simply a piece of canvas about 7 feet long and 18 inches wide, suspended from a bamboo. This canvas has no sides, and it is very difficult for a man in health to keep from falling out of it when carried over ground at all rough, and consequently far more so for a wounded or sick man, besides being a most uncomfortable means of conveyance, as the weight of the hips and buttocks causes the canvas to bag in the centre with the feet and head at a much higher level than the rest of the body. The only advantage it possesses being its lightness. The so-called dooly-bearers were simply labourers of all kinds, domestic servants, syces, &c., who for the sake of the good pay and rations enlisted for the campaign, but of the 370 odd men who were sent to the Regiment, I do not think that more than a dozen had ever seen, much less carried, a dooly. Besides, numbers of them were quite unfitted for service, many being old, grey-headed men, and others quite small boys. Also, having been enlisted in a great hurry and sent off in batches to join the Regiment without any proper arrange- ments being made about their pay or family remittance, they caused an immense amount of labour in the Paymaster's office. I would recommend that the Looshaie dandy be taken as the pattern, as it possesses all the advantages of the dooly, as far as having an even surface for the patient to lie on; and having four short legs, it can be used as a temporary bed, as it can be easily and quickly detached from its pole, and so does not take up much room in a tent. The Hamilton is the best form of dooly, as it is very light, strong, and packs into a small compass when not in actual use. With regard to bearers, if Government would only sanction the maintenance of a regular corps, as in Madras, there would not be the same difficulty, as at present, in furnishing sick carriage, nor would the expense be any greater, as the bearers in time of peace would be always of use in the Commissariat and Ordnance Departments, and take the place of other hired labourers, besides being far more effective in time of war than the present system of employing untrained men. Invaliding, and its causes. 10. Twenty men have been sent on sick leave, most of them suffering from scurvy or anæmia, ten have been pensioned, four of these being men of over 32 years' service; one case of insanity was pensioned from the Lunatic Asylum, and four for general debility; one man was discharged who had never joined the Regiment, only having reached Kurrachee; cause of discharge unknown. Special treatment. 11. No special treatment has been practised, as the only medicines I had were those supplied with the field chests. I would suggest that a liberal allowance of neutral quinine for hypodermic injection should always be supplied, as it takes very little space, and is very effective in treatment.
99 CABUL EXPEDITION. H. M.'s 19th Regiment N. I. BOLAN PASS.100 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Kassim-ke-Joke the supply was by a canal from the Nari, but on the banks on either side is a considerable village not tending to improve the quality of the water. At Bagh and Hajee-ke-Sher the supply was from the river Nari I am unable to give my opinion as to the water-supply along the route by which the head-quarters marched, not having seen any of the stations. Dadur is on an alluvial plain between the Chota Bolan and the Belooch and Murree Hills. It is about two miles from the entrance of the Bolan Pass. The camp consists of a mud enclosure or fort, in which are the Commissariat stores, and adjacent to it transport lines, &c., and a bazaar. At a distance of a mile is a rest-house and camping ground for troops. Between these the ground is intersected by irrigation ditches, and from these the drinking water-supply is obtained. In the absence of sufficiently stringent conservancy rules, any one familiar with the habits of the natives or ignorant people of any nationality will understand how liable such a water-supply is to dangerous pollution. The Bolan Pass, which extends from Dadur to Dasht, is a deep cleft, the result of denu- dation through the limestone and conglomerate hills of Beluchistan, and in its bed is the Bolan River, which, rising from a perennial rock spring in the Dozan Nullah, disappears fre- quently in the deep shingly bed of the upper part of the Pass, but is a stream of varying breadth and depth from Kirta downwards, and at Dadur is about 40 feet broad by 2 feet deep. The Pass varies considerably in width, spreading out into a wide plain between South Kirta and Mach, and again between Mach and Lower Dozan, but the rest is a narrow glen, and in parts between Kundilani and South Kirta, and in the neighbourhood of Dozan, it is of only some 30 or 40 yards width. The scene is generally bleak and barren, for there are few trees on the hills, and no cultivation except at Kirta. The hills, which rise to a height of some 5,000 or 6,000 feet, or even in a few cases up to 10,000 feet above sea level, are rugged, precipitous, and with numerous boulders and shingle, but with a considerable amount of grass. There is but little brushwood, and in this dry climate no rank vegetation which could be a source of malaria. But in most parts of the Pass the ground is cut up by nullahs, a possible source of malaria in wet weather. The topographical features of the country show the action of mountain torrents, which are apparently produced by the rapid collection of the rainfall or melted snow from the steep hill-sides and from the numerous and extensive glens which open into the Bolan. There does not appear to be evidence of a long rainy season, but rather of a brief but heavy fall rapidly running off. The soil of the Pass consists chiefly of deep gravel beds, with here and there alluvial deposits, and is dry and wholesome. The climate varies in different parts and at different seasons. In the lower parts it resembles that of Dadur, which is intensely hot in the hot weather, so much so, that I believe the inhabitants generally migrate to the highlands. At Dozan, which is at an altitude of some 5,600 feet, the heat in tents in the hot weather reached 112°, but the nights were cool, and in properly constructed houses the climate would not have been considered very hot. In the cold weather the thermometer falls to some 15° Fahr. at nights, and there is a daily range of some 30 or 40 degrees. In November and December the thermometer fell below freezing point on thirty-seven occasions. The air in the cold weather is generally dry, fresh, and bracing, and hence pedestrian exercise, which in Bombay is a trouble and only performed as a duty, is here spontaneously resorted to. The sun, however, at noon is hot. The water-supply in the Pass is from the Bolan River, a clear sparkling stream of rather hard water, and therefore tending to the development of dyspeptic complaints. The Dozan Nullah branches off from the Bolan Pass at Lower Dozan. At a distance of two miles from this place the nullah widens to about 1,000 yards, and on the western side of this on a slope is the camp of Upper Dozan. The bed of the Dozan Nullah is shingle, and the hills are of the usual barren, stony appearance, with a sprinkling of stunted trees and shrubs. With the exception of the rough and irregular surface of the ground, which in a wet season might retain water and be a possible source of malaria, there is nothing morbific in the situation. Speaking generally, then, the stations in the Bolan Pass, or at all events those in the upper part, if in well selected positions, should be healthy; there is nothing in the configura- tion of the country or in the soil to originate disease. The effect of prolonged residence under the condition of soldiers on a campaign will be referred to further on. The Regiment has been under canvas during the whole of the year. The tents are sepoys' pals; Bengal pattern, and accommodate 44 men. This would be overcrowding but that many of the occupants are constantly absent on guard or other duty. The slope on which the camp is situated has been cut into terraces, and on these the tents are pitched. As a protection from the cold, biting winds which blow in the cold season, walls 8 feet high have been built on three sides of the terraces. The subsoil is dry; there is nothing to interfere with the free movement of air, and there is nothing insanitary in the surroundings.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996841.tif] CR. Phillipps, Lient 19th Reqt. Bo: N.1. 27th 1880.
CAMP 19th ReBo. N. I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74996844.tif] R. Philliphs, Leirt 19th Reqt. Bo:No.1. January 27th 1880.
CABUL EXPEDITION. 101 Conservancy. 3. Latrines are dug in a deep ravine to the rear and leeward of the camp. They are at a distance of 600 yards from the water-supply, and in a safe position. Water-supply. 4. The water-supply is from the Dozan rivulet, which springs from rock some 600 yards up a small nullah, which joins the Dozan Nullah about 600 yards from the camp. From this spot it is carried in a channel in the shingle on the left side of the nullah for some 500 yards, and then by an aqueduct to Lower Dozan in the Bolan Pass. The water is clear and sparkling, but rather hard. A small Brahoi outpost of some three or four men occupy a cave102 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. Malarial fevers are prevalent in Jacobabad, and probably the whole country thence to Dadur is also feverish after the rainy season. The Regiment marched from Jacobabad to Dadur in January, when probably febrile influences are slight, but nevertheless a large proportion of the sick were cases of ague, of which perhaps a portion were the result of a malarious taint contracted at Sholapur and Hydrabad in Sind. In the Bolan Pass the health was good until May, when the causes above mentioned came into operation. I am unable from per- sonal observation to give any opinion as to the climate of Dozan during the hot weather, but in the cold weather it appears to be healthy. It is not malarious, and the air is pure, brac- ing, and dry, but in new-corners the usual effects of altitude (as at Mahableshwur) are observ- able. Europeans here have a fresh, ruddy complexion, favourably contrasting with the washed-out appearance of Anglo-Indians. The jaundice, which gave so many admissions, was probably due to catarrh of the bileducts, the result, as was also the disorder of the stomach and bowels many of the men complained of, of hard water. There is a constant tendency to the development of scurvy except during the fruit season. On the whole I think that Dozan would be a healthy station for troops if properly clothed, housed, and fed, and if they had some means of amusement. Details of treated. 10. There were 1,612 admissions as compared with 1,244 in the preceding year, when the Regiment was stationed at Kurrachee. Fevers gave 645 admissions, which is less than in the preceding year. Diseases of the digestive system were prevalent, diarrhCABUL EXPEDITION. 103 Requirements and recommen- dations. 15. On field service a Regiment is much broken into detachments; some increase of the hospital establishment is therefore desirable. When this Regiment was ordered on field service the Medical Officer was ordered to indent for dandies at the rate of 10 per cent. of strength; bearers 4 per dandy, and a certain proportion of muccadums. This amount of sick carriage would not have been superfluous if the Regiment had been sickly on the march or been engaged with the enemy. In a country where local carriage is not obtainable, and where, as for instance when we left Dozan, it may be impossible to leave any sick behind, sick carriage should be provided for at least five per cent. of strength. Dandies, though in some respects and for some cases objectionable, are from their lightness preferable to doolies. The doolies we have weigh about 140 lbs., and I have found that six ordinary bearers will not carry a sick man over a march of ten miles or more in good time; they eventually straggle in, but the sick are on the road without proper food, medicines, or attendance for a length of time, which must be more or less injurious. There should be, I think, eight bearers per dooly, and six per dandy, and 5 per cent. to replace those who may fall sick. The bearers should be carefully selected men. Many of those sent up to this Regiment in December are not strong enough to carry a dooly or dandy. The field panniers are excellent, but would be improved if iron rings were attached to them, by which they could, by means of ropes, be slung on a mule. The straps and buckles get soon worn out. I regret the incompleteness of this report, which, however, is unavoidable, as I had not an opportunity of obtaining from Surgeon-Major Cates any details from which to supplement the facts in the hospital records. It has seemed to me right to compile a report, however imperfect, of the Regiment during the year as a contribution towards the medical history of the campaign. 16. The hospital establishment has worked well since I took charge of the Regiment, and I beg to bring to notice the energy and ability of Hospital Assistant Gopal Cuddum. H. M'.s 30th Regiment N. I. QUETTA.104 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The officers' tents were on the Miri (citadel) and the men were on lower ground. On the 1st of April the officers and men moved into barracks which they were occupying when the year closed. On the outbreak of cholera in the cantonment in June last, the men left barracks and lived under canvas about 600 yards to the north of the barracks. At the same time the hospital was removed about a mile and a half away from the barracks, in the direction of the Hanna Pass, to good high ground, very near a flowing stream of clear water issuing from the Pass. In September the men returned to barracks after the latter had been thoroughly disinfected and whitewashed. The hospital also was removed into cantonment in October. The barracks are made of kutcha bricks with mud-plastered walls and roofs. The men's quarters consist of eight separate blocks facing north and south, in parallel rows of four, with a passage 22 feet wide between. Between each block there is a space of 50 feet. Each block is divided into two compartments by a central wall reaching to the roof and has six doors 6 feet X 3 feet and a verandah with twelve arches on either side. There is no communication between the two divisions. Each division is again sub-divided into two by a massive arch. Each sub-division is 23 feet long, 9 feet broad, and 10 to 12 feet high, and has one fireplace. The cubic space of each block, roughly speaking, is about 10,000 cubic feet. There is a small room at the eastern end of each compartment for a non-commissioned officer. A block and a half on the southern side are used for the hospital. At the western end of each block there are separate roomy, well-ventilated quarters with verandahs and enclosed backyards for native officers. At the southern side of the barracks are two sheds with arches for native followers. The arches are effectually closed against wind by means of mats. The quarter- guard, dispensary, and hospital assistants' quarters are entirely separate from the men's lines, and are situated to the north and south of the blocks, respectively. They are roomy with verandahs and glass-pane windows. The officers' quarters are 500 yards to the south-east of the lines. Each officer has a roomy house or a set of rooms with the necessary out-houses. The position of the lines is on very low ground. Seen from the Kakur village, which lies to the north, the whole cantonment appears to be situated in the basin of the valley. Coming down from Siriab into the cantonment the descent is notably marked. There is plenty of open space all round the men's lines; ventilation is therefore as free as it could possibly be in lines built on the system of parallel rows of blocks. Near the officers' quarters there is an extensive orchard of mulberries, apricots, and almonds. The ground in the immediate vicinity of the camp is in a satisfactory state; that at the distance of about two miles to the north, by sheer force of unavoidable circumstances, is the graveyard of many a hundred of camels and men. The latter condition requires particular mention on account of the position of the cantonment on low ground, where in times of rain and snow water accumulates, or at any rate passes through. The running nullahs under such circum- stances act as drains of surface water or sub-soil water permeating the higher burial ground. Conservancy 3. The conservancy arrangements in the Regiment are carried out by means of sweep- ers. At one time the dry-earth system was carried out in trenches dug for latrines. Old trenches were filled up with dry earth thrown in daily in measured quantity, and new ones dug as the old ones were filled up. This practice being likely to cover in time a good deal of ground near the lines, was dispensed with before the close of the year, and a conservancy cart carried away morning and evening the collected excreta and sweepings of the barracks and hospital. This rubbish is buried miles away from the cantonment. The stable litter is made over to the P. W. Department for use in lime-kilns, or is burnt near the stables. There is no drainage system in Quetta. On either side of several roads in the cantonment and civil camp there are deep trenches for carrying away surface water. As a rule these are dry, except when it rains or snows. Permanent latrines would be a decided advantage if troops are to occupy Quetta for any length of years. No protection whatever from the inclemencies of winter is possible in enclosures of mats far removed from barracks and hospital. The inability of the Commis- sariat Department to procure earthen gumlahs and baskets here has interfered greatly with the conservancy arrangements of the hospital. Water-supply 4. Water is abundant in running streams and nullahs, which come down from the sur- rounding hills. Between the Kakur village and the lines there is a "karez" (subterranean water-course) running from south-east to north-west. There is a well 30 feet deep near the quarter-guard, from which several men in the lines draw their water, which though muddy is sweet, and clears on standing. This water is safer to a certain extent than the running water from surface nullahs as being less liable to contamination. The officers and others who do not object to the bhistee's water are supplied with it from a flowing spring issuing from the ground on the south-eastern side of the officers' quarters. To all external appearance the water is clear, crystal, and sweet. Whence the springs, which are perennial, derive their origin it is not possible to determine. As it flows, it has all
CABUL EXPEDITION. 105 the disadvantages of surface water. It is liable to contamination, especially when melting snow or a shower of rain washes down from the sides of hills all kinds of deleterious matter. Such surface water is rendered still more injurious during the hot weather when evaporation is rapid and increased, and water getting concentrated, is charged with a greater proportion of organic and inorganic and dissolved and suspended impurities. It is on account of this condition of the water, I believe, that in summer catarrhal diseases of the bowels prevail in larger numbers. I have myself made no analysis of the water, but I have no doubt it contains alkaline and other salts, judging from the thick white efflorescence left on patches of ground where water has collected and dried up. Along the sides of the nullahs which pass through the cantonment in various places a thick collection of this saline efflorescence is often noticeable; chlorides seem to be present in abundance, as a week solution of nitrate of silver produces milkiness in the water. Another and more frequent source of contamination of the nullah water is the innate desire of all the lower classes of the natives of washing themselves in the streams, whenever and wherever they can do so, observed or unobserved, without the slightest regard as to who the future user of the water will be. In times of epidemics, and in the case of men affected with diseases like dysentery, washing themselves in the nullahs after depositing their excreta close by, such thoughtless and culpable fouling of water assumes a very grave aspect. If the purposes of irrigation require the nullahs to be kept up, they should be deep and not quite readily accessible for the purposes of ablution. But by far the best way of storing water to ensure a perenniel supply is to dig wells in the vicinity of the streams, and thus effectually stop all chance of fouling. Food supply. 5. Men draw compensation from Government instead of the rations as per Field Service Scale. In a station like Quetta, where provisions are procura- ble, though at advanced prices, the system of compensation is an advantage, especially as regards atta. The Commissariat atta from the very nature of the surrounding circumstances is some- times very old, and although it may not be mouldy or otherwise injurious, it is often bitterish and oily to the taste. The sepoy prefers purchasing atta in the bazaar. The water-mills worked at this station by the natives afford a ready means of obtaining fresh atta. With regard to the Field Service Scale of rations it may be remarked that condiments will not be an unwholesome addition to the native scale, whereas occasional issue of meat will counter- act the deteriorating effects of hard work in a foreign soil. Fruit is abundant in summer, and is of various kinds, such as mulberries, apricots, peaches, pears, quinces, apples, grapes of various sorts, pomegranates, almonds, &c. Raddishes, carrots, wild onion and garlic, and a variety of spinach, maize, barley, and wheat grow abundantly all round. The soil is so fertile that English vegetables thrive very well. It would doubtless be a very useful recreation for the men to set up a regimental garden. The soil is rich enough to reward any little labour or time expended on it. Vegetables are scarce in the bazaar, except in summer, yet, with a little well-directed labour the men in the Regiment can be supplied with greens at all times of the year by encouraging the establishment of regimental gardens. The willow, the poplar, and the dalbergia sissoo grow to a very great height here. Dandelion, varieties of fragrant lilies, and iris, dill, carraway, peppermint, and a variety of thyme grow wild all over the valley. Duties, exercise, and amusements. 6. The duties have been very heavy during the year. They consisted principally of guards in the station and escort between Dadur and Kandahar. Considering the whole regiment as a body, although the num- ber of nights in bed have been shown in the return as 3.5 on an average throughout the year106 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. for the most part under canvas since the beginning of 1878, the physique of the men has kept up fairly well. Hospital and its surroundings. 8. Described under para. 2. Influence of climate or local circumstances on health. 9. The valley of Quetta is situated 5,500 feet above sea level at latitude 30° 10' 50" and longitute 67° 2' 51". It extends north to south, and takes a bend eastward near the Fort. It covers a length of about thirty miles, and is from three to five miles broad. The extent of the hills around is from two to eight miles, presenting a bare surface of apparently burnt clay and rock. To the north runs the river Lora, cutting through the western portion of the valley and debouching over the Pisheen Valley. The several nullahs and water-courses in the valley of Quetta empty themselves into the Lora. The climate of Quetta is delightful to those who belong to the temperate zone. To the inhabitant of Hindustan proper and to the Sindhi and Dekkani Maratha it is quite otherwise in winter months. For him the snow, the frost, and the keen cutting winds are too much to bear, especially when on sentry duty. The thermometer ranged between 2° to 98° Farh. during the year, November being the month in which the lowest, and August the month in which the highest temperature was registered. The prevailing direction of the wind during the year was mostly W.N.W., in June it was S.S.W., and in November N.N.W. Small dust whirls and occasionally violent dust-storms prevail at midday and in the afternoon more or less throughout the year. Dur- ing winter months electric tension is so strong in this valley that brisk rubbing of woollen clothes or dry human hair elicits a series of electric sparks in the dark. Rainfall throughout the year is registered 2.86 inches, lasting twenty-two days between January and June. The habits of the various classes of natives forming the Regiment are not an unimpor- tant factor in the causation of disease. The Sindhi is proverbial for his filthy habits. Cutaneous diseases are therefore common among Sindhis. Their quarters require rigid and repeated supervision to bring them to the standard of ordinary cleanliness. The Hindu of Hindustan proper has a habit of eating one meal a day, during which he stuffs himself with a large quantity of unleavened bread and dhal. This is productive of disturbances of the alimentary canal. With regard to the influence of local conditions on the men, it may be observed that the Regiment is living here under several unfavourable circumstances. Fuel is extremely dear, and not easily procurable. One rupee and even more per maund is a prohibitive price. Milk, eggs, and meat are not easily to be purchased in the bazaar. This interferes materially with the diet of the sick. They have therefore to be fed at Government expense, where very serious cases require careful and substantial feeding. Venereal diseases, soft chancre, and gonorrhCABUL EXPEDITION. 107 number being between April and September. There were 96 cases of dysentery. Although only one death has been recorded from this affection, many a convalescent from ague, remittent fever, anæmia, or chronic rheumatism has been carried off by dysentery. Liver diseases are rare, there having been only 3 cases of congestion of the liver. There were only 12 admissions for jaundice, yet jaundice has frequently been a complication of catarrhal diseases of the bowels during the latter part of summer. Tænia solium is not an uncommon parasite to find in Beluchistan, although there is only one case recorded here. Kidney dis- eases seem to be rare. There were 10 admissions for gonorrh108 MEDICAL AND SANITARY REPORT OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. tion. Application has been made to the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Sind Division, for the supply of lymph. Even if lymph were available now, the call for duty is so pressing that men will not be easily available for the purposes of re-vaccination. But on opportunity presenting the doubtful cases will be attended to. Invaliding, and its causes. 14. One subedar-major, two havildars, and fifteen sepoys were invalided at the head- quarters. Of these one was over 35 years' service, two over 21 years', four over 15 years', six under 12 years', and the remaining five under 4 years'. Ten were invalided for general debility following repeated attacks of malarial fevers, chronic interstitial pneumonia, chronic dysentery, and chronic diarrhSTATEMENT.
110 STATEMENT Showing the SICKNESS, MORTALITY, and INVALIDING in the N.B.No. 1. 111 NATIVE ARMY of BOMBAY, for the Year 1879. in the Army List on the 1st of July 1879. INVALIDED. Discharged by Commanding Officers at their own request, &c. Desertion, struck off for bad conduct, &c. CONSTITUTION OF THE REGIMENT. Strength remaining on rolls on 31st December 1879. Average number of consecutive nights in bed. Number of Recruits joined during the year. REMARKS. Hindus. Mahomedans. Chris- tians. Others. Invalided for discharge. Discharged for physical disability. For change of climate. Strength. Died during the year. Strength. Died during the year. Strength. Died during the year. Strength. Died during the year. AND BOMBAY MARINE. 1 .. 4 ... 1 39 ... 61 1 ... ... ... ... 100 6.0 3 43 8 30 7 2 563 7 96 1 17 ... 1 ... 677 2.5 122 Includes Det. at Janjeera. 29 9 36 ... 12 445 7 223 3 23 ... 4 ... 695 3.9 83 Do. on Board the several steam-ships, &c. 28 1 39 ... 3 540 6 92 1 5 ... 7 ... 644 3.4 ... Do. at Perim. 36 12 57 ... 5 606 16 98 3 11 ... 10 ... 725 7.5 85 6 ... 1 ... ... 48 ... 3 ... 1 ... 1 ... 53 3.3 ... 143 30 167 7 23 2,241 36 573 9 57 ... 23 ... 2,894 4.4 293 DIVISION. 44 3 17 ... 2 266 3 196 ... 7 ... ... ... 469 9.5 46 9 1 5 4 7 97 ... 387 3 ... ... ... ... 484 10.7 14 5 ... ... ... ... 50 2 8 ... ... ... 5 ... 63 4.8 74 31 ... 24 8 4 535 4 105 2 16 ... 22 ... 678 4.1 56 Includes Dets. at Bombay and Assirghar. 53 20 17 1 9 582 7 73 4 1 ... 3 ... 659 5.9 146 35 1 14 ... 6 563 5 58 2 74 ... 16 ... 711 5.1 115 21 5 14 ... 9 678 25 93 1 10 ... 10 ... 791 7.0 137 24 3 10 ... 6 564 4 79 ... 18 ... 8 ... 669 4.8 57 Includes Det. at Kulladghee. 11 21 8 ... 3 639 3 46 1 11 ... 9 ... 705 4.9 150 Do. at Tanna. 60 1 15 9 8 479 3 90 ... 20 ... 14 ... 603 6.5 122 14 5 11 ... 3 519 6 131 1 19 ... 9 ... 678 5.7 75 307 60 135 22 57 4,972 62 1,266 14 176 ... 96 ... 6,510 6.2 992 DIVISION. 16 3 10 2 3 315 3 159 1 8 ... ... ... 482 9.4 53 Includes Det. at Nusseera bad. 10 ... 6 ... 3 314 2 163 ... 3 ... ... ... 480 5.4 38 Do. Squadron at Rajkot. 16 ... 2 3 1 23 2 9 ... ... ... 1 ... 33 4.0 5 29 1 24 3 1 525 14 66 ... 17 ... 21 ... 629 4.8 52 65 11 18 10 1 493 5 84 ... 22 ... 6 ... 605 5.2 84 50 1 13 ... 2 538 12 109 4 19 ... 5 ... 671 4.5 61 43 8 44 1 1 533 8 103 2 13 1 11 ... 660 7.6 62 32 2 3 2 ... 541 11 112 1 15 1 31 2 699 5.0 78 Includes Det. at Dwarka. 26 11 4 ... 8 554 4 88 1 3 ... 6 ... 651 6.0 69 Do. at Indore. 34 ... 17 1 4 581 15 69 1 12 ... 8 ... 670 4.5 48 Do. at Sadra. 22 1 35 1 5 604 10 85 1 11 ... 3 ... 703 6.8 75 10 5 5 ... 8 597 5 91 ... 21 ... 17 ... 726 7.7 74 Do. at Angar. 21 3 6 4 6 587 6 79 1 13 ... 3 ... 682 3.6 89 374 46 187 27 43 6,205 97 1,217 12 157 2 112 2 7,691 5.7 788 DIVISION. 12 2 16 7 8 62 ... 473 16 ... ... ... ... 535 4.2 103 15 7 13 3 2 75 ... 400 13 5 ... ... ... 480 4.0 46 30 2 33 ... ... 411 5 151 7 2 ... 130 ... 694 6.2 40 35 1 8 ... 7 642 2 124 10 7 ... ... .. 773 6.5 ... 40 ... 24 1 23 160 2 511 10 ... ... ... ... 671 4.0 55 132 12 94 11 40 1,350 9 1,659 56 14 ... 130 ... 3,153 5.0 244 EXPEDITION. ... ... 8 ... 2 435 7 107 1 ... ... 30 ... 572 * 13 5 ... 16 3 11 170 3 383 44 4 ... ... ... 557 3.2 125 Includes Det. at Jacobabad. 10 ... 20 1 9 743 47 100 2 16 ... 1 ... 860 4.2 31 Do. Depôt at Ahmedabad. 53 4 8 ... ... 703 62 96 5 33 2 15 ... 847 5.6 84 19 19 12 6 21 343 25 428 19 ... ... ... ... 771 3.5 173 Includes Det. at Jacobabad. 87 23 64 10 43 2,394 144 1,114 71 53 2 46 ... 3,607 4.1 426 1,043 171 647 77 206 17,162 348 5,829 162 457 4 407 2 23,855 5.1 2,743 *Information not obtainable.
112 Summary of the Statistics for the Year 1879 and nine previous Years. Years. Average Daily Strength present. Admissions into Hospitals Ratio per cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Average Daily Sick per cent. to Average Strength. Deaths in Hospitals. Ratio of Deaths in Hospitals per cent. to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths in Hospitals per cent. to Admis- sions. Deaths out of Hospitals and on Leave. Total Deaths in and out of Hospitals. Ratio per cent. to Strength of Hindus who died in and out of Hospitals and on Leave. Ratio per cent. to Strength of Mahomedans who died in and out of Hospitals and on Leave. Ratio per cent. to Strength in- valided for discharge the Service. Ratio per cent. to Strength in- valided for change of climate. 1879 22,406 38,246 170.69 4.93 436 1.94 1.14 80 516 2.02 2.77 5.09 2.71 1878 23,671 40,012 169.03 4.40 305 1.28 0.77 151 456 1.91 1.56 5.51 2.17 1877 22,561 25,130 111.38 3.49 215 0.95 0.85 95 310 1.39 1.22 4.51 2.03 1876 22,583 22,918 119.20 3.79 247 1.09 0.90 49 296 1.14 1.57 4.27 2.17 1875 22,819 25,475 111.63 3.38 213 0.93 0.83 66 279 1.30 1.18 4.27 1.83 1874 22,750 26,601 116.92 3.68 176 0.77 0.66 72 248 0.99 1.12 4.60 1.73 1873 22,967 29,035 126.86 3.82 165 0.71 0.56 81 246 ...... ...... 4.35 2.11 1872 22,903 36,209 158.09 4.54 226 0.98 0.62 95 321 3.98 2.13 1871 22,959 29,733 129.50 4.31 236 1.03 0.79 97 333 3.12 2.10 1870 22,715 28,380 139.08 4.33 191 0.84 0.68 95 286 3.71 2.33
fication and Nomenclature. REGIMENTS. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. TOTAL. Abscess, 819; and elsewhere accord- ing to site. Ulcers, 859. Skin Diseases, 827 to 901. Other Diseases of this Class. Injuries, 992 to 1146, and Blistered Feet, 1148. Punishment, 1147. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. Admitted. Died. 1st Regt., N.L.C.or Lanrs Neemu 2 ... 12 ... 44 ... 17 ... 2 ... 1 ... 60 1 ... ... 621 4 2nd do. Poona 10 ... ... ... 12 ... 19 ... 7 ... ... ... 80 ... ... ... 598 2 3rd do. Deesa 2 ... 8 ... 41 ... 29 ... 2 ... ... ... 70 ... ... ... 677 ... 1st Sind Horse Jacoba 1 ..14 ... 36 ... 7 ... 9 ... 1 1 46 ... ... ..648 15 2nd. do. D 7 ..23 ... 35 ... 13 1 2 1 1 ... 41 2 ... ... 525 12 3rd do. Khoos ... ... 12 ..32 ... 17 ... 21 ... 1 ... 64 4 ... ... 655 41 Poona Horse Siroor ... ... 7 ... 6 ... 15 ... 7 ... 1 ... 36 ... ... ..258 3 Sappers and Miners Afgha Ade 15 ... 13 ... 50 ... 32 2 49 2 ... ... 178 ... ... ... 1,129 10 No. 1 Mountain Battery. Rajkot 3 ... 1 ... 18 ... 11 ... 2 ... 1 ... 44 ... ... ... 328 1 No. 2 do. 1st Regiment, N. I. Afgha 31 ... 112 1 100 ... 22 ... 90 5 ... ... 98 1 ... ... 2,145 47 2nd do. Nusse 2 ... 4 ..35 ... 11 ... 3 1 2 ... 28 ... ... ..1,423 12 3rd do. Hyder 15 ... 6 ... 73 1 16 ... 24 1 2 1 61 ... ... ... 1,839 11 4th do. 5th do. Kurra 5 ... 2 ... 27 ... 23 1 5 ... 3 ... 18 ... ... ... 1,060 9 6th do. Mhow ... ... 6 . 40 ... 35 ... 32 ... ... ..71 1 ... ... 878 2 7th do. Bhuj 10 ... 2 ... 25 ... 17 1 10 ... 2 ... 43 ... ... ... 1,159 10 8th do. Sattar 5 ... 7 ... 39 ... 52 ... 12 ... ... ... 75 ... ... ... 752 4 9th do. Bomba 7 ... 7 ... 67 ... 50 ... 26 ... 1 1 83 ... ... ... 909 6 10th do. Neemu 11 ... 5 ... 30 ... 14 ... 2 ... ... ... 50 ... ... ... 1,444 10 11th do. Poona 5 ... 5 ... 40 ... 26 ... 11 ..... ... 73 ..... ... 872 7 12th do. Rajkot 19 ... 10 ... 40 ... 48 ... 15 1 2 ... 39 ... ... ... 1,846 11 13th do. Mhow 7 ... 2 ... 48 ... 21 ... ... ... ... ... 85 ... ... ... 747 4 14th do. Belgau 9 ... 10 ... 40 ... 14 ... 2 ... ... ... 44 1 ... ... 639 3 15th do. Ahmed 5 ... 6 ... 24 ... 16 ... 1 ... ... ... 31 ... ... ... 1,345 11 16th do. Malleg 2 ... 5 ... 48 ... 35 ... 6 ... ... ... 73 ... ... ... 792 24 17th do. Dharw 8 ... 5 ... 24 ... 17 ... 7 ... ... ... 60 ... 1 ... 617 3 18th do. Poona 4 ... 1 ... 8 ... 24 ... 10 ... ... ... 47 ..... ... 543 2 19th do. Bolan 19 ... 36 ... 48 ... 68 ... 48 4 ... ... 143 1 ... ... 1,612 66 20th do. Baroda 24 ... 3 ... 39 ... 20 ... 55 2 1 ... 58 ... ... ... 2,097 10 21st do. Bomba 1 ... 3 ... 41 ... 11 ... 9 ... ... ... 49 1 1 ... 1,227 8 22nd do. Belgau 8 ... 2 ... 67 ... 68 ... 6 ... ... ... 154 ... ... ... 1,343 2 23rd do. Ahmed 2 ... 7 ... 54 ... 35 ... 2 ... ... ... 44 ... ... ... 696 5 24th do. Mehid 5 ... 4 ... 31 ... 26 ... 1 ... 1 ... 51 ... 1 ... 1,623 5 25th do. Aden 2 ... 17 ... 5 ... 20 ... 10 ... 1 ... 91 ... ... ... 504 4 26th do. Deesa 2 ... 1 ... 47 ... 17 ... 1 ... ... ... 54 1 ... ... 607 5 27th do. Jacoba 21 ... 45 1 100 ... 30 2 11 ... 1 ... 52 1 ... ... 799 12 28th do. Surat 34 ... 8 ... 78 ... 42 ... 16 2 1 ... 145 ... ... ... 1,489 14 29th do. 30th do. Quetta 25 ... 44 ..74 ... 83 ... 21 ... 3 ... 72 ... ... ... 1,620 40 Aden Troop Khor M 5 ... 4 ... 2 ... 9 ... ... ... ... ... 19 ... ... ... 180 1 333 ... 459 2 1,568 1 1,030 7 537 19 26 3 2,530 14 3 ... 38,246 436 26 m
113 STATEMENT No. 2, Exhibiting the Sick of H. M.'s Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency for the Year 1879, arranged according to authorized Classification and Nomenclature. REGIMENTS. STATIONS. Averge Strength Present. Average Daily Sick. 1879. CLASSES OF DISEASES. GENERAL DISEASES. LOCAL DISEASES. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. TOTAL. Sub-Division A. Sub-Division B. Diseases of the Nervous System, 59 to 104. Insanity, 105 to 110. Diseases of the Eye, 111 to 185. Diseases of the Heart, 219 to 244, and 250 to 258. Diseases of the Lungs, 290 to 337. Diseases of the Sto- mach and Intestines, 449 to 500. Diseases of the Liver, 501 to 520. Diseases of the Spleen, 524 to 530. GonorrhBOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
