IP/QB.10 m. 91. b SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY W. R. RICE ESQ., M. D. SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VI. 1891. 1.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000665.tif] 3942410
SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY W. R. RICE, ESQ., M.D. SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VI. 1891. 1.On some Species of Choleraic Comma-Bacilli occurring in Calcutta. BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, F.R.S., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. In the early part of the past year I submitted a brief report to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India, embodying the result of a series of observations demonstrating the fact that several distinct species of Comma-Bacilli occurred in association with cholera in Calcutta, and that, therefore, no indi- vidual species could reasonably be any longer regarded as specifically related to the disease causally. Since that time I have been continuously occupied in fur- ther investigations on the subject, and in the present paper I propose to give a detailed account of the results which have now been arrived at. It may at first sight appear strange that, whilst for the past seven years so much attention has been devoted both in Europe and India to the question of the association of Comma-Bacilli with cholera, it should only now be demonstrated that not one, but a number of distinct species of such organisms are related to the disease, but, in reality, it is not hard to find an explanation for the delay in the recognition of the fact, especially by observers in Europe. Attention was natu- rally directed, in the first place, to an endeavour to ascertain whether Koch's statements in regard to the association of Comma-Bacilli with the disease were well founded2 Scientific Memoirs by temporary and violent epidemics. It is, moreover, quite possible, especially if it be taken into account that Koch's observations were limited to the cold season in India, that in Europe his species is that of most frequent occurrence. At the same time, however, facts are not wanting in regard to European observations which, in the light of our present information, render it highly probable that in Europe also different observers have really been dealing with distinct species, whilst believing that they were occupied in the study of a single one only. It is only on this supposition that it appears to be possible to account for the very con- flicting statements which have from time to time been made in regard to many points in the life-history of Choleraic Comma-Bacilli in Europe. That such an experienced and skilful observer as Professor Hueppe, of Prague, should have been mistaken in regard to his observations regarding the formation of spores by Choleraic Comma-Bacilli, is from the outset improbable, and it is much more likely that the discrepancy between his views and those of many other eminent observers is dependent simply on the fact that more than one species was actually under observation. So, again, with regard to the discrepan- cies between the statements which have been made by various observers in re- gard to the capacity for growth of Choleraic Comma-Bacilli in acid media. As will be shown presently, the different species present in Calcutta, differ conspicu- ously from one another in this respect, so that Koch's original statements re- garding the incapacity for growth of his species, under such conditions, may quite possibly have been dependent on his actually having encountered a species characterised by it, and that the contradictory utterances of various observers in Europe on the same point, need not necessarily be regarded as due to imper- fect observation. As more positive evidence of the existence of a multiplicity of species in Europe, we have further Zäslein's observations regarding the differ- ence presented by the Comma-Bacilli derived from simultaneous epidemics in different localities3 Medical Officers of the Army of India. organisms present in different cases, and from distinct localities, many independ- ent investigations being liable to be conducted in regard to cultivations originally derived from a common source. That the multiplicity of species should have so long escaped notice in India, and specially in an endemic locality like Calcutta, in which fresh materials may be obtained more or less constantly throughout the entire course of the year from distinct sources, is not so excusable, and is only to be accounted for by the small numbers of resident investigators, and by the fact that atten- tion was primarily directed to other points, so that the occurrence of minor discrepancies in the phenomena coming under observation in different cases for some time attracted no particular notice. That such minor discrepancies presented themselves occasionally in my own experience I can now readily recognise; but at the time when they did so, they were passed over as trivial, and failed to convey any suggestion of the fact of the possible presence of distinct species. The fact that, owing to the conditions of temperature which prevail during a great part of the year, Agar-agar has to be substituted for common gelatine as a medium, was, no doubt, one reason why the distinctness of the different species escaped notice, as there can be no doubt that the latter medium is much more favorable than the former as a means of demonstrating specific peculiarities in the growth of distinct schizomycete organisms, but what now appears to have been very suggestive phenomena certainly did from time to time present themselves. When working at the subject of the septicaemic phenomena, sometimes presenting themselves in guinea-pigs subsequent to subcutaneous injections of Comma-Bacilli, it was observed, and even specially recorded, that very different results followed on the injection of materials derived from cultivations belonging to series related to distinct cases of cholera, small doses from certain cultivations being constantly followed by the death of the animals experimented with, whilst much larger amounts of materials derived from cultivations of different origin, were constantly innocuous. Various distinctive peculiarities of growth in Commas, originally derived from distinct sources, but cultivated under precisely like exter- nal conditions, were also noted from time to time. In certain cases, too, these were very conspicuous. For example, in a series of experiments which were conduct- ed in the beginning of 1889, in regard to the question of the occurrence of spore- formation as described by Hueppe, very striking differences presented themselves in regard to the style of growth of distinct sets of Commas when exposed to uniform conditions of medium and temperature, some of them showing hardly any tendency when cultivated in peptonised broth to become associated in vibri- onic filaments, whilst in the case of others such filaments formed the characteris- tic feature of the cultivations. In the case of one set of Commas of the latter class, moreover, the filaments showed very distinctive features in the later periods of their existence, the greater number of the constituent elements ultimately failing B2
4 Scientific Memoirs by to stain well, whilst a certain number stained very deeply, and at the, same time showed an alteration in their form, becoming fusiform and thicker than their neighbours, so that the entire filaments appeared like pale threads, with deeply colored beads strung upon them at intervals. So completely, however, did the idea that Choleraic Comma-Bacilli were necessarily Koch's bacilli prevail that the obvious suggestion conveyed by the phenomena escaped notice; they were noted as remarkable, but passed over as the result of inappreciable differ- ences in external conditions, telling on organisms of one and the same species. So much so was this the case that, even when, during the summer of 1889, a specimen of choleraic materials presented itself which was certainly crowded with distinct and healthy looking Comma-Bacilli, incultivable in any ordinary media, the phenomenon was assumed to have been due to something having proved fatal to them ere they were subjected to experiment. As in so many other cases, the discovery of the multiplicity of species did not result from investigations primarily directed to settle the question, but in the course of an enquiry into the old question of the invariable association of Koch's Comma-Bacilli, with choleraic materials. As it had been ascertained during the course of the previous year that at certain times large numbers of cases presenting essentially choleraic symptoms may be admitted into the hos- pitals of Calcutta, and be there diagnosed and treated as cases of cholera without the contents of the intestines showing any trace of the presence of Comma- Bacilli, it appeared to be desirable once more to investigate the subject closely, with a view to determine, if possible, whether the phenomenon were due to error in diagnosis or to inconstancy of the association of Comma-Bacilli with the disease. Arrangements were accordingly made to secure materials from all cases regarded as genuine cases of cholera in three of the principal hospitals in Calcutta. The hospitals serving as the source of supply were the General Hospital, the Medical College Hospital, and the Sealdah Pauper Hospital, the first serving as an, index to the conditions present in the case of the disease as affecting Europeans, and the two latter doing the same in regard to the native population. There seems to be no reasonable ground to doubt that the cases from which the materials yielding the various species of Commas, to be described pre- sently, were obtained were genuine cases of cholera5 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Hospital presented certain constant distinctive peculiarities, as compared with precisely similarly treated cultivations of the Commas obtained from cases in the General Hospital; and, attention having once been directed to the subject, and special experiments in regard to it instituted, it very soon became evident that at least two distinct species of Choleraic Comma-Bacilli were present. The specific distinctness of the Commas, derived from the cases simultaneously present in the Sealdah Pauper Hospital was not so readily or quickly detected, owing to their presenting certain features resembling those of the Commas derived from the Medical College Hospital, but, as the result of closer investigation, it also became quite evident. At the beginning of the year 1890, then, three of the principal hospitals in Calcutta contained cases of cholera, not differing from one another in symptoms or mortality, and all alike being characterised by the presence of abundance of cultivable Comma-Bacilli in the intestinal contents, but these not of one, but of three distinct species6 Scientific Memoirs by others were admitted into the Medical College Hospital on the 24th and 26th of November, and each furnished a new and distinct species. The total number of cases which furnished the materials for special investi- gation during the course of the year was sixteen, and they have yielded no less than ten distinct species of Comma-Bacilli, the distinctive characters of which must next be considered. In proceeding to give detailed descriptions of the different species I do not propose, in the meantime, to designate them by specific terms, but merely to distinguish them from one another by lettering. I.7 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Symptoms. 8 Scientific Memoirs by When cultivated in a temperature ranging between 16° and 21° C. in nutritive beef-juice gelatine containing 10 per cent. of Heinrich's "gold-label" emulsion- gelatine in vertical test tubes, visible growth,and liquefaction of the basis is visible within twenty-four hours, in the form of a small crater and short tapering funnel. At the close of forty-eight hours the crater is enlarged, and the solution has extended along the entire course of the track. The rate at which liquefaction proceeds is more rapid than in cultivations of species 9 Medical Officers of the Army of India. the same constancy as in the case of cultivations in the solid media. The pel- licle, which ultimately forms on the surface of the fluid, is soft and homogeneous, and almost never shows any tendency towards the membranousness, dryness and wrinkling so conspicuous in those of certain other species. The pheno- mena presenting themselves in tubes, which have been treated with nitric and sulphuric acids, so as to develope the so-called cholera-purple due to the simul- taneous presence of indol and nitrites, are very characteristic in those cases where both acids are employed. The fluid is then distinguished from that in similarly treated cultivations of any of the other species, by the constancy with which it becomes quite limpid within twenty-four hours, due to complete deposit of the cloudiness originally present in it. This character comes out most clearly as a distinctive feature in cases where the tubes have been under cultivation at temperatures of 35° to 37° C. for periods of seventy-two hours or more. After the lapse of twenty-four hours from the time when the acids were added to the fluid, this is found almost invariably to be quite limpid, whilst those in corresponding tubes of the other species present various degrees of haziness or cloudiness. The fluid, also, is ordinarily at this time characterised by having a more or less decided brown tinge, which is not, as a rule, present in the case of the other species (vide Table II). It is only where both acids are added that this distinctive clearing occurs with certainty, the addition of either of them alone leading to the develop- ment of a purple color, but the fluid usually remaining persistently cloudy. The distinctive characters of this species are therefore as follow:10 Scientific Memoirs by Symptoms. 11 Medical Officers of the Army of India. The elements of this species are morphologically very distinct from those of the previous one. They are not by any means so constant in respect to size as the latter are, but are almost always considerably smaller than they are They may be described as typical Commas, being short, thick, well-curved, and, as a rule, with pointed extremities (vide Plate I, Fig. 2). They have no special tendency to aggregation, and when introduced into fluids become readily and evenly diffused throughout them. When examined in neutral salt-solution, they are characterised by their excessively active, darting, and swarming move- ments. Their power of liquefying gelatine is conspicuously greater than that of the previous species, and, indeed, seems on the whole to be higher than that of any of the other species. The solution takes place with special activity at the sur- face of the medium, and hence in tube-cultivations the entire surface becomes liquid at a time when corresponding tubes of the previous species still show a wide rim of solid gelatine around a limited crater. Due to the special rapidity of the liquefaction at the surface, the liquefied area takes the form of a funnel which tapers much more than that present in the case of cultivations of species a . Gelatine plate-cultivations show corresponding distinctive features from those of species a , the colonies growing more rapidly, and showing distinct evidences of their liquefying newer relatively early. The growth where Agar-agar replaces common gelatine in the basis is also relatively rapid. Where the basis is neutral, or slightly alkaline, and is relatively dense, the rapidity of growth, and specially of surface-growth, as compared with that in species a is very conspicuous, and the surface-growth in tube-cultiva- tions of some duration is evidently thicker than in it. It resembles the surface growth in tubes of species a in being either diffluent, or only very slightly adhesive, but differs conspicuously from it in being almost invariably rough or wrinkled and dryish (vide Table I). The colonies which develop in Agar- agar plate-cultivations are larger than those of the former species of similar age, and they are also less dense in texture, and have a greater tendency to become confluent. When cultivated in non-neutralised Agar-agar basis, it grows much more readily, especially at low temperatures, than species a , evident growth usually showing itself within twenty-four hours, and proceeding with relative rapidity to form a stratum of considerable thickness over the surface of the medium. As in the previous case, there is no appreciable interstitial growth along the track of the needle. The growth on potatoes is highly characteristic and very distinct from the corresponding growth in species a . It takes place comparatively readily, more especially when the growth employed as a source of materials for inoculation is that in a cultivation on non-neutralised Agar-agar medium. It is relatively thick, and of a yellow color, ranging from pure ochre to pale primrose, or strong canary yellow, and in successful cases is of very considerable thickness. It has in many cases a tendency (vide Plate II, Fig. 2) C 2
12 Scientific Memoirs by to extend peripherally by the formation of distinct islets, which subsequently become confluent with one another, and with the parent mass. The smell is strong, sometimes of a somewhat yeasty character, and at others resembling that of decaying apples. As a rule, it is not easy to transplant from potato to potato, but I have had one series of cultivations in which very thorough accli- matisation has taken place, and in which successful transfers have now been carried on for a period of eleven months. As certain remarkable phenomena have manifested themselves in connection with these, it may be well here to give some particulars regarding them. The first potato of the series was inocu- lated on the 10th February 1890, with materials from all Agar-agar tube cultiva- tion of the series proper to the species. Growth took place very slowly, so that on the 18th February its results consisted only of a single, small, prominent yellow patch. This was of soft consistence, and the material of which it was composed, and which was formed of well-formed Commas, was readily diffusible in salt-solution. Portions of it, transferred to other potatoes, gave origin to rapidly-spreading, thick, soft yellow growths, one of which was photographed (vide Plate II, Fig. 2), and from these the continuous series of cultivations still carried on at the present time, January 1891, was readily propagated. The cultivations almost from the first ceased to show characteristic Commas, and consisted of almost micrococcoid particles, short ovals, and varying numbers of ill-formed Commas. These, in some cases, appeared as though they were com- posed of short series of the micrococcoid bodies, and in others as if built up by the more or less complete union of two of the oval elements. Agar-agar tube- cultivations derived from them continued for some time invariably and rapidly to yield abundant and pure growths of characteristic Commas. Towards the latter part of April, however, it began to be difficult to secure success in transfer, and in a series of twelve tubes set on the 15th of May only a single one yielded any growth. Subsequent to this, during a period of some months, although transfers from potato to potato were constantly successful and continued to yield charac- teristic yellow growths, all attempts at transfer from potatoes to Agar-agar medi- um, or to broth, were invariably unsuccessful. The growth on potatoes varied in regard to details in different instances. The color was always yellow, but the tint varied from ochreous yellow to strong canary, and the consistence also was not invariably alike, being in some cases quite diffluent, and in others more or less decidedly adhesive. The tint appeared to be in some degree related to the precise form prevailing among the elements in the different cases, being paler where oval and abortive commatous forms predominated, and stronger yellow in proportion to the abundance of micrococcoid ones. The form of the growth also varied, for whilst in the earlier cultivations it was characterised, as shown in the photograph, by the presence of a marginal fringe of islets, and by an irregular outline resulting from the coalescence of these, for some time it almost invariably presented itself as a continuous expansion with even edges.
13 Medical Officers of the Army of India. The failure of growth in Agar-agar media, and nutritive broth lasted so long that it almost appeared as though a permanent variety had been established, and, had not attempts at recovering the original form been persistently carried out, the natural conclusion would have been that this had actually occurred. At length, however, in the beginning of October, a tube which had been inoculated from a potato set on the 27th September, and in which the growth presented once again the irregular outlines and detached islets characteristic of the primary cultiva- tions, yielded a successful result. The growth was, however, very slow, and solely confined to the surface, spreading gradually around the orifice, but never appearing around the length of the needle-track. From this time onwards, successful transfers continued to occur in cases where Agar-agar medium was employed, but the growth in them continued to be entirely limited to the surface, and transfers to nutritive broth were still persist- ently unsuccessful. The growth in these cases of partial recovery of the original properties was composed to a large extent of Comma-Bacilli, but only a few of them presented normal appearances, the larger number continuing, as in the growths on potatoes, to appear either as if composed of a series of beads, or of two associated oval particles. Full resumption of original powers for anaërobic growth in the substance of Agar-agar media, of liquefying gelatine, and of growth in broth was first present in a cultivation which was set on the 8th of December, but has continued to manifest itself in all subsequent cultiva- tions up to the present time. Even where the original properties are fully regained, however, a certain amount of effect due to the influence of the medium continues to manifest itself, for if two tubes of gelatine be simultaneously inoculated, one from a potato cultivation, and the other from another gelatine or Agar-agar cultivation, an appreciable difference in the rate at which liquefaction of the medium advances is recognisable, the process being appreciably slower, es- pecially at first, wher ea potato cultivation has been the source of the inoculated material. The cultivations on potatoes retain the same general characters which they had during the period when transfer to the other media was impossible, save that there is, perhaps, a more constant tendency to isleted growth, and their microscopical characters remain apparently unaltered, but the growths in common gelatine, Agar-agar, and broth media, present the characteristic features of cultivations of the typical Commas of the species, and microscopically consist of such bodies. The broth cultivations yield beautiful, strong purple within 24 hours, form tough, membranous, wrinkled pellicles, have the characteristic light cloudiness, and the ordinary tendency to persistent evolution of bubbles of gas after the addition of the acids, which will be presently alluded to in describing the phenomena presented by broth cultivations of the ordinary series. In attempting to account for this gradual resumption of original properties in the potato cultivations, after they had, for such a prolonged period, lost them in such important respects, it was at first supposed that the nature of the
14 Scientific Memoirs by potatoes which formed the basis might have been influential, as different samples of potatoes certainly exhibit very considerable differences in constitution, their degree of acidity especially, varying very conspicuously. As, however, cultiva- tions have now been for some time conducted on potatoes of different qualities without any appreciable alteration in the essential phenomena, it is necessary to look for some other explanation, and the only factor which presents itself as likely to have played an important part is atmospheric temperature. During the cool period of the early part of 1890 certain features presented themselves with constancy; as the temperature rose they first became uncertain in occurrence, and then, for a long time, totally disappeared; when the atmo- spheric temperature began to fall considerably, resumption of the original pro- perties began to manifest itself, and when it had regained the level at which it had been when the series of cultivations was first established, complete re- sumption occurred. These phenomena are certainly very striking as showing the possibility of the origination of varieties of a considerable degree of permanence, and perpetuated through very many generations, under the influence of external conditions, and, as will shortly be shown, they are not peculiar to this species, but manifested themselves in more or less parallel fashion in regard to other species also. Cultivations of this species in broth do not give such strikingly distinctive specific features as those present in the cultivations which have just been con- sidered, but they do show certain peculiarities (vide Table II). The clouding of the fluid due to the multiplication of the Commas in it diminishes with relative rapidity, and the surface pellicle has a very great tendency to assume a dry, membranous, and often permanently wrinkled character. Treatment with acids gives distinct, and often strong purple, within 24 hours from the commencement of cultivations exposed to a temperature of from 35° to 37°C. Rapid clearing of the acidified fluid does not occur so invariably, especially in cultivations of several days' duration, as in the case of cultivations of the previous species, nor is there the same tendency as in them to the ultimate development of a brownish tint in the fluid. Another characteristic of the acidified fluids here is their spe- cial tendency to conspicuous effervescence, which frequently persists for a con- siderable time. The distinctive features of this species are- 1. The Commas are relatively short, thick, well curved, and more or less pointed, and they have no special tendency to aggregation into groups. 2. It liquefies gelatine with relative rapidity. 3. The growth over the surface of neutralised Agar-agar media is relatively rapid, and the stratum which it forms is almost always, within a few days, dryish and rough or distinctly wrinkled. As in the case of the previous species it is usually incoherent, and, at the utmost, slightly adhesive. 4. The growth in non-neutralised Agar-agar is relatively rapid.
15 Medical Officers of the Army of India. 5. The growth on potatoes is quite distinctive, and unlike that present in the case of any other species. 6.The pellicle in broth-cultivations has a great tendency to become membranous, and rough or wrinkled, and the fluid, when treated with acids, has a marked tendency to copious and persistent gaseous evolution. III. SPECIES 16 Scientific Memoirs by and pointed. They do not show the coarse, blunt appearance and aggregant tendency of those in species 17 Medical Officers of the Army of India. of stricture. On the 13th April choleraic symptoms manifested themselves and he died at midnight of the same day. Symptoms .18 Scientific Memoirs by consists almost entirely of comparatively small, straight rods, but at a later stage large, well curved and often beaded commas are present in considerable numbers. The smell is faint, peculiar, not unpleasant and somewhat like that of decaying apples. The growth is certainly and rapidly19 Medical Officers of the Army of India. forms present on the surface in approximately equal proportions. The first of these presented a bluish yellow tint when the plate was viewed obliquely by trans- mitted light. They were of considerable diameter and were composed of a densely adherent stratum of small, well formed Commas. The second, when examined in the same fashion, were of a pure blue tint, quite diffluent and composed of relatively long, slender Commas. The third were more prominent than the others, of a yellow tint, diffluent and composed of very short, thick, almost micrococcoid Commas, which were distinctly vacuolate and only faintly stained when treated with Gentian-Violet. The present species was that which occurred in the first form of colonies, the two next species being present in the remaining forms respectively. The morphological characters of the elements vary considerably in relation to different media and different methods of cultivation. In all cases they agree in being short and relatively thick. In common nutritive gelatine they very closely resemble those of species 20 Scientific Memoirs by Plate II, fig.5). In those cases in which the growth is vigorous the resulting mass becomes of very considerable thickness, and of a bright pink tint, ranging from strong salmon-color to pale rose-madder. The color from the very outset is pink, but is at first relatively pale and deepens gradually as time goes on. The texture is at first soft but firm, and in some cases retains these characters throughout. In others, however, after a time softening takes place internally, and, the change being accompanied by processes of gaseous evolution, large bubbles come to protrude on the surface. In very old cultivations, even on what appear to be quite normal potatoes, a thin peripheral fringe sometimes makes its appearance around the margins, but in all other cases these are pro- minent and sharply defined. Such fringes, when present, are ordinarily almost colorless, or very pale pink or buff. This alteration in color and habit are apparent- ly due to changes in the re-action of the medium, as in cases where potatoes of manifestly abnormal acidity are employed the growth throughout remains rela- tively thin and almost colorless. The influence of the re-action of the agent as the cause of the alteration in color is also indicated by the fact that acids, even dilute acetic acid among the number, rapidly remove the color even from deeply tinted normal growths. In most instances, as is the case with similar growths in the species pre- viously described, with the exception of species 21 Medical Officers of the Army of India. at first, regained it as they increased in age. The aërobic and anaërobic varieties, when cultivated in Agar-agar, present certain distinct differences in form, the former consisting of straight or only very slightly curved rods, whilst the latter is composed of well-formed commas, and in those cases where anaërobic property is only gradually regained as the result of repeated transfers from one Agar-agar medium to another, corresponding gradual modifications in the form of the elements are readily traceable. The presence of profound temporary alterations in the constitution of the elements under such circumstances is indicated not only by the differences in form and habit which have just been described, but further by the fact that the purely aërobic variety when grown in broth does not lead to those decompositions in the medium to which the development of purple on the addition of acids are due. Both varieties grow readily in broth, but it is only in cultivations of the anaërobic variety that any appreciable develop- ment of purple follows the addition of acids, and the extent to which develop- ment does occur appears to be directly related to the degree of anaërobism which is present. This frequently comes out most distinctly in cases where a series of broth cultivations are made parallel to a series of successive Agar-agar cultivations in which a gradual recovery of anaërobic property is occurring. In the first broth cultivation there may be a complete absence of the constituents requisite to give the color re-action, whilst in the subsequent ones, derived from tubes showing progressive increase in anaërobic property, a progressive increase in the degree of the re-action manifests itself. Similar phenomena present them- selves in the case of broth-cultivations derived directly from the growths on potatoes. Where the latter give rise to purely aerobic cultivations, in Agar-agar media they give rise to cultivations in broth which fail to give the color re-action; and just in proportion to their power of giving origin to anaerobic growths in the one case is their power for giving rise to growths associated with varying degrees of the color re-action in the other. Cultivations in broth show no very distinctive peculiarities (vide Table II). The formation of a pellicle on the surface is frequently somewhat re- tarded. The fluid within twenty-four hours when exposed to temperatures of from 35° to 37°C. gives strong purple on treatment with acids. Cultivations of only twenty-four hours hardly ever clear completely within twenty-four hours after the addition of acids, and those of longer duration often remain persistently clouded. This species is principally distinguished by the following characters:22 Scientific Memoirs by In the morphological characters of its elements this differs very conspicu- ously from, species 23 Medical Officers of the Army of India. invariably, even from the very first cultivation of the kind which was carried out; purely confined to the surface, and although very, many attempts were made by means of repeated transfers to Agar-agar and broth-media to secure a resumption of the anaërobic habit they always failed completely. In certain cases a certain amount of resumption of the original form manifested itself in the course of these experiments, more or less distinctly commatous elements replacing the straight ones originally present in the cultivations most nearly related to the potatoes in the series of transfers, but the power for intersticial growth in Agar-agar, or of causing the decompositions in broth necessary for the development of purple color on the addition of acids was never regained in the slightest degree. Ulti- mately, when the growth on potatoes hadbegun persistently to show the abnor- malities in consistence and color described above, transfers to Agar-agar media became entirely unsuccessful and a condition of pure acclimatisation to potatoes, like that which persisted so long in the case of species 24 Scientific Memoirs by or less even columnar outline, quite distinct from the evenly tapering one in tubes of species 25 Medical Officers of the Army of India. of gelatinous, yellowish grey flocculi. The smell was strong and offensive. Cover-glass preparations showed that the flocculi were practically pure cultiv- ations of Commas and pale, slender spirilla, and plate-cultivations, yielded an almost pure growth of colonies composed of beautiful, highly-curved Commas. When grown in common gelatine and neutralised Agar-agar media the elements of this species are typical well-curved Commas, almost always of smaller size and slenderer than those in corresponding cultivations of species 26 Scientific Memoirs by regard to clearing after the addition of acids they hold a rather intermediate posi- tion, having less tendency to rapid clearing than those of species 27 Medical Officers of the Army of India. The orifice of the tube is sharply defined and abrupt and is plugged below by a conspicuous white mass of growth. Above this it is usually empty of fluid, and hence the peculiar appearances due to the presence of air in it are frequently very conspicuous. The lower part of the tube, due to its narrow lumen, is usually very conspicuous as a white streak of accumulated deposit. Gelatine cultivations of a few days' growth are also distinguished from corresponding cul- tivations of any of the other species, by showing much more distinct purple on the addition of acids than they do, and by there being hardly any tendency to the development of any yellow color. Growth occurs rapidly in neutralised Agar-agar media both superficially and intersticially. The intersticial growth has, however, in the early periods of cultivation, a marked tendency to be limited to the upper portion of the course of the needle-track. This is especially marked when the cultivations are exposed to relatively low temperatures, so that, at temperatures ranging between 16° and 21º C., the intersticial growth at the close of the first twenty-four hours usually presents the form of a short, conical cloud not extending beyond the upper fourth of the track. The superficial growth ultimately forms a thick, soft, perfectly diffluent and very opaque stratum, which never shows any trace of adhesiveness. Cultivations of a few days' duration also show another dis- tinctive feature in the form of a diffuse olive discoloration of the substance of the medium, very unlike the yellow tint present in it in the case of cultivations of all the other species capable of intersticial growth, and which goes on and increases in degree as time advances. The colonies in Agar-agar plates pre- sent certain very characteristic appearances in most cases. They have a very distinct, dense nucleus, surrounded by a softer peripheral area, which is at first coarsely granular and afterwards becomes covered with projecting nodular elevations so that the entire surface is coarsely tuberculate. When non-neutralised Agar-agar is substituted, growth manifests itself com- paratively early, a limited white patch usually being recognisable around the orifice of the needle-track within twenty-four hours after inoculation. The extension over the surface is, however, very slow and irregular, and the patch, although of some thickness, remains for long of very small area and with an irregular out- line. Curiously enough, whilst this is the case, intersticial growth occurs much more conspicuously than in the case of corresponding cultivations of any other species, and the entire course of the needle-track becomes surrounded by an irregular dense cloud of growth. Growth on potatoes does not occur readily. In successful cases it pre- sents itself in the form of thin, moist expansions of a strong Indian yellow color, consisting of very minute, short, thick, often distinctly vacuolate Commas, which are not readily induced to grow when transferred to other potatoes. Cultivations in broth present equally conspicuous distinctive features. Clouding of the fluid takes place slowly, only a very light cloud being present at E2
28 Scientific Memoirs by the close of twenty-four hours' inoculation. It is the nature of the pellicle, how- ever, which forms the most strikingly distinctive feature. It makes its appearance comparatively rapidly, but very rarely takes the form of a continuous stratum, being represented either by a narrow ring around the margins of the fluid, or by isolated flocculi. The material of which it is composed is in any case opaquely white and very friable and sinks to the bottom of the tube on the slightest agitation. The latter property is no doubt the reason why complete pellicles are so seldom to be met with, as in many cases where an annular one is present a considerable flocculent deposit may be recognised at the bottom of the fluid, which is apparently due to the rupture of the surface-stratum and the subsidence of the central portion, leaving the peripheral ones adherent to the sides of the tube. This tendency to subsidence of the pellicle is peculiar to this species of all those which are capable of liquefying gelatine and of intersticial growth in Agar-agar, but, as previously mentioned in describing the properties of that species, it is present in the case of the pellicles of broth-cultivations of species Medical Officers of the Army of India. 29 X.30 Scientific Memoirs by those which have been observed in the case of potato cultivations of any of the other species. The growth, in broth-cultivations is often rather slow, clouding occurring slowly and a pellicle being late in developing. From the beginning broth-culti- vations invariably gave strong purple on the addition of acids to them within twenty-four hours from their initiation. Clearing as a rule only takes place slowly after acidification. The distinctive features in this species areMedical Officers of the Army of India. 31 Potato-cultivations, where successful, afford much more striking demon- strations of the differences in properties possessed by the different species, but unfortunately the success attending them is very variable. In cultivations of this kind, again, species 32 Scientific Memoirs by where the temperature of the latter had been somewhat higher than it ordinarily was, than in corresponding cultivations conducted at the ordinary atmospheric temperature. A loss of power for anaerobic growth was in these cases a result of cultiva- tion on particular media, but such a loss does not manifest itself solely in relation to transplantation to a new medium of different constitution from that in which growth originally occurred, for it sometimes occurs to a greater or less degree independent of any transfer, in cultivations, originally of anaerobic pro- perty, which have been kept for prolonged periods. This came out very clearly in a series of experiments which were tried some years ago on the effects of pro- longed preservation of Agar-agar cultivations of Commas. At that time two tubes of Agar-agar medium were simultaneously inoculated on the 3rd of March, one from a tube-cultivation of a few days' duration, and the other from one belonging to the same series and derived from the same source as the former, but which had been established on the 20th of December. In both cases free growth occurred on the surface of the medium within twenty-four hours, but, while the first tube showed the presence of very free intersticial growth, forming a dense cloud all along the course of the needle-track, the second one showed hardly an appreciable trace of the occurrence of any at all. Here also, as in the case of the phenomena present in connection with potato-cultivations, there was distinct evidence of hereditary transmission of the modification in properties, for, although capacity for free anaerobic growth was ultimately regained, it was not regained immediately, but only gradually and in the course of repeated successive cultures in fresh media. Just as in the case of the potato-cultiva- tions, the change in functional properties is associated with more or less altera- tion in form, the growth persisting in tubes which have been preserved during prolonged periods, and which has lost anaërobic property, consisting in most cases almost entirely of short, straight, almost micrococcoid particles in place of normal Comma-Bacilli. In certain cases a directly opposite result follows from prolonged cultivation on one and the same medium, an acquisition of capacity for anaerobic growth in place of a loss of such capacity manifesting itself. Instances of such an acquisition came under notice not unfrequently in connection with potato-culti- vations of species Medical Officers of the Army of India. 33 Modifications of a similar nature, capable to a greater or less degree of hereditary transmission, and tending, therefore, towards the establishment of definite varieties, have been already recorded by Hansen, *Fritsch 34 Scientific Memoirs by It need hardly be a matter of surprise that such modifications should be capable of rapid development, and of quickly acquiring greater or less perma- nence in schizomycete organisms: the rapidity must be considered in relation to the rapidity with which generations of such organisms succeed one another, and, therefore, to the brief period within which it is possible for hereditary peculiarities to become persistent. It now only remains briefly to consider what are the main points indicated by the above data. In the outset it is clear that they show that Koch's theory that cholera is primarily due to the access of a specific Comma-Bacillus to the interior of the intestinal tract must be finally abandoned as inconsistent with fact. Koch's Comma-Bacillus certainly does occur in association with cases of cholera in Calcutta, but it is not the only species which does so, and, indeed, it does not appear to occur by any means so frequently as the other species taken as a group do; for, taking the sixteen cases of cholera from which Comma- Bacilli were obtained during the course of the past year, we find that in four of them only was the species which was present even doubtfully that described by Koch. This species is that which is distinguished as a in the present paper, and the doubt as to its identity with Koch's species rests mainly on the persistent differences presented by the phenomena attending cultivations of it in gelatine as compared with those described by Koch as attending corresponding culti- vations. Granting the identity, however, we have four cases in which it was present, against twelve in which it was replaced by totally distinct species. More than this, there is not even conclusive evidence to show that it is specially associated with the more severe and fatal forms of the disease, for the total number of cases is so small that the fact that three out of the four cases in which it occurred were fatal, whilst only eight out of the twelve associated with the other species were so, cannot be taken as of conclusive value in this respect. Knowing what we do of Koch's original statements regarding his discovery, we can only regard them as indicative of his ignorance, at that time, of the frequency with which vibrionic schizomycetes occur, so that, when he detected them in choleraic materials, he was readily led to assume on insufficient grounds that he was in all cases dealing with a single specific organism. It had long been vaguely recognised that vibrionic schizomycetes abounded in choleraic materials, and Koch's discovery was, in fact, merely an arbitrary selection of one of these as the cause of the disease, elected because it happened to be present in a limited number of cases which specially came under his observation. The species of Comma-Bacillus described by Koch is, then, certainly not the specific and sole cause of cholera, but this does not necessarily imply that it is not causally related to the disease, as a member of a group of organisms capable of manufacturing noxious products of a definite nature. There can be no doubt that all save one of the species of Comma-Bacilli which have been described above possess many common properties indicative of their holding a close relation to one
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 35 another, and of their being quite possibly capable of giving rise to certain identical noxious products during the course of their development. It has been pointed out by Lesage and Winter that, in cases of infantile cholera occurring in Paris, a Ba- cillus was present in the intestinal contents, specifically distinct from Koch's Bacillus, but possessed of a similar capacity for the development of a special poisonous product capable of giving rise to the phenomena of so-called experi- mental cholera in the lower animals.*In the case of the Bacillus discovered by Prior and Finkler, too, we have to deal with an organism so closely related in its properties to Koch's species as to be really mainly distinguishable from the latter in being related to so-called "Cholera Nostras," as distinguished from Chol- era Asiatica. It has been hastily assumed that cholera in India is invariably associated with a single species of Comma-Bacillus, and that it is this which is invariably associated with the disease when it occurs in spreading epidemics beyond the limits of India. But the first of these assumptions has now been shown to be absolutely groundless, and with this the principal ground for the second one disappears, so that if Comma-Bacilli are to be regarded as in any sense the essential cause of cholera, it must be as members of a group of species. Were it possible to show definitely that Comma-Bacilli of one or other species were con- stantly associated with the disease, and that all the species were closely related in properties, it might have been fairly maintained that, whilst no individual spe- cies can be regarded as the specific cause, the group as a whole may be viewed as such, but even could this be safely affirmed, it would necessarily carry with it important modifications in our views regarding the spread of the disease and the means likely to be efficient in preventing its epidemic diffusion. Were cholera really associated with a single species of Bacillus normally existing only in India, there might be some theoretical grounds for advocating the employment of quarantine measures calculated to prevent the emigration of the organism beyond the limits of its native area. But, as the disease is asso- ciated36 Scientific Memoirs by Comma-Bacillus is native to India, and that, when it is observed in Europe, it must have been imported thence. But in India, as in Europe, it has as yet only been detected in relation to choleraic materials, and it can therefore only be described as endemic in India, because cholera is of constant occurrence in certain localities there. Vibrio Proteus is only known in Europe in connection with Cholera Nostras, but no one will deny that it must be endemic in Europe. It has, however, just like Koch's Comma-Bacillus, only been detected in relation to the presence of disease there, and it would really be quite as reasonable to regard its presence as necessarily the result of importation, as it is to regard that of Koch's Bacillus as dependent on such a process. The entire evidence is more in favor of a belief that the detection of both organisms alike is due to the presence of conditions favoring their multiplication in any locality, rather than to their importation into it. When we come to enquire into the grounds for regarding even the group of Comma-Bacilli as a whole as causally related to cholera, we find them by no means conclusive. Even among the very limited number of cases of the disease which have been specially considered here, there was one in which the Comma- Bacilli can in no sense be regarded as having any close physiological relation to the species present in association with any of the others, so that the probability of their possessing identical toxic properties with the latter is reduced to a mini- mum. In another case three distinct species were present simultaneously, a phenomenon which, of course, is conceivably compatible with their holding a causal relation to the disease, but which, at the same time, to any one who is not fully prejudiced in favor of the necessity of such a relation, must appear to be rather suggestive of a suspicion that the presence of the Comma-Bacilli is not the cause of the morbid condition, but that the existence of the morbid con- dition is the cause of the presence of the Comma-Bacilli. But this is not all, for there can be no doubt that numerous cases occur which, both in respect of symp- toms and mortality, must be regarded as choleraic, but in which the intestinal contents are devoid of cultivable Commas, or, indeed, of Commas of any kind at all I have previously pointed out this fact as one which presented itself very promi- nently to notice during the summer of 1889, and one very striking case occurred within the following year. This was admitted into the Medical College Hospital, and in accordance with the symptoms which it presented, classed and treated as one of cholera, the diagnosis being justified by the course and rapidly fatal termina- tion which it presented. The evacuations whilst recent presented the outward aspect of typical choleraic ones, consisting of a clear, greyish watery fluid and an abundant white deposit. They very rapidly, however, passed on into a state of highly acid fermentation, during the course of which a considerable amount of the original deposit rose to the surface and formed a white layer there. On micro- scopic examination not a trace of the presence of Comma-Bacilli of any kind could be detected in either fluid or flocculi. The latter consisted of epithelial
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 37 cells and débris , and might certainly, with far more accuracy than is usually the case of those in common choleraic materials, be described as representing a pure cultivation, not, however, of Comma-Bacilli, but of very peculiar, short, straight, thick oval rods. These were present in immense numbers, spe- cially in dense groups which closely encircled the nuclei of the epithelial cells. Plate-cultivations yielded an abundant and seemingly quite pure growth of colonies, which were confined to the surface of the medium and consisted of elements presenting the same characters as those in the flocculi. So long as only one species of Comma-Bacilli had been recognised as associated with choleraic materials, cases of this nature might with some show of reason be rejected as not being true cases of cholera; but this is no longer so when we are acquainted with the existence of numerous species of choleraic Commas, for, if cholera be associated with numerous distinct Comma-Bacilli, there is no rational ground for denying the possibility that in certain cases these may be replaced by other forms of schizomycete organisms. The occurrence of such anomalous cases, together with a consideration of the fact that we have no evidence of the multiplication of Comma-Bacilli within the intestinal tract antecedent to the ma- nifestation of active symptoms of the disease, and of the manifest improbability of any appreciable absorption of intestinal contents taking place during its earlier stages, appear to be sufficient to indicate that neither Koch's species, nor the group of Comma-Bacilli as a whole, are capable of acting as the essential primary cause of cholera. Taking all the facts into consideration, there would almost appear to be grounds for formulating a theory of the following nature in regard to the relation of the various species of Comma-Bacilli and other schizomycete organisms abounding in choleraic materials to the disease. None of them have been shown to be capable of originating the disease, and they are all merely normal inhabitants of the intestinal tract which have undergone abnormal multiplication as the result of the important modifications which the contents of the tract undergo during its primary stages. The intestinal canal is constantly peopled by an in- finite variety of schizomycete organisms, among which, in many instances, Com- mas and other vibrionic elements are readily recognisable. All of them must necessarily be subject to a continuous struggle for existence, the conditions being such that, under ordinary circumstances, certain species, such as the common cho- leraic Comma-Bacilli, are repressed and rendered incapable of multiplying to any considerable extent. On the profound alteration in the conditions incident on the onset of cholera, certain of the species of schizomycetes which happen at the time to be inmates of the intestinal tract encounter conditions specially favorable to them, and consequently undergo excessive multiplication. The number of species to which the altered conditions are specially favorable is different in different instances, and the results will necessarily vary accordingly, so that in certain cases relatively pure cultivations of one or other species will occur,
38 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army in India. whilst in others several species will multiply simultaneously and mixed cultiva- tions arise. During the course of their development all the species must tend to develope decomposition-products of various kinds, and these may, of course, differ greatly from one another in properties, some being quite innocuous, and others toxic in various degrees should they undergo absorption. Absorption must, how- ever, be almost entirely in abeyance during the earlier stages of the choleraic condition, and it is only when these have been passed that it can come into play to any appreciable extent. When it has been re-established the results which fol- low will necessarily vary with the nature of the materials absorbed. Where these are innocuous, no appreciable effects will occur, but where they are toxic they will give rise to the symptoms which so often manifest themselves in the later stages of cholera, and hence, whilst quite incapable of originating the disease, the in- testinal schizomycetes may have a very important effect in relation to its mortality. One of the most striking phenomena of cholera is the great variation in regard to mortality of cases which at the outset appear to be of equal se- verity, and in which all the primary phenomena are equally well marked, the vari- ation presenting itself both in regard to distinct local epidemics, to different periods of one and the same epidemic, and casually to individual cases. In certain cases, too, there is an absence of any marked septicæmic phenomena, and those which recover pass on at once from a condition of collapse to one of convalescence, whilst in a large number of instances septicæmic symptoms of varying intensity characterise the later stages of the disease. Not less con- spicuous is the strangely conflicting nature of the evidence in regard to the value of certain remedies, such, for example, as salol, in treatment. Now, all these phenomena are quite incomprehensible on any theory, such as that of Koch, in which cholera is ascribed to the action of a single species, but are quite explicable on one which, whilst denying that the primary cause of cholera is represented by any species of intestinal schizomycetes which has yet been discovered, affirms that those whose development is favored by the existence of the choleraic condition may exert an important influence on the ultimate outcome of individual cases of the disease. D. D. CUNNINGHAM. CALCUTTA The 16th January 1891.
TABLES.
40 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE I.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 41 different Species of Comma-Bacilli after some days' cultivation in Agar-agar. tivations. 4 Species 42 Scientific Memoirs by Series. Date. Age of cultivation. 1 Species Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 4 Species 44 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE II.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 45 of various Species of Comma-Bacilli in Broth. Species 46 Scientific Memoirs by Series. Period after setting. Species Medical Officers of the Army of India. 47 Species 48 Scientific Memoirs by Series. Period after setting. Species Medical Officers of the Army of India. 49 Species PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000827.tif] FIG. 1. II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000836.tif] Fig. 1. SPECIES The Morbid Anatomy of a Form of Biliary Cirrhosis in children in India. BY SURGEON J. B. GIBBONS. During the last three years a fatal disease of the liver in young children has been discussed at several meetings of the Calcutta Medical Society; but no conclusion as to its nature was arrived at until I showed the liver of a child who was admitted into the Eden Hospital in a moribund state in January 1888. Since then I have had the opportunity of examining four additional cases. The accounts given by the parents and the symptoms observed in Hospital corresponded with the description of the fatal disease of the liver above men- tioned, and there can be no longer any doubt that, as the morbid anatomy of these livers shows, cirrhosis, presenting in the advanced stage the appearances of the variety termed "Biliary," is a common disease among the children of cer- tain classes in Calcutta and other parts of Lower Bengal. It will be evident from the description of the liver of case 5 that in the early stage the appear- ances present certain marked differences from those of the ordinary form of biliary cirrhosis, and that the formation of fibrous tissue occurs primarily within the lobules between the hepatic cells, and therefore "Intercellular Cirrhosis" would be a more appropriate designation. I have, however, kept to the former name, because this term was used in communicating the cases to the Calcutta Medical Society, and because multiplication of the bile ducts is one of the most striking features of the disease. It is greatly to be regretted that caste pre- judices have prevented a post-mortem examination being made in any of the cases which were under medical observation during the whole course of the disease. In my five cases the children belonged to the poorer cooly class, and were brought to Hospital in a more or less moribund condition. It is not among the children of the poor that the disease is common, but among those of the well-to-do classes of Hindus and Mahomedans. I have never seen a case in a European or Eurasian child, though large numbers of the latter are treated at the Medical College Dispensary. The disease is almost always fatal, and runs its course in three or four months H 2
52 Scientific Memoirs by It generally begins towards the end of the first year, but in some children the enlargement of the liver has been detected as early as the third month, and in others it does not begin until the end of the second year. The onset is insidious, unmarked by symptoms likely to attract the attention of the parents. In most cases the disease is not discovered until the liver has attained a considerable size. For example, a child was brought to the Medical College Dispensary by its grandfather, an intelligent man, who stated that up to a month previous it was quite well. It then had an attack of fever for which it was taken to a medical practitioner, who found the liver to be greatly enlarged. It is evident that this must have existed for a considerable time, although the child appeared to the parents to be in good health. This child died three months after the disease was detected, which is about the average duration. The symp- toms are: painless enlargement of the liver; the child becomes languid and fretful, having at first a voracious appetite, but after a time refusing food. Throughout the whole course of the disease constant thirst is present. Fever may be present, though usually absent, except in those cases in which the spleen is enlarged. The hands and feet have a burning sensation even when no rise of temperature can be detected by the thermometer. Enlargement of the spleen takes place in most cases, either simultaneously with that of the liver or later. The bowels are constipated, the stools white and clayey, especially towards the termination of the case. The liver enlargement goes on, and the organ reaches an enormous size; for example, in case 5 it filled the whole of the upper part of the abdomen, the right lobe reached within half an inch of the crest of the ilium, the left lobe filled the left hypochondrium. Many children die without exhibiting any other symptoms, the immediate cause of death being fever or some other intercurrent affection, but in most cases they survive to a later period, and, in these, the liver diminishes in size, contracting gradually, and jaundice appears, at first slight, but becoming daily deeper. Oedema, beginning in the feet and gradually extending upwards to the abdomen, in which sometimes a considerable quantity of fluid collects, comes on towards the end. Death is generally preceded by symptoms of cholæmia. I have not at empted to give a f ullaccount of the symptoms, but merely to indicate the principal features of the disease. Of the five cases upon which the following description of the morbid anatomy of the disease is based, the fifth died in the stage of enlargement without signs of jaundice or Medical Officers of the Army of India. 53 The spleen, which was enlarged in all the cases, presented nothing peculiar under the microscope. The livers were enlarged uniformly, the shape was normal, the anterior edge thin, the surface smooth and mapped out into minute areas by delicate lines, so as to present an appearance like the surface of morocco leather. The capsule was not thickened and there were no signs of perihepatitis. On section the sub- stance was very tough and fibrous, and deeply bile-stained. The cut surface was granular and the lobules were encircled by fibrous tissue, which in places was so abundant as to obscure the hepatic structure. In none of the four cases was there more than a drachm of fluid in the gall-bladder. This fluid was pale, glutinous mucus, altogether different from normal bile. The orifice of the bile duct in the duodenum was patent. Microscopical Appearances. The following description applies to the livers of the four advanced cases, and is based upon the examination of sections taken from different parts of each specimen. The appearances were essentially the same in all, though the amount of fibrous tissue, the number of bile ducts and the degree of destruction of the hepatic cells varied in different sections and in parts of a section. Fig. I was taken from case 2 and shows the alterations produced by the disease while the hepatic structure is recognisable. In most sections the destruction of the liver tissue was greater and in some the whole field was made up of fibrous tissue, bile ducts and a few scattered masses of granular débris. The lobules were small, irregular in shape, and each was encircled by a band of fibrous tissue, which varied in width. The hepatic cells were massed together in groups; the normal arrangement in columns, radiating from the central vein, was destroyed by strands of fibrous tissue, which were generally visible with low power (vide fig. I). Under higher powers the presence of fibres within the lobules, separa- ting the liver cells into groups, was seen to be universal. The fibrous tissue of the interlobular tracts was composed of coarse fibres compactly arranged with many nuclei and considerable round-cell-infiltration; the blood vessels among the fibres were large and numerous. The intercellular fibres were also well formed and distinct, but generally more delicate in structure than those around the lobules. Among the fibres of the interlobular tracts and also within the peri- phery of the lobules, numerous bile ducts were visible. The largest, which are shown in fig. 1 as short dark rods among the fibres between the lobules, possessed a well-marked lumen and were formed of a distinct external coat of fibrous tissue and lined with cubical epithelium (fig. 4). In the ducts of smaller size the fibrous coat was indistinct and the lining composed of oval epithelium; in the smallest only two rows of nuclei could be distinguished. The formation of these ducts could be traced through every intermediate stage, from the elon-
54 Scientific Memoirs by gated masses, composed of two rows of nuclei, to the large tubes lined with cubical epithelium. They were found ramifying in every direction among the fibres, some were seen in longitudinal, others in transverse section, and many were branched. Those of large size had a distinct lumen, but no contents of any de- scription could be seen. The number and distribution of the bile ducts were irregular; in some sections comparatively few could be seen, and these only of small size, while in other sections fifteen to twenty were found in a single inter- lobular tract. The smaller ducts were more numerous than those of large size, and were found not only in the fibrous tissue outside the lobules, but also among the fibres between the cells of the peripheral portion of the lobules. The ducts were most numerous in those parts of a section in which the liver substance was destroyed, and its place occupied by fibrous tissue55 Medical Officers of the Army of India. mal appearance being quite exceptional, and many sections may be examined without finding a single cell free from marked signs of degeneration. The macro56 Scientific Memoirs by In the fibrous tissue of the portal sheaths and interlobular tracts bile ducts were visible, but neither so large nor so numerous as in the advanced stage of the disease. When examined with higher powers (vide fig. 7) the details of the intra- lobular changes appeared. The new formation between the liver cells was found to consist of fasciculi, formed of several fibres loosely arranged, with numerous nuclei and large capillary vessels distended with blood. The hepatic cells were formed into groups, encircled by the fibrous fasciculi which had completely broken up the normal columnar arrangement of the lobular elements. The groups contained, as a rule, five or six liver cells, some were larger, others were composed of one or two cells only. The condition of the hepatic cells varied greatly, not only in the different groups, but also in the individual cells compos- ing them. In many of the groups the cells appeared quite healthy; in others they showed signs of degeneration and atrophy, varying from cloudiness of the protoplasm to complete destruction. The majority of the cells possessed two or three nuclei, and in these cells the protoplasm was generally abnormally gran- ular and contained minute particles of pigment. In some groups a mass was found in which the nuclei only could be distinguished. In a considerable number of groups the destruction was complete, the nuclei had disappeared, and all that remained was a small quantity of débris composed of granules and pig- ment particles. Very few oil globules were found in the cells at any stage of degeneration. The condition of the cells composing the different groups also varied. In some groups healthy and degenerate cells were found side by side. It was evident that the state of the hepatic cells was in no way dependent on the position they occupied in the lobules; central groups presented as marked signs of degeneration as those at the periphery; and as many healthy cells were found in the one situation as in the other. The majority of the liver cells were healthy, or presented an abnormal granular pigmented condition of the proto- plasm and multiplication of the nuclei. Complete destruction was exceptional, though in almost every field some cells were found which had undergone extreme degeneration. The fibrous tissue of the portal sheaths was in a state of active prolifer- ation, as evidenced by the numerous nuclei and abundant infiltration of round cells between the fibres. The formation of the interlobular tracts by prolong- ations from the portal sheaths was clearly shown. The processes dipped in between the lobules and were formed of delicate, richly nucleated fibres, infil- trated with round cells, which in places were so numerous as to hide the fibres. In the centre of fig. 7 an interlobular tract is shown. In the portal sheaths and interlobular tracts numerous bile ducts were visible. Most of them were small and consequently could not be seen with low power, Some were large with a distinct fibrous coat and lining of cubical epi- thelium, but the greater number were minute tubules formed of two rows of cells
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 57 of which the nuclei only were distinguishable. The ducts were most numerous in the fibrous tissue of the portal sheaths, a few were found in the larger inter- lobular tracts and in the fibrous tissue between the groups of hepatic cells at the periphery of the lobules. From the foregoing description of the morbid anatomy of the form of cir- rhosis found in children in this part of India, it is evident that the disease pre- sents several peculiar features. It attacks young children, usually under one year old. The liver primarily enlarges with comparative rapidity and reaches an enormous size, and subsequently contraction takes place. The disease is almost invariably fatal. The appearances presented by the liver of case 5 show that the formation of fibrous tissue begins within the lobules and occurs indepen- dently of the portal sheaths which undergo proliferation at a later period. The presence of abundant loosely arranged fibres between the liver cells explains the large size of the organ. The cirrhosis is primarily intercellular. In most cases the portal sheaths proliferate and each lobule becomes encircled by a band of fibrous tissue. The diminution in the size of the liver follows, as in the ordinary form of cirrhosis, from the contraction of the interlobular bands. Re- cently I have had the opportunity of examining two cases (known as cases 6 and 7) which were treated in the Medical College Hospital. In case 6 the inter- cellular fibres are very abundant; the groups of liver cells are separated by wider intervals, but the portal sheaths are only slightly affected and the interlobular tracts are narrow and inconspicuous. This seems to show that the intercellular formation of fibres is the primary and essential feature of the disease, and that the proliferation of the portal sheaths and interlobular tracts, though generally present, is secondary and may be altogether absent. In the later stage of the disease jaundice is present. It comes on gradually, and in most cases consti- tutes the most prominent symptom. It was absent in cases 5, 6, and 7. In these three cases, although many of the liver cells are destroyed, a large number appear healthy, or but slightly affected. In my first four cases t he liver cells are almost completely destroyed and jaundice of a most marked character was present. It seems that jaundice, in this disease, depends upon the amount of liver cells destroyed, and that so long as a sufficient number of healthy cells remain, this symptom is absent. The destruction of the liver cells can hardly be altogether due to pressure; it has begun in case 5 in which the fibrous tissue is composed of loosely arranged fibres, and is not greater in cases 6 and 7, although in these the quantity of intercellular tissue is much more and the fibres are compactly arranged. It may be due to the direct action of an irritant on the liver cells. The multiplication of the bilducts appears to be connected with the de- struction of the liver cells. They are most numerous in those parts of the sec- tions of the first four cases in which the liver cells are completely destroyed. Comparatively few are found in the three last cases. I
58 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. It remains now to state briefly what is known of the causation of this fatal affection of the liver. Unfortunately all that can be said at present is that it is not due to any of the usual causes of cirrhosis of the liver in adults. It is not necessary to discuss the possibility of alcohol being the cause. The age at which the disease is found, and the social customs of the Hindus and Mahomedans, prove that alcohol has no part in its causation. As regards syphilis, the clinical evidence is altogether against it, and in none of the cases examined by me were there any signs of infantile syphilis. As to malaria, the general opinion of medical men in Calcutta is against its being the cause, though it may be a pre-disposing factor. As I have elsewhere pointed out, there are good grounds for believing that the disease is brought about by the irritation produced by the products of faulty digestion, and that the cause lies in unsuitable food, but at present the evidence is not sufficient to justify a positive opinion.
Description of Plate. To illustrate SURGEON J. B. GIBBONS' Paper on Biliary Cirrhosis in Children . FIG. 1 x 30.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000872.tif] Fig 1. x30. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000872.tif] Fig 2. x160. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000872.tif] Fig 3. x340. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000872.tif] Fig 4. x285. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000872.tif] Fig 5. x160. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000872.tif] Fig 7. x160. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000872.tif] Fig 6. x30. BILIARY CIRRHOSIS IN CHILDREN. Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta. October 1890.
On the Habits of Certain " Harvesting." Ants. (WITH PLATE.) Genus.60 Scientific Memoirs by Indian Museum collection. The observations in this paper refer to H. scabriceps and H. criniceps indifferently, as their habits and methods of working are, so far as I can see, identical. During 1889 and the early months of 1890 I observed several nests of both species either near the town of Puri or in the district; in- deed, both kinds are rather common, frequenting " bunds," the banks of roads, the borders of fields and open grassy spots. I have lately (March 17th, 1890) found two nests of H. scabriceps on the Calcutta maidan . The nest, which is always in the ground, has no dome or " hill " over it, and generally only one opening in the centre of the crateriform midden. The main entrance leads into a passage from which numerous other passages branch horizontally and obliquely in all directions leading to the chambers in which the ants live and to the granaries. The passages are very narrow and the chambers often at a considerable distance from the main entrance to the nest, and this, as I shall have occasion to mention fur- ther on, makes it difficult to find the stores of grain. In some cases there may be a second or even three openings to the nest, and if the main entrance is dis- turbed or blocked up, another door will be formed close by. It takes a great deal of disturbance to make these ants forsake their nest. The active members of the community consist of an elephant-headed soldier, a worker major, and a worker minor. On dry days all through the cold weather the ants may be seen harvesting for the greater part of the day. Sometimes, however, they are seen in the morning or in the evening, and again on certain days hardly any ants go out harvesting, and only a few 61 Medical Officers of the Army of India. midden and all the seeds found in the granaries are beautifully clean. I have never found any débris of insects in the middens, nor have I ever noticed these ants carrying insects into their nests. If an insect is placed near them they do not, as a rule, take much notice of it. For a long time after.I first began to observe these ants I failed entirely to find a perfect granary, although I frequently found a few seeds in the earth turned up. The reason of my want of success lay in my failing to understand the structure of the nest. After a time I gave up digging down on the main entrance and took to making tentative thrusts with the trowel in various directions at various distances from the opening to the nest, and often with success. It was not, however, until the 27th October 1889 that I succeeded in obtaining an entire undamaged granary. This I dug up from a nest of H. criniceps in the clayey soil in the Puri Jail garden. This granary was at the end of an almost horizontal passage; in shape irregularly round and somewhat larger than a hazelnut. Its walls were firm and it contained three hundred and five seeds of Amaranthus gangeticus, grown as a vegetable in the garden and in seed at the time, and twenty-two seeds of Scirpus barbatus, of which only a few plants could be seen near the nest. This was, I think, a small granary. I have seen some which must have been as large as a walnut when entire. Moggridge speaks of granaries as large as a gentleman's gold watch which he found in the nests of Atta barbara. It is, of course, impossible to count all the seeds in any one nest, but62 Scientific Memoirs by remain more or less torpid, finding sufficient for their wants in the stores of grain remaining at the end of the harvesting season. No doubt where the heat is less or the nest sheltered, the ants work on up to the rains, and as I have shown they occasionally come out even during the "rains," when there is an interval of fine weather. In such cases the necessity for extensive storing would be lessened. When we consider the formation of the mouth parts of an ant it seems evi- dent that they cannot eat seeds which have become hard and dry, and must store them until the starch in the seed is changing into sugar, when they tear through the testa and suck out the sweet juice: "Exactement commeles chiens lorsqu'ils lapent ou lorsqu'ils lèchent le fond d'une assiette" (Forel63 Medical Officers of the Army of India. The harvesting ants of the south of India have been described by Sykes and Jerdon and include Pheidole providens, West, This ant is not found in Puri, but I have noticed that Pheidole indica, Mayr, sometimes carry fallen seeds, though their chief food is insects. On the authority of Mr. Horn (ref. Moggridge "Harvesting Ants and Trapdoor Spiders," pp. 66-67, edition 1873) Sima(Pseudomyrma) rufo-nigra, Jerdon, is included among the harvesting ants. It would be rash for me to say that this species does not harvest in some part of India, but it certainly does not in Orissa. I have had several nests under ob- servation in the neighbourhood of Puri for more than a year. Mr. Horn is quoted (loc. cit. ) as saying that the ants he noticed in Mainpuri were "of a medium size, shortish bodies, and of a reddish brown colour.64 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army in India. striated longitudinally and covered with very fine white hairs; head, without mandibles, almost square, wider behind than in front, slightly concave behind in the centre of the occipital margin, posterior angles rounded; the small triangular portion of the vertex enclosed by the ocelli is reddish black and the angles ap- pear raised to form partial sockets for the ocelli. Thorax nigro-ferruginous and shining on the upper surface, lighter at the sides and beneath, somewhat rugose at the sides and generally hairy; pronotum small, mesonotum large and very convex in front, grooves between mesonotum, scutellum, post-scu- tellum and metanotum distinct; basal portion of metanotum with slightly irre- gular transverse striæ. First node of the petiole somewhat conical, rounded on the top; second node round and almost sessile on the abdomen; color as head, but lighter beneath and at the sides, upper surface of nodes darker than other parts; a few strong hairs on the posterior aspect of each node, more marked on the first. Abdomen brownish-black, shining, oval, truncated in front and not very pointed behind, covered with small strong whitish hairs; first segment very large, occupying half the abdomen. Legs: coxæ pale rust red, femora and tibiae blackish brown and shining, tarsi rust red. Wings unknown. The individuals which I have called soldiers are, with the head stretched out, about. 75 mm. long and remarkable for the "elephantine" appearance of the head, which measures 2.3 by 2 mm. in the widest part. What their parti- cular functions may be I am not able to say with certainty; they do not harvest, and their teeth are too blunt for seed-cleaning. They act, I think, as pioneers, road-makers, &c., and with their large heads would be able to block up the entrance to the nest in case of invasion. The measurements given by Dr. Mayr for the major and Description of Plate. Holcomyrmex scabriceps. a worker major (about natural size) b " minor " C soldier " d female " A worker major (enlarged). B " minor " C soldier " D female "
HARVESTING ANTS. (J. H. TULL WALSH.) HOLCOMYRMEX SCABRICEPS (about natural size). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000905.tif] a [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000905.tif] b [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000905.tif] c [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000905.tif] d HOLCOMYRMEX SCABRICEPS (enlarged). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000905.tif] a [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000905.tif] b [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000905.tif] c [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000905.tif] d Reg. No. 194, San., IndiaOn two Autcecious Cæomata in Simla. BY SURGEON-MAJOR A. BARCLAY, M.B. Two complete autcecious Comata occur in Simla, one on Smilax aspera, L. and the other on Prenanthes Brunoniana, Wall and Lactuca macrorhiza, Hook. f. The former I have already described in a preceding volume of these Memoirs,* but I have since obtained further information regarding its life history, which I will add here after describing the fungus on Prenanthes and Lactuca; and I shall conclude with some general remarks on the genus Cooma. I. Puccinia Prenanthes,Pers. Var. Himalensis. I have met with this fungus in two separate localities widely distant from one another; in the one locality on Prenanthes Brunoniana and in the other on Lactuca macrorhiza. The aacidial stage on Prenanthes is found during the latter part of March and April and on Lactuca considerably later, but it is by no means common. In March the leaves of Prenanthes were found in early attack, bearing spermogonia and a few young cidia, not yet open, but in the case of Lac- tuca this does not occur until June and July. The fungus causes considerable hypertrophy and distortion. The leaf patches, which are about 0.5 mm. in dia- meter, on an average, on Prenanthes, are much paled in colour, usually deeply concave above and convex below. spermogonia are numerous on both surfaces. The petioles of leaves are also often found attacked, when they swell somewhat and become distorted. The leaf patches are irregularly round or oval, and as many as six may be found on a single leaf. The cidia are all on the lower leaf surface, and open by a pore. There is no peridium. The aecidia are very large, occupying almost the whole depth of the leaf blade. The a2cidiospores are round oval or pyriform, pale yellowish brown, and with a densely tuberculated epispore. The fresh spores from Pre- nanthes measured from 21 p, in diameter to 28x20, or 23.5x20 p, on an average (28-21x22-1.8), whilst those from Lactuca' measured 32-16x28-16 µ. I could not detect any germ pores in the spores from Prenanthes even with sul- phuric acid, which immediately bleached them; but those from Lactuca revealed *Part IV, 1889. K
66 Scientific Memoirs by four pores very clearly. Some spores from Prenanthes were placed in water on the 14th April, and next day they had germinated freely (fig. 6), throwing out long germ tubes, mostly branched and very long. The spores from Lactuca also germinated freely and in the same way the germ tubes containing orange red matter. The spermogonia are numerous, with tufts of paraphyses protruding through their mouths. I uprooted some of these attacked plants of Prenanthes found in nature with æcidia and kept them in a gardener's box with their roots in a glass vessel of water. At the end of April I found that some new leaves, which had been put forth bore brown pustules, mostly hypophyllous, on large areas of mycelial invasion, which retained their green colour for some time after the rest of the leaf blade yellowed from withering or decay. These pustules bore uredospores. Each leaf bore two to twelve pustules; but in nature the whole leaf surface is often besprinkled with them. The uredospores are pale brown, very deciduous with- out any portion of stalk adhering, round oval or pyriform, covered sparsely with minute spines, and measuring when fresh 26-21 x 21-18 µ. Those from Lactuca measured 26-19 x 23-17 µ. There are pale semi-lunar thickenings on the epi- spore, one to three being visible at once, implying from four to five on each spore (figs. 2, 5, 6). These semi-lunar excrescences swell up in sulphuric acid and gradually disappear. I frequently placed these spores from Prenanthes in water, but they persistently refused to germinate. Spores from Lactuca germ- inated tardily, emitting a straight, unbranched tube, containing very pale orange- red matter, and leaving the spore-walls grey. After producing these uredospore pustules, my Prenanthes plants unfortu- nately diedMedical Officers of the Army of India. 67 This fungus is sufficiently like P. Prenanthis, Pers., to warrant its being so named; but it is a distinct variety in that it has no vestige of peridium, and in that its spore measurements are somewhat different from those given by European observers, as shown in the following table:68 Scientific Memoirs by glass of water under á bell glass, as recommended by Plowright, they produce regular sporidia in the usual way. Under these circumstances the contents of the spore cells, which are orange red, wander into the discal ends of the promy- celia, which then divide as usual, and produce four sporidia on four long and stout sterigmata (fig. 4b ). The sporidia are large, round to oval, orange red bodies, measuring 22-10 x 12-869 Medical Officers of the Army of India. General Remarks. As long as it was believed that the CDescription of Plate. FIG. 1. Photograph, natural size, of leaf of Smila xaspera, showing teleutosporic stage. " 2. Uredospore from Prenanthes, x 350. " 3. Teleutospore from Prenanthes, X 350. " 4 a. Teleutospore from Smilax, showing places of exit of promycelia and swollen stalk x 350. b. Showing end of promycelium, with one Sporidium in situ, x 350. c. Detached sporidia, one germinating, x 350. d. Secondary sporidium, x 350. " 5. Ungerminated uredospore from Penanthis, x 350. " 6. Uredospore, with detached germ tube, x 240. " 7. Teleutospore from Lactuca.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000959.tif] 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000959.tif] 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000959.tif] 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000959.tif] 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000959.tif] 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000959.tif] 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000959.tif] 4. PUCCINIA PRAINIANA AND P. PRENANTHIS. 22, San., India.Rhododendron Uredineæ. BY SURGEON-MAJOR A. BARCLAY, M.B. In the preceding volume of these Memoirs I described in detail the charac- ters and structure of a Chrysomyxa on Rhododendron arboreum (C. Himalense, mihi) a species extremely abundant here, but without trace of any other spore form. I had at that time no information regarding the geographical distribution of the fungus. But during the summer of 1890 I received specimens, apparently of C. Himalense on Rhododendron Hodgsoni, Hook. f. from Surgeon L. A. Waddell, collected at Lingtu, below the Jelep Pass in Sikkim, at an elevation of 11,500-12,000 ft. showing its extension far eastwards along the Himalayas (Pl. I, fig. 2b ). Again, my friend Mr. J. H. Lace, of the Forest Department, sent me other specimens, collected on the inner ranges of the Himalayas, towards the north of Simla, which are of exceptional interest, since they consisted of a uredo form on Rhododendron lepidotum, Wall, and an æcidial form on R. campanula- tum, Don. The existence of an æcidium on Rhododendron is extremely interesting, especially in connection with de Bary's speculations on the remote history of Chrysomyxa Rhododendri, D. C. But, before proceeding to any con- sideration of the possible connection between the Himalayan and Alpine forms, it will be convenient to describe these two new forms, which I have recently received, in some detail. Uredo on Rhododendron lepidotum, Wall. (Pl. I, fig. 2c).72 Scientfiic Memoirs by In stained preparations I could determine six or more germ pores in some individual spores; but in others, equally colored, I could detect none. In trans- verse sections of a leaf through spore beds the mycelium is seen to be very abundant, and to contain bright orange red oil globules. It gives rise to no appreciable thickening of the leaf blade, but many spongy cells are entirely destroyed, though the palisade cells are uninjured. The mass of the mycelium occupies the place of the spongy tissue, but filaments course singly among the palisade cells to the epidermis on the opposite side. Æcidium on Rhododendron campanulatum, Don. (Pl. I, figs. I and 2a).Medical Officers of the Army of India. 73 25 miles in a direct line, and the Murali peak, 54 miles as the crow flies. On Hatu, a mountain about 23 miles distant, in a direct line, R. lepidotum occurs, but not R. campanulatum. Near all these localities, but at lower elevations, R. arboreum is also plentifully met with. Dr. Waddell's specimen of Chrysomyxa Himalense on R. Hodgsoni, collected in Sikkim, would tend to show that this teleutosporic stage is found throughout the inner ranges of the Himalayas. In Hooker's "Flora of British India" R. arboreum is said to be found throughout the Himalayas at elevations between 5,000 and 10,000 feet, and R. Hodgsoni only on the eastern Himalayas at elevations of 10,000 to 12,000 feet. The latter presumably therefore overlaps the former. On the other hand, it seems highly probable that the Uredo form on R. lepidotum, and the Æcidial form on R. campanulatum are related to one another, since Mr. Lace collected both forms in the same locality and at the same time; and, moreover, the Æcidial specimens presented the appearance of being old and nearly over, whilst the Uredo form presented the opposite condition. But in this locality R. arboreum is absent Mr. Lace informs me. In the "Flora of British India" R. lepidotum is said to occur throughout temperate and alpine Himalayas from 8,000 to 15,000 feet, and so likewise does R. campanulatum,at about the same levels (9,000 to 14,000 feet). Bringing all these heights together, we see that it is possible that all these forms of Uredine on them may well, from this point of view alone be connected with one another R. arboreum . . . . . . . 5 to 10,000 ft. R. Hodgsoni. . . . . . . . 10 to 12,000 " R. lepidotum. . . . . . . . 8 to 15,000 " R. cambanulatum . . . . . . . 9 to 14,000 " In my description of the teleutosporic form (C. Himalense) I considered the possible connection between it and the several species of Æcidia borne by our Conifer74 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. Chrysomyxa, which I have left to Dr. Dietel to re-describe, is to all appearances associated with A. Thomsoni. There is no obvious connection between A. PiceDescription of Plates. PLATE I. FIG. 1. Photograph of Rhododendron campanulatum , with Æcidium; slightly, enlarged. PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001031.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001031.tif] Fig. 2. Photo-etching. RHODODENDRON UREDINEAE. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta. November 1896.
PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001037.tif] 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001037.tif] 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001037.tif] 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001037.tif] 4. A. Barclay. del. RHODODENDRON UREDINEÆ. Reg No. 450. Sen., India.1290.320 Litho., S. I. O., Calcutta.
SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY W. R. RICE ESQ., M. D. SURGEON GENERAL W1TH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VI. 1891. 1.