21/2/98 IP/QB.10 m. 91. b. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON-MAJOR-GENERAL J. CLEGHORN, M.D., C.S.I., DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. PART X. 1897. 1.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON-MAJOR-GENERAL J. CLEGHORN, M,D., C.S.I., DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. PART X. 1897. 1.CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PRINTING OFFICE, 8, HASTINGS STREET.
Choleraic and other Commas; on the influence of certain condi- tions in determining morphological variations in vibrionic organisms. BY BRIGADE-SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. D. CUNNINGHAM, C.I.E., F.R.S. A.2 Scientific Memoirs by relatively very large size, and in certain instances demonstrate the presence of a sheath including the ultimate elements very distinctly. The form which the ulti- mate elements assume would appear to be to a considerable extent determined by conditions in the environment favouring or inhibiting rapid growth, for when growing slowly, at relatively low temperatures such as 70°F., rods or elongated filaments tend to predominate, whilst the rapid growths developed at 95°F. are ordinarily composed, in greater part, of short, oval or rounded cocci. In agar-agar media, growth occurs both superficially and interstitially all along the course of the track of the needle, in stab-cultures, and in dense small colonies in the substance of plate ones. The surface growth in tube-cultures in agar-agar media is soft, incoherent and chalky white, and, as in the case of agar- agar cultures -of certain other species of choleraic bacilli, the substance of the me- dium retains a light colour throughout and does not assume the strong yellow or brownish yellow tint characteristic of old cultures of the majority of species. Old cultures in agar-agar are specially characterised by the relatively very large size and eccentric forms of the involution elements which they contain, and some of which from their size very distinctly demonstrate the presence of an including sheath surrounding included coccal elements. Shortly after it was first obtained, cultivations of the organism in 10 per cent. common gelatine were attended by slow, progressive liquefaction of the basis; The process of liquefaction was unlike that attending the growth of any other species of choleraic comma bacillus as yet met with in Calcutta, as there was not a trace of any softening along the course of the needle track, but an even liquefaction, set- ting in over the entire surface of the medium, and gradually and steadily eating its way down to the bottom of it. This was not dependent on absence of intersti- tial development, as a finely clouded cone of growth soon made its appearance along the entire course of the track. A little more than a year later all capacity for liquefaction had disappeared, the characters of the growth otherwise remain- ing entirely unchanged. Cultivations in broth give pale, bright purple throughout, with pure sul- phuric acid, 24 hours after their initiation, and very strong, pure purple after 48 hours' cultivation, and this although the growth is quite exceptionally slow, so that after 48 hours the fluid is merely faintly hazy and has no pellicle. Growth takes place on potatoes certainly and rapidly, in the form of a very thin, moist, canary-yellow stratum. The edges of this are at first very ill defined, but gradually become distinct owing to the fact that the uncovered surface of the potato assumes a very deep pure umber tint. The cultivations rapidly acquire a very strong, bitter-sweet odour. In guinea pigs, subcutaneous injections of diffusions of considerable masses of the growth in water gave rise to extreme dulness and, drowsiness, usually followed by death in the course of a few days. This organism has been under cultivation for a year and nine months, and
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 3 save in respect to loss of power to dissolve gelatine, has retained the characters which originally distinguished it entirely unaltered. G. H. XVIII. Received 29th March 1894. Plate cultures:4 Scientific Memoirs by commas. No trace of interstitial growth. or of pink with 33 per cent. nitric acid. Potato cultivations:Medical Officers of the Army of India . 5 Cultivations in 10 per cent. common gelatine:6 Scientific Memoirs by Primary agar-agar tube cultures from the plates:Medical Officers of the Army of India . 7 the course of a few days proved fatal to all of them but one. This one was removed to another basin and is still alive and healthy up to the present time- more than a year later. A cultivation of the intestinal contents of one of the. dead fish was first established in a tube of agar-agar medium, and primary growth which appeared in this was employed as the source for a plate-culture. Twenty-four hours after the latter had been set, it was found to be crowded with superficial and interstitial colonies which, apparently, were all alike in regard to the nature of their constituent elements. The superficial colonies were ochreous, roughly granular in texture and of very dense consistence, resisting diffusion even under rough friction. The smell of the culture was fishy. When treated with 33 per cent. nitric acid the colonies very slowly acquired a faint pink tinge. The constituent elements entering into their composition were well-curved comma-bacilli, of considerable size, and staining very deeply with ordinary aniline dyes. Tube stab-cultures, derived from the plate, rapidly yielded abundant growth, both on the surface and all along the course of the needle-track, consist- ing of comma-bacilli of like character. The surface growth on old tubes ulti- mately became very thick, of a whitish colour and devoid of any appreciable adhesiveness. Cultivations on potatoes at first yielded characteristic growths certainly and rapidly. These formed expansions, relatively thin, with irregular, ill- defined margins, which were originally ochreous and gradually acquired a pink tint of soft, smeary, inconsistent, creamy texture, and with a strong, sweet, somewhat caseous odour. The constituent elements had the form of oval cocci and short rods, but plate cultivations inoculated with them yielded pure cultivations of colonies, which, both macroscopically and microscopically, were identical with those of the primary one of the series. Subsequently, in the case of cultures which had not been carried on direct from potato to potato, but from continuous sub-cultures of the series of tube cultivations, the growth was much slower, remained throughout relatively thin, never acquired such a distinct pink tint, and consisted of beautiful, highly-curved commas. This affords a striking example of the phenomenon, which is not infre- quently encountered in connection with the morphological variation of certain other species of vibrionic organisms, that, where growth is excessively rapid and luxuriant, the constituent elements tend to separate from one another rapidly in a more or less coccoid condition, whilst, when it is more retarded, they either assume a simple bacillar form or appear in the form of rods composed of a series of cocci included within a common sheath. At a still later period, as is not unfrequently the case with vibrionic organisms, the growths in the continuous series of tube cultures ultimately failed entirely to yield any on potatoes. Growth in common gelatine is accompanied by rapid liquefaction of the medium, which soon shows a wide tapering column of liquid extending along
8 Scientific Memoirs by the entire course of the needle-track in stab-cultures, the walls of the cavity being very conspicuously dotted, and the deposit in the lower part abundant. The liquid strikes intense purple with sulphuric acid. Broth cultures show only faint clouding and no pellicle even after 48 hours' growth. They give faint purple within 24, and well-developed purple within 48 hours, on the addition of sulphuric acid. b . Species present in the intestinal tract of a perfectly healthy gold-fish. A large, perfectly healthy gold-fish was killed and a plate and stab-tube cultivation were set at once from the intestinal contents. Both yielded results within the course of 24 hours, the tube showing limited superficial growth and abundant, softly clouded, interstitial growth along the entire course of the track of the needle. The plate-culture contained two perfectly distinct kinds of superficial colonies; Medical Officers of the Army of India . 9 constituents consisted of slender rods, many of them with typical comma contour, and evidently consisting in many cases of 3 or 4 cocci included within a common sheath. Broth cultivations:10 Scientific Memoirs by limited number of colonies both superficial and interstitial, arid apparently almost all consisting of one species of Schizomycete. The superficial colonies of this were of an ochreous tint by transmitted light, had a coarsely granular texture, and consisted of slightly curved commas. After some time the colonies struck distinct pink with 33 per cent, nitric acid. An agar-agar stab-culture, set from one of the colonies within 24 hours, yielded very abundant superficial and interstitial growth of very short, thick commas, demilunes and oval cocci, The growth within the course of a few days struck faint purple with 33 per cent. nitric acid. The continuous series of sub-cultures, which were carried out from the primary tube, presented the following characters. They continued throughout to give interstitial as well as superficial growth, and the former, like that of the second form, derived from the healthy gold-fish, was frequently accompanied by a conspicuous evolution of gaseous bubbles into the medium. In other respects, however, it was quite different, being softly and diffusedly clouded in place of limited and dense. The constituent elements persistently had the form of large, fairly well curved com- mas. The surface growth was relatively thin and of a distinctly yellow tint. Broth cultivations:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 11 from its contents gave what was practically a pure culture of colonies of comma-bacilli. The colonies were of relatively small size and circular outline, of a bluish tint under oblique illumination, and, when viewed by directly transmitted light, pale ochre, with a central dark nucleus immediately surrounded, first by a homogene- ous yellow zone, succeeded by a shaded zone fringed by a delicate, pale, some- what radiant margin. The constituent elements consisted of slender, pale, well curved, and, in many instances, distinctly beaded comma-bacilli. The colonies failed to show any pink under the influence of 33 per cent. nitric acid. Stab tube-cultures in agar-agar:12 Scientific Memoirs by that which invariably characterises tube-cultures of M. XI Within the course of a few days the colonies acquired a distinct pink tint on adding 33 per cent. nitric acid. Stab tube-cultures in agar-agar:Medical Officers of the Army of India . 13 On commensalism as a factor in determining the growth of certain species of Comma-Bacilli under special conditions. In connection with the views which Buchner and Metchnikoff have latterly adopted in regard to the importance of commensalism of comma-bacilli with other schizomycete organisms within the digestive tract, as a factor regulating the capacity of the former to give rise to the choleraic condition in the host- organism; and also, because, if vibrionic organisms be in any way causally re- lated to the disease, the normal phenomena of seasonal fluctuations in the pre- valence of the latter, especially within endemic areas, may conceivably be, to some extent at all events, determined by commensal fluctuations in the numbers of the causative organisms in the environment, or to commensal alterations in the nature of the products which they are capable of elaborating there, it appears to be worth while to record an undoubted example of the influence of commensalism in preserving the vitality and securing the multiplication of a species of choleraic comma-bacillus which came under observation in the early part of the current year. In the end of December 1895, an isolated and very rapidly fatal case of cholera occurred in the person of a European soldier in Fort William, and some of the contents of the stomach and intestines were submitted to me for bacterio- logical investigation. When received, the specimen consisted of a turbid, pale pinkish fluid, full of adhesive gelatinous flakes. The reaction was primarily neu- tral, but became finally acid as the test paper dried. The addition of pure nitric acid occasioned no perceptible increase in the depth of the pink colouration. Cover-glass preparation showed that the mucous flakes, in many places, con- tained nearly pure cultivations of beautiful, highly curved comma-bacilli, of rela- tively large size, mingled with large numbers of characteristic intestinal epithe- lial cells. A plate culture, within the course of 24 hours, yielded an apparently pure cultivation of rather large colonies, many ranging up to 0.11" or more in diameter, of coarsely granular, lumpy texture, and with irregularly lobulated margins. The odour of the culture was strong and musty, and the constituent elements of the colonies had the form of relatively thick, short, well-curved comma-bacilli. Even after 48 hours' growth, the colonies failed to acquire any pink tint when treated with 33 per cent. nitric acid, but, after the lapse of 72 hours, gave well marked pink. Subsequent plate sub-cultures from the series of tube-cultures derived from the primary one, however, especially in cases where they had been developed under the influence of temperatures of 37°C. in the incubator, struck beautiful pink with the acid within the course of 48 hours. The abbreviation of the period of growth necessary to secure the colour reaction may have been partly determined by the influence of continued cul- ture in agar-agar media, for there can be no question that this, in the case
14 Scientific Memoirs by of certain species, tends to induce this result quite apart from the influence of any other conditions. In this instance, however, conditions of temperature also unequivocally came into play in determining the result, as was con- clusively proved by the fact that where, respectively, the members of paired sub-cultures were exposed to a temperature of 37°C, and to ordinary atmos- pheric temperatures ranging from 62° to 66°F., the former gave the reaction at periods when the latter entirely failed to do so. In both cases alikeMedical Officers of the Army of India. 15 different times owing to the fact that the extension of the host-bacillus is much more rapid than that of its guest. The result of this is, that at first the growth appears to be entirely composed of perfectly straight bacilli of considerable size and closely resembling the common potato-bacillus, whilst later, minute commas come to be more and more prominent and widely diffused. This difference in rate of growth and extension of the two associated organisms renders it possi- ble easily to obtain pure cultivations of the host-one, without having recourse to plate-cultures, and simply by inoculation from the peripheral portions of young growths. Stab tube-cultures in agar-agar inoculated in this way, fail to show any interstitial growth along the track of the needle, but rapidly yield pure growths of the straight bacilli on the surface, whilst cultures, taken sub- sequently and after the comma-bacilli have had time to diffuse themselves, yield surface growths consisting of a mixture of the straight bacilli and commas, and abundant, interstitial, softly clouded growths of commas alone. After pure cultivations of the host-organism had been obtained in this way, an indefinite series of cultures on agar-agar or on potatoes could readily be conducted, whereas, whenever pure cultures of the commas were obtained, an indefinite series of agar-agar sub-cultures were easily carried out, but growth on potatoes could only be secured by means of artificial association of the two organisms. Subsequent experiments, in which the common potato-bacillus was em- ployed as a host in place of the host-species just described, showed that the former also possessed, although in minor degree, the power of favouring the growth of the comma-bacillus on potatoes, and, in the case of another species of comma, Sarcina lutea showed unequivocal evidence of playing a similar part. The precise method in which the host schizomycetes act in favouring the growth of their associates has not meanwhile been definitely determined, but it appears not improbable that, in cases such as the present, their action may to some extent depend upon their effecting alterations in the reaction of the basis, for whilst the reaction of the surfaces of uncontaminated potatoes is nor- mally decidedly acid, that of potatoes invaded by the common potato-bacillus is only faintly acid, and that of those affected by the other host-species is faintly alkaline. Whatever the precise method of action may have been, there can, at all events, be no question, that, in the above phenomena we have conclusive evidence of the fact that an association of choleraic comma-bacilli with certain schizomycetes of totally different nature may play an important part in determining the continued vitality and multiplication of the former. So far, then, as comma-bacilli, or, in other words, certain species of vibrionic organisms, are in any way causally related to cholera, it is clear that one of the factors favouring the evolution of the disease in any locality may be the presence of certain other schizomycetes in the latter, or, in other words, that these adjuvant species may be a factor in determining what Von Pettenkofer has denominated " local predisposition." It matters not whether
16 Scientific Memoirs by the ordinary view of the action of choleraic vibriones in inducing the disease, or that which I am now inclined to hold, and according to which they act by developing toxins in the environment under the influence of certain conditions there, be accepted; the fact remains, that the presence or absence of certain other schizomycete organisms may have an influence in determining the incidence of the disease, because they favour the continued development and multiplication of the pathogenic organisms. On the relation of Vibrionic Organisms to Cholera. The continued study of the bacteriology of cholera in Calcutta has in no way caused me to modify the views which I have, on several previous occasions, ex- pressed in regard to the absurdity of talking of " the cholera bacillus." The longer the question is investigated in the endemic area of the disease, as represented by Calcutta, more and more evidence accumulates to show that the choleraic condition is not necessarily associated with the presence or predomin- ance of any one species of vibrio within the intestinal tract, and that any assump- tion that such an association necessarily exists is merely founded on the fact that Professor Koch, when in Calcutta, was either profoundly ignorant of vibrionic schizomycetes as a group, or that, owing to his brief and limited local experience in the locality, he accidentally encountered only a single species in connection with the few cases of cholera which he had the opportunity of investigating. At the same time, it must be allowed that he was the first observer who drew attention to the undoubted fact that a very special relation does exist between the occurrence of the disease and the predominance of vibrionic schizomycetes within the diges- tive tract, for, although a certain number of exceptional cases do occur in which the choleraic condition exists apart from the presence of any abnormal predomin- ance of intestinal vibriones, there can be no question whatever that an association of the disease with such predominance is normal. In connection with this point, it has to be constantly borne in mind, that the fact that choleraic materials (or cultivations immediately derived from these) contain no bodies which are morphologically of a vibrionic character affords no sufficient ground for any assumption of the actual absence of organisms of truly vibrionic nature in them, for both the original materials and many successive sub-cultures derived from them may, whilst persistently devoid of actual vibriones, contain a profusion of potential ones. Many vibrionic organisms under certain circumstances have the power of multiplying indefinitely in the form of cocci, diplococci and short, straight rods, although under other conditions they are capable of assum- ing typically vibrionic characters. This is a fact which is well known to everyone who has practically studied the subject, and even to those who have ever examined figures illustrative of the life history of such organisms as Cladothrix dichotoma . This truth cannot be too clearly borne in mind in
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 17 attempting to diagnose any case of disease as of choleraic or non-choleraic nature on the ground of the presence or absence of morphological vibriones in the intestinal contents or in cultures derived from such sources. The choleraic condition is certainly normally associated with an astonishing predominance of vibrionic schizomycetes in the intestinal flora, but does not necessarily imply that any corresponding predominance, or indeed any appreciable evi- dence whatever, of the presence of morphological vibriones should be present. In the majority of cases morphological vibriones are from the outset recognis- able; in a certain number they are potentially present, and only in a very few exceptional cases do they seem to be both actually and potentially absent. Until quite recently, I was inclined to regard the normal association of intestinal vibriones with cholera as a purely fortuitous phenomenon, solely deter- mined by the fact that the abnormal condition of the intestinal contents, accom- panying the onset of the disease, afforded a favourable environment to schizomycetes of certain kinds, and especially to members of the vibrionic group of such organisms. The mere fact that species of vibrio do, as a rule, abound so excessively in choleraic materials, implies the fact that the latter constitute a highly favourable environment for their continued vitality and indefinite multi- plication; but the mass of evidence accumulated by the labours of von Pettenkofer and other epidemiologists, and the data derived from the history of cholera in the hospitals of Calcutta and from the practical results of " camping out " of bodies of troops or prisoners in all parts of India, appeared so conclusively to demonstrate that the introduction of choleraic patients and, therefore, of large quantities of choleraic vibriones into a locality, is by no means necessarily any source of immediate danger to the latter, that there appeared to be good ground to doubt whether there were any causal relation whatever between choleraic vibriones and the disease, and whether the association of the former with the latter ought not to be regarded as merely consequential rather than of causal origin. The data were such as seemed to render it possible to account for the peculiari- ties of the choleraic intestinal flora on the hypothesis that they were simply the result of the action of the abnormal conditions of the intestinal fluids, in the cho- leraic state, on the schizomycete population of the intestinal tract; for it is per- fectly evident that, with such a formidable alteration in the nature of the intestinal fluids (looked on as an environment), as the establishment of the choleraic condition implies, there must tend to be an equally considerable altera- tion in the nature of the intestinal schizomycete population. Under normal circumstances, the intestinal contents represent an environment of certain definite properties, and the latter must necessarily determine what the nature of the pre- dominant schizomycete population will be; but, if the properties of the environ- ment be suddenly and very essentially altered, it almost necessarily follows that a corresponding alteration in the nature of the population must ensue. The normal intestinal flora represents the outcome of a struggle for existence under one set of D
18 Scientific Memoirs by conditions, and it would be strange indeed were it not to undergo important modifications under totally different ones. The contents of the intestinal tract most certainly do not normally represent a favourable environment to vibrionic organisms, and equally certainly they come to do so under the influence of the alterations which they undergo on the establishment of the choleraic condition, but this is no proof whatever that the alteration which provides the favourable environment is directly provided by the favoured schizomycetes. Even, according to Koch, the epidemic diffusion of cholera necessarily implies a coincident epi- demic diffusion of certain dyspeptic conditions permitting of the continued vitality and activity of choleraic vibriones when they gain access to the intestinal tract. Influenced by such considerations, I have hitherto maintained that there is no sufficient evidence that choleraic vibriones have any causal relation to cholera whatever, and, in doing so, I have departed from pure Pettenkoferianism; but of late I have become inclined to revert to the latter in an immaterially modified form, and to allow of the probability that there may be a certain causal relation between certain vibrionic schizomycetes and the disease. The accumulation of evidence, indicative of the normal and almost constant association of vibrionic organisms with the choleraic condition, renders it more and more difficult to re- gard the phenomenon as a purely fortuitous one, or one solely dependent on alterations in the nature of the intestinal contents viewed as an environment, and cannot but suggest that the schizomycetes do play a definite rôle in giving rise to the disease. But this does not in any way involve any abandonment of the views which I have always maintained in regard to the incapacity of choleraic vibriones to induce the disease as the simple result of their access to the intesti- nal tract, and as to the supreme importance of local conditions on the elaboration of the toxin upon the action of which the establishment of the choleraic condition depends. All that I am now prepared to grant is, that the normal presence of vibrionic organisms of various species as a predominant and characteristic feature of the contents of the intestinal tract during the choleraic condition does suggest the pro- bability that vibriones as a group do really hold causal relation to the development of that condition. Formerly, I was disposed to regard the phenomenon as one solely dependent on the action of alterations on the intestinal contents, as an environment, on the predominance of special forms, normally, and constantly present in them,Medical Officers of the Army of India. 19 solely on the action of alterations in the constitution of the intestinal contents as an environment; and, were epidemiological data to be set aside as of no significance, we might be more or less justified in explaining the induction of the choleraic condition as simply dependent on the access of certain vibrionic organisms to the digestive tract. But, not only do epidemiological data not fit in with any such assumption, not only is there an overpowering mass of evidence to show that choleraic patients, apart from conditions of the locality into which they are introduced, are not efficient causes for the establishment and diffusion of the disease, but there is an absolute absence of any conclusive evidence that choleraic vibrionic organisms, either as they issue from the bodies of the sick, or as ordinarily artificially propagated in laboratories, are necessarily capable of giving rise to the choleraic state on gaining access to the intestinal tract. Actual experimental evidence on the effects of the ingestion of fresh choleraic dejecta is naturally not ordinarily forthcoming, but when I first be- came acquainted with the General Hospital in Calcutta, the old head-sweeper there was always willing to earn a rupee by partaking of a dose, and certainly appeared to suffer from no ill-effects from the treatment, and judging from the habits of the class to which he belonged, there can be no reasonable question that members of the latter must, during any period of prevalence of cholera, be constantly liable to carry out similar experiments, casually and involuntarily, with equal impunity. Numerous experiments on the ingestion of artificial cul- tures of choleraic vibriones have, however, been deliberately undertaken, and, in any laboratory in which such organisms are extensively cultivated, it may be fairly assumed that innumerable involuntary experiments of like nature must have taken place, and yet the record of unequivocal cases of so-called Laboratory- cholera remains a minimal one. The data are such that, in order to account for the seasonal fluctuations and epidemic diffusion of cholera, we must assume the occurrence of coincident seasonal fluctuations, and epidemic diffusion of certain predisposing conditions; and the only question is whether these are to be regarded as of a local or a per- sonal origin. The question is:20 Scientific Memoirs by or as affecting the capacity of the latter for manufacturing toxic materials, or finally, as favouring the access of pathogenic organisms or their products to the bodies of the resident population. It appears to me to be most probable that their most influential action is conducted in the two latter ways. There is practically no evidence whatever to show that the vibrionic organ- isms associated with cholera are necessarily endowed with pathogenic proper- ties, there is abundant evidence that such organisms are normally associated with the choleraic condition, and finally there is conclusive evidence that the physiological properties of such organisms may vary conspicuously under different circumstances. The mere presence of local conditions favouring the growth of choleraic vibriones need not necessarily imply a coincident prevalence of the disease, because mere multiplication does not necessitate the presence of the pathogenic property; but it may imply a coincident prevalence of the disease where not only multiplication, but also the manufacture of special toxic pro- ducts by the multiplying organisms occurs. The evidence which is at present available certainly does not tend to show that the normal intestinal tract provides a favourable environment for the manufacture of any toxic materials by vibrionic organisms capable of giving rise to the choleraic condition, or one which is favourable to the multiplication of the latter. On the other hand, the choleraic intestinal tract does provide an exceptionally favourable environment for vibrionic organisms, but there is no proof that the latter, on escaping from it, have any necessary choleragenic property. Guided by such considerations, von Pettenkofer was led to assume that the contents of the choleraic intestinal tract contained elements of the nature of germs, which, so long as they retained this character, were innocuous, and which were only a source of danger because, after issuing from the site of their original development, they were capable of acquiring pathogenic properties as the result of processes of maturation which could only be carried out under certain conditions of environment. The evidence which led him to frame such a theory has certainly only gained additional strength with the advance of our knowledge in regard to the epi- demiological phenomena which are presented by the disease, and there is now only one point in which it seems to me that his doctrine may with advantage be modified. In framing any theory in regard to the causation of cholera, we have to take the following facts into account, to which the evidence at present available unequivocally leads:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 21 3. At periods when cholera is prevalent, comma-bacilli may be present in the intestinal contents of perfectly healthy individuals. 4.The choleraic condition may be present in individuals whose intes- tinal contents are seemingly entirely devoid of comma-bacilli. 5. In cases of cholera, in connection with which comma-bacilli are pre- sent in the dejecta, there is no necessary direct relation between the numbers of the latter and the severity of the symptoms. 6.The artificial administration of distinct species of vibrionic organisms may lead to the development of the choleraic condition. 7. The physiological properties of vibrionic and other schizomycete organisms may unequivocally vary very greatly under different circumstances, in connection with growth in different environments, and consequently the nature of the products to which they give rise must also vary greatly. 8. There is a great mass of evidence to show that the result of the introduction of cases of cholera into any locality is not necessarily followed by any diffusion of the disease within the latter22 Scientific Memoirs by affecting the physiological properties of the choleraic vibriones within the in- testinal tract; and, taking the fact into account that choleraic vibriones may abound within the latter without the coincident development of any truly choleraic condition, the really essential action of the peculiarities in the intes- tinal flora must apparently lie in their power of inducing alterations of the physiological properties of the vibriones. But this lands us in pure Petten- koferianism, save that the modification in the physiological properties of the vibriones is supposed to occur, not in the environment, but in the interior of the digestive tract. According to Pettenkofer, the modification rendering the germs, assumed to be present in choleraic materials, capable of giving rise to cholera, is regarded as taking place in the locality; according to the other view, as taking place within the digestive tract. But it appears to be quite permissible to interpret the data in yet another way. Both Pettenkofer and the later theorists regard the intestinal tract as the essential site of the manufacture of the specific toxin which induces the primary symptoms of cholera; but, in certain respects at all events, it appears to be more logical to regard the existent data as indicating that the specific toxin is one which is produced in the environment, and which enters the digestive tract already elaborated and capable of giving rise to its toxic effects. On the supposition that the interior of the intestinal tract is the proper site of the elaboration of the specific toxin, it is surely only logical to assume that choleraic discharges must necessarily be endowed with a highly developed toxic property, and yet, as has been already pointed out there is an entire absence of any positive evidence to show that they normally are so. Had choleraic excreta normally contained any large quantity of an elaborated toxin, there could have been no need of ascribing any influence to local conditions on the incidence of the disease, unless in so far as they served to favour direct access of the toxin to the human organism. It is just because there is no satisfactory evidence that choleraic excreta are normally directly highly toxic, or in other words, it is just because of the evidence that the interior of the digestive tract in the choleraic condition, while unequivocally a favourable site for the multiplication of vibrionic organisms, is not normally a favourable site for the manufacture of the choleragenic toxin that von Petten- kofer was led to regard the environment as all-powerful in determining the occurrence of maturative processes in the former. Buchner and Metchni- koff, for the same reason, consider the environment as essential in determining certain adjuvant conditions in the intestinal flora. But, if this be so, it can hardly fail to strike one that the suggestion is permissible that the environment may be the normal site of the manufacture of the toxin, and the choleraic intestinal tract merely a site for the excessive multiplication of the factors of it, and it appears to me that such a supposition fits in better with all the data which are at present at our disposal than either of the other theories does. The objection may be raised that this theory would imply the ingestion of impossibly
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 23 large doses of the toxin, and also that it would imply that in every case an attack of cholera should be of a sudden, explosive character, whereas in many instances this is not so, the development of characteristic choleraic symptoms only supervening on a given period of systemic disturbance. Neither of these phenomena appear, however, to constitute conclusive objections. About two and a half grains of powerful, dried cobra-venom probably amount to a fatal dose for any average human subject, and it by no means necessarily follows that with this we have reached the maximum of lethality of an organic poison. Dried venom, moreover, does not consist of the specific toxin alone, so that the amount of the latter constituting a lethal dose must be very considerably less, and, in any case, it cannot be affirmed that maximum of toxicity for organic poisons has been reached by the active principle of cobra-venom,24 Scientific Memoirs by This is a phenomenon which certainly presents great difficulties to the theory of local manufacture of the toxin within the interior of the digestive tract, but none whatever to that which is here advocated. Sudden explosive cases are unequivocally very hard to explain as the result of intraintestinal manufacture of a toxin, but are readily explicable as the result of the sudden ingestion of lethal doses of an elaborated one, and, granting the possibility of cumulative action, there is equally little difficulty in explaining the occurrence of cases in which the choleraic condition is only gradually developed. The hypothesis accounts satisfactorily both for the sudden and the progressive estab- lishment of the condition, and also for the impossibility of drawing any sharp line of demarcation between cholera and choleraic diarrhMedical Officers of the Army of India 25 access of the specific toxin will be associated with access of a certain number of the toxogenic organisms, which find a congenial nidus in the contents of the intestinal tract, as modified by the establishment of the choleraic condition. 5. The choleraic condition may be present in individuals whose intestinal contents are devoid of any appreciable choleraic vibriones, either actual or potential, because it does not necessarily follow that a lethal dose of the toxin should invariably be accompanied by any of its specific factors. Thus, alcoholic intoxication may certainly be present quite apart from the coincident presence of any yeast or other alcohologenic fungi within the digestive tract. 6. In cases of cholera, in connection with which unequivocal choleraic vibriones occur within the digestive tract, the intensity of the choleraic condition does not necessarily bear any direct ratio to the numbers of vibriones which are present, because the intensity of the condition is dependent on the dose of elaborated toxin and not on that of the elaborating organisms. 7. Vibriones, presenting all the characteristic features of those ordinarily associated with cholera, may be present in the water-supply or else- where in the environment,without any coincident occurrence of cases of cholera within the latter, because mere presence of choleraic vibriones in a given medium or locality certainly does not neces- sarily imply their capacity for manufacturing physiological products of an invariable quality. It is a matter of common laboratory experi- ence that the physiological properties of schizomycete organisms may be very greatly modified by the nature of their environment, so that the presence of organisms which are capable of manufacturing toxins, under certain conditions, does not necessarily imply any such coincident presence of their specific toxins, e.g., hemp, etc. 8. The artificial administration of perfectly distinct species of vibriones may lead to the development of the choleraic condition, because organisms of perfectly distinct nature may, under certain cir- cumstances, give rise to the manufacture of one and the same toxic material in their environment. Alcohol is produced not only by various species of saccharomyces, but also by mucorinic fungi such as Chlamydomucor racemosus, and the allied species which consti- tutes the efficient factor in the so-called " Darjiling bread," the ferment employed by the natives of the Eastern Himalayas. It does not, therefore, necessarily follow that any one species of schizo- mycete organism should be the essential elaborator of the choleraic toxin. (The administration of yeast fungi or alcohologenic mucorinic E
26 Scientific Memoirs by fungi, apart from the products which they are capable of giving origin to in their environment, will not lead to alcoholic intoxication. The administration of the specific product will do so, but the administration of the specific factors will not.) 9. Mere introduction of choleraic patients into a locality is, apparently, per se, incapable of determining any general development of the disease there, but may occasionally be the cause of cholera among those who come into direct relation with the patients or their effects. The introduction of choleraic cases into any given locality certainly nor- mally implies coincident introduction of large numbers of the specific factors of the choleraic toxin, and may occasionally imply the in- troduction of a certain limited amount of the latter in elaborated form. If the factors alone be introduced, the outcome will necessarily depend on whether local conditions do, or do not, permit of their continued existence and of their elaborating the specific toxin; if a certain amount of the toxin be imported in elaborated form, it may suffice to induce intoxication in a certain number of cases, but, apart from coincident importation of the specific factors and the presence of favourable local conditions, the number must remain strictly limited. 10. There can be no question in regard to the possibility of the occurrence of variations in the physiological properties of schizomycetes and other vegetable organisms when cultivated under different external conditions. It has been already pointed out that we have a striking example of such variation in phanerogamic plants in the case of hemp, and all bacteriological experience agrees in indicating the extent to which similar variations occur in connection with schizo- mycete organisms. 11. The theory does not in any way exclude the possibility that com- mensal conditions may exert an important influence, but merely transfers the commensalism from the interior of the digestive tract to the general environment. A striking example of the influence of commensalism in determining the persistent vitality and multiplica- tion of a choleraic vibrio has already been given in a previous paper, and if commensalism can act in this way, there can assuredly be no ground for denying that it may have the effect of influencing the nature of the specific products elaborated in connection with growth. Commensalism may, therefore, very possibly act in determining local predisposition, not merely by favouring the continued existence of choleraic schizomycetes, but by favouring the elaboration of their specific toxins.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 27 12. On the other hand, it by no means necessarily follows that, in every case, excessive dirt, and therefore an excessive schizomycete popu- lation in a locality, should invariably render the latter specially sub- ject to cholera. Certain schizomycetes certainly play a commensal part in relation to choleraic ones; but, as certainly, others are inimical to them, and, as Nägeli long ago pointed out, an excess of putrefactive schizomycetes may possibly be unfavourable to the continued vitality and multiplication of specific pathogenic ones. Commas and Cholera. Buchner and others believed in a mixed infection owing, not to infection by commas alone, but by commas in association with some unknown micro-organism locally developed in certain places under certain conditions. Rumpf holds that, although commas are the specific cause of cholera, their presence in the intestinal tract does not necessarily give rise to cholera or cho- leraic diarrh28 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. Facts:Notes on the Malarial Parasite as observed in the blood during life, and in the tissues post-mortem, at Lahore, Punjab. BY SURGEON CAPTAIN J. MURRAY, M.B., PROFESSOR OF PATHOLOGY, LAHORE MEDICAL COLLEGE. So much valuable literature has appeared on the subject of the malarial parasite within the past few years, and so much of an authoritative character has been written by observers who have devoted a large part of their time and energies entirely to this work, that some excuse is necessary for venturing to publish a report on investigations that are necessarily comparatively meagre and unimportant. My apology for doing so lies in the fact that, so far as I know, no definite statements have as yet been made regarding the biological characters of the parasite as met with in India, in the light of the compara- tively recent work of Golgi, Marchiafáva, Bignámi, Mannaberg, and other observers, chiefly of Italian experience. From the time of the discovery by Laveran in November 1880, of the so- called Plasmodium malariæ, up to 1885, it was generally held that the parasite met with in all cases of malarial fever was the same, and that the various forms described by Laveran were, in all probability, but protean varieties of one species, the life history of which was not known. No morphological or biological distinctions were noted between the forms associated with the various clinical types of malarial fevers. In 1885, however, Golgi was able to detect the pre- sence of a distinct type in ordinary tertian, and another in quartan fever. He was also successful in tracing the development of the parasite from a very minute to a large sporing body, and in proving that the sporulation of one generation of the mature parasites coincided with the febrile paroxysm. Some time later, Marchiafáva and Celli, Canalis and others, following the lines of investigation origainted by Golgi, confirmed his results as regards simple tertian and quartan fevers, and, in addition, succeeded in proving to their own satisfaction and to that of most unbiased critics, that these parasites, in their turn, differed from those of quotidian fevers, and of the grave forms of malarial intermittents and remittents to which they gave the name of " Summer Autumn Fevers." During this period of progress, Laveran, the discoverer of the parasite, maintained his original position, holding that the organism did not differ suffi- ciently in the various clinical types of fever to warrant its division into distinct varieties or species. In his book "Du Paludisme, " published in 1891, he sums up his observations on the point by the following remarks:30 Scientific Memoirs by tendent à démontrer qu'il n'existe pas de rapport direct et constant entre les formes sous lequelles les hématozoaires.se présentent dans le sang, et les mani- festations cliniques du paludisme; ou peut dire seulement que certaines formes parasitaires is observent plus souvent chez certains malades; les corpes en croissant, par exemple, dans les formes de rechute et chez les cachectiques, ainsi que je l'ai etabli depuis longtemps." Indian medical literature has, as far as I know, produced no report of accurate investigations on this point. Dr. Vandyke Carter, in his interesting and valuable article on the malarial parasite (scientific Memoirs, 1887 ) agrees with Laveran as to the probability of the vari- ous forms belonging to one species; but it is noteworthy that, in the only pure quartan case in his series he found no crescentic forms, while in all the others, which were quotidian or irregular in type, he observed these forms. The drawings (which accompany the article) of the parasites seen in the quartan case, correspond also in their characters with the form of parasite described by Golgi, etc., as characteristic of quartan fever. Since the date of this article many observers have published short records of their work in various medical papers, but, as far as the writer knows, no attempt has been made to confirm or refute the results arrived at in Europe, as to the various species and the relation they bear to the chief types of the disease. During the past two years the writer has had opportunities of observing many cases of malarial fevers, and, in all of a definite and well marked type, has been able to distinguish the marked peculiarities and characteristic life history which have been noticed in similar cases in Europe. Though an account of these observations may add nothing to our knowledge of the biology of the parasite and its relation to disease, it may perhaps possess some value as a confirmation of work already done elsewhere, and as a further proof of the constant characters which the parasite presents in all countries in which it has been observed. The investigations of observers in all parts of the world during the past 15 years, render it now unnecessary to enter into an argument as to whether the bodies present in the blood in malarial fevers are of a parasitic nature or not. The almost universal position of opinion on this point is very well expressed by a recent remark of Dr. Patrick Manson that " if Laveran's body is not a para- site, then it is a most wonderfully contrived device in Nature for deceiving the pathologist." I have therefore thought it better in this short note, not to give a full list of the cases examined by me with notes on each; but to take two or three typical examples of each group in which there could be no doubt as to the clinical type of the fever, and to record, in a systematic form, the results of the examination of the blood, giving at the same time reproductions of drawings made from these selected cases, outlined by the camera lucida and coloured from nature. These I have endeavoured to make absolutely
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 31 faithful, as far as my indifferent powers of drawing permit, and can only regret that the apparatus at my disposal during the past two years has not been such as to enable satisfactory photo-micrographs to be made with the high powers necessary. All the drawings of blood cells and parasites have been made by the aid of a Natchet's or Abbe's camera lucida with a Zeiss 1/1:2" objective (oil immersion), and the No. 4 eye-piece, so the magnification is con- stant. Quartan Fever. Cases of simple quartan fever are comparatively seldom available for con- tinued investigation. They do not often apply for indoor relief, partly, pro- bably, owing to the fact that the general health may be fairly well preserved throughout a long period, partly to the circumstance that a belief pervails amongst certain of the people in this part of India that " chauthe din ke bukhár " is not susceptible of cure by medicine. Several cases have been examined amongst out-door patients, but the two following may be taken as typical. 1. Sikandar Khán, Pathan, æt. circ. 30, a native of Bannu. This patient was admitted in March. 1895, suffering from anæmia with dyspn32 Scientific Memoirs by diminished in size, the oligocythæmia and aglobulia disappeared, and he left perfectly recovered. 2. Faizi, sweeper-woman, æt. 50, a native of the Lahore district, May 1895. The former case was one of an attack of quartan fever observed from the beginning, before the onset of pyrexia, this has been chosen as a contrast, as the condition had lasted more than a year before the patient came under observation. She was a comparatively feeble old woman who gave a history of regular quartan fever during the previous 14 months. Her lips, conjunctivæ and nails were very pale, the tongue, gums and lips showed a deposit of melanin and the spleen was enlarged, reaching the umbilicus. She was kept under observation during three cycles of the fever, each paroxysm occurred at its regular time, and the pyrexial period lasted for nearly 12 hours; during the intervening 60 hours of each cycle the temperature was normal or slightly sub-normal. After the third period of pyrexia 10 grains of quinine was administered 4 times a day, with the result that no more fever occurred. Ten days after the commencement of treatment she insisted that she had perfectly recovered and went home. In each of the above cases the blood was examined at frequent intervals; the disease was of a pure type, and the appearances were identical in both. The description given below, together with the figures, have been taken from the notes made on the observations of both cases indifferently. FORMS OF PARASITE. (1) The fresh blood, drawn and prepared on the slide in the usual way, about 12 hours after the height of the pyrexia, was found to contain the following forms of parasite:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 33 in fig. K. 3,4,5. In this case the parasite was undoubtedly extracorpuscular, the red cell, which it had left remained perfectly normal in all its appearances. The rapidity of approach of the macrophage, the way in which the long process of granular protoplasm flowed towards the parasite and the remarkable manner in which it avoided intervening red cells in its course, presented a most remarkable picture. It certainly seemed that the parasite in leaving the red blood cell had exposed itself to attack, and the phenomenon suggested that the organism had commenced to lose vitality at an early period after having separated from its source of nourishment, and had thus increased the attraction exercised by it on the phagocyte. 2nd. 34 Scientific Memoirs by with very active amMedical Officers of the Army of India. 35 extremity, the accumulated pigment lying between their ends. At the centre of the thickest part of each was a small, light, highly refractile spot, easily seen even in unstained specimens by careful illumination and focussing. This is the "forme en rosace " of Golgi . In some, the point of collection of the pigment and centre of radiation of the segmental spores was not in the centre of the parasite, but towards its periphery, in which case the general appearance resembled that of a fan (Fig. F. 3 and 5 ). Non-sporing spherical forms with the pigment in motion, were still to be found at this, as at all other stages of the fever. At 2 to 4 hours after the height of the paroxysm some sporing forms were still seen, with, in addition, a number of small clear bodies in or on the red blood cells, which differed from those shown fn. Fig. A. only, in being smaller, in having no pigment in their interior and in possessing very slow am36 Scientific Memoirs by formed small rounded bodies which moved rapidly through the hæmocyte. Each detached part contained, as a rule, one or more particles of melanin. These portions frequently again united with each other, and again separated with great rapidity, presenting a most curious and beautiful microscopic object. In addition large and small spherical bodies were seen, with no amMedical Officers of the Army of India. 37 does not form spores, which appears to remain sterile as long as it persists in the peripheral blood, which lives through many generations and which has the power of forming flagella when lying on a slide after removal from the body. The larger forms of these may be seen at all periods of the fever, while the smaller (A 2d, G.4 H. 6 ) were seen by me only in blood examined on the first and second day. The method of production of one of these bodies from a small am38 Scientific Memoirs by and gave a history of perfect health, with no previous attack of fever. Six days before admission he had high fever about midday, and gave a history of the fever having recurred every second day till the date of admission. On the after- noon of the 6th he had fever which reached a temperature of 105°. Next morning the temperature was normal. The spleen was found to be enlarged 1½inches below the costal arch in the left mammary line; physical examination did not reveal abnormality in any other organ, but the tongue was furred and the bowels constipated. The general condition was extremely good. The temperature remained normal on the 7th, on the 8th it rose to 102.4 at 6 P.M. (probably higher in the early afternoon) and on the 10th it reached 106° just before midday. Quinine sulphate was then administered for the first time, in doses of 15 grains three times a day. On the 12th the temperature commenced to rise in the morning, and reached its maximum, 100.8, at 5 P.M, The first effect of the quinine was therefore to modify the paroxysm, producing a prolonged febrile period with delay in the occurrence of the maximum. On the 14th the temperature remained sub-nor- mal, and the patient, who now protested that he was perfectly well, refused to remain in hospital and went on down country with his horses. This case was evidently a typical one of a fresh attack of tertian fever in a previously healthy man of strong constitution. FORMS OF PARASITE.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 39 after having been removed from circulation for some time, an occasional flagel- lated body was seen (Fig. M. 5 and 6 ). From 44 to 52 hours new forms were met with, in the act of sporing. In the case of Lal Khan these were particularly abundant, several could be seen in each slide made at the pyrexial period; in most cases, however, they have to be carefully searched for. In these the pigment was con- centrated in the centre or towards one side, and the appearances were very similar to those described in the quartan parasite (see Fig. N. 1 to 4 ) The chief distinctive features are:40 Scientific Memoirs by with a dilute solution of Ehrlich's acid hæmatoxylin, carefully differentiating with weak hydrochloric acid alcohol, and counter-staining with a weak alcoholic solution of eosin during the process of dehydration. The films may be pre- pared either by rapid dessication and exposure to heat, or (and I think better) by the process recommended by Muir for the study of Leucocythæmic blood (Journal of Pathology and Bact., Vol. I., p. 123 ). The preparations from which all the drawings were made were prepared in this way. The film is obtained in the usual manner by letting a small drop of blood spread itself out between two cover glasses. These are drawn apart and immediately, before they become dry, are floated film downwards on the surface of a saturated solution of mercuric chloride. They are then washed for some minutes in equal parts of absolute alcohol and ether, and are removed, through gradually weaker strengths of alcohol, to distilled water previous to staining. When treated in this way, the youngest stage of the parasite may be seen to have two well marked layers; an outer, deeply stained, and an inner much more lightly stained. A small, circular, very deeply stained spot is seen to lie in the outer layer. No other structure can be made out; I have never seen chromophil granules or fibres in the lightly stained central part (Fig. 0. 1 ). Opinions vary as to the nature of these differently staining portions. Mannaberg believes the highly chromophil part to be a nucleolus, the clear portion to be the true nucleus, and the peripheral portion to be the cytoplasm. Bignami and Bastianelli have not been able to demonstrate any formation which they can regard as a true nucleus, but believe the dark stained spot to represent a nucleus in its functions. The differentiation of the parasite into three distinct parts seems to disappear very early in its life. From about 12 to 36 hours the body stains fairly uniformly (Figs. 0. 2 to 7 ). It occasionally, but by no means always, presents areas defi- cient in, or altogether devoid of, chromatin (Fig. 0. 5 ), while in other cases ill- defined patches of deep staining may be seen (Fig. 0. 6 ). I have not been able to demonstrate the persistence for many hours of a more or less regular, clear space (nuclear ? ), as described by Mannaberg, nor have I satisfied myself in any case, that any remains of the chromophil granule ( nucleolus ?) can be seen after about 12 hours. This may be due to imperfections of method, but numerous and very careful endeavours were made to obtain the appearances so fully described by Mannaberg, with negative results. It appears to be not impossible that the clear spaces, referred to by him as nuclear, may be a result of irregular contraction in the cytoplasm during fixation. I have also failed in demonstrating any regular or constant division of the cytoplasm into a pigmented ectoplasm and a non-pigmented endoplasm. The peripheral layers are generally most richly pigmented but by no means always so, even in fresh preparations. In short, from 12 hours to 36 or 40 hours, the parasite appears
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 41 to me to consist, simply, of an irregularly staining and sometimes vacuolated mass of cytoplasm, which contains melanin granules, sometimes scattered irre- gularly throughout its substance, sometimes confined chiefly to its peripheral portion. At about 40 hours, however, differentiation of structure again becomes ap- parent. Small, deeply-stained, ill-defined spots commence to appear, scattered irregularly through the cytoplasm (Fig. 0. 8 ). Their outline becomes more distinct (Fig. 0. 9 ), the cytoplasm commences to collect round them (Fig. 0. 10 ), and, finally each becomes absolutely well defined and occupies a position in the centre of a small ellipsoidal or irregularly pear-shaped body, each of which has a distinct, sharp contour, and is completely separate from its neighbours. According to Mannaberg the spores undergo a further change while still lying together, in the formation of a lightly stained area lying near the chromophil granule. This I have not seen, and I do not think that this differentiation occurs till after the spore has lain some time free in the blood plasma, or has become attached to a hæmocyte. The facts which the writer has been able to demonstrate regarding the structure of the tertian parasite are therefore as follows:- (1) That the young parasite (from 1 to about 12 hours) consists of a peripheral darkly stained layer, which contains a highly chromo- phil granule or spot, probably nucleolar or nuclear in function; and an inner lightly staining portion. (2) That at about 12 hours this differentiation disappears and that the chromatin then becomes fairly regularly distributed through the cytoplasm. (3) That, about 40 hours, darkly staining bodies begin to separate out, irregularly scattered throughout the mass of the parasite. (4) That these acquire a sharply defined outline, that the remainder of the cytoplasm collects round them, and that about 20 small spores are thus formed by a process apparently of direct division. From these facts, therefore, I am inclined to believe that the dark chromo- phil spot is, as held by Bignami and Bastianelli, of a nuclear nature. In connection with this part of the subject, it may be permissible to remark, that it is inconceivable how any one who has seen the sporing body properly fixed and stained can possibly retain any doubt as to the vital nature of the process. No form of degeneration in red or white blood cells could possibly assume such definite structural characters. That the structure is definite and constant, and that it presents exactly the same characters in India as it does in Southern Europe, any one with a knowledge of the necessary technique and a little experience in the preparation of blood specimens can easily satisfy himself. Variation in method of fixing and staining may produce slight differences of G
42 Scientific Memoirs by opinion regarding the differentiation of the cell substance into nucleus, nucleolus, etc., but the general results are incontestable. Fevers characterised by the presence of crescentic bodies in the blood. The clinical varieties of malarial fever which belong to this group are according to the whole school of Italian observers, whose opinion has now been confirmed by workers in many parts of the worldMedical Officers of the Army of India. 43 upheld as a distinct species by Mannaberg, must be very rare in Upper India, if it occur at all; no case of it has been observed here. Cases of severe malignant remittents are fortunately not common in Lahore. We know that when they do occur in the Punjab, that they frequently assume an epidemic character, and that severe outbreaks of fever of this type are commonest in autumn. No such outbreak has occurred during the past two years, and the cases observed have consequently not been numerous. Further experience may decide that certain of these are produced by a para- site with a tertian cycle: but at present I have no data to warrant the adoption of two species. The cases from which the accompanying drawings were made were:44 Scientific Memoirs by 8 A.M. on the 15th it rose to 98.6. At 1 P.M., when first seen by me, the man was found to be in a comatose condition, he could with difficulty be roused to open the eyes and move, he could not answer questions, reflexes were present but lazy, the pupils were equal and fairly normal in size. The tongue was moist and coated, the spleen was not palpable but its area of dulness reached nearly to the costal arch; the hepatic dulness was increased, reaching to 1 inch below the costal arch in the right mammary line. The lower lobe of the left lung was slightly dull and the breathing over it was harsh. The urine contained no albumen. The pulse was fairly full, 100 per minute, and the heart sounds were weak. The temperature was 101 8ºFh. Examination of the blood at 2 P.M. showed it to be swarming with parasites to be afterwards described. Quinine was given in large doses by the mouth and hypodermically, but the temperature rose to 103ºFh. in the evening and the general condition became worse. At 7 A.M. on the 16th the temperature was 99.2, at 8 102.4, at 1 P.M. 102.8. The parasites were as numerous as ever in the blood, and melaniferous leucocytes abounded. At 6 P.M. the temperature continued 102°, and no remission occurred during the night; at 5 A.M. on the 17th it was 102.5, and death occurred in deep coma at 6.15 A.M. This case affords a good example of malignant comatose remittent fever. The temperature was never very high, the severe symptoms were purely cerebral, and the only clinical guide to a diagnosis of malaria was the man's statement that the fever, though in his opinion it had not left him for 12 days, had been characterised by a daily exacerbation. Examination of the blood at once settled the diagnosis, though the patient's condition was too grave for improvement to follow treatment. FORMS OF PARASITE.-(1) In Simple Quotidian Fever. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 45 instead of being large, pale and 46 Scientific Memoirs by along with, in the younger or smaller forms, the chromophil granule (7 ). A clear unstained area, corresponding in its appearances to the non-staining " nucleus " of Mannaberg is occasionally to be seen (8, 9, 10 ), but its late appearance and irregularity render it more probably of the nature of a vacuole, or space due to irregular fixation. The cytoplasm of the largest forms stains of a uniform azure colour (11 to 15 ), it is seen to contain the melanin towards its centre, or grouped at one side. Two or three may still be found in one hæmocyte. The final sporing stage, though rare as a rule in the peripheral blood, was frequently seen in that of Haidar, and when stained shows the characters drawn in fig. 47. Recalling in most ways the appearances of the sporing body of tertian and quartan fevers, it differs in being smaller and more irregular. The spores are, however, quite as distinct, and the chromophil body in each stains deeply. The bodies of the crescentic series. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 47 the centre (Figs. B, 21, 22, 23, 25 and A, 7 ) frequently becoming arranged in little lines, or in the form of an H or figure of 8 (fig. A., 7 ), and finally forming a compact, more or less circular mass (24, and 26 to 29 ). Sometimes however it assumes a ring-like form as if surrounding a vacuole, (Fig. A, 9 ), but when this is the case the part within the ring stains as deeply as the rest. The spherical bodies of the crescentic series stain of the same colour as the true crescents and fusiform bodies, and the pigment has the same central arrangement. In both, the pigment granules have nearly always the shape of minute rods or spicules sometimes distinctly red in colour ( Fig. A, 8 and 9 ) more generally warm sepia brown. When flagella are about to develope the pigment again be- comes distributed uniformly through, the cytoplasm (Fig. B, 16 and A, 14 ). Origin, nature, and functions of the crescentic bodies. 48 Scientific Memoirs by for believing that the crescents themselves may also act the part of resistant resting spores. Very careful examination of, many film preparations, and, in the case of Haidar, of preparations from the spleen and bone marrow, have afforded no data confirmatory of Mannaberg's syzygies or conjugation theory; though I was at first strongly prejudiced in its favour and confidently hoped to recognise the appearances depicted by him. Multiple parasites, in or on one hæmocyte, are very common indeed, but though they frequently lie in actual contact, I have seen nothing at all resembling a fusion of their protoplasmic contents. On the other hand, fully developed multiple organisms with pigment concentrated, and just on the point of sporing, are as common as multiple young forms. One point of great interest is the fact, that young forms of the crescen- tic series are extremely common in the red marrow, in which they are relatively much more abundant than either in the spleen or peripheral blood. Many of them seem to become free early, forming small spherical bodies with the typical mauve staining reaction (Pl. II., Fig. D., 4 ). Whether the crescents develop chiefly or not in this position seems worthy of further investigation: it is difficult otherwise to account for their abundance in the marrow. I have never seen segmentation occur in a mature crescent, nor any evidence of its having occur- red in any stained preparation. The results of my observations therefore have been:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 49 the preparations obtained were in good condition, and perhaps sufficiently in- teresting to warrant a short description. At the autopsy the following macro- scopic appearances were noted:50 Scientific Memoirs by parasite-laden cells may be due to the parasites causing the affected hæmocytes to become of lower specific gravity than the blood plasma, and thus to render their circulation through narrow capillaries more difficult. They would thus get filtered out of the blood and remain behind, while the healthy cells would be able to pass on. 2. The Lungs. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 51 many cases of malignant remittent fevers, however, very extensive changes occur in the walls of the intestine, particularly in those which present choleraic fea- tures. I may here refer to the result of examination of the tissues of such a case, which came under my observation in the winter of 1892. Pieces of the liver and intestine from a fatal case of acute malignant remittent fever in Peshawar, during the severe outbreak of so-called Peshawar fever in 1892, were kindly given to me by Surgeon-Captain Evans. In this case the mucous membrane was found in an advanced state of superficial necrosis, with enormous cellular infiltration of its deeper layers, which were intensely congested and full of punctiform hæmor- rhages, and the vessels were loaded with melaniferous leucocytes. The ne- crosis and great cellular infiltration of the superficial layers is shewn in Plate III., fig. 1 , a photo-micrograph of a section stained in hæmatoxylin, and magnified 35 diameters. The liver capillaries in this case were injected with melaniferous phagocytes (Pl. II., fig. F., drawing with Zeiss A. A. and No.4 ocular ), leaving no doubt as to the malarial character of the fever. Sections of the intestine, stained by Weigert's method with methyl violet, showed the whole of the necro- tic mucous membrane, down to its deepest layers, to be densely studded with a large curved bacillus, the appearances of which are well shown in Pl. III,, 2 and 3, photomicrographs with magnifications of 500 and 1,000 diameters, respectively, It appears to be not improbable that such malignant forms of choleraiform remittent fever, which occur almost always as severe epidemic out- breaks, and which have so often decimated regiments particularly in Peshawar, may be due to a specific bacterial infection of the intestinal mucous membrane superadded on the primary malarial attack. It is quite conceivable that the interference to the circulation through the mucous membrane, caused by the parasitic blocking of the vessels, might render the tissues particularly vulnerable to the attacks of a schizomycete organism which would otherwise not be patho- genic. The matter appears to be at least worthy of investigation, if such an outbreak again occur as that which wrought havoc with the British troops in Peshawar in 1892. It is difficult to understand on any other hypothesis why certain outbreaks should be characterised by cases which go on for days, terminating finally in death from coma with complete blocking of the cerebral capillaries, the intestine remaining fairly normal while in others, so many cases should terminate fatally within from a few hours to two or three days, with complete necrosis of the intestinal epithelium, before the parasite-laden red-cell embolism becomes anywhere very marked. I have to thank Dr. Woodhead, Director of the Laboratory of the Con- joint Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons in London, for his kindly granting me permission to work at these tissues of Peshawar fever in the Laboratory, and also for enabling me to have the accompanying photo-micrographs made. 7. The red bone marrow 52 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. spore-forming and crescentic forms, the latter of which greatly preponderated. Pigmented marrow cells (fig. D. 8 ) large pigmented phagocytes and leuco- cytes, nucleated red cells, (fig. D. 8 ) and eosinophile leucocytes (fig. D. 7 ), not melaniferous, were also seen in abundance. To sum up:Explanation of Plates. (Except where otherwise noted, all magnified by Zeiss 1/12th objective and No. 4 ocular.) PLATE 1.PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003227.tif] STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT OF QUARTAN PARASITE. STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT OF TERTIAN PARASITE. Reg. No. 600, San., Comr., India.Plate II. A.PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003239.tif] QUOTIDIAN AND IRREGULAR FEVERS. Reg. No. 600, San., Comr., India.Plate III. Fig. 1.PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003254.tif] PHOTO-MICROGRAPHS OF SECTIONS OF SMALL INTESTINE IN CASE OF "PESHAWAR FEVER". Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, December 1896.
On the influence of variations of the ground-water level on the prevalence of Malarial Fevers. BY SURGEON-CAPTAIN LEONARD ROGERS, M.B., B.S., LOND., F. R. C. S., ENG., I.M.S. IN a paper read before the Calcutta Medical Society in January 1896, I showed that the number of fresh cases of malarial fever in the men of the 11th Bengal Infantry rose and fell with the rise and fall of the ground-water level of the lines in which they were living, to such a degree that the curve illus- trating the four rises and falls of the ground-water, which occurred during the course of the rains, was closely followed by the curve of the fever prevalence. The two were practically parallel, and on two occasions a fall of only seven inches, when the water was 16 and 8 feet respectively from the surface of the ground, during three and four daily periods, was accom- panied by falls of the fever to ½ and 1/3 respectively of its rate during the preceding rises, facts which could only be explained on the supposition that the infection was due to the inhalation of plasmodium malari54 Scientific Memoirs by increase to any marked extent until July. This is due to the fact that, at the beginning of the rains, in this place, the ground-water is always from 35 to 40 feet from the surface of the ground, and, in the year 1895, was still 28 feet down at the end of June in spite of almost to inches of rain having fallen during that month. As soon, however, as there has been heavy rain in July on the top of that of June, the fever begins to rise and continues to be prevalent as long as, or rather longer than, the rain lasts, declining again in October, or even in September in such years as the rains terminate early, as in 1891 and 1887, but going on into November or December in years in which the rains continue later than usual as in 1889 and 1893, in the latter of which there was very heavy rain in September. A further study shows that there are two main factors on which the amount of fever in any given year depends. These are, firstly, the amount of the rain, and, secondly, the regularity or irregularity of its distribution. On these depend the height to which the ground water will rise and the rapidity and amplitude of its variations of level; and, if my supposition that the amount of fever in any given year in this place will depend on the amount of displacement of the ground air, carrying up the organisms into the atmos- phere, is correct, then the amount of fever should depend on the amount and irregularity of the distribution of the rainfall. Let us see whether this is the case or not. If the years 1887 and 1892 be compared, it will be seen that the charts of the rainfall show much the same character, inasmuch as there was no very excessive fall in any month, but the fever rate was very high in the former year, while there was practically no fever at all during the rains in the latter. If, however, the quantity of rain be noted, it will be seen that in 1887 the rainfall was considerably in excess, amounting to over 70 inches, while in 1892 it was less than normal, being only 52.53 inches. The water must, then, have risen much higher in the former year, It will also be noticed that the rains began very early in 1887, namely in May, so that the ground-water must have been very high during July and August, while, on the other hand, the rains stopped early, and so the fever rapidly fell in September and October. Again, if we compare 1892 with 1894, it will be seen that in the latter year, not only was the rainfall in excess, but it was also unevenly distributed, so that there was over 19 inches in both July and August. Here, then, we have both factors well marked, and it is worthy of note that, in this year, the fever is higher than any other year of the series, and that there was 12 times as much fever this year as there was in 1892; and, if only that in the rainy seasons be counted, which, for reasons which will appear later, gives the most correct comparison, then it was 30 times as much. The practical absence of fever in the rainy season of 1892 remains to be explained, as it is very extra-
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 55 ordinary. It has already been mentioned that there may be heavy rain in June, or even in both May and June, as in 1887, and yet no marked increase of fever will occur until July. This shows that the increase does not depend on either the variations of temperature, which will be most marked at the beginning of the rains, or on chills produced by getting wet (a very strong point in favour of my theory), and it has already been shown that the absence of fever in June is due to the water being too low down to cause it during that month. Now, in the year 1892, not only is the rainfall deficient, but it is also very evenly distributed, not quite 12 inches having fallen during any one month, so that it is evident that in this year the water-level must have been lower and more constant than in any other year of the series, and hence the nearly complete absence of fever. Moreover, it will be seen that there was only 331 inches of rain between October 1891 and May 1892, so that the water-level must have been unusually low at the beginning of the rains in this year (at least forty feet), which, again, is an important factor, as it would lessen the influence of the small amount of rain that actually did fall, in the rainy season, in raising the water-level. Thus, it is evident that everything combined to make the conditions least favourable for the incidence of fever during that year. On the other hand, there was a low rainfall in 1890, but it was more unevenly distributed, and there was more rain in March and May, so that, although the fever in the rains (for that in the early months of the year is due to an entirely different cause) was less than the average, yet it was greater than in 1892. Thus, all the peculiarities of the distribution of the fever during the rainy seasons are easily explained on the above-mentioned supposition, but that which occurs in the cold weather months does not come under the same laws, and remains to be considered. That the amount of rain in the early months of the year does not in- fluence the fever rate during the same months, is evident from a comparison of the small amount of fever during the first five months of 1895, in spite of unusually heavy rain during the same period, with the high rate of fever in the same months of 1889, accompanied by a low rainfall. For a long time I was at a loss to account for the considerable variation in the amount of fever in the early months of the different years, although the fact that it did not coincide with the rainfall was not surprising, seeing that the ground-water level during the cold weather months of 1895-96, the years in which I took measurements, reached a depth of 30 feet from the surface by the end of November, and remained at below that level until the onset of the next rainy season, and the very slight variations which it undergoes at that depth could not be expected to influence the fever rate. In fact I believe that the malarial organisms will be found in largest numbers in the damp earth at or just above the water level, and hence, during the cold weather, will be too far down to be able to gain access to the air in large enough number to cause many fresh
56 Scientific Memoirs by infections. The following explanation of the cold weather incidence of the fever in Doranda supports this supposition. If the charts be examined from year to year as one continuous record, it will be found that the amount of fever in the early months of one year is, in the majority of instances, in proportion to its prevalence during the rainy season of the year before. Thus after the high rate of fever during the rains of 1887, there was a correspondingly large amount in the early part of 1888, and on the other hand, after the very low prevalence of fever in the rainy season of 1892 there was an equally low rate in the first half of 1893. There are, however, two very marked exceptions to this rule, namely, when the comparatively slight prevalence of 1888 was followed by a high cold weather rate in 1889, and when the very high rate of 1894 was followed by very little fever early in 1895. These instances form, however, a true case of the exceptions proving the rule, for, in January of both 1889 and 1895 and also in 1892, the regiments were changed, and as is shown in the accompanying table the fever in these, and also in 1886 and 1892, was actually proportionate to the amount of fever that the incoming regiments had had in the previous rainy season in other provinces. Again, in the rains of 1895, just 25 per cent. of the men of the 11th B. I. suffered from fever, that is 1 in every 4, yet of those who had fever in December 1895, and January 1896 out of 22 cases, no less than 15 or very nearly 3/4 of them had had fever in the previous rains, and several of them had had it two or three times. Regiment. Reached Doranda. Previous station. Former fever rate. Fiver first 6 month in Doranda. IX B. I. January 1889. Barrackpore and Chittagong. 480 per 1,000 58 cases. XII. B. I. January 1892. Benares 267·1 per 1,000 20 cases. XI. B. I. January 1895. Bareilly. 116.3 per 1,000 9 cases. It is also worth noting that two or three dry years in succession, as in 1889 to 1892, have a decreasingly small fever rate, while two wet years such as 1893, 1894 show a progressively high rate. The above facts then prove that the great majority of the cases of fever which occur in winter in Doranda are recurrences and not new infections, and the whole yearly incidence of fevers here are easily explained on the theory that I have advanced. That malarial fevers are commonly got through the inhalation of air containing the organisms has of course long been known, especially in con- nection with the drying up of marshy ground, but the above observations seem to show that this is the usual mode of infection also in places on higher
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 57 ground, and when the water is many feet from the surface, and that this mode of infection is a much commoner one than that by drinking water, although the latter doubtless also occurs. As the plasmodium malari58 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. to the conclusion that malarial infection is mainly through the air, for at such times the organisms would less readily find their way into the air by either displacement from the ground or by evaporation from a saturated soil. In short, I am inclined to think that all the main facts with regard to the seasonal incidence of malarial fevers are explainable in great part by the height and variations of the ground-water level, but as these vary in the most extraordinary way in even very similarly situated places, all the local circumstances have to be taken into account before the explanation which I have here advanced is reject- ed in any given case. A good instance of such a variation, which has also a practical bearing, happened in the case of the Doranda lines with which I will conclude this paper. On the same day that the water level in the regimental lines was only 5¼ feet from the surface of the ground, it was 25 feet down only 300 yards away on the parade ground, although there was not a difference of more than three feet in the level of the two places. The high level in the lines was due to a road having been made with only one small culvert in it, (and that on too high a level) which obstructed the surface drainage of the lines. This is to be remedied on my suggestion as far as possible, but unfortunately it could not be done before the rains of this year set in, so I am unable at present to give the result of this measure. It shews, however, what apparently slight things may modify very materially the health of a site, for I have no doubt whatever that if the lines had been where the parade ground is, there would not have been half the amount of fever that there now is in the wet season. In 1894, for instance, the water reached the level of the mouth of one of the wells, a rise of from 35 to 40 feet from the lowest level at the end of the hot weather. Until measure- ments of the ground-water were taken there was no suspicion that the surface drainage was so deficient. The lesson is obvious, and I would suggest that such measurements should be taken, for a year if possible, before a site for a station or cantonment is chosen in any malarious country, as this simple measure might prevent the necessity of abandoning posts after the expenditure of considerable sums of money on buildings, etc., on account of the amount of fever in the place, as has happened before now. If, for instance, two or more sites appeared to be about equally favourable, and time permitted, a well should be sunk in each and measurements taken, which would show in which site the ground-water is lowest and least variable. This site would be the least malarial. I have recently met with other instances in certain tea garden coolies' lines where by means of taking the ground-water levels, I have been able to show that the nearer the water is to the surface and the more it varies the greater is the fever rate, so that the Doranda case is not an isolated one. Many more observations in places whose ground-water levels differ widely will be necessary before a general law of their influence on the prevalence of malarial fevers can be formulated, but it is hoped that this contribution may lead to renewed attention being given to the subject.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003284.tif] Lith by A. C.Mukerjei. DIAGRAM ILLUSTRATIVE OF FLUCTUATIONS IN THE LEVEL OF THE GROUNDReport on the results of experiments on the action of various reputed antidotes to Snake-venom conducted during the season 1895-96. BY BRIGADE SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. D. CUNNINGHAM, C.I.E., F.R.S. As the most important of the experiments which have been conducted during the course of the past season have been devoted to the investigation of the efficacy of the so-called antivenenes of Calmette and Fraser, and the effects following the habitual introduction of cobra-serum and of cobra and daboia- venoms into the bodies of animals, it appears to be desirable to deal with them in the first place and to leave the question of the action of various other alleged remedies, which have been tested, to be briefly noticed in the conclusion of this paper. In testing the efficacy of the antivenenes, the instructions which are issued along with them as remedies for cases of snake-bite were not precisely followed, as they appear to be of a nature calculated to induce erroneous conclusions in regard to the actual value of the materials as antidotes to minimal or slightly supra-minimal doses of venom, such as those which were employed in the greater number of the experiments. Calmette's instructions include not merely the injection of antivenene away from the site of inocula- tion of the venom, but also the introduction of relatively large quantities of solutions of bleaching powder at and around the latter, and Professor Fraser's, the application of ligatures above the site of inoculation and free incisions at and around it. Now such recommendations are naturally most judicious in relation to the treatment of cases of snake-bite, in which the great aim is to reduce the amount of venom actually entering the system from lethal to sublethal proportions by any available means, but if carried out in cases where the object in view is to test the actual efficacy of antivenene and its power to conflict with minimal and slightly supra-minimal lethal doses of venom, they must necessarily serve as sources of error, because the subsidiary measures alone are capable in many cases of reducing such doses to sublethal pro- portions, and consequently, in cases where they are employed and recovery follows, it must always remain uncertain how far the result can fairly be ascribed to the antidotal property of the antivenene. This is at once evident in regard to Calmette's subsidiary measures, when it is borne in mind that the local application of solutions of bleaching powder to the sites of introduction 12
60 Scientific Memoirs by of cobra-venom is in most cases sufficient to secure recovery after the admin- istration of minimal lethal doses of the latter, even in instances in which a considerable interval of time has elapsed between the period of inoculation and that of treatment, and that, when the interval between the two periods is brief enough, the treatment suffices to secure recovery even after the administration of double minimal lethal doses of venom. Solutions of bleaching powder have undoubtedly the power of reducing the lethal properties of any cobra-venom with which they may come into direct contact, and hence their local application in the site of inoculation is very likely to be followed by recovery in cases in which the amount of venom introduced has not exceeded a minimal lethal dose, or even a double minimal lethal one, so long as the treatment is carried out before sufficient time has elapsed to allow of any considerable absorptive removal of the venom from the site of inocu- lation. In the case of minimal lethal doses, the treatment is likely to be successful when applied at any time before the whole of the venom has been absorbed: in that of supra-minimal lethal ones, it is likely to prove efficacious when applied ere a sufficient period of time has elapsed to allow of the absorption of a lethal quantity. The subsidiary measures recommended by Fraser61 Medical Officers of the Army of India. 61 and cure remains undetermined, it is clear that a possible source of error in the exact interpretation of results must necessarily be present in all cases where an animal is made the subject of repeated experiments. The access of venom to the system in non-lethal doses certainly induces a reactive elabora- tion of antivenene in the system; so that, unless the administration of extraneous antivenene entirely suppresses such elaboration, the results in any one of a series of repeated experiments on one animal must necessarily be affected by the systemic manufacture of antivenene attending all the preced- ing ones, and hence any curative or protective results which may manifest themselves cannot be wholly credited to the treatment with the extraneous antivenene. It is possible to convert normally lethal doses of venom into sublethal ones by means of treatment with antivenene, but it certainly does not necessarily follow that any corresponding reduction should take place in the systemic manufacture of antivenene normally attending the access of an amount of venom equivalent to that of which the toxic property has been reduced; or, in other words, antivenene may give us a short cut in establishing immunity by repeated treatment with venom. A.62 Scientific Memoirs by EXPERIMENTS IN WHICH THE INJECTION OF MINIMAL LETHAL DOSES OF COBRA-VENOM WAS FOLLOWED BY THE INTRODUCTION OF ANTIVENENE. (1 )Experiments in which the Antivenene was introduced in the same site as the Venom. Experiment II. 63 Medical Officers of the Army of India. (c ) EXPERIMENT IN WHICH THE INJECTION OF A DOUBLE MINIMAL LETHAL DOSE OF COBRA-VENOM WAS FOLLOWED BY THE ADMIN- ISTRATION OF ANTIVENENE. Experiment VI. 64 Scientific Memoirs by but on the day previous to that on which the introduction of the venom took place. The result of Experiment I, in which the employment of antivenene as a vehicle for the venom was followed by almost complete suppression of symptoms of intoxication, cannot, in the face of the rest of the evidence, be taken as a demonstration of the presence of any direct action of the antidote on the venom, more especially when it is taken into account that, as will appear when the phenomena presented by other experiments of like nature come to be dealt with, the venom is certainly not necessarily deprived of active property by mere solution in antivenene. The probable explanation of the almost complete suppression of symptoms occasionally attending the employment of antivenene as a vehicle for the venom is that the procedure necessarily places the remedy at a relative advantage, not because it especially facilitates any direct action on the venom, but because it favours the coincident absorption of antidote and venom. The antecedent administration of antivenene in this set of experiments certainly seemed to yield the best, and its administration subsequent to that of the venom, even where direct contact of the two materials is provided for by their introduction in the same site, the least satisfactory results. In those cases in which a considerable period is allowed to intervene between the administra- tion of the antidote and that of the venom, the absorption of the former must have been fully accomplished ere that of the latter begins to take place, and, consequently, any protective effects which may attend the presence of anti- venene in the blood have had time to be produced before any venom has had an opportunity of gaining access to the circulation. Where the poison and the anti- dote are administered coincidently the results are not so likely to be uniformly favourable, as they must necessarily be influenced both by the relative rates of absorption of the two materials, and also by the relative rates at which they are capable of producing their specific effects on the blood. Finally, where the administration of the venom precedes that of the antivenene, the latter is placed at a disadvantage, as the conditions are such as to allow of the possibility of the absorption of sufficient venom to give rise to lethal changes in the blood ere any equivalent antidotal change has had time to be produced. II.65 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Symptoms set in two hours later, and death occurred at three hours and three quarters after the administration of the venom. Experiment II. 66 Scientific Memoirs by injected into the opposite leg, and four more injections of 0.5 C.C. were similarly administered during the course of the next five hours. Symptoms of intoxication did not appear until the following day, and were then only slightly marked, and on the next day complete recovery had occurred. Experiment VIII. 67 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Experiment XI. 68 Scientific Memoirs by in 15 C.C. of distilled water. Four fowls69 Medical Officers. of the Army of India. cobra-venom, and in 13 of these death did not occur. Excluding the 4 cases in which the antidote was employed as the medium for the introduction of the venom, and in 3 of which the dose of the latter was relatively an excessive one, together with the 2 last cases, in which a prolonged interval elapsed between the introduction of the antidote and the venom, we have 13 cases of recovery and 4 deaths out of a total of 17. These results are considerably better than those which were yielded by the liquid preparation of antivenene, as, where the latter was employed, the 7 cases, parallel to the above 17, gave only 3 recoveries. The antecedent administration of the antidote unequivocally yielded the best results, as out of 8 cases which were treated in this fashion, and in which the period elapsing between the administration of the antidote and of a minimal lethal dose of venom did not exceed five days, only 1 terminated fatally. On the other hand, the absence of any appreciable direct action of the antidote upon the toxin appears to be clearly indicated by the fact that a fatal result ensued in all the four cases in which the former was employed as the medium for the introduction of the latter, death occurring even in the case in which the dose of venom was a minimal lethal one. The introduction of the antidote subsequent to that of the venom gave more favourable results than in the case of the liquid preparation, there being four instances of recovery out of a total of eight experiments; but, as has already been pointed out, the extreme limitation of antidotal property was clearly indicated by the fact that, while three cases of recovery occurred in the four experiments in which minimal lethal doses of venom were employed, only one recovery occurred among the four in which the dose was a double minimal lethal one. The results, as in the case of the experiments in which the liquid preparation was employed, clearly show that the action of the antidote is not a mere local one, like that of bleaching powder or- gold chloride, depending on local contact with the venom at the site of intro- duction and before absorption has taken place, but that it is a systemic one, occurring after the venom has entered the circulation. Such a systemic anti- dotal action may be conceived of as being exerted in several distinct ways. Putting aside any direct action on the venom, of which we have already seen ground for doubting the existence, the results may be regarded as dependent either on a direct action on the blood rendering it unsusceptible to the influence of the venom, or of an action primarily affecting the tissues and through them telling on the properties of the blood. There appears to be some ground to suspect that the action is a purely hæmic one, for it can be shown that the action of the venom on specimens of blood outside the body is in certain respects interfered with by the presence of antivenene. Be the action direct or indirect, however, it is, at all events, quite clear that it differs from that exerted by cobra- venom when habitually introduced into the system, in that the protection which
70 Scientific Memoirs by it confers is a very transitory one, and therefore cannot be dependent on any persistent, reactive, systemic change such as that which is induced under the influence of the habitual introduction of venom into the system. The immunity which is established by the habitual introduction of venom persists almost unaltered for periods of months, whereas that connected with the access of antivenene to the circulation appears to disappear entirely within the course of a few days. The phenomena in the former case appear to indicate the estab- lishment of a persistent systemic manufacture of an antidotal material, those of the latter the action of an extraneous antidote, which is capable of remaining for some time unaltered after entering the circulation because it is a blood derivative, but which does not induce any reactive, systemic manufacture of material of like nature to itself, and undergoes total expenditure within a com- paratively short time. The above conclusions in regard to the action of antivenene differ from those at which Professor Fraser has arrived*He finds that the results of treatment with antivenene are most satisfactory in cases in which the antidote forms the vehicle in which the venom is dissolved, less satisfactory where they are introduced simultaneously but in distinct sites, and least satisfactory where the introduction of the venom precedes that of the antidote, and argues from this that the antidotal property of antivenene must necessarily be owing to its exerting a direct action on the venom. Here, however, there can be no ques- tion whatever that the antecedent administration of antivenene gave by far the greatest ratio of recoveries; and, taking Professor Fraser's data as they stand, it appears that they may be interpreted in a fashion quite distinct from that in which he has interpreted them. In dealing with them, he apparently has omitted to take into account that the outcome in any case must be liable to be modified by conditions affecting the relative rates at which the venom and the antidote are absorbed into the circulation. To any one familiar with the characters of watery solutions, containing at the utmost a few milligrammes of dried venom per C.C. of water, it must be clear that they are likely to be much more rapidly absorbed than viscid solutions of antivenene containing 0.1 gramme of dried serum per C.C. of water, and, consequently, that the antidote must be placed at a disadvantage in cases where it has to conflict with antecedent or simultaneous but independent injections of aqueous solutions of venom as compared with cases in which it forms the vehicle in which the venom is dissolved, and in which, therefore, differences in rate of absorption no longer come into play. In cases in which the venom and the antidote are mixed with one another, their absorption must necessarily go on simultaneously and alike; in cases where the aqueous solutions of antivenene and venom are introduced at the same time, but at distinct sites, the absorption *Immunisation against Serpents' Venom: an Address delivered by Professor Fraser, M.D., LL.D., F.R.S., at the Royal Institution of Great Britain, on Friday, March 20,1896.
71 Medical Officers of the Army of India. will still for a time be simultaneous; but, being carried on at different rates, the amount of antivenene which has entered the circulation will not for some time bear the same ratio to the amount of venom which has entered it, as it did in the previous case; finally, when solutions of venom are introduced, not only apart from, but antecedently to, solutions of antivenene, the latter must necessarily be placed at still greater disadvantage. On the other hand, where the administra- tion of the antidote precedes that of the venom by a period allowing of complete absorption into the circulation ere absorption of the venom has begun to occur, the antidote will evidently be placed at an even greater advantage than it is when employed as a vehicle for the venom. Professor Fraser's data do not, therefore, appear to afford conclusive proof that the antidotal property of anti- venene is dependent on any direct action on the toxin, and those derived from the present series of experiments seem to indicate, either that the action is not of a direct nature at all, or that, if it be direct, it is one which is more efficiently conducted after absorption of both toxin and antidote into the circulation. III.72 Scientific Memoirs by Experiment III. 73 Medical Officers of the Army of India. efficacy. The third sample, which, like the second, was contained in numerous bottles, was very kindly sent to me by Mr. Hankin, who had obtained it direct from Calmette, and regarded the material as of good quality and practically sterile, and thus of a nature calculated to avoid the introduction of errors arising in connection with the presence of putrefactive changes in composition. I.74 Scientific Memoirs by Experiment II. 75 Medical Officers of the Army of India. profound, On the third day they were less marked, and on the fourth complete recovery seemed to have taken place. Experiment VIII. 76 Scientific Memoirs by intoxication set in 2½ hours later, and death took place about 8½ hours after the administration of the venom. The result of the entire series of experiments with this antivenene was very disappointing, and very inferior to that obtained with Professor Fraser's preparations. When Professor Fraser's liquid antivenene was made use of, 8 experiments yielded 4 recoveries, and where his dry preparation was employed 23 experiments gave 13 recoveries, whereas here we have a series of 17 experi- ments and only 2 recoveries, and both of these in cases in which the antidote was used in relatively large bulk, and under the most favourable circumstances by being administered antecedently, against minimal and slightly supra-minimal lethal doses of venom. The material, as it reaches this country at all events, would thus appear to be distinctly inferior in potency to Professor Fraser's pre- parations, and to possess only very feeble antidotal properties. That it has a certain antidotal power is indicated, not merely by the two cases of recovery which occurred, but by the fact that in many of those which terminated fatally both the onset of symptoms of intoxication and their subsequent progress appeared to be distinctly retarded, and when employed along with free appli- cation of bleaching powder or gold chloride at the site of entry of the venom it may, no doubt, aid in averting the fatal effects normally following minimal and slightly supra-minimal lethal doses of the latter, but, as an independent antidote against the action of even minimal lethal doses or an adjuvant one in dealing with cases where considerable doses have gained access to the system, the result of the experiments gives no ground for regarding it as of any practical value. The transitory nature of the protection afforded by the access of even very large quantities of antivenene to the system is once again clearly indicated by the results of the experiments which were conducted with the material obtained from Mr. Hankin, for, in the case of the first four of them, the adminis- tration of antivenene was effected simultaneously, and the only case of recovery after subsequent treatment with venom occurred when the latter was administered after an interval of 24 hours only, while in the fifth the administration of an amount of the antidote equivalent to the greater part of a litre to a man of 140 lbs. weight had left no appreciable protective effect after the lapse of an interval of nine days from the date on which the administration was completed.
77 Medical Officers of the Army of India. C.78 Scientific Memoirs by Experiment VIII. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 79 appearing to be on the verge of dying, but on the following morning they had somewhat diminished in intensity, and from this time onwards gradually wore off until complete recovery had occurred. Experiment XV. 80 Scientific Memoirs by immunity which is established in other animals as the result of continued treatment with cobra-venom, and that it is unconnected with the presence of any material of the nature of the antivenene on which artificial immunity depends. This phenomenon is not an exceptional one, as parallels to it have been already recorded in connection with other examples of natural and artificial immunities to the action of toxins, such as that of diphtheria.*It would have been satisfactory indeed to have entertained the belief that in the bodies of venomous snakes we have to deal with factories in which not only toxins but their antidotes are elaborated, but in the meantime there are no good grounds for doing so. In addition to the preceding experiments in which cobra-serum was employed in connection with cobra-venom, an additional one was carried out in which the latter was replaced by daboia-venom. Experiment XVI. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 81 minimal lethal dose for animals of the same species and weight. The treat- ment was followed by no appreciable effect, but 2 days later a dose of 0.0005 gramme was followed by marked drowsiness. After this a series of gradually increasing doses of venom was steadily introduced at intervals of a few days' duration for a period of 11 months, at the close of which the animal was taking 0.05 gramme, or 20 times a minimal lethal dose, without showing any appreciable symtoms of intoxication. An interval of 5 weeks was now allowed to elapse, and a dose of 0.05 gramme again administered without giving rise to any symptoms. After another interval of 2 months' duration 0.05 gramme was once more administered, and was followed merely by a certain temporary amount of dulness. Unfortunately, the continuation of the experi- ment was prevented owing to the death of the animal some time after the last occasion on which venom had been administered and before the interval of 4 months, which was to have elapsed ere renewed treatment was under- taken had been completed. This experiment is of course an imperfect one, as it does not absolutely determine the length of time to which artificial immunity, arrived at by habitual treatment with venom, lasts; the data do not determine whether it is temporary or permanent, but they are at all events sufficient to show that it differs from that which is capable of arising under the influence of treatment with antivenene in being of a very persistent character. The phenomena do not, as in the case of the immunity arising in connection with the use of antivenene, indicate the mere introduction of a ready-made antidote which is capable of retaining its activity for a certain time after entering the circulation, but the establishment of a local manufacture of an antidote within the system. They are only explicable as dependent on the fact that the access of the venom to the system not only gives rise to intoxication, but to the reactive, systemic manufacture of an antidote which constitutes the active principle which is present in the preparations of serum which are described as antivenenes. (2 ) Experiments on the effects produced by ingestion of Cobra-venom. Experiment II. 82 Scientific Memoirs by Symptoms of intoxication appeared after an interval of 4½ hours, and death occurred 5½ hours later. Experiment III. 83 Medical Officers of the Army of India. can possibly occur, it would have been somewhat surprising had the result of the treatment been uniformly satisfactory. There is no evidence whatever to show that the natural immunity of venomous snakes to the toxic action of their own venom is normally dependent on any process of auto-inoculation, seeing that immunity of exceedingly high degree is present in certain species of perfectly harmless snakes, in which no process of auto-inoculation can possibly be carried on, and that there is nothing to show that the blood of venomous snakes necessarily and normally contains any appreciable quantity of antivenene, or, in other words, of the antidotal material which is normally elaborated in connection with the access of venom to the system. Moreover, the mere fact that cobras are endowed with an excessive immunity not only against their own venom, but also against viperine venom, is of itself almost conclusive proof that the exemption cannot be essentially dependent on any process of auto-inoculation, seeing that cobrine antivenene is powerless against viperine venom. It has, however, yet to be experimentally demonstrated whether the immunity of venomous and non-venomous snakes to the action of venom is not, partially at all events, connected with an excessive systemic reactive manufacture of antivenene when venom does enter the system. The immunity is certainly not dependent on the normal presence of a large quan- tity of antivenene in the blood, but this, of course, does not exclude the possibility that it may be due to an excessively active manufacture of anti- venene under the influence of the access of venom to the system, or, in other words, under the influence of the normal stimulus to such manufacture. Should it turn out to be the case that natural immunity is in any degree appre- ciably dependent on such excessive reactive manufacture of antivenene, we shall at once have a satisfactory explanation of the conflicting statements which are on record in regard to the antidotal properties of cobra-serum, for it is clear that under such circumstances, whilst normal cobra-serum would possess no antidotal properties, serum derived from cobras in which auto-inoculation had taken place in connection with abnormalities in the mucous membrane of the digestive tract would necessarily be highly antidotal in relation to the amount of venom which had been absorbed. Another point which must be taken into account in endeavouring to explain the discrepancies existing between the results which have been obtained in different series of experiments in regard to the properties of cobra-serum is that facilities for the occurrence of processes of auto-inoculation in snakes are likely to be present in very varying degrees under different circumstances. In the case of perfectly healthy snakes, which are obtaining their food naturally, the chances of the occurrence of any auto-inoculation must necessarily be very much smaller than they are in the case of unhealthy snakes, or in snakes which have to he forcibly fed. The hamadryad (Naia Bungarus) although apparently M 2
84 Scientific Memoirs by a very intelligent and ultimately tameable animal, initially resents captivity to such an extent that it will frequently practically starve itself to death. Under these circumstances, and taking the value of the species into account, we have found it necessary in the Zoological Garden at Alipur to feed newly-captured individuals artificially for some time after they have been acquired. This is done by means of forcibly cramming them with the legs of fowls, which are thrust into their mouths and then passed down their throats by the aid of external pressure, and anyone who has ever seen the process carried out can have no doubt that the chances of auto-inoculation, which must be present under such circumstances, must be infinitely greater than they are in the case of snakes spontaneously partaking of their natural ophidian diet. When, therefore, one hears of instances in which the serum of the blood of venomous snakes has appeared to be endowed with an immunising property, one is justified in enquiring how far there is any satisfactory evidence that the snakes were perfectly healthy and feeding naturally before one regards the endowment as a natural one. In the meantime, however, there is nothing to show that the conflicting nature of the evidence in regard to the antidotal property of cobra-serum can be satisfactorily explained on such grounds as the above. The results of one or two experiments only are not, of course, finally decisive in regard to the ques- tion of the presence of any reactive elaboration of antivenene in the system of venomous snakes in response to the access of their own venom to the system, but those of the following experiments appear at all events clearly to show that, even if antivenene be produced under such circumstances, the amount which is elaborated is neither necessarily excessive or in any way proportionate to the degree of immunity which is present, and therefore afford additional evidence that the natural immunity of venomous snakes is not essentially and primarily dependent on any processes of auto-inoculation or of exceptionally energetic development of antivenene when venom is otherwise introduced into the system. A cobra, weighing 780 grammes, received an injection of 0.75 gramme of dry cobra-venom dissolved in 3 C.C. of water, or an amount sufficient to have proved fatal to 1,000 fowls of one kilo in weight. No unequivocal symptoms of intoxication followed. The snake was quiet and somewhat dull during the course of the following day, but as the weather was cyclonic in character, with a relatively low temperature, violent continuous rainfall, and dense clouds, this may not have been in any way owing to the treatment. Forty-eight hours after the injection had been performed, the snake was decapitated and its blood collected and allowed to coagulate. After contraction of the clot and separation of the serum had occurred, 5 C.C. of the latter were used as the medium in which 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom, of which 0.00075 gramme constituted a minimal lethal dose for fowls of 1 kilo in weight, was dissolved. Two fowls85 Medical Officers of the Army of India. (a ) and (b )86 Scientific Memoirs by does not necessarily contain any material conferring any immunity against the action of venom on susceptible animals, and in this case we have conclusive evidence that it may contain lethal quantities of venom without giving rise to any appreciable symptoms of intoxication in the snake from whose blood it has been derived. In this instance the amount of venom present in the blood of the snake was so great as to give rise to fatal intoxication in a susceptible animal on the access of the serum to its system; but had the blood of the snake been less highly charged with venom, appreciable symptoms of intoxication might have failed to appear in the recipient animal, and yet a certain amount of reactive elaboration of antivenene might have been initiated in its system, and have determined a proportionate degree of insusceptibility to the action of subsequent doses of venom. Auto-inoculation may certainly provide for the presence of a certain amount of venom in the blood of venomous snakes, and may, therefore, endow it with a certain protective property dependent not on its containing any ready-made antivenene, but on its acting as a stimulant to the elaboration of antivenene in the system of susceptible animals when it gains access to their circulation.* (b ) EXPERIMENTS ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF IMMUNITY TO DABOIA-VENOM. Experiment IV. 87 Medical Officers of the Army of India. ones. Local muscular action was well marked, and 7 minutes later violent general convulsions set in, and terminated in death immmediately after. The suppression of all local and general symptoms of nervous irritation, which attended the second administration of the venom in this case, in spite of the coincident increase in the dose which was employed, was probably merely the result of retarded absorption connected with the local irritant effects induced in the tissues by the primary one, for the acutely fatal effect of a correspondingly augmented dose, when introduced on the subsequent day in a fresh site, clearly shows that no considerable rise in degree of immunity had up to that time been established as the result of any reactive systemic manufacture of antivenene. Experiment V. 88 Scientific Memoirs by It sat down drowsily, and within the course of ten minutes slight spasmodic jerking of the wings and legs set in, and continued to be present during the next 20 minutes. They then disappeared, and shortly after, when grain was introduced into the cage, the bird stood up and began to feed greedily. It remained very quiet for some hours, and then appeared to have completely recovered from all effects of the treatment. January 24th. 89 Medical Officers of the Army of India. immediately antecedent dose. In consequence of this, when the doses came to be of more than sublethal amount, each increment of venom, although incap- able of causing death, was for some time followed by the appearance of general symptoms of intoxication, and it was evident that, with a slight increase in the amount of the increment, fatal intoxication must have followed. It would appear, then, that there is a definite direct relation between the amount of venom which enters the system and the activity of the reactive systemic manufacture of antivenene, and that the amount of the latter which is manu- factured is not greatly in excess of that requisite, to neutralise the toxic effect of the amount of venom which acts as the stimulant to the manufacture. It is, no doubt, true that, during the latter portion of the course of the experiment, increments in the amount of venom, which had previously sufficed to give rise to appreciable effects, ceased to do so, but this may have been simply owing to the fact that in this case the increments of venom remained constant, whilst the total production of antivenene, being directly proportionate to the total amount of venom administered at any one time, underwent a progressive increase, so that increments which at first bore a high ratio to the amount of available antivenene ultimately came to hold a much lower one, and so ceased to give rise to the same effect which they were primarily capable of inducing. Be that as it may, however, the phenomena at all events afford no positive evidence that the reactive manufacture of antivenene is at any time carried on to such an extent as to provide for the presence of any great surplus of the antidote in the blood beyond the amount which is necessary to equilibrate the toxic action of any given bulk of venom against which an immunity has gradually been established. The second noteworthy point is that, in the termination of the experiment we have conclusive evidence of the fact that the immunity which can be estab- lished against the action of daboia-venom by means of habitual cumulative treatment does not imply the presence of any corresponding immunity against that of cobra-venom. In this case an apparently complete immunity against the action of four times a minimal lethal dose of daboia-venom afforded no pro- tection whatever against a slightly supra-minimal lethal dose of cobra-venom. But the immunity against the daboia-venom must presumably have been depend- ent on the presence of a material of the nature of antivenene, so that the evi- dence goes to prove that, just as cobrine antivenene has been already shown to be powerless in cases in which daboia-venom has entered the system, the cor- responding daboia antivenene is powerless where cobra-venom has done so. The normal toxic effects produced under the influence of colubrine and viperine poisons are certainly quite distinct in character, and the antivenenes which are coincidently developed within the system appear to be equally so. Experiment VI. 90 Scientific Memoirs by the lethal value of the sample of venom in use being such that 0.006 gramme in 0.5 C. C. of water caused violent general convulsions and death in fowls of 1 kilo. in weight within ten minutes. Slight local muscular action ensued, and during the rest of that day and the whole of the following one, conspicuous lameness was present. The animal became very dull, refused all food, and remained almost constantly lying down for four days. On the fifth day after the injection it appeared to be livelier, and once more began to feed. Nine days after the first injection, and when complete recovery appeared to have occurred, a second dose of 0.01 gramme of dried venom was administered. Conspicuous dulness was present during the whole of that day and the following one, but on the latter the animal began to feed again. A week later it received a third injection of 0.015 gramme, and after this at intervals of four or five days' dura- tion, a series of steadily increasing doses was administered, until six weeks after the beginning of the experiment the dose amounted to 0.055 gramme. The animal did not bear the treatment nearly so well as the fowl of the previous experiment did, for a certain amount of dulness and loss of appetite continued to manifest themselves after each injection, and a continuous and progressive loss in condition occurred, which had become so marked at the time at which the injection last alluded to was administered that it appeared to be undesir- able to push the treatment further for the time being. An interval of nearly three months' duration was accordingly allowed to elapse, and an injection of 0.05 gramme, or an amount only a little less than that which had been last employed, was administered. Conspicuous local irritation ensued, as evinced by a large amount of swelling around the site of the injection, and the usual dulness was present for some time, but the animal began to feed again after the lapse of a few hours. The principal value of this experiment is to demonstrate that, in the case of habitual treatment with viperine venom, just as in the case of similar treat- ment with colubrine venom, the resultant immunity is not a mere temporary one, like that arising under the influence of the introduction of extraneous anti- venene, but persists over very considerable periods and must, therefore, be owing to correspondingly persistent reactive manufacture of antivenene by the system. E.91 Medical Officers of the Army of India. No symptoms of intoxication followed the treatment. Four days later the animal was treated with an injection of 0.01 gramme of the same dried cobra-venom without any result. After an interval of three days it received an injection of 0.01 gramme of dried daboia-venom in 0.5 C. C. of water, or a dose equivalent to 2½ minimal lethal doses for fowls of one kilo. in weight. No symptoms of either acute or chronic intoxication followed. Experiment II. 92 Scientific Memoirs by This concludes the record of the experiments directly dealing with the question of the efficacy of antivenene and of cobra-serum as antidotes in cases of snake-bite and with that of the means of establishing artificial immunity to the action of snake-venoms, which have been conducted during the course of the past season. The most important conclusions to be derived from it would appear to be of the following nature:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 93 (5) Treatment with crude antivenin, more especially in combination with other remedial measures, such as ligature and free incision and injections of solution of bleaching powder or gold chloride at and around the site of injury may, therefore, be of some practical value in dealing with cases in which minimal lethal or slightly supra-minimal lethal doses of venom are in question, but unless the really active constituent can be separated from the rest of the serum, its curative value must remain strictly limited. (6) The superiority of antivenene over other remedies in dealing with small doses of venom lies in the fact that its action is not a purely local one, but one which continues to be exerted subsequent to absorption into the circulation, so that it is capable of dealing with venom which has been already absorbed, and may therefore be an important aid to means which only act locally in reducing small lethal doses of venom to sublethal ones. (7) Whilst the serum of the blood of animals which have been artificially immunised possesses antidotal properties in relation to the venom in connection with the action of which the immunity has origi- nated, this is not the case with the serum of the blood of the snakes which produce the venom, and consequently the natural immunity of venomous snakes to the action of their own venom cannot be essentially dependent on any process of auto-inoculation or, in other words, on the constant and normal presence in their blood of any material of the nature of the antivenene elaborated in the bodies of artificially-immunised animals. (8) The protective effect attending the introduction of antivenene into the system is a very transitory one, whilst that attending the habitual introduction of venom is persistent over prolonged periods, and therefore, whilst in the latter case the protection would appear to be dependent on persistent, reactive, systemic manufacture of an antidote, in the former it is seemingly merely dependent on the introduction of a ready-made antidote, which, because it is a blood derivative, is capable of remaining for some time unaltered within the system. (9) The ingestion of large quantities of cobra-venom, either habitually or on a single occasion, neither necessarily induces any toxic effects nor any appreciable protection against the action of the venom when it enters the circulation. (10) Mature specimens of the common mungoose certainly may be characterised by a relatively high immunity against the action of both colubrine and viperine venoms, but in the meantime it
94 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. remains uncertain whether the exemption is of hereditary or acquired character. In addition to the above experiments dealing with the antidotal properties of antivenene and the establishment of artificial immunity, another series was devoted to testing the efficacy of various other reputed remedies, and a third, and very extensive one, to the investigation of the action of cobra-venom on the blood. The reputed antidotes which were dealt with consisted of a fluid, denominated " Viperina," which was sent out to this country by the India Office for trial, and which is said to have a high reputation in certain parts of South America; of a preparation manufactured by a jogi in Western India and supplied by a Forest Officer of the Bombay Presidency, who had a great faith in its merits; and of a local remedy, prepared and supplied by a lady, named Mrs. Baptiste, residing in the neighbourhood of Calcutta. It appears, however, to be unnecessary to enter into any detailed record of the results attending their trial, as they were of exactly the same nature as those which have been previously recorded in connection with trials of other popular, but futile, reputed remedies. In conclusion, I have only once more to record my deep obligations to the Superintendent of the Zoological Garden, Babu R. B. Sanyal, C.M.Z.S., without whose willing and intelligent co-operation it would have been a matter of extreme difficulty to have conducted these investigations satisfactorily. The 15th July 1896.
On certain diseases of Fungal and Algal Origin affecting economic plants in India. BY BRIGADE-SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. D. CUNNINGHAM, C.I.E., F.R.S. The following pages contain an account of what I have hitherto been able to ascertain regarding the nature of certain common forms of vegetable blights affecting plants of economic value in India. The materials from which data were obtained are derived from various sources. Most of those illustra- tive of blights affecting potato crops were supplied by district officers and officials in the Agricultural Department; the specimens of tea and opium blights were forwarded to me by Dr. George King, to whom they had primarily been submitted; those affecting Pinus and Deodar were supplied by Mr. J. S. Gamble of the Forest Department; those on Lucerne and Brinjal by Mr. Mollison, Superintendent of Government Farms, Bombay; whilst those illustrating the blights of the Teak and Terminal Catappa were obtained direct from trees growing in and around Calcutta. It must at the outset be confessed that the information contained in the present paper regarding most of the blights dealt with is very imperfect. With regard to some of them all that has hitherto been ascertained is that they are of unequivocally fungal origin, and, in hardly any case, has the life-history of the parasite been fully ascertained, owing in part, at all events, to the fact that in very few instances is the disease native to the locality in which it was studied. It is only, then, as a step towards the acquisition of fuller information, and as a means of aiding those who may subsequently have the opportunity of fully working out the subject, that it has been deemed justifiable to publish the data as they stand. It is never satisfactory to put forth incomplete results, but this appears to be one of the occasions on which utility ought to be preferred to inclination and the desire for completeness. The subject-matter of a paper of this nature might be arranged according to two distinct methods: the various diseases might be grouped according to the nature of the parasites which give rise to them, or of the host-plants in which they occur. The latter method has here been preferred as being of more practical utility to those who have to deal with the matter from an economic rather than a purely scientific point of view, and, one similar grounds, the host-
96 Scientific Memoirs by plants have been arranged, not in the order of botanical taxology, but according to their relative local agricultural importance. 1. Smut-blight of Rice. This form of blight, which is dependent on the attacks of a Ustilago which fructifies in the ovaries of the grains, apparently only prevails abundantly at comparatively rare intervals, for it produces such very conspicuous effects that it is very unlikely to escape the most casual observation when present in any amount, and yet I have only twice had specimens of it submitted to me for determination,Medical Officers of the Army of India. 97 form of an impalpable powder which readily adheres to the healthy grains and to the leaves and stems of the same and surrounding plants. These thus come to be covered with spores which are capable of retaining vitality for periods of years, so long as they are kept dry, and then of wakening up to germinate and serve as a source of renewed infection where their products come into relations with young seedlings of the host-plant. This being the case, it is evident that one most important factor in securing a recurrence of the disease must be the employment of grain which is polluted by adherent spores as seed- corn, unless some special measures are adopted which are calculated to destroy the vitality of the spores without affecting that of the grain. If, therefore, grain derived from a crop affected by the disease must be employed as seed-corn, the practice in Europe is to immerse it for a period of about twelve hours in a solu- tion of sulphate of copper as a reagent which effectually kills the spores without affecting the life of the grain. After having been treated in this fashion, the grain is simply well washed in water and then carefully dried, and practical experience has demonstrated that the procedure does much to limit the preval- ence of disease. But as the spores do not adhere merely to the grain, but also to the leaves and stalks of the plants, all straw coming from an infected area must be dangerous, more especially where it enters into the constitution of manure in which the spores will encounter all the conditions for germination and subsequent luxuriant production of the conidia which, when they in their turn germinate, provide the direct means of infection. The straw from any infected crop should, therefore, not be employed in manure, and the residual stubble remaining in the fields ought to be, as far as possible, destroyed. By the adop- tion of measures of this nature the occurrence and extension of such blights may to a great extent be controlled, but where either crops of like nature are cultivated year after year in the same sites, or where the parasite is not limited to cultivated hosts, but occurs among certain individuals of the natural vegetation of the area, it must be impossible to obviate completely the possibility of renewed infection. Under such circumstances the soil must remain constantly liable to contain varying numbers of spores, and the only remedial measure which can be attempted is to endeavour to promote the rapid growth of the seedling host-plants as much as possible, for we know, thanks to Professor Oscar Brefeld's brilliant series of observations, that, even after the mycelium of the parasite has gained access to the tissues of the host, no harm will follow unless it gains access to the special site in which its further development normally occurs, and that it is incapable of travelling far in search of this. Where, therefore, as in the case of the rice-plant, the site for the ultimate evolution of the parasite lies in the floral organs, it is only at a very early stage in the life of the host that the intrusive mycelium, with its very limited capacity for extension, will be able to reach its aim,98 Scientific Memoirs by and representing the rudiments of the flowers; and hence, just in proportion to the rapidity with which the growth of the host primarily occurs, there will be a diminished likelihood of the blight successfully establishing itself. The fact that rice is so much primarily cultivated in seed-beds in place of being sown broadcast in the fields, is thus probably one reason for the very limited extension of the disease, as under such a system of cultivation the conditions providing for very rapid initial growth are, as a rule, generally present. NOTE.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 99 crops, they are not exposed to such conditions, and consequently, even if the disease is actually imported into a locality, its diffusion must necessarily remain limited. The phenomena are, in fact, precisely parallel to those which we find occurring in Europe, where general epidemic diffusion of the disease is practically regulated by the annual variations in atmospheric humidity. b. Root-blight caused by the invasion of the tissues by a species of Pythium. 100 Scientific Memoirs by base of the stem and the larger roots. The mycelium was of characteristically aseptate type save in the immediate neighbourhood of the oospores where a few partitions could occasionally be recognised. The fructification was of two kinds; one presenting the character of asexual sporangia (Plate I, Fig. 15), occurred abundantly within the tissues of the pith, whilst the other, consisting of oospores (Plate I, Figs. 13-14), was present in smaller numbers there, but in excessive abundance within the cells of the cortex. When portions of tissue containing oospores were immersed in water germination presently occurred with the formation of a branched aseptate mycelium, so that there could be no question of the capacity of the fungus for saprophytic existence for some time, at all events, as the tissues of the host were completely dead and consequently incapable of providing for the requirements of a pure parasite. The oogonia (Plate I, Fig. 14) were colourless and measured about 18µ, in diameter. The oospores were considerably smaller than the oogonia, so that they lay quite free within the cavity of the latter. They had a pale ochre tint. No unequivocal evidences of the presence of antheridia could be detected, but this does not necessarily imply a parthenogenetic production of the oospores as all the specimens were more or less completely dried up ere they were examined and contained only fully matured fructification, so that previously existent antheridia might quite possibly have become unrecognisable. The occurrence of species of Pythium as parasites capable of affecting the potato plant has already been recorded. Sadebeck found a potato-field, near Coblenz, in which his Pythium Equiseti or autumnale replaced Phytophthora as a cause of blight,*and De Bary has shown that Hesse's Pythium de Baryanum attacks potatoes energeticallyMedical Officers of the Army of India. 101 oospores which are liable to be present within the tissues of dead and blighted plants, the latter must serve as a means of securing the recurrence of the blight from year to year if they be allowed to remain in the soil of any area within which the cultivation of potatoes is annually conducted. The oospores, being capable of lying dormant for prolonged periods so long as they are kept dry, will readily survive in the soil for an indefinite time and retain their capacity for producing mycelium, primarily of a saprophytic type, but ready to adapt itself to parasitic existence whenever it meets with a suitable host. c. A leaf-blight termed " Farrah" by the natives of Oudh. 102 Scientific Memoirs by days' duration, and were consequently hopelessly wilted. The disease was assuredly not caused by Phytophthora, and may have been caused by the first form of fungus described above. This is a question which can only be satis- factorily worked out in localities within which potatoes are cultivated and are subject to the disease, but there the solution of the problem would be extremely easily arrived at by means of a few careful experiments, and it has, therefore, been deemed advisable to publish the results of the present observations, im- perfect though they be, in the hope that they may lead to the local study of the subject. d. " Bangle-blight. " Medical Officers of the Army of India. 103 elements appeared to be strictly confined to the wood; the tissues of the bast, cortex, and pith being seemingly entirely free from them. Within the wood, they were present in the interior of the spiral vessels, the wood-cells, and the great pitted ducts. In the latter they were specially abundant, and it was here that the sclerotia giving rise to the streaks and points of brown discoloration, previously alluded to, were present (Plate I, Figs. 5-11). The disease appeared to be limited to the base of the haulm in its subterranean and aërial portions, and a little farther up no traces of it could be detected. The roots appeared to be entirely free of fungal elements, and, what is more remarkable, the tubers also appeared to be entirely exempt even in the sites in which the brown discolora- tion forming the so-called " bangle " was present. The characters of the disease are, therefore, typical of those dependent on the presence of a Sclerotinia or other closely allied form of Ascomycete parasite. The distribution of the fungal elements within the host, the presence of sclerotia, and the history of the conditions of cultivation under which the blight originates, are all equally characteristic, and, under these circumstances, there can be no doubt whatever in regard to the preventive measures which ought to be adopted. The source of recurrent infection lies unequivocally in the sclerotia which are situated within the substance of the vascular bundles, and which, after lying dormant for a time in the dead tissues, are the origin of the reproductive elements which invade the new crop of the host-plant, and the germination of these elements and the growth and diffusion of the resultant mycelium must assuredly be favoured by any conditions giving rise to saturation of the soil. It is thus evident that the methods of cultivation described by Mr. Mollison as prevailing near Poona are precisely those which are specially adapted to secure the persistence and extension of the disease. The continuous cultivation of the host-plant year after year within the same areas must tend effectually to secure the constant presence in the soil of sclerotia, and the excessive irriga- tion must provide special facilities for their farther evolution and for the growth and diffusion of the infective elements ultimately derived from them. But, if this be so, it is equally evident that the proper preventive measures are the care- ful removal and destruction of all the diseased portions of blighted plants, the abandonment of the system of continuous culture of potatoes within the same areas, and the avoidance of all excessive irrigation. As the group of blights, of which this is a typical example, would appear to be very prevalent in India, but at the same time to have received very little local attention, it may, for practical purposes, be well to note briefly what are the distinctive features of it. The fungi which are the specific causes of the diseases included in it are, so far as is known, all Ascomycetes distinguished by the fact that the common vegetative mycelium does not give direct origin to a car- posporic fructification, but to dense pseudo-parenchymatous masses of felted
104 Scientific Memoirs by filaments termed sclerotia which lie dormant for varying periods and then give direct origin to the carposporic fructification proper to the species. This, in all cases in which the life-history of the species has been fully worked out, is of discomycete type, consisting of shallow, widely open receptacles of saucer-shape, and these in the case of the genus Sclerotinia, to which the majority of the scle- rotial blights which have been fully investigated belong, are specially distin- guished by the fact that they are borne on the extremities of elongated pedicels, in place of being sessile as the carposporic fructification of the closely allied genus Peziza is. Taking such carposporic bodies as the starting-point of a fresh generation of the fungus, we find them ultimately producing large numbers of asci or sporangia each containing eight spores. The latter are ultimately discharged, and then, under favourable circumstances, germinate and give origin to mycelium. This is capable of growth and often of excessive growth sapro- phytically, but in most cases only attains its perfect development, as evinced by the production of sclerotia, when it has been enabled to invade the tissues of some host-plant and assume a parasitic existence. The capacity for a purely saprophytic existence is, however, of great utility to the plant in affording facilities for reaching a suitable host, and practically makes up for the frequent absence of any conidial fructification. In the absence of abundant conidial fructification, which is the great means for the aerial dissemination of any blight, the diffusion of any fungal disease would necessarily be very greatly restricted unless a capacity for saprophytic existence were present to permit of very considerable progression of the protoplasm in quest of a suitable host. In any case, in the absence of abundant conidial fructification, the extension of a blight must be more or less slow and limited, but the capacity for saprophytic existence comes in as an important factor in favouring extension. What renders sclerotial blights specially mischievous is the fact that their parasitism is not as a rule highly specialised. They are, ordinarily, capable of attacking various host-plants, and, in addition to this, of existing for prolonged periods saprophy- tically. Conidial fructification is not, however, invariably absent, although in many cases only rarely produced. Under the influence of certain conditions it is in some cases produced direct from the spores, and in others from the mycelium also, in the form of Botrytis cinerea which appears as a mould on the surface of the blighted tissues of the host. The degree to which parasitism has been evolved appears to differ consider- ably in different instances. In certain forms commonly occurring in India, the mycelium is capable of invading and of effectually blighting many different hosts without being capable of giving origin to sclerotia within or upon them, whilst in other cases, fully developed sclerotia are produced indifferently in connection with vegetative growth within hosts of most unlike nature. This variation is, of course, of very considerable importance in regulating the extent to which a
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 105 blight is liable to recur. The importance of the production of sclerotia lies in the fact that it is this which provides for the persistence of the blight from year to year, in spite of prolonged periods during which external conditions are such as to preclude its activity. So long as external conditions are favourable, very extensive blighting may be effected by means of mere ordinary vegetative growth of mycelium, but, in the absence of sclerotia, there would be no tendency to any regular annual recurrence of the disease. It is evident, then, that any species in which parasitism has been so slightly specialised that sclerotia may be produced in connection with very different hosts, is likely to be more mischievous than one in which, although vegetative growth of mycelium may take place freely in connection with various hosts, the production of sclerotia is limited to cases where the growth occurs within one, or, at utmost, a limited number of hosts. The importance of the production of sclerotia is strikingly demonstrated by certain phenomena of annual recurrence in Calcutta. Every autumn large unsightly patches of blighted foliage make their appearance on surfaces covered by Ficus stipulate. They normally appear first at the level of the surface of the soil, and gradually ascend thence in radiant fashion over areas whose magnitude varies with the nature of the atmospheric conditions which characterise particular seasons. When atmospheric humidity remains persistently excessive over prolonged periods, the extension of the blight is correspondingly great; when it is relatively low and does not last long, the disease remains comparatively limited and in any case, with the onset of the cool and relatively dry weather at the beginning of winter, it is abruptly arrested. If the leaves within a blighted area are examined, it will be found that towards the margins of it and where they are only beginning to be discoloured, their under surfaces are coated with a web of white mycelium, which, in some cases, extends directly from leaf to leaf, and, in others, reaches successive leaves by means of connecting white strings which run along the course of the axis on which they are situated. Where such a string reaches the base of a petiole, it travels out along it and spreads out over the under-surface of the lamina in a layer of divergent white filaments. These adhere closely to the epidermis, and, after they have been in contact with it for a short time, the substance of the lamina becomes first ochreous and ultimately quite dead and brown. In the case, therefore, of leaves in which the disease is still in progress, the under surface shows first areas already discoloured and covered by mycelium; secondly, and immediately adjoining these, others clothed with a layer of mycelium, but still green; and finally, others which are as yet quite healthy. When the leaves have become completely killed and discoloured, sclerotia begin to make their appearance. They, unlike the common vegetative mycelium, are in most cases situated on the upper surfaces of the leaves, and occur specially abundantly there towards the margins of the laminae (Plate II, Fig. 10). They are developed from tufts of mycelium which break out at points in the P
106 Scientific Memoirs by upper surface, and, having done so, ramify in a complicated fashion so as ulti- mately to form dense masses of pseudo-parenchymatous tissue, about the size of a pin's head, which are at first pure-white throughout, and subsequently become first ochreous and then deep-brown superficially (Plate II, Fig. 6). The sclerotia, when mature and dry, are very readily detached owing to the rupture of their slender pedicels, and may be found lying loose in large numbers among the dead leaves and on neighbouring surfaces. With the onset of continuous relatively dry and cool weather the extension of the disease is arrested the dead leaves fall off and a bare patch is left which is anew clothed with leaves in the succeeding spring. But the sclerotia, where they escape the attacks of insects and other destructive agents, do not lose their vitality, but, as may readily be determined experimentally, are capable of lying dormant for many months, and then serving as the source of renewed appearance of the disease when exposed to favourable conditions. I have thus preserved some of them for an entire annual period, and then employed them as the means of establish- ing patches of blight at an elevation of twenty feet or so above the ground, thereby not merely demonstrating the prolonged vitality of the sclerotia, but also that the fact that the disease normally originates at the level of the soil is simply owing to the fact that the detached sclerotia naturally tend to accumulate there. The extreme abundance with which sclerotia are produced by this species, and the fact that its parasitism is so feebly specialised that it is capable of attacking very many distinct hosts, renders it most undesirable to employ Ficus stipulata as a creeper to screen the sides of any plant-house in which orna- mental succulent foliage-plants are cultivated. So long as it was employed thus in the Botanic Garden in Calcutta, the annual blighting of Begonias and other succulents within the houses was enormous, but since it has been replaced by Ficus repens and other creepers which are not so subject to attack, the disease has practically disappeared. Sclerotia are produced on the leaves of Begonias and various other plants, but by no means in such abundance as on those of Ficus stipulate, and as the blighted leaves of plants within the houses are naturally in greater part removed ere the sclerotia have matured, the numbers of the latter which tend to accumulate as a source of renewed disease are trifling as compared with those which are constantly liable to be present among the remains of the dead leaves of the Ficus at the base of any surface covered by it. The mycelium grows abundantly on the surface of sections of potato-tubers, producing a densely filled, snowy-white mass of considerable thickness, and its capacity for purely saprophytic existence is demonstrated by the fact that it produces similar although somewhat more limited growths on the surface of media consisting of starch-paste containing sugar and peptones. In either of these cases, however, it fails to produce any sclerotia, so that apparently para-
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 107 sitism, although relatively undifferentiated, has been evolved so far that the saprophytism is facultative only. A large number of the sclerotial blights that occur in India appear to be characterised by a feature which renders them likely to be more extensively mis- chievous than those which ordinarily occur in Europe. This is that the extension of disease from one part of a host-plant to another, and from one host to a neighbouring one, is effected with great rapidity, in spite of the absence of readily diffusible reproductive bodies such as conidia, owing to the fact that the mycelium is not confined to the interior of the host, but also spreads with great rapidity and luxuriance over the surface, giving off as it does so bundles of invading filaments which penetrate the stomatic orifices and ramify throughout the intercellular spaces and within the cavities of the cells of the tissues. The presence of the blight is therefore rendered readily recognisable even within areas in which the tissues yet retain their normal colour by the presence of strands and webs of white mycelium extending over the surface. For example, in the case of the blight affecting Ficus stipulata, the first conspicuous indication of the presence of the disease appears in the form of yellowish or brownish patches of discoloration on the upper surfaces of the leaves; but if at this time we examine the under surfaces we find that, extending far beyond the limits of the discoloured areas, there are radiant strands of white mycelium spreading over the surface of the epidermis. When the whole of a leaf has been blighted, similar strands extend freely beyond its margins, and where they come into contact with other foliar surfaces, adhere to them and serve as the source of further infection, whilst, where they come in contact with the petiole, they creep along the course of it and of the axis until they reach other leaves. This free superficial extension of mycelium only occurs under conditions of high atmospheric humidity, and conse- quently we find blights whose extension is mainly determined by it, only present- ing themselves conspicuously during the rainy season and producing effects directly proportionate to the degree and duration of excessive atmospheric humidity which prevail in any particular year. Fortunately the foliage tissues alone are attacked by most blights of this type, but very extensive defoliation is yet in many cases effected owing to this capacity for superficial extension of mycelium. Were it not for this, in the absence of readily diffusible repro- ductive bodies in the form of conidia, only those leaves would be affected which formed the sites of primary infection, but the capacity for free superficial extension serves to replace the presence of conidia and penetration of axial tissues as a means of diffusion so long as atmospheric conditions remain favour- able. The capacity which the mycelium has for invading the interior of the tissues of host-plants varies in degree in various instances. In any case, entrance is mainly effected by means of the stomatic orifices (Plate II, Fig 7), and in P 2
108 Scientific Memoirs by some cases it appears that it is only by means of the latter or of abnormal in- terruptions of the continuity of the epidermal surfaces that entrance is capable of being achieved. When a blighted leaf of Ficus stipulata clothed with the mycelium of the species of blight naturally affecting it is placed in contact with the under surface of a Begonia leaf, rapid and indefinite superficial extension of mycelium and spreading infection of the new host occurs (Plate II, Figs. 7.9); but, if the Ficus-leaf is applied to the intact upper surface of the leaf, a certain amount of superficial extension of mycelium occurs, but this is very soon arrested on the expenditure of the nutritive supply in the tissues of the primary host, and no infection of the secondary one occurs. This, however, is not the case with another species of sclerotial blight which occurs as a cause of destruc- tive disease in Evolvulus nummularius, Linn., and other plants forming common constituents of turf in Calcutta. In this case, whilst infection of Begonia leaves is induced more readily and extends more rapidly when portions of the diseased tissues of the primary host are applied to the lower (Plate II, Fig. 11) than to the upper surfaces, it also constantly occurs eventually in connection with the latter also. The superficial extension of the mycelium is capable of being provided for to a certain extent saprophytically, but it is only where penetration of host- tissues provides nutritive supplies of parasitic origin that it becomes rapid and indefinite. It is thus regulated by two distinct factors, the presence of atmo- spheric humidity of high degree and of facilities for penetration of host-tissues and acquisition of nutritive supplies from them, and hence it is readily explicable why, as a rule, it should occur so much less conspicuously on the upper than on the under surfaces of leaves, as the latter not only afford greater protection from desiccation, but, as a rule, much greater facilities for penetration than the former do. Blights of the above nature, which practically limit their attacks to the foliar tissues, are naturally, as a rule, of less economic importance than those which, like the so-called " Bangle-blight " of potatoes, specially attack the tissues of the axis. They give rise to extensive defoliation, but do not neces- sarily cause the death of the whole or of great parts of their hosts. They may, however, come to be of very considerable importance where they attack plants which are cultivated on account of their foliage, whether for ornamental purposes as is the case with Begonias and other so-called foliage-plants, or for economic purposes as is the case with the tea-shrub, the " Thread-blight" of which would appear, as will be subsequently shown, in all probability to belong to this class of diseases. e. Sclerotial blight affecting the tubers. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 109 of the blight of Ficus stipulata, but of considerably larger size than these ever are (Plate II, Fig. 1). The affected tubers showed little conspicuous evidence of disease externally, but were more or less softened in texture, and, on being laid open, were found to contain irregular cavities of greater or less extent, the walls of which were coated with thick fleeces of white mycelium. On removing these the subjacent tissue was found to be softened and pulpy for some depth, but appeared not to be penetrated by any fungal elements. In spite of this, however, both the growth of mycelium and the softening of tissue continued to advance rapidly in a moist atmosphere until the tubers were reduced to mere shells containing masses of fungal elements and a moist, ill-odoured pulp. When the nutritive supplies afforded by the latter were exhausted, the sclerotia produced large numbers of sclerotia of ovoid form with average diameters of 75 X 52 µ, originally pure-white or pale ochreous throughout, but ultimately assuming a deep, rich brown tint externally (Plate II, Fig. 1). Numerous experiments were tried in regard to the infective power of the mycelium, and it was ascertained that it was capable of giving rise to spreading blight when applied to the leaves of Ficus stipulata and various kinds of Begonias, the filaments rapidly extending over the surfaces and at the same time invading the interior by penetrating the stomatic orifices. When applied to the outer surfaces of intact potatoes, a considerable amount of growth occurred in moist atmospheres, but no penetration of the tissues occurred, and the spread of the mycelium was soon arrested without having caused any damage. The effects were, however, very different when the continuity of the rind was interrupted at any point reached by the mycelium, or when the latter was applied direct to raw surfaces. Under such circumstances luxuriant and continued growth occurred, fleeces of white filaments accumulated, the subjacent tissues softened, and, as time went on, all the phenomena present in the case of the original diseased tubers were repeated. In this incapacity for affecting intact tubers and rapid destruction of those presenting raw surfaces, this blight resembles that occurring normally on the leaves of Ficus stipulata, and differs from that obtained from Evolvulus nummularia, which, although incapable of penetrating the general surface of the rind, does attain access to the interior of the tubers by means of the tissues of the eyes, especially when the latter have under- gone a certain amount of development and have come to present somatic orifices. The occurrence of extensive destruction of tubers by this form of blight thus implies the presence of some adjuvant agency facilitating access by establishing breaches in the continuity of the epidermal surface. Such solutions of continuity may of course arise in many different ways, but in the instance of this particular sample of tubers there could be no doubt whatever what the really effective agent was, as the tubers were not only affected by the mycelium but also by a species of Acarus; the tissue beneath the fleeces of
110 Scientific Memoirs by fungal elements being in many places swarming with mites such as those which are figured in Plate II, Figs. 2-5. It might have remained an open question whether these were primary or secondary elements in the diseaseMedical Officers of the Army of India. 111 Taking the nature of these blights, whether of purely acarine or of mingled acarine and fungal origin, into account, there can be no question that the means to be adopted with a view to limiting their extension and preventing their recurrence must lie in the first place in keeping the tubers as dry as possible, and in the second in carefully removing and burning all those in which the disease has already established itself. The first of these measures will tend to repress the multiplication of both acarine and fungal elements, and the second to secure the destruction of acari, ova and sclerotia, and thus to prevent the reproduction of both the primary and secondary causes which provide for the recurrence of the blight from year to year. III.112 Scientific Memoirs by Reinwardt, were described,*but the injury which is produced in the host-plant in that case is trifling in comparison to that occurring in connection with the blight induced by the same alga when it attacks the cortical tissues of the shoots of tea-plants. Specimens of the disease were forwarded to me for examination by Dr. King, of the Royal Botanic Garden, Shibpur, to whom they had been ori- ginally sent by the agents of a tea-garden in which it had been the cause of considerable mischief. They consisted of branches bearing the remains of numerous withered leaves on their twigs. The terminal portions of the twigs where the bark was still young and green did not show any signs of disease, but lower down the surface was either covered by dense felts of the fructifying filaments of Cephaleuros, or the bark was entirely wanting and the outer surface of the bast exposed to the air (Plate III, Fig. 1). Vertical and longitudinal sections of portions of shoots in various stages of disease unequivocally demon- strated that the destruction of the bark was owing to the disruptive effects produced by intrusive filaments, sheets and solid masses of the vegetative cells of the alga whose fructification clothed the surface in those places where any bark remained adherent (Plate III, Figs. 2-3). In the earlier stages of the disease the cortex was still of considerable thickness and the algal elements were situated comparatively superficially, spreading out in sheets through the corky strata and breaking up at intervals through it to give origin to erect, fertile filaments on the surface. In more advanced specimens processes could be seen descending through the substance of the host-tissues from such superficial layers, and in their turn spreading out at deeper levels to give rise to new horizontally-disposed extensions which broke up the continuity of the surrounding parts, and in still older cases the thickness of the cortex was greatly reduced (Plate III, Figs. 3-4), and algal elements were visible throughout its entire depth right down to the outer limits of the bast. Taking these appear- ances into account, there can be no difficulty in accounting for the decortication and ultimate death of the affected shoots. It is evident that the disease origin- ates superficially, and is dependent on penetration of the outer layers of the cortex by processes descending from the under surfaces of the normal discoid expansions of Cephaleuros which are developed on any suitable surface on which the zoospores may happen to come to rest and germinate. Such processes find all the conditions for luxuriant growth in the constant water-supply and protection from direct exposure to the sun's rays which the cortical tissues provide. They grow freely and spreading out horizontally tend to break up the continuity of the tissues and to cause the desquaniation of the layers which lie above them, partly by mere increase in bulk, and partly because they give off *On an Entophytic alga occurring in the leaves of Limnanthemum indicum, with notes on a peculiarly parasitic variety of Mycoidea.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 113 numberless emergent fructifying filaments which force their way outwards to the surface (Plate III, Fig. 3), At the same time, they in their turn give off de- scending processes (Plate III, Fig. 2), like those from which they originated, which force their way downwards into deeper portions of the cortex and give rise to new horizontal expansions. During periods of sunny weather and rela- tively low atmospheric humidity, the active growth of the algal elements will naturally be retarded, and, at the same time, the superficial layers of them and the disintegrated cortical tissues will tend to dry up and become detached, whilst the deeper strata of the host-tissues, which retain more continuity, persist and afford protection to the algal elements which they contain. When, on the other hand, conditions of excessive humidity once more prevail, active growth will recur and provide for additional disintegration of the host-tissues, and these processes being recurrently carried on, complete destruction of the cortex will ultimately ensue, and the entophytic elements no longer meeting with a suitable nidus, will also disappear, leaving the bast-tissue completely denuded. The mere abnormal drain upon the water-supply of the host incident on the demands of the intrusive algal elements must necessarily tend to interfere with the nutrition of all distally situated parts even from the outset, and, with the advance towards complete decortication, a purely physical evaporative drain must be established, the ultimate result of which will be a fatal defect in distal water-supply. The disease is described as tending to occur specially in particularly damp sites, which is just what might have been expected from its origin, seeing that excessive damp must on the one hand favour the vegetative growth, and on the other the reproductive diffusion, of the alga. At the same time the destructive effects which it produces are likely to occur most rapidly and conspicuously in sites which are freely exposed to the sun, and therefore at particular times of year subject to considerable desiccation, as this must both facilitate decortication and also render any abnormal drain on the water-supply of the host more injurious. Under the influence of excessive moisture, on the other hand, the extension of the Entophyte within the host-tissues will occur rapidly, and fructifying filaments will appear in abundance on the surface of the diseased areas and produce innumer- able sporangia, the zoosporic contents of which only require the presence of abundant moisture to become fully developed and endowed with active move- ment securing their diffusion. They will thus be able to spread from their site of development to other previously unaffected areas, and, on germinating, to serve as sources of infection there. Their diffusion, moreover, under the influence of excessive moisture will tend to be effected not only actively, but passively, as multitudes of them may readily be conveyed in any drop of water running along a continuous surface, or falling from a higher to a lower one. There is unequivocal evidence of this in the excessive prevalence of Cephaleuros, Q
114 Scientific Memoirs by which may constantly be found on the leaves of shrubs subject to drip from trees whose leaves are also affected by the alga. In dealing with a blight of this kind, the great thing must necessarily be to prevent it establishing itself in sites presenting specially favourable conditions for the development of the alga. Cephaleuros occurs abundantly on most diverse hosts in tropical regions, but, as a rule, confines itself almost solely to leaves and produces mere localised mischief in these. The affection of the leaves is, generally speaking, of no practical importance, but it may serve as a source of serious mischief where local conditions are such as to favour the excessive growth and multiplication of the algal elements and their invasion of axial structures in which their presence may give rise to interference with the general water-supply of the host-tissues. The presence of the alga in and on leaves is readily recognisable from the conspicuous orange, lichenoid patches which the superficial discs and tufts of fructifying filaments form on the foliar surfaces, and the diffusion of the disease is a gradual process, and one which can never occur over wide areas with the rapidity with which that of many blights caused by the presence of parasitic fungi is effected. There can, there- fore, be little difficulty in successfully contending with it at the outset, and by the careful removal and destruction of all conspicuously affected leaves when it first makes its appearance, and by avoiding planting in sites exposed to the drip from affected trees, any excessive extension of it, even within otherwise specially favourable localities, might be effectually prevented. Where this has been neglected, however, and it has been thus allowed to establish itself thoroughly and to invade large areas of bark, more drastic measures will be necessary in the form of free pruning or even total removal of entire shrubs and careful destruc- tion of all the diseased tissues. The relatively slow growth and the limited means of diffusion of the alga are such that it can only, be as the result of the neglect of such simple preventive measures that the disease can ever become of any serious importance in any locality, but, given the neglect, it may be the cause of very considerable mischief. b. " Thread-blight." Medical Officers of the Army of India. 115 surfaces. When the extremity of a cord reaches the base of a petiole, it is either completely diverted outwards along its course, or divides, giving off a branch towards the leaf, whilst the rest of it continues to ascend along the axis. When the mycelium reaches the under surface of a leaf, the cord breaks up and ramifies indefinitely, covering the epidermis with a coating of white filaments, and as this advances the tissues of the lamina throughout become discoloured and die. Where, on the other hand, it comes in contact with the upper surface, only a limited amount of ramification occurs and growth is soon arrested without visible injury to the leaf. It thus behaves in precisely the same fashion as the mycelium of the common sclerotial blight of Ficus stipulata does. The nutritional relations of the mycelium to the upper and lower surfaces of the leaves are quite distinct. The upper surfaces are apparently related to the mycelium just in the same fashion as the bark of the shoots is; they merely serve as a supporting surface over which mycelial filaments deriving their nutri- tion from other sites may travel, but the under ones are clearly a site for the acquisition of large supplies of fresh nutritive material, as indicated by the indefinite and rapid growth of mycelial elements occurring in connection with it. But the great difference which exists between the upper and under surfaces of leaves generally in their nutritional relations to parasitic or facultatively parasitic fungi lies in the much greater facilities which the latter afford for the penetration of mycelial filaments into the interior of the host-tissues, both from their gener- ally less resistant texture, and from the great excess of stomatic orifices which they present. Taking this into account, together with the destructive effects following the access of the mycelium to the inferior foliar surfaces, and the close parallelism of the phenomena with those present in the case of the blight of Ficus stipulata, there is little room to doubt that such penetration does occur. At the same time it must be allowed that none of the specimens which I have had the opportunity of examining have afforded any actual demonstration of the fact. This, however, is not very astonishing, considering the exceptionally dense texture of the leaves and the fact that in all the specimens the tissues had more or less completely dried up ere they were subjected to examination116 Scientific Memoirs by blights of Ficus stiputata and Evolvulus nummularius. The principal distinctive feature lies in the definite cord-like arrangement which the mycelium assumes in passing from one nutritive area to another. The distinction, however, is not an absolute one, for, although in the two latter blights the mycelium never forms such definite cords, it does tend to become aggregated in the form of strands in passing from one leaf to another or when spreading out from the edges of an exhausted leaf over neighbouring non-nutritive surfaces such as glass or water. The distinction thus is one of degree and not of kind. In none of the specimens which have yet reached me have there been any traces of true sclerotia either within or on the blighted tissues or in the substance of the mycelial cords, but this may very probably have been owing to the fact that the normal development of the mycelium was arrested by the conditions to which it was subjected after the affected shoots were detached. In certain cases renewed active growth occurred in some of the mycelial cords when subjected to the influence of a moist atmosphere, but in the absence of fresh foliar surfaces as a source of new stores of nutritive material it was soon arrested. The phenomena certainly render it extremely probable that the disease is a sclerotial one, but the question is one which can only be deter- mined in a site in which both parasite and host-plant are at home, but in any such site a little careful observation would be all that would be necessary to decide it. In the absence of precise information in regard to the true nature of the parasite and the exact form and site of development of the reproductive apparatus, all that can be suggested with a view to the prevention of the disease is that whenever it makes its appearance all infected shoots should, as far as possible, be at once removed and burned. Such treatment will prevent the development of any true sclerotia, should such bodies be normal constituents in the develop- mental cycle of the parasite, and will at the same time secure the destruction of the dense mycelial cords on the bark the tissue of which does not merely serve as a means of spreading the disease from one leaf to another, but is also capable of retaining its vitality in a dormant condition for some time under conditions fatal to the mycelium generally, and is therefore capable of ensuring the persis- tence of the disease during periods prohibitive of its active extension. c. Root-blight dependent on the presence of a destructive fungal mycelium. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 117 so closely over the base of the stem and origins of the larger roots as to be more or less completely confluent, whilst farther out along the course of the roots they occurred in isolated patches (Plate III, Fig. 6). Where they were present, the bark no longer retained its normal smooth texture and grey colour, but was roughened, friable, and deep brown, owing to the mixture of earth, derived from the surrounding soil, with the disintegrated tissues. In certain sites masses of material of rusty-brown colour and spongy texture were visible in fissures of the surface, and, on removing portions of the disintegrating bark, these were seen to form portions of sheets and strands of similarly coloured material traversing the tissues in every direction. Such material was present throughout the entire thickness of the cortical tissues, and specially abundant at the level of the bast, where it was in many places spread out so as to form a continuous stratum over large areas. The wood appeared to be comparatively little affected, but was here and there interrupted by distinct wedge-shaped portions of a greyish tissue, with narrow, sinuous, blackish margins. On microscopic examination, the rusty-brown substance was found to be composed of dense, felted masses of mycelial filaments of brownish or greenish colour, and in those areas in which the invasion of the disease was progressing, but in which the tissues still retained their continuity, the cortex and bast were found to be everywhere permeated by fine filaments forcing their way between the constituent elements. In the earlier stages of dis ease, the wood appeared to be entirely unaffected, but, where it was far advanced, the mycelium tended to invade the medullary rays and to give rise to the discoloured radii previously alluded to. All attempts at cultivating the mycelium with the view of obtaining fructification failed entirely, which is hardly to be wondered at considering that it had evidently been primarily developed parasitically in connection with the living elements of the tissues, and that, by the time the specimens were submitted to examination, the latter were already dead and dried up. A certain amount of growth did occur in some cases, but it was soon arrested and was never attended by the production of any distinct reproductive bodies. The phenomena apparently indicated that the persistent masses of mycelium contained a certain amount of intrinsic nutritive material stored up within them which served to provide for a limited amount of growth, but that, when this had been expended, the latter ceased in the absence of any living host-tissues as a source of further supply. In those cases in which such limited growth occurred, the outer surfaces of the bark became covered by a coating of an orange colour, consisting of short, erect, emergent filaments originating from newly-developed horizontal extensions of mycelium within the substance of the tissues. The development of such emergent filaments in this case is probably an indication of the method in which the extension of the parasite from the roots of one plant to another is
118 Scientific Memoirs by effected. The growth which occurred in the present instance was, no doubt, very limited and only sufficient to give rise to a. superficial coating of mycelium on the diseased tissues, but under normal conditions, where the mycelium is in full vigour and the host-tissues still capable of affording abundant nutritive supply, it may well be much more extensive and provide for the development of mycelial strands capable of traversing considerable areas of the soil and so of coming into contact with neighbouring healthy roots. As the specimens neither contained nor yielded anything save masses of purely mycelial elements, it is impossible to come to any definite conclusion in regard to the precise nature of the parasite, but taking the characters of the disease into account along with the well-ascertained fact of the destructive form of root-blight which prevails in European coniferous forests in connection with the invasion of the tissues by the mycelium of Agaricus melleus, Vahl., it appears not improbable that it may be of Hymenomycete origin. Fortunately, however, there can be no doubt in regard to the nature of the measures which ought to be adopted in order to limit the extension of the disease in any area within which it has established itself. All diseased plants ought to be at once removed and burned, and special care should be taken to remove the roots as thoroughly as possible, so that portions of them may not remain in the soil as sources of infection. If possible, moreover, it would be desirable not to replant the infected area for some time, and also to isolate it by means of digging a trench around it sufficiently deep to pass below the lowest level in the soil to which the roots normally penetrate. By such means any extension of mycelium connected with residual fragments of roots remaining in the soil to neighbouring uninfected areas would be effectually prevented, and in the absence of suitable nutritive supply the parasitic elements would, in the course of time, die out within the primarily infected one. IV.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 119 plant, as they are almost invariably entirely destroyed at one or other stage of their development. So much so is this the case, that, as a rule, no garden varieties of Papaver somniferum are cultivated in the Botanical Garden at Shibpur, and on the exceptional occasions on which an attempt is made to grow them, even from seed imported direct from Europe and after the cultivation has been intermitted for periods of several successive years, the disease invariably makes its appear- ance to foil it. A very striking instance of this fact presented itself during the course of the present year. No varieties of opium-poppies had been grown in the garden for eight or ten years previously, but in the winter of 1894 a large bed was planted with seedlings which had been raised from seed freshly imported from Europe in the autumn. As usual they grew vigorously and they had even come into full flower in apparently perfect health, but whenever the tem- perature began to rise steadily towards the end of February, the blight suddenly made its appearance and spread with such rapidity that within the course of a few days every plant was attacked and killed by it. The relatively high nocturnal temperature and the drenching dews of the deltaic area are specially favourable to the rapid extension of the disease, because they provide conditions favouring the development and evolution of the aërial fructification of the parasite which is the essential cause of it, but, although its destructive effects are not invariably so excessive in dryer regions, it is by no means absent from them and is occasionally a cause of serious mischief there. The very first specimens of the blight which I had an opportunity of examining were sent down from Behar in the year 1874, when it was the cause of very serious damage to the local cultivation of the opium-poppy there. The presence of the disease is from the outset very readily recognisable from the conspicuous effects which it produces on the affected leaves. They show patches of pale-brown discoloration, which are generally primarily situated towards the tips and margins of the laminæ, but rapidly spread, become con- fluent, and involve the entire foliar surfaces, which at the same time wilt and soon become dry and brittle. The blight as occurring in Europe is described as occa- sionally affecting the stems of the plants more conspicuously than the leaves; but in India this phenomenon, if it occur at all, must be very rare, as I have never encountered an instance of it. If the under surfaces of the affected leaves are examined with a lens in the earlier stages of the disease, especially in the early morning and before the dew has evaporated, they are found to be covered by a whitish or very pale ochreous coating of minute, erect, branched filaments bearing terminal sporangia, and, under somewhat higher magnifying powers, it will be seen that they emerge from the interior of the lamina by the stomatic orifices. In the earlier stages of the disease these are the only fungal elements recognisable on the foliar surfaces, but, subsequently, the dead tissues become invaded by saprophytic fungi of many different kinds, the conidial and peritherial
120 Scientific Memoirs by fructifications of which frequently give rise to the formation of variously coloured patches on the originally uniform, pale-brown surface. The fructifying filaments of the Peronospera are repeatedly dichotomously ramified and terminate in a series of slender, conspicuously curved twigs, so that the entire structure comes to resemble a miniature deer's antler in some degree (Plate IV, Fig. 2). The terminal twigs are short and slender, and each of them gives origin to a sporangium. The sporangia are, when fresh, almost colour- less, of rounded-oval figure, with average diameter of 23 X 20 µ and contain a mass of finely granular protoplasm within which a nucleoid body may frequently be recognised (Plate IV, Fig. 2). I have not been able to follow out the farther stages of their evolution after they have become detached. Many attempts were made to cultivate them both in water and in neutral salt solution, but in no case did any of them either germinate or give origin to zoospores. This may have been owing to their very rapidly losing vitality after separation, or to an incapacity for farther evolution save when in contact with the host-tissues, but the very rapid extension of the blight under favourable circumstances unequivocally indicates that they are normally capable of undergoing their ultimate develop- ment without delay. On making vertical sections through the thickness of affected portions of the laminæ, the fructifying filaments are found to be continuous with a richly ramified system of septate mycelial filaments filled with granular protoplasm penetrating the entire thickness of the leaf between the superior and inferior epidermis (Plate IV, Fig. 1). The filaments, as a rule, appear to be situated between the cells of the host-tissues, but in some cases give origin to short, simple, rounded, intracellular haustoria. In some leaves the mycelium produces only sporangial fructification, but in others innumerable oospores are also developed. They make their appearance at a relatively late period and when the nutritive properties of the host-tissues have been more or less expended. I have not yet been able to follow out the details of the earlier stages of their development, but have obtained numer- ous immature specimens in which the oogonium was still connected with two filaments, one representing the one proper to it, and the other an adherent antheridium, so that there can be no doubt that the fructification is of a truly sexual character (Plate IV, Figs. 4, 5, 7). The mature oogonia are very readily recognisable in the dead tissues owing to the thickness and bright reddish- brown colour of their walls (Plate IV, Fig. 3). They are situated in the inter- spaces of the open parenchyma beneath the stratum of palisade-cells, and in many places are present in very large numbers. They vary very considerably in size in different instances, but those of average size have diameters of 33 µ. The walls are about 4.5 µ in thickness and surround a central space which is almost entirely occupied by the oospore. The latter has a thin wall
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 121 surrounding a peripheral stratum of granular protoplasm including a large central globule of apparently oily matter (Plate IV, Fig. 6). The following figures give the detailed measurements of two mature oogonia and their contents:122 Scientific Memoirs by if the greatest care is taken to remove and destroy all diseased plants, a certain number of them must almost inevitably escape, and if only a very few do so they will be amply sufficient, in such a favourable locality, to originate devastating disease. In any localities, however, in which such favourable conditions are not present, and in which, in connection with the presence of relative atmos- pheric aridity, the production of, the sporangial fructification is kept within bounds, and therefore the rapid diffusion of the disease is prevented, much might be done to limit the prevalence of it by the careful and early removal and burning of all affected plants, and it is even possible that by means of steady perseverance in such measures it might be totally extinguished. V.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 123 fungal elements, but a jointed mycelium was present in the substance of the cambium, the wood and the outer portions of the pith. Filaments were present in considerable numbers in the cambium, but the outer zone of the wood was the area within which they specially abounded. In it they were present in great numbers in the wood cells, the large pitted vessels and the proper tissue of the medullary rays, whilst the abnormal unlignified areas between the masses of woody tissue were everywhere crowded with them. Throughout the greater part of the primary zone of wood they were almost entirely absent, the pitted vessels and the wood-cells being entirely free from them and the medullary rays containing traces of their presence only here and there. Just at the inner edge, however, they again made their appearance in some numbers within the medullary rays and here and there within the spiral vessels and from this area they extended into the immediately adjoining strata of the pith. Judging from these phenomena, it appears probable that infection did not take place until after the development of the primary zone of wood and that the original site in which the parasitic elements established themselves was the cambium. Their presence there appears to have given rise, as it might have been expected to do, to imperfect development of the secondary strata of both wood and bast, whilst, at the same time, they invaded the tissue of the pre- existent medullary rays to a certain extent and by means of them reached the spirals and the adjoining portion of the pith. The nature of the changes induced in the secondary wood and bast was of unlike character owing to the fact that whilst they underwent excessive development in the tissues of the developing wood they had no tendency to invade the new bast tissue. In con- sequence of this there had been more defective formation of secondary bast, but extremely abnormal as well as defective formation of the secondary wood, many of the elements which ought to have contributed to its formation retaining an embryonic character and thus giving rise to appearances which to casual observation simulated those of hypertrophy of the medullary rays. The distribution of the mycelium throughout the tissues of the axis explains why in this case the disease, although in many points closely resembling the so-called " Bangle-blight " of potatoes, should be of a chronic in place of an acute type as the latter is. In the case of the stem of the potato-plant the water-conducting system is a very limited one, consisting of a few isolated bundles of fibro-vascular tissue (Plate I, Fig. 4), and as these are attacked by the mycelium of the parasite the water-supply of all the tissues beyond the invaded area is so seriously interfered with that rapid wilting necessarily occurs. But in the case of the Brinjal, the water-conducting system of the base of the stem is much more highly developed in the form of a continuous zone of wood, so that when, as in the present instance, this is only very partially affected, the water-supply, although interfered with, yet remains sufficient to prevent the R 2
124 Scientific Memoirs by occurrence of total withering of the distal parts. The defect in supply is of sufficient magnitude seriously to interfere with nutrition, but is not so great as to determine immediate wilting and death from disproportion between root- supply and foliar transpiratory loss. As none of the specimens showed any indications of the development of reproductive bodies of any kind in connection with the mycelium, it was, of course, quite impossible definitely to determine what the precise nature of the parasite was. When, however, the great prevalence of sclerotial blights in India, and the localisation of the disease within the tissues of the host-plant are taken into account, it appears not to be unlikely that the disease is of a sclerotial type. In any case it is clear that the practical measures to be recommended in contending with it are the avoidance of all excessive irrigation and the careful removal and burning of all blighted plants and portions of the dead tissues of such as have already died of the disease. VIMedical Officers of the Army of India. 125 Here again we have an instance of the origin and diffusion of a sclerotial blight under the influence of conditions specially calculated to favour such an occurrence. The soil is stated to have been excessively manured and flooded with irrigation-water, conditions specially adapted to favour the evolution of any sclerotia which may have been originally present in it, and the development of invasive mycelium from the reproductive bodies to which they gave origin. The gradual extension of the disease from one side of the field to the other points to infection spreading from host to host by means of direct extension of mycelium, and, as portions of the diseased roots when exposed to a moist atmosphere became rapidly clothed superficially with emergent white strands of filaments, there can be little doubt that this had actually taken place. In the case of a blight of this character, affecting the superficial tissues and of directly contagious character, the immediate removal and destruction of any diseased plants is, of course, much more important than in the case of the sclerotial root- blights of the Potato and Brinjal which have been previously described and in which the parasitic elements are deeply buried within the substance of the host. This, combined with sparing irrigation and avoidance of any excessive manuring of the soil, would certainly tend to limit the extension of the disease in any area in which it has actually established itself, whilst the tendency to its recurrence at future periods would be obviated by careful burning of all portions of diseased tissues which are likely to harbour sclerotia. VII.126 Scientific Memoirs by In many instances the prominences which they form are half as thick as the stem or bough from which they originate. Ultimately, processes of destructive disintegration set in in the mass, and now the mycelium no longer confines itself to vegetative growth, but gives origin to fructification in the form of crops of deep rusty-brown pilei (Plate VI, Fig. II) of woody texture and presenting the structural features characteristic of those of the genus Trameter. As the decay of the host-tissues advances, masses of the tumour fall away carrying the earlier crops of pilei with them, and leaving raw surfaces exposed, from which fresh crops originate. In consequence of frequent repetitions of these processes, the bulk of the morbid tissue becomes greatly reduced, but, as the invasion of healthy areas continues simultaneously to progress, any spontaneous cure of the disease does not tend to occur. On the contrary, the general nutrition of the host ultimately comes to be seriously interfered with by the spread of the parasite, and, at the same time, so much. weakening is induced by the steady disintegrative loss of tissue, that fractures are readily induced under the influence of any sudden strain such as that caused by gusts of wind. The appearances presented by the morbid tissues in the earlier stages of the disease, ere disintegrative changes have begun to occur, are illustrated in Fig. 8 of Plate V, which represents a portion of a section through the substance of one of the localised tumours which originate where the original site of inva- sion is in an embryonic shoot. The particular growth from which the section was obtained was still of small size and its outer surface was quite intact and covered with seemingly normal bark. It will be seen from the figure that the substance of the wood is everywhere permeated by large filaments of a deep- brown, branching, septate mycelium which occur in especial abundance in the large pitted vessels and the tissues of the medullary rays, whilst the wood-cells remain practically exempt. The details of the structure of the mycelium are further illustrated in Fig. 9, which represents portions of individual filaments from various parts of the same section. This blight is exceedingly common among, and eventually destructive to, trees of Terminalia Catappa in the neighbourhood of Calcutta, but there is little doubt that it might be practically abolished were a little attention bestowed on detecting and treating it at an early stage of its development. It so early shows conspicuous indications of its presence, that its invasion can hardly escape notice at a stage long before the parasite has begun to fructify, and when the diseased tissues might readily be completely removed by means of free excision. Such treatment would effectually prevent its further local extension, and also the development of the reproductive elements securing its infective invasion of other hosts, and, considering the ornamental and economic properties of the tree, it is certainly a pity that it should be allowed to suffer as it does.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 127 VIII.128 Scientific Memoirs by even after germination, the empty spores in many instances retain their tuber- culate character very distinctly. On making vertical sections through the thickness of affected leaves, there is no evidence whatever of any general permeation of the tissues by mycelium (Plate VI, Fig. 9). The double stratum of palisade-cells beneath the epidermis of the upper surface of the lamina is apparently entirely free from fungal elements, and, even in the open tissue beneath, there is no evidence of any continuous system of mycelium. On the contrary, the mycelium appears to occur only in the form of localised patches of dense parenchymatoid tissue composed of closely aggregated cells (Plate VI, Fig. l0), from which the stalks of the uredospores originate. The normal structure of the leaf of the Teak is somewhat peculiar. Immediately beneath the epidermis of the upper surface there is a stratum of greatly elongated palisade-cells, which is succeeded by another in which the elements are considerably shorter but also arranged in palisade fashion. Beneath this comes a layer of open tissue composed of cells of irregular outline, having large intercellular spaces between them. This tissue is everywhere present save where its continuity is interrupted by lignified cells either belong- ing to the fibro-vascular bundles or occurring independently of these in the form of supporting pillars passing right through the substance of the lamina from the superior to the inferior epidermis (Plate VI, Fig. 9). It varies, however, greatly in thickness in different places. In many, it is composed of a single row of cells only, but in others, it forms a series of eminences filling into the interior of corresponding projections of the inferior epidermis. In these sites the thickness of open tissue and the area occupied by intercellular spaces is, of course, greater than they are elsewhere and it is to them that the mycelium of the parasite apparently is practically confined (Plate VI, Fig. 9). Here it forms isolated, parenchymatoid beds of closely appressed cells in the deeper parts of the open tissue and from these cellular masses the pedicels of the uredospores originate, filling up the interior of the prominences as they increase in size and numbers and ultimately rupturing the continuity of the epidermis to project free upon the surface of the lamina. In spite of this essentially localised distribution of the mycelium, the exten- sion of the disease and of the coincident destruction of the tissues of the host is very rapid, owing to the readiness and rapidity with which the uredospores germinate and the great length which the resultant germinal tubes are capable of attaining in their search for a suitable site for further development. All that is necessary is the presence of a certain amount of moistureMedical Officers of the Army of India. 129 the germinal tubes to the interior of the host, is apparently immediately devoted to the local production of beds of fructiferous tissue, no time is lost in the development of new crops of spores. All attempts to discover any other form of fructification save this uredinous one have hitherto entirely failed. In spite of the constancy and excessive abund- ance with which the uredospores are produced, no traces of any teleutosporic fructification have appeared on any of the numerous specimens of blighted leaves which have been examined, and, in spite of repeated and careful search, no satis- factory evidence of the presence of any intermediate host producing the missing forms of fructification has been obtained. That such an intermediate host does exist there can, however, be little doubt, as in the entire absence of any teleutosporic fructification on the leaves of the Teak, there would appear to be no other theory by which to account for the constant annual recurrence of the disease. It is not as though the successive crops of leaves normally overlapped one another, as they do in the case of certain other trees, such as Bassia longifolia, which are annually affected by uredinous blights devoid of teleu- tosporic fructification, for a considerable period always elapses between the fall of one set of leaves and the appearance of the next one. Moreover, during a prolonged period in the earlier part of the existence of each successive crop of leaves, the latter show no traces whatever of being affected, and, when they do begin to do so, the fructification is from the outset uredinous, which may be taken to indicate that uredospores are the primary cause of infection. I have, unfortunately, no information regarding the extent to which the disease prevails in other localities than the neighbourhood of Calcutta, but it appears to be not improbable that in drier regions its recurrence and diffusion may be very considerably checked by the absence of conditions favouring the rapid germination of the successive crops of uredospores. In the lower Gangetic delta, however, where atmospheric humidity is constantly relatively high and where heavy falls of dew normally occur even during the driest periods of the year, the amount of destruction of leaf-tissue which it annually occasions must be enormous, and must certainly be well calculated to interfere seriously with the nutrition of the host-trees. The mycelium, no doubt, appears to be very localised in its distribution throughout the foliar tissues, but the number of individual points of infection is enormous. Each individual patch of mycelium may only be capable of acting as a very limited drain on the nutrition of the host, but the sum of drain determined by the coincident action of innumerable patches must be very great indeed. Moreover, the destructive effects on the leaf-tissues are not determined merely by the amount of direct abnormal drain on nutritive supply by the parasitic elements, for the latter also mechanically cause such extensive destruction of epidermis as must inevitably lead to the death of neighbouring and deeper tissues in consequence of the incident S
130 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. abnormal loss of water from the laminar surfaces. The excessive prevalence of the blight may thus well be one factor in determining the very imperfect growth of the Teak-tree in Lower Bengal. IX.Plate I. Blights affecting the Potato in India. FIG. 1. Bangle-blight; showing the blighted portion of the base of the axis Nat. size. " 2. Section of a tuber in the early stage of disease " " 3. " " " in a later stage of disease " " 4. Transverse section of an axis; showing the position of the fibro- vascular bundles x 3.5 " 5. Spiral vessel containing mycelial filaments x 400 " 6. Large pitted vessel containing mycelium x 400 " 7. Uncoiled spiral from a vessel surrounding mycelial filaments x 400 " 8. Portion of a wood.cell containing mycelium x 400 " 9. Transverse section of a large pitted vessel partially blocked by mycelium x 660 " 10. Pitted vessel containing a sclerotium x 660 " 11. Portion of a pitted vessel containing mycelium and developing sclerotia x 400 " 12. Fructification of Phytophthora infestans x 400 " 13. Pythium-blight; oospores in the cells of the cortex x 150 " 14. Oospores from the pith x 660 " 15. Asexual sporangia from the pith x 400 " 16. Fungi occurring in connection with "Karrah,"
PLATE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003518.tif] D. D. C. del. ad. nat. Lith: by S. C. Mondul. BLIGHTS AFFECTING THE POTATOE. figs. 1.11. Bangle - blight. fig. 12. Phytophthora infestans. figs. 13.15. Pythium-blight. fig. 16. Pungi occurring in connection with "Karrah"
Plate II. Sclerotial blights occurring in India, and Mites which are sometimes associated with them. FIG. 1. Sclerotia of blight affecting tubers of potato x l0 " 2. Mites PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003533.tif] D.D.C. del. ad nat. Lith. by A. C. Mukerjei. SCLEROTIAL BLIGHTS, & MITES ASSOCIATED WITH THAT OF POTATOE-TUBERS.
Plate III. Vegetable blights of Tea and Rice. FIG. 1. Portions of two shoots of Tea affected by Cephaleuros virescens as a bark-blight Nat. size. " 2. Vertical section of the bark; showing algal cells permeating its entire thickness down to the level of the bast x 150 " 3. Vertical section of the bark; showing great thinning owing to detachment of successive strata from the surface, and the expansions of algal tissue which cause this x 150 " 4. Vertical section showing normal structure and thickness of the bark of Tea x 150 " 5. Portion of a Tea-plant affected by "Thread-blight"; showing the strands of mycelium which run along the shoots from leaf to leaf to give origin to destructive mycelial expansions over the under surfaces of the leaves Nat. size. " 6. Root-blight of Tea caused by invasion of the tissues by fungal mycelium " " 7. Rice affected by Ustilago " " 8. Spikelet of Rice with one grain affected by Ustilago " " 9. Spores of the Ustilago of Rice x 1030
PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003545.tif] D.D.C. del. ad nat. Lith. by S.C. Mondul. BLIGHTS OF TEA & RICE. Figs. 1 3, Cephaleuros as a bark - blight on Tea. Fig. 4; Normal bark of Tea. Fig. 5; Thread - blight of Tea. Fig 6; Root - blight of Tea. Figs.7-9; Ustilsgo of Rice.
Plate IV. Opium Blight. FIG. 1. Vertical section through a portion of a leaf stained with picro- carmine; showing mycelium and aërial fertile filaments of Peronospora arborescens x 400 " 2. Upper extremity of a fertile filament and detached sporangia from a fresh preparation x 400 " 3. Groups of mature oogonia and oospores in the tissue of a dead leaf x 50 " 4. Immature oogonium and oospore with adherent antheridium x 400 " 5. Small mature oogonium with adherent antheridium x 400 " 6. Mature oogonium and oospore x 400 " 7. Immature oogonium and oospore with adherent antheridium. x 400
PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003557.tif] Lith by A. Chowdhary D.D.C. del. ad. nat. OPIUM-BLIGHT Mycelium, Sporangic and Oosporic fructification of Peronospora arborescens.
Plate V. Fungal blights of Brinjal (Solanum Melongena), Lucern (Medicago sp.) and Terminalia Catappa. FIG. 1. Transverse section of base of stem of Brinjal stained with picro- carmine; showing imperfect formation of the secondary zone of wood in consequence of the presence of fungal mycelium x 10 " 2. Portion of a medullary ray containing mycelium x 400 " 3. Large pitted vessels containing mycelial filaments x 150 " 4. Bundle of larger mycelial filaments from one of the non-lignified areas in the secondary zone of wood x 150 " 5. Transverse section of two pitted vessels and surrounding wood- cells containing fungal mycelium x 400 " 6. Transverse section of a root of Lucern stained with picro- carmine; showing numerous small sclerotia in the substance of the cortex x 10 " 7. Vertical section through the cortex; showing mycelial elements in the deeper strata and a sclerotium breaking through the superficial layers x 150 " 8. Section of one of the tumours on the stem of a tree of Terminalia Catappa; showing brown mycelial filaments in the pitted vessels and medullary rays of the wood x 150 " 9. Portions of the brown mycelium x 400
PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003572.tif] D.D.C. del. ad nat. Lith: by S. C. Mondul. Figs. 1-5, Root-blight of Solanum Melongena. Figs. 6-7, Root-blight of Medicago Sativa. Figs. 8-9, Blight of stem of Terminalia Catappa.
Plate VI. Blights affecting Conifers and the Teak. FIG. 1. Portion of a longitudinal vertical section of a needle of a seed- ling of Pinus longifolia; showing mycelial filaments and subepidermal conidiiferous pustule x 150 " 2. Portion of a subepidermal conidiiferous pustule breaking up the hypodermal tissue x 400 " 3. Detached conidia from such a pustule x 400 " 4. Larger conidia occurring in the stomatic vestibular spaces x 400 " 5. Similar large conidia and mycelial: filaments in the substomatic space x 400 " 6. Portion of a transverse, vertical section of a needle of a seedling Deodar; showing abundance of large, brown mycelial fila- ments in the deeper parts of the tissue immediately around the central area x 150 " 7. Portions of such mycelial filaments x 400 " 8. Vertical section of a portion of a Teak-leaf showing one of the prominences of open tissue on the inferior surface which constitute the special sites within which pustules of uredinous fructification are developed x 400 " 9. A similar section including a pustule of uredinous fructification x 400 " 10. Portion of the dense, parenchymatous mycelial tissue from which the uredospores originate x 400 " 11. Polyporus causing the stem blight of Terminalia Catappa; small specimen Nat. size.
PLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003584.tif] D.D.C. del. ad nat. Lith. by A. C. Mukerjei. FUNGAL BLIGHTS OF CONIFERS, TEAK & TERMINALIA CATAPPA. Figs. 1-5; blight of PINUS LONGIFOLIA. Figs. 6,7; blight of CEDRUS DEODORA. Figs. 8-10; uredinous blight of TECTONA GRANDIS. Fig. 11; fructification of Stem-blight of TERMINALIA CATAPPA.
SCIENTIFIC MEMORIES BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON-MAJOR-GENERAL J. CLEGHORN, M.D., C.S.I., DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. PART X. 1897. 1. 