IP/QB.10 m 91. C. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON MAJOR-GENERAL W. R. RICE, M.D., C.S.I., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VIII. 1894. 1.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON MAJOR-GENERAL W. RICE, M.D., C.S.I., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VIII. 1894. 1.The Results of continued Study of Various Forms of Comma- Bacilli occurring in Calcutta. BY BRIGADE-SURGEON LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. D. CUNNINGHAM, F.R.S., C.I.E. It is now more than three years since I drew attention to the fact that cholera in Calcutta is not invariably characterised by the presence of any cultivable comma-bacilli in the intestinal contents, and that, even in those cases where such organisms are present, they by no means invariably present the characters of those described by Koch and ordinarily accepted as true choleraic bacilli, but differ greatly in different instances both as regards their morphological and physiological properties. The strangely implicit faith which at that time was almost universally yielded to the finality of Koch's statements and theories prevented these observations from producing any appreciable impression, and even a year later, when full details were published in this periodical regarding the subject, they were received either with entire incredu- lity or by an attempt to force them into agreement with the requirements of the theory. The history of the evolution and acceptance of the theory are equally curious; the haste and confidence with which results of a few weeks' observations were assumed to afford sufficient grounds for the most sweeping generalisations and the wonderfully implicit faith with which the latter were as a rule adopted being equally phenomenal. The practical results of the theory and its acceptation, as we now know, can hardly be regarded as very satis- factory either for the community at large or for the judgment of its adherents, consisting as they have done in errors in diagnosis and failure to recognise the presence of local epidemics of cholera until they have attained unmanage- able proportions. Had the diagnosis of cholera in Hamburg last summer not been delayed until 85 cases and 36 deaths had occurred because of the belief that the disease must be accompanied by Koch's comma-bacillus, the epidemic might never have attained the appalling magnitude which it ulti- mately did, and had the medical profession in Berlin not been possessed by a blind faith in the theory, we might have been spared the curious spectacle which they furnished by their refusal to admit that any cases of disease, however otherwise indistinguishable in symptoms and mortality they might be, were of a truly choleraic nature, unless they conformed to Koch's dicta. As I have had ample opportunities for continuing the study of the subject since I last published anything regarding it, and as the results have B
2 Scientific Memoirs by been in my opinion fully confirmatory of my original views, it seems desirable to bring them forward and compare them with the theory. As has been already mentioned, the data obtained here were either ignored altogether or were received by an attempt to force them as far as possible to conform to the requirements of the theory; the fact of the occurrence of cases, apart from the presence of any comma-bacilli being simply ignored, and the multiplicity of forms of comma-bacilli being regarded as explicable as the result of mere variability and as corresponding with the existence of an indefinite number of "atypical varieties" of one and the same species. The cases in which the disease was present and commas absent were dismissed as not being cases of cholera, the phenomenon being accounted for as the result of diagnostic error. This is no doubt a very convenient method of disposing of the question, but one which is, as we have already seen, fraught with practical danger to the public, and, in so far as the theory itself is concerned, is a double-edged weapon. If it once be adopted there is nothing to prevent its general applica- tion, and it then becomes open to us to question whether the cases on which Koch originally founded his theory were typical ones, or even cases of the disease at all. He accepted them as true, typical cases on the ground of the symptoms and general pathological phenomena which they presented, and if these afford sufficient guides for diagnosis in one case, they cannot be lightly rejected in others merely to suit the convenience of a theory. His cases were characterised by the presence of comma-bacilli presenting certain definite characters, but the latter are certainly not typical of the commas occurring most frequently in Calcutta in association with the disease, If then we are to accept the presence of Koch's commas as the real diagnostic, cholera must be of rare occurrence in Calcutta although associated with a very large number of cases which are indistinguishable from it in symptoms, general pathology and mortality. We are required to believe that, due to some inexplicable coincidence, a large number of cases of a rare disease occurred during Koch's brief stay in Calcutta simply because it was desirable that they should do so, or to accept a certain peculiarity which they happened to present as of typical value, merely because he observed it. Are we to suppose that he was endowed with supernatural powers of diagnosis, which rendered him capable of infallibly discriminating true cases of cholera and avoiding errors to which Indian medical men with a life-long experience of the disease are liable? It is all very well to regard Koch's work in connection with cholera as typical, but, if it were typical of anything, it was of imperfect observation and rash generalisation. It is, no doubt, a characteristic feature in the majority of cases of cholera that the intestinal contents should include large numbers of curved bacilli, but it was only ignorance of the numerous forms of such organisms and of the frequency with which they occur that could have led any one to assume that
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 3 they were necessarily and invariably of one species, and to neglect entirely to notice the differences in character which they present in individual cases. Originally, however, it was assumed that the diagnosis of any case of disease as of truly choleraic nature might be safely and definitely founded on the detection of comma-bacilli in the contents of the intestines, and it was not until Lewis drew attention to the presence of such organisms in saliva and Prior and Finkler discovered them in the dejecta of cases of what is termed in Europe "Cholera nostras" that special stress was laid on the presence of certain physiological details as definitely distinguishing truly choleraic bacilli from all other similar organisms. At this time, in order to maintain the theory, great stress was laid on certain details in the life-history of the bacilli as of specific value, but whenever it was pointed out that such details are not constant, for the bacilli obtained from different cases of the disease, an immediate change of tactics was adopted, and it was as stoutly affirmed that they were of no specific value whatever, and that the differences were merely indicative of the existence of numerous varieties in type of one and the same species. Now, either of these views is logically tenable according to the opinion which its advocates may entertain as to what it is that imparts specific value to any special characters, but it is preposterous to attempt to maintain both of them simultaneously, merely in order to bolster up a theory. The distinctive characters of Finkler's Comma are either of specific value, or they are not. If they are, those of many distinct forms of choleraic commas are equally so, and the association of the disease, with a single species, comes to the ground; if they are not, then the specific relation of a distinct species to cholera ceases. It does not matter which view is adopted, both are equally fatal to the theory, but no one is logically entitled now to hold one and again the other merely on account of a prejudice in favour of it. So long as the theory appeared to require that stress should be laid on particular characters these were regarded as of specific value, but whenever it became inconvenient that they should be so regarded, this ceased to be the case and their specificity was promptly denied. For a time accordingly we were furnished with the most definite descriptions of the distinctive features of choleraic comma-bacilli as compared with those of any similar organisms occurring under other circumstances, but, as experience accumulated and it became more and more certain that many very distinct forms were found in association with the disease, one after another of their characters was affirmed to be of no specific value, until at the present time it is hard to see what definition of "the choleraic comma" the advocates of Koch's views could give save that it is a bacillus occurring in the intestinal contents of most cases of cholera, and which has formed the basis of a celebrated theory. Whilst freely allowing that it is possible to regard all the various forms of B 2
4 Scientific Memoirs by choleraic bacilli as mere varieties of one and the same species, I do not individually believe that this can fairly be done without striking at the root of all attempts at classification of Schizomycete organisms, or, indeed, at classification generally. They, no doubt, do present certain common morphological and physiological properties, but this is not peculiar to them as a group of distinct organisms. Were it not that groups of organisms constantly do so, it would be impossible to have any classification beyond a mere category of individual species, and if we are to adopt the view that the possession of certain common properties indicates specific identity, then we have only to push it far enough, and there is an end of classification altogether, and we must remain content to affirm that all living beings, whether animal or vegetal, are mere atypical varieties of a common primitive protoplast. The resemblances which distinct forms of choleraic bacilli may under certain circumstances present are certainly very conspicuous, but the conditions under which these resemblances arise are not such as to justify us in regarding the latter as indicative of specific identity. In a limited number of instances we find resemblances manifesting themselves under the influence of like conditions of environment, but this is almost always where the latter are unfavourable and the growth correspondingly unhealthy, and more or less abortive. Where this is not the case and resemblances yet are present, we do not find them arising under the influence of like conditions, but under that of diverse ones, and as the result of the fact that the different forms are differently affected by the latter, certain features presenting themselves in one form under given conditions and in another under totally distinct ones. Now, no one will propose to ascribe any decisive value to the characters presented by abnor- mal, unhealthy growths, and the resemblances which arise under the influence of unlike conditions, in place of being any proof of specific identity, are strong evidence against it. The constancy with which the different choleraic comma-bacilli continue to present conspicuous differences whilst exposed to certain like conditions, and the fact that the modifications which they undergo on being transferred from one to another environment, differ from one another so as to cause certain forms when in one environ- ment to present resemblances to others in another environment render it extremely improbable that they do not possess specific peculiarities. Even where we find that organisms which, under the influence of particular common conditions present conspicuous differences, cease to do so any longer under the influence of other but equally common ones, we have no satisfactory evidence of any essential identity in their nature unless the resemblance between them has arisen as the result of truly assimilatory modificationMedical Officers of the Army of India. 5 inluence of the alteration of environment, the resemblance in place of affording evidence of any true similarity, is strong evidence of essential dissimilarity in their nature, for it is evidence of the unlike action of like external conditions upon them. Every one is aware that schizomycete organisms generally are readily modified under the influence of exposure to varied conditions, and, as will presently be shown, choleraic-bacilli are certainly possessed' of no exceptional resistance to such action. But the more modifiable any organisms are, the more have we a right to expect that long-continued exposure to like conditions must induce an assimilation in the characters of any mere varieties which have originated as the result of evolution under unlike ones. Now this is most certainly not the case in regard to many forms of choleraic comma-bacilli. Certain forms have now been in continuous cultivation in Calcutta under like conditions for from two to three years and even longer, and although in some cases and in regard to certain properties they have undergone important modifications, these have not as a rule given rise to any assimilation of charac- ters, but on the contrary have merely tended to replace the original differences by other and even more conspicuous ones. A certain amount of alteration in character is naturally to be looked for as the result of the continuous cultivation of modifiable organisms in a new environment. In the present case the organisms are readily modified, and their rate of multiplication is such that what for us is a relatively brief period is for them one of geologic duration, so that it would be surprising indeed did no modifications arise; but, after a time, the limit of modification for any given environment appears to be reached, and then, so long as external conditions are unchanged, the acquired characters remain fixed and stable. When, therefore, we find organisms undergoing modification and acquiring new characters under the influence of altered conditions, this is no evidence of any want of specificity in them, of any want of specific differ. ences between them, unless the modifications which they exhibit are of an assimilatory character. The differences which they originally presented may or may not have been of specific value, may or may not have arisen as the result of antecedent exposure to unlike conditions; but, unless they tend to be replaced by resemblances under the influence of prolonged exposure to like conditions, we have no evidence that they are not of specific value. In attempting to arrive at any correct decision in regard to the specificity of such readily modifiable organisms as schizomycetes, we must therefore carefully avoid regarding mere resemblances apart from the conditions under which they have arisen as satisfactory guides, for the more any organisms are liable to be modified by external influences, the greater is the likelihood that modifications which in one form are induced by one set of conditions may in another be induced by totally different ones. Mere resemblances are in themselves of no decisive value; we must have resemblances which have arisen under similar conditions.
6 Scientific Memoirs by The question is farther complicated by the fact that characters which have been acquired under given conditions may sometimes possess a certain amount of persistence, so that on the transfer of the organism to a different environment an immediate development of the characters proper to it in the latter may not occur. It has already been pointed out that the modifications taking place under the influence, of special conditions have a and that, this having been reached, the characters of the modified organism remain more or less stable so long as external conditions remain unchanged; but, more than this, continued exposure to unchanged conditions after the limit of adaptation to these has been attained, in many cases tends in a greater or less degree either to diminish the capacity for existence, or, at all events, for rapid modification of characters under altered conditions. When the latter effect is produced there is not an absolute abolition of liability to modification, but there appears to be a tendency towards fixation of characters, so that transfer to a fresh environment, to which another form is proper, does not at once give rise to the appearance of the latter, but only produces its effect gradually and by insensible degrees. We thus have two factors at work in influencing the characters of any organisms such as choleraic comma-bacilli, first, an inherent tendency to variation under the influence of alterations in environment, and, secondly, a tendency to increased stability of property in connection with continued existence under a uniform environment. Under these circumstances it is evident that the differences which originally present themselves in indivi- dual specimens derived from distinct sources do not necessarily indicate the presence of specific differences between them and that it is only as the result of prolonged and continuous observation of the degree to which differences continue to exist under the influence of like conditions that we can arrive at any correct decision of the question. But where we find conspicuous differ- ences persisting in spite of indefinitely prolonged exposure to the influence of one environment, and distinct modifications attending transference from one like environment to another of different nature but also common to the organ- isms experimented with, the evidence of the existence of specific difference between the latter becomes overpoweringly strong. It is because I believe that evidence of such a nature is present in regard to many distinct forms of choleraic comma-bacilli, and from no ignorance or under-estimate of their liability to variation that I am led anew to affirm that there is no specific cho- leraic comma-bacillus, but that the disease may be associated with an indefinite number of distinct species of such organisms or may exist independent of the presence of any of them. The history of the European epidemic of 1892 may be regarded as effectu- ally disposing of the question whether the comma-bacilli associated with cholera invariably present the characters which, according to Koch's original statements, they ought to possess, unless, indeed, we adopt the views of his most enthusiastic
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 7 disciples and refuse to recognise that any cases of disease are of a truly choleraic nature, unless they are accompanied by the classical commas, a procedure which, however it may serve to maintain the integrity of the theory, is clearly of no practical import to the community at large. The question with which we have to deal here is, How far do the distinct forms of comma-bacilli, which undoubtedly both in Europe and India are present in connection with different cases of the disease, show differences of specific value; or, in other words, how far do we find them continuing to differ from one another under the influence of prolonged exposure to the influence of like. conditions? In considering it, we have, in the first place, to endeavour to ascertain whether choleraic comma-bacilli are liable to undergo modification under the influence of external conditions, and, secondly, how far any modifications arising under the influence of prolonged exposure to like conditions tend to give rise to any general assimilation in the characters of primarily differing forms. The fact that many forms of choleraic comma-bacilli are extremely liable to modifications in form and properties in connection with variations in the nature of their environment must be familiar to any one who has had any opportunity of continuously studying such organisms. At the same time we find that very considerable differences are presented by different forms in regard to their liability to undergo such modifications, certain of them being relatively stable, and, consequently, showing little variation in any medium in which they are capable of existing at all, whilst others show immediate and considerable modifications under the influence of certain alterations in their environment. In dealing with this question we necessarily encounter a great difficulty in determining how far we are ever dealing with truly uniform conditions in con- tinued series of cultivations. The majority of ordinary culture-media cannot be said to present truly fixed characters. Taking ordinary bouillon or beef- juice-gelatine we have no security that any two successive samples possess truly identical properties. Even within the limits of a single sample differ- ences may arise simply as the result of time. Evaporation or absorption of water may gradually give rise to alterations in consistence, which we are apt to neglect as trivial, but which, as experience shows, are quite sufficient in certain cases to induce changes in the characters of the organisms which are exposed to their influence. We are ordinarily inclined to assume that so long as a culture medium is neutralised it is of little moment by what means we effect the process, but even the employment of one alkaline re-agent in place of another may sometimes be sufficient to give rise to modifications in the cha racters of organisms cultivated in the neutralised media. At a period in the course of the past year when certain forms of choleraic comma-bacilli were constantly giving growths in agar-agar beef-juice media neutralised with carbo- nate of soda, which were characterised on the surface of the substratum by extreme adhesiveness or ropiness, a set of culture-tubes was prepared in which
8 Scientific Memoirs by the medium was neutralised with liquor potass. In these adhesiveness absolutely disappeared, but on renewed employment of the soda medium, it rapidly manifested itself anew. If a difficulty of this kind exists in regard to artificial media, it is clear that it must be present in far higher degree in the case of many natural media, such as potatoes, in which we have absolutely no security of the presence of even approximate uniformity in the characters of any two successive specimens. Every one must have frequently observed how. inexplicable failures may attend attempts to transfer a growth to particular potatoes, whilst in other cases the very same growth on transfer to tubers of apparently precisely similar character grows rapidly and luxuriantly, so that it is only as the result of prolonged experience that it is possible to determine with any security that a given form is incapable of growth on potatoes gene- rally. We cannot be too careful in our attempts to secure approximate uniformity in media which are to be employed in comparative experiments on the effects of exposure to special conditions, or too carefully avoid comparing the cha- racters of the growth of any form in one specimen of any mediumMedical Officers of the Army of India. 9 cases distinctly proportional to the vigour of the growth on the new medium. For example, in my previous paper I pointed out that the vigorous growths of species 10 Scientific Memoirs by in addition of even more persistent functional change. The common agar-agar growths, like those of almost all other choleraic comma-bacilli, when transferred to bouillon, give rise to changes in it which lead to the development of the so called cholera-purple on the addition of acids. But it is quite exceptional to find the growths on potatoes retaining this property, and even those which have been developed on renewed transfer to agar-agar media, and which have even for a considerable time resumed a typical comma-form may remain devoid of it for an indefinite period, and when they do regain it only do so gradually and by insensible degrees. The same bacillus affords examples of farther modifications, for in some cases transfer from potatoes to agar-agar media fails to give rise to, any interstitial growth throughout the latter, no development occurring along the course of the needle track in stable-cultures although abundant growth takes place over the surface. In such cases there is little or no tendency to imme- diate resumption of the typical comma-form, even in plate-cultures, and the growth at the same time on retransfer to potatoes is at once vigorous and cer- tain, whereas in cases where the typical form and the capacity for interstitial growth are regained in the agar-agar this is not nearly so constantly the case. Why such differences should present themselves remains meantime a mystery. There is absolutely nothing in either the macroscopic or microscopic features in the potato-growths which distinguishes specimens at once regaining the typical form and possessing the capacity for interstitial growth in agar-agar from those which do not do so. In many cases a growth which for a time does not regain the typical form or show interstitial growth on transfer will at a later period become capable of doing both without otherwise showing any appreciable change of character, and a growth on one potato devoid of such capacities will give rise to a growth on another which possesses them in the highest degree. The influence of the environment in determining modification does not only appear in connection with cases of transfer from one medium to another of different nature, for in many instances quite as conspicuous changes are gradually produced in connection with prolonged exposure to the influence of media of uniform character. Prolonged cultivation in agar-agar media has thus in many cases very greatly modified the capacity for liquefying gelatine which the various forms of bacilli originally possessed. The modification of property has in some cases led to a great increase, and in others to as conspicuous a decrease in liquefying power, or has produced conspicuous differences in the details of the process of liquefaction. The same holds good in regard to capacity for growth on potatoes. In most cases prolonged cultivation in agar-agar media has greatly decreased or apparently entirely abolished the capacity, but in one form at all events a precisely opposite effect has been produced. The degree of modification which has attended prolonged
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 11 cultivation in agar-agar media differs greatly in the case of different forms. Some have retained their original characters almost unaltered, whilst others have become very greatly altered both morphologically and physiologically. The nature, too, of the modification differs in different cases, for whilst in some forms the morphological characters have remained uniform and the physiological ones have become greatly altered, in others exactly the reverse has been the case. From what has been already mentioned in regard to the action of vari- ations in external conditions in giving rise to modifications in the characters of the various forms of choleraic comma-bacilli, it may have been remarked that the results have differed in different instances. This, however, does not in itself constitute satisfactory evidence of the existence of specific differences between variable organisms obtained from distinct sources and which may have been antecedently exposed to unlike conditions. The point which has to be specially considered in connection with the question of specificity is, how far has continued exposure to the influence of like conditions given rise to any general assimilation of characters in the organisms which have been subjected to its influence. The most satisfactory method of dealing with this question in the present instance will be to institute a detailed comparison of the principal features which originally distinguished the various choleraic bacilli from one another with those which they now present after prolonged cultivation under uniform common conditions. A continued series of agar-agar beef-juice cultures has been carried out for each form from the date of its original discovery up to the present time, and, although, as all the forms were not simultaneously obtained, all of them have not been subject to the influence of a common environment for the same length of time, they have all, at all events, been subject to its action for a period of many months' duration, so that any inherent tendency towards a general assimilation in their characters ought clearly to have manifested itself in greater or less degree. The series of cultivations have throughout been conducted in such a fashion as to secure as far as possible that all the organisms experimented with shall actually have been exposed to like conditions. In starting new cultures all the forms under observation have been transplanted simultaneously and into tubes containing portions of the same sample of the nutrient medium, and subsequent to inoculation all the individual tubes of one date have been exposed to identical external conditions. None of the choleraic bacilli, which I propose specially to consider here, have been for less than a year in continued cultivation, and certain of them have been so for three years and a half. In my previous paper on this subject the characters on which I laid most weight as affording evidence of the existence of various distinct species of choleraic comma-bacilli were the morphological peculiarities of the constituent elements, and the general characters of the growths occurring in common C 2
12 Scientific Memoirs by gelatine and agar-agar media, in bouillon and on potatoes, and in recurring to the question I propose to consider the same points in detail. Considering how subject to modification the morphological features of schizomycetes are under the influence of external conditions, it is somewhat surprising to find how comparatively seldom any conspicuous changes of form have manifested themselves in the various choleraic comma-bacilli as a result of continued cultivation in neutralised agar-agar media. In the greater number of instances the original morphological features have sustained no appreciable alteration, and where alteration has occurred it has generally been limited in amount. Figures 1, 2, and 3 of Plate IV are copies of camera-lucida drawings of preparations of the elements of forms Medical Officers of the Army of India. 13 normally highly curved bodies. Forms 14 Scientific Memoirs by regard to the morphological characters of their constituent elements, but in certain other features. Certain forms are characterised by the frequency with which the growth on the surface of the nutrient medium presents a highly adhesive or ropey consistence, whilst in others it is invariably entirely devoid of any such peculiarity. During the entire period in which they have been cultivated forms Medical Officers of the Army of India. 15 The growth in form 16 Scientific Memoirs by surface of the medium with a thick, continuous stratum of growth, tubes con- taining Medical Officers of the Army of India. 17 in non-neutralised agar-agar media we might well be inclined to believe that no such differences were present. In organisms so susceptible to modifica- tion under the influence of alterations in environment as schizomycetes are we may reduce or abolish the distinctive peculiarities which they normally present by means of exposing them to the action of such uncongenial media that they are incapable of producing any but abortive elements, but this is no sufficient evidence that the normal differences are not of specific value. Could it be shown that the resemblance thus produced were persistent when the organ- isms were once more exposed to favourable conditions the phenomena would certainly be in favour of an absence of specific differences, but as this is not the case, and the resumption of vigorous growth is accompanied by the re-appear- ance of the normal distinctive peculiarities, the evidence unequivocally points in the opposite direction, as it shows that in spite of the great modifications which have arisen under the influence of an unfavourable environment no general assimilation in nature has been achieved. Whilst the three forms 18 Scientific Memoirs by case of forms Medical Officers of the Army of India. 19 Plate III, b, we have a corresponding series of drawings of another set of tube- cultures of the nine forms which have been longest subject to the influence of like common conditions. The remaining figures in Plate III and all those in Plate II illustrate the characters of the growths presented by the forms which were photographed at different periods during the time in which they have been in con- tinuous cultivation in agar-agar media. For forms 20 Scientific Memoirs by of a more or less columnar channel, whereas subsequently it has occurred in a fashion similar to that which from the outset characterised form Medical Officers of the Army of India. 21 as an average capacity, now present conspicuous differences, because in the first a great increase, in the second a great decrease, and in the third no appre22 Scientific Memoirs by and absolutely distinct from those of either Medical Officers of the Army of India. 23 ditions, or are only capable of giving rise to unhealthy and abortive growths. The very fact that under the influence of common, like conditions, certain forms should have retained the capacity for vigorous growth, whilst others have par- tially or totally lost it is certainly not in favour of the assumption that all of them are of essentially identical nature, and the resemblances or rather the want of characteristic distinctions presented by unhealthy and abortive growths can- not be regarded as evidence of any appreciable value. Where the capacity for growth has not been entirely lost, as in many cases it appears to have been, but is only to a greater or less degree impaired, the degree of resemblance present- ed by cultivations of the individual forms varies directly with the degree of abortiveness of the growths; where the developments are very feeble and the elements composing them are unhealthy and to a great extent in a state of involution, very considerable resemblances may be present both in regard to the growths generally and to the characters of their constituents, but just in propor- tion to the degree in which they show indications of greater vigour, differ- ences in their general habit and in the characters of their constituent elements become more and more conspicuous. I have never succeeded in re-establishing the original vigorous, healthy, bright yellow growths of form 24 Scientific Memoirs by which they subsequently produce is no evidence of their specific identity. The abortiveness of the growths is evidence of the common action of previous exposure to a special environment, but the resemblance between the resultant abortive growths is of no value as evidence, one way or other, in regard to the question of specific identity. No one would propose to determine the species included in any genus of the higher plants by comparing the characters of abortive seedlings which had been developed under highly unfavourable cir- cumstances, and had therefore failed to show characteristic differences, and where dealing with organisms, such as schizomycetes, which are so conspicuously modified by the nature of their environment, it is even less rational to adopt any such procedure. Prolonged cultivation in neutralised agar-agar media certainly tends to produce general assimilation in most forms of choleraic comma-bacilli in one respect, namely, in their capacity for giving rise to those changes in bouillon which lead to the appearance of the so-called cholera-purple on the addition of acids. Some forms from the very outset possessed this property in high degree, whilst others when first obtained were almost entirely wanting in it, but at present, after months or years of continued cultivation under like con- ditions all, save one or two exceptional forms, alike possess it in high degree. For example, forms Medical Officers of the Army of India. 25 by the fact that a perfect pellicle never forms on its surface. A dense, white ring of pellicle does eventually tend to appear around the edge of the fluid in contact with the wall of the tube, but it never attains any breadth because it is so brittle and of such high specific gravity that the slightest agitation serves to detach flocculi from the inner edge of the ring which immediately sink to the bottom of the tube. A conspicuous accumulation of deposit thus gradually arises, which usually rises to the surface in the form of one or two large flocculent masses on the addition of acids. In the case of form 26 Scientific Memoirs by was composed of short, thick, highly curved commas, resembling those developed by the same form in non-neutralised agar-agar media, and in that of Medical Officers of the Army of India. 27 2. Growth in non-neutralised agar-agar media. 28 Scientific Memoirs by stratum of considerable thickness, with irregularly lobate margins and shining polished surface; colour at first ochreous, but gradually acquiring a strong burnt-sienna tint elements at first consisting almost purely of short, straight rods, but in the later stages a certain number assuming the form of large, well curved and often distinctly beaded commas. 5. Growth in bouillon. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 29 Form 30 Scientific Memoirs by 2. Growth in non-neutralised agar-agar media. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 31 white or faintly greenish stratum of absolutely diffluent consistence; interstitial growth unattended by any appreciable darkening in the colour of the medium, and almost invariably by an increased pallor in it; growths possessing a peculiar urinous or herring-pickle odour; elements consisting invariably of slender rods; the majority straight and only a limited number showing any decided curvature, very frequently distinguished by the relatively light colour which they acquire from staining re-agents. 2. Growth in non-neutralised agar-agar media. 32 Scientific Memoirs by presenting uniform and quite distinctive peculiarities; forming a comparatively thick stra- tum of a warm Indian yellow colour surrounded by a halo of neutral tinted discolouration of the surface of the medium; odourless; surface dryish and very conspicuously nodulated as though composed of masses of confluent colonies; elements consisting of short, thick commas very similiar to those present in most growths occurring in neutralised agar-agar media. (Plate IV, Figs. 10, a . and b. ) 5. Growth in bouillon. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 33 A comparison of the above notes shows clearly that, in spite of prolonged exposure to the influence of cultivation under like conditions, certain forms of comma-bacilli occurring in connection with cholera in Calcutta continue to show distinctive peculiarities. In certain cases, such as those of forms 34 Scientific Memoirs by positive proof that any of the forms of comma-bacilli which have yet been isolated are capable of giving rise to unequivocal choleraic symptoms, when introduced into the intestinal tract, and secondly, in the existence of evidence which may be taken as indicating that the multiplication of comma-bacilli within the intestinal tract, in place of being the cause of the initial symptoms of cholera is a consequence of the abnormal condition of the intestinal con- tents associated with the onset of the disease. Very many distinct forms of schizomycetes must constantly be gaining access to the intestinal tract, and, as a matter of fact, we know that the intestinal contents are normally peopled by innumerable multitudes of such organisms. Under normal circumstances, however, certain forms are present in vast pre- ponderance, which can only be due to the fact that the local conditions are more favourable to them than to their neighbours. But if the local conditions be profoundly altered, as they certainly are on the onset of cholera, it would be very strange to find that the alterations were of precisely such a nature as still to place the previously favoured organisms at an advantage. It is surely far more natural to conclude that great alteration in any environment should give rise to alter- ation in the relative prevalence of the various organisms inhabiting it than that it should leave the latter entirely unaffected. Granted, therefore, such profound change in the constitution of the intestinal fluids as the choleraic condition im- plies, the fact that certain forms of schizomycetes should make their appearance in them in abnormal abundance is only what might be looked for on a priore grounds. Comma-bacilli of various kinds are certainly recognisable in varying numbers in many instances in the intestinal contents apart from the presence of any diseased condition whatever. Under ordinary circumstances these are, no doubt, incultivable as such under the conditions in which choleraic commas grow with ease, but this may be due either to their having been killed or specially mo- dified in nature during transit along the intestinal tract. Moreover, as we have already seen, organisms which assume the form of typical comma-bacilli in certain media, not only frequently assume absolutely different forms in others, but may undergo more or less persistent physiological modification, so that the mere absence of commas or of any elements immediately capable of giving origin to commas in any particular material is no conclusive evidence of the absence of such organisms in potential form. The possibility thus remains that the great prevalence of comma-bacilli in choleraic fluids is the consequence, not the cause of the existence of the latter, and positive evidence in favour of such a view is not wanting. Whenever Prior and Finkler had recorded the frequent occurrence of comma- bacilli, unequivocally closely related to those occurring in choleraic fluids in India, in association with cases of so-called cholera nostras in Europe, and when it had been shown that the association was not an invariable one, this possibility at once suggested itself, and since then evidence has gradually accumulated
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 35 pointing in the same direction. Klein has recorded cases in which, both as the result of experimental interference in lower animals and as a concomitant of intestinal disturbance in the human subject attending errors of diet, the intestinal contents have come to be peopled by innumerable comma-bacili,*and similar phenomena present themselves in Calcutta in connection with cases which are certainly not of a choleraic nature in any sense. The authorities of the Presi- dency Jail in Calcutta are much troubled by the habit which many prisoners, who are desirous of shirking labour, have of inducing a peculiar species of diarrh36 Scientific Memoirs by of this nature presented itself in Calcutta during the course of 1892 in connection with a violent and fatal outbreak of disease which occurred on board the ship Crofton Hall, and which was clearly traced to the ingestion of decomposing meat. The phenomena showed an unequivocal coincidence between the employment of certain meat, and the occurrence of cases of the disease, and both the author- ities who investigated the history of the outbreak and those who treated some of those suffering from it came to the conclusion that the case was one of acute ptomaine-poisoning.*Several cases of the disease were under treatment in the General Hospital, and samples of the intestinal discharges derived from them were submitted to me for examination. The material obtained from one of these cases, which otherwise was indistinguishable from any of the others was characterised by the presence of innumerable comma-bacilli, which not only presented a general morphological similarity to those occurring in connection with cholera, but, like these, were readily cultivable in agar-agar and gelatine media, and in bouillon; the growth in neutralised agar-agar media occurring both superficially and interstitially, that in gelatine being attended by gradual solu- tion of the medium and that in bouillon giving rise to the decompositions on which the appearance of cholera-purple on the addition of acids depends. Here, then, we have the appearance of comma-bacilli, certainly closely allied to those occurring in connection with cholera, in the intestinal contents of a case of ptomaine-poisoning, and of poisoning which was clearly not dependent on their presence, seeing that this was not a feature common to all the cases of the disease, but a peculiarity in an individual one, and that the brine in which the poisonous meat had been immersed, although containing various kinds of schizomycetes, was entirely free of any comma-bacilli. The commas which were obtained in this case have now been kept under continuous cultivation for more than a year, and the results have been to show that this non-choleraic form differs much less conspicuously from certain of the choleraic ones, than certain members of the choleraic group differ among themselves. The following description, arranged on the same lines as those of the various choleraic commas, shows the characters of the growth of this form in various media:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 37 3. Growth in common nutrient gelatine. 38 Scientific Memoirs by a change, and at the same time find it providing them with a favourable medium, it is surely only rational to conclude that the frequency with which their preva- lence attends the choleraic condition is in any case an effect, and not a cause of the latter. When we find that comma-bacilli multiply freely in choleraic fluids, that numerous instances have been recorded in which choleraic materials are devoid of any recognisable comma-bacilli, or contain only very small numbers of such organisms, and, at the same time, that cases of disease occur in which any primary causative action of comma-bacilli appears to be entirely excluded, and which are yet attended by the presence of innumerable multitudes of comma- bacilli in the intestinal fluids, we can hardly be expected to accept any theory which regards them as the essential cause of cholera. There is really just as much ground for affirming that the normal condition of the intestinal contents is essentially due to the presence of those species of schizomycete organisms which occur most abundantly in them, as for affirming that their choleraic condition is essentially due to comma-bacilli because the latter occur with special fre- quence and in special abundance in them under such circumstances. Every one will at once allow that the excessive prevalence of certain forms of schizomy- cetes in the normal intestinal contents is the result of peculiarities in the latter re-acting upon the organisms which gain access to them. The elements of many distinct species of schizomycetes must constantly be gaining access to the interior of the intestinal tract, but the extent to which they will increase and multiply there must depend on the degree to which they find a congenial environ- ment in it; it is the nature of the environment which determines the prevalence, and not the prevalence that determines the nature of the environment. Even Koch seems to allow this in regard to cholera when he admits that in order to allow of his comma-bacilli multiplying sufficiently to give rise to the disease an abnormal condition of the digestive tract must be present. But if this be so, it can no longer be affirmed that the multiplication of the bacilli is the primary essential cause of the disease, as it is a consequence of an antecedent abnormal state, and therefore may have no causal relation to the disease whatever. We are first called on to suppose the existence of an abnormal condition to allow of their multiplication, and next to assume that in course of multiplication they secure the continued presence of such a condition. The data which are at present available certainly furnish no evidence that the presence of any special form of comma-bacillus, or, indeed, that the presence of any comma-bacilli whatever is an essential concomitant of the choleraic condition, and they render it at all events highly probable that the abnormal nature of the schizomycete population of the intestinal tract in cases of cholera holds a consequential, and not a causal relation to the initial phenomena of the disease. But if this be so, to what are we to ascribe the latter ? The earliest symptons of cholera are those of acute ptomaine-poisoning, and it has been ordinarily assumed that the toxic materials must have been elaborated
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 39 within the organism which they act upon. But this by no means necessarily follows from the data. The phenomena presented by individual cases of the disease and those attending its epidemic diffusion leave little room to doubt that it is essentially due to the action of poisonous materials which have been elaborated by an organised agency, but they most certainly do not conclusively show that the process of manufacture is carried out within the bodies of those upon whom they act. On the contrary, there are many phenomena which strong- ly suggest that the manufacture occurs in the environment, and that the initiation of the morbid state is due to the ingestion of the elaborated poison, and not of the factors which elaborate it. Did the manufacture of the poison and the multi- plication of the factors producing it go on within the bodies of the sick, it would be almost impossible to explain that necessity of local predisposition for the de- velopment of epidemics, the existence of which has been so clearly demonstrated by Professor von Pettenkofer. In connection with diseases which are due to the action of organisms whose proper site for multiplication is the bodies of those affected by them, we do not find any examples of localities in which relative or complete exemption from any diffusion of disease continues to manifest itself in spite of repeated importation of individual cases. But in the case of cholera, phenomena of local exemption on a larger or smaller scale are con- stantly presenting themselves to observation. In certain cases it may be possi- ble to ascribe the exemption to an absence of personal predisposition on the part of those living within the area in which it manifests itself, but there are other instances in which any such explanation is entirely insufficient. Any one who has had a prolonged experience of the phenomena which are presented by the hospitals in Calcutta is aware that any diffusion of cholera within them has always been a most exceptional occurrence in spite of entire absence or very imperfect enforcement of any measures for isolating the sick, and that when cases of cholera do originate within them, they do so either as solitary cases or as units in small local epidemics originating quite apart from any traceable connec- tion with imported cases. Now, the transitory nature of the population of any hospital renders it at all events extremely improbable that the phenomena of normal localised exemption and of exceptional localised occurrence of the disease are due to the absence or presence of personal predisposition, and, excluding this, the only explanation is that they are connected with the presence of local conditions which normally are of a nature to prevent the manufacture and multiplication of the cause of cholera, but which exceptionally become so far altered as to allow of their occurrence. The practical benefits which attend the temporary abandonment of localities in which cholera has established itself40 Scientific Memoirs by initial morbid symptoms lies in the environment, and not within the bodies of the sick. If the manufacture of the poison took place within the bodies of the sick, there could be no sufficient reason why a change of site should produce any appreciable effect on the prevalence of the disease. But practical experience has demonstrated unequivocally that it does produce such an effect in such high degree in many instances that an immediate arrest is put upon any further ex- tension of the diseaseMedical Officers of the Army of India. 41 a traveller who had just arrived from Hamburg, where the disease was prevalent in epidemic form, died of cholera in the isolation ward of the hospital in Koblenz. During the period between the first and fourth of September, five more attacks occurred in the persons of two attendants, who had waited on the deceased, the washerwoman who had washed his clothes, and two sisters, of whom one was occu- pied in the isolation ward, and with this the local diffusion of the disease ceased. Now, in such instances, it appears clear that the originally imported case was capable of giving rise to a certain number of secondary ones, but that these had no such property, and that, consequently, no general diffusion of the disease fol- lowed. But were the bodies of the sick the essential site of the development and multiplication of the specific cause of the disease, there could be no satisfac- tory explanation of this phenomenon, there could be no sufficient reason to account or the fact that the secondary cases are less efficient than the primary ones. On the theory that the specific cause of the disease is manufactured and multi- plied within the bodies of the sick, we must, in order to account for such cases, assume that whilst the primary cases came into direct or indirect relation with a relatively large number of predisposed individuals, the secondary ones failed to encounter any at all, or, in other words, that the primary cases were distinguished from the secondary ones by possessing a specific peculiarity for encountering predisposed individuals42 Scientific Memoirs by disease, and I believe that his original theory only requires very trivial modifica- tion to adapt it to the requirements of the increased information which has been accumulated since he first propounded it. The modification lies merely in ceasing to regard the bodies of the sick, as in any sense specially related to the manufacture of the essential cause of the disease, as in any sense forming an essential site for the manufacture and multiplication of the specific poison which induces the characteristic phenomena of cholera. According to Professor von Pettenkofer's theory the bodies of the sick were not the site for the manufacture of the poison in elaborated and efficient form, but they had a certain special relation to its manufacture, in that they constituted a special site for the multiplication of the organisms which subsequently, if they encoun- tered favourable conditions in the environment after leaving the site of their original development, were capable of giving rise to the specific poison. The bodies of the sick, therefore, were a potential, although not an actual, site of manufacture of the latter. But there is really no satisfactory evidence of the existence of any such potential manufacture. It was apparently only to account for the unquestionable influence that human intercourse exerts in promoting the diffusion of the disease that the assumption of its existence was introduced into the theory, and in the light of our present knowledge it appears that its introduction is not only entirely unnecessary but calculated to lead to complication. If the elaboration of the specific cause of the disease be due, as there seems to be little doubt that it actually is, to the action of schizomycete organisms, and if this action be carried on in the environment and dependent on the presence of certain conditions there, there is no sufficient ground for assuming that the human organism is in any way necessarily related to it, save as a subject on which it can act. The manufacture of the poison according to the theory implies the existence of certain conditions in a locality and the presence of certain organisms which may either be a normal inmate of it, or may have to be introduced into it, but there is no logical necessity for supposing that introduction must necessarily be effected by means of the intestinal discharges of those who have come from a previously infected locality, and subsequently develop the symptoms of the disease. People surely carry other things with them beyond the contents of their intestinal tract when they move from one locality to another, and, granted that local conditions are favourable, the introduction of very minute quantities of the organisms on whose presence the elaboration of the poison appears to be dependent will amply suffice to secure the rapid local formation of the latter in very large amount. It may be asked why it is that the importation of the disease is ap- parently so much more frequently connected with the advent of individuals who are either on arrival already ill, or who subsequently are attacked by cholera, than with that of those who, equally coming from an affected side, show no symptoms of disease, but it is not hard to find an explanation of this without assuming
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 that any manufacture of the poison attends the effects which it gives rise to. Every one in an infected locality does not necessarily come in contact either with the elaborated poison or with the factors which elaborate it but those who suffer from the disease have unquestionably come into contact with the former, and in doing so have very probably come in contact with the latter also, where- as with regard to those who remain free from the disease, we have no evidence that they ever came into direct relation with either the one or the other. In the meantime there is no satisfactory evidence that any particular species of organism is invariably present within the intestinal tract of cases of cholera, or that the presence of any of the various species which do occur within it is sufficient to induce the onset of the disease. On the other hand, there is evidence which appears to indicate that the frequency with which certain forms of organ- isms are conspicuously associated with the disease is to be ascribed to the action of the coincident abnormal condition of the intestinal contents, and, in addition, a great mass of evidence which clearly indicates the overweening importance of local conditions in determining epidemic diffusion and prevalence. But, this being so, there cannot be any sufficient ground for continuing to assume that the bodies of the sick are anything more than the subjects on which a locally-manufactured poison acts. We do not expect to find crops of opium poppies flourishing within the intestinal tracts of individuals who have died of opium-poisoning, why then should we expect to find crops of the factors of the choleraic poison present within the intestinal tracts of those who have died in consequence of the action of their products ? The phenomena attending the onset of an attack of cholera in very many cases are certainly not of a nature to suggest that they are due to the gradual local evolution and absorption of a poison, but from their abrupt and rapid character resemble those attending the sudden absorption of a given dose of a ready-formed one. Every one is aware that there is nothing in the initial symp- toms of cases of epidemic cholera to distinguish them decisively from cases of so-called cholera nostras or of unequivocal, acute ptomaine poisoning, and that the only really distinctive feature of the latter is that they occur in more or less sporadic fashion and are unaccompanied by any general diffusion of the disease. So much is this the case that when Koch announced that Asiatic cholera was invariably distinguished by the fact that it was accompanied by the presence of a specifically distinct schizomycete organism within the intestinal tract, even those who declined to allow that this necessarily bore a casual relation to the disease readily acknowledged the great diagnostic value of the discovery. Now, however, that we know that cases of cholera may occur entirely apart from the pre- sence of any such organism, that many more or less allied species may replace one another as associates of the disease, and that similar forms may occur in association with cases of " cholera nostras " and of ptomaine poisoning, we are once more reduced to a position of total uncertainty in attempting to determine G 2
44 Scientific Memoirs by whether in any individual instance we are dealing with a case which should or should not be regarded as of truly choleraic nature. It has been hastily assumed that an essential difference must exist between cases of true cholera and cases of cholera nostras and of ptomaine poisoning because in the case of cholera we are dealing with a series of symptoms which occasionally present themselves in widespread epidemic fashion, and that the only explanation of epidemic diffusion is to be found in a local multiplication and manufacture of the essential toxic agents within the organisms of those who are affected by them; in other words, it has been assumed that true cholera differs from cholera nostras or ptomaine poisoning, in that in true cholera we are dealing with disease dependent on factors which are developed within the organisms of the sick, whilst in the other case we are dealing with disease dependent on factors of extrinsic origin which have been developed in the environment. But any such assumption is entirely unwarranted by the data which are actually at our disposal. The mere fact that certain morbid symptoms sometimes manifest themselves in sporadic and at others in widely diffused epidemic fashion is no evidence that in the two cases they are due to distinct causes, or to the manufacture of one and the same cause in distinct sites, for, if the cause in both cases alike be one, which is normally developed in the environment, the number of individuals on which it will act must necessarily be regulated by the extent to which it is locally produced. Where only limited quantities are developed and those only in isolated localities, sporadic cases of disease will manifest themselves, where larger quantities are produced, but the process of manufacture remains confined to isolated localities; local epidemics will arise, and where it is produced in large amount and over wide areas, epidemic diffusion will naturally take place. It remains thus not improbable that there is no essential difference between epidemic cholera and cases of " cholera nostras " or ptomaine poisoning, and that the apparent difference which presents itself is simply the result of the absence or presence of local conditions favourable to, or repressive of, the manufacture of one common cause. In local conditions, however, it must be borne in mind that we may have to deal with two distinct classes of factors whose co-operation is necessary to secure the development of such a causeMedical Officers of the Army of India. 45 absence and presence of the factors whose efficiency is affected by these. Within the endemic area regularly recurring fluctuations in seasonal prevalence manifest themselves, but there is clearly never either an entire absence of the actual manufacturing agents nor of conditions allowing of their exercising their activities. The very regularity with which fluctuations in prevalence succeed one another is in itself very strong evidence that the process of manufacture is carried on in the environment, and not in the bodies of the sick, for there is certainly not a trace of evidence to show that the periods of maximum prevalence coincide with periods in which there is any specially close crowding together and association of the population. On the contrary, whilst the periods of maximal prevalence occur in March and April, and again at the close of the rainy season, the periods of minimal prevalence occur during the rainy season and at the period at which atmospheric temperature falls to a minimum. In other words, maximal prevalence coincides with periods when the population is least likely to be specially closely associated and minimal prevalence when aggregation of the population is at a maximum. During the height of the rainy season and again in the middle of winter the natives at night remain crowded together and cooped up within their huts, whilst during the hot weather and again subsequent to the cessation of the rains and before nocturnal tem- perature falls low, a very large number of them spend their nights al fresco. With regard to localities lying outside the endemic area, it is of course possible to regard the phenomena of prevalence from two distinct points of view. We may ascribe them to alternating absence or presence of the agents manu- facturing the poison, or to the absence or presence of local conditions favouring or repressing them in carrying on the manufacture. According to the crude contagionist opinion the former explanation is the true and sufficient one, and the absence or presence of epidemic diffusion is simply due to absence or pre- sence of importation of the factors of the poison; according to the extreme localist opinion the phenomena are to be accounted for simply as the result of the action of fluctuations in the conditions of the environment acting on factors which are constantly present and ready to manufacture the specific poison whenever they encounter favourable surroundings. But there are good grounds for refusing to accept either explanation as sufficient, for if we adopt the contagionist theory, we are unable to account for the fact that constant and free communication with the endemic area or with infected areas lying outside it is only occasionally followed by any epidemic diffusion of the disease, whilst from the purely localist point of view it is impossible to explain the phenomena which appear certainly to indicate that intercourse with infected localities is to a certain extent an appreciable factor in determining epidemic diffusion. Werethe specific cause of cholera normally manufactured within the bodies of the sick, we should be left without any sufficient explanation of the fitfulness with which general epidemic diffusion occurs, and of the fact that so often repeated im- portation of cases of the disease is followed by no appreciable result; were all
46 Scientific Memoirs by the necessary factors for the production of the specific cause everywhere generally diffused, the phenomena indicating that communication with an infected area appears in some cases to be unequivocally connected with the local development of an epidemic would remain entirely incomprehensible. But if, whilst refusing to accept the pure contagionist point of view that the cause of cholera is manufactured within the bodies of the sick, and the purely localist theory that the actual factors are universally diffused and only require to be properly associated with certain local conditions in order to secure the development of epidemics, an intermediate position be adopted, no difficulty remains in finding a satisfactory explanation of the actually existing phenomena. If the manufacture of the specific cause of the dis- ease be carried on not within the bodies of the sick, but in the environment and only there under certain conditions, the want of any close correspondence between communication with infected localities or actual introduction of cases of the disease and the occurrence of epidemic diffusion is no longer incompre- hensible, and, on the other hand, if the actual factors of the specific cause be not normally universally diffused, there is certainly no difficulty in com- prehending why communication with sites in which they are present should be capable of influencing their dissemination. Up to the present time there has been no satisfactory laboratory demon- stration that the specific cause which gives rise to the initial symptoms of cholera is manufactured and multiplied within the bodies of the sick, and there are very many epidemiological phenomena which appear to indicate unequivo- cally that the manufacture takes place elsewhere, so that there would appear to be no good ground for persisting in endeavouring to account for epidemics on the contagionist point of view, or for insisting in seeking for the factors of the poison within the bodies of those who suffer from it. If we accept the view that the poison is manufactured in the environment, but only manufac- tured there under certain circumstances, we have no difficulty in finding an explanation of many phenomena, which are utterly inexplicable if we insist on regarding the bodies of the sick as the essential site of manufacture and, on the other hand, we have no difficulty in accounting for the very phenomena on which the contagionist theory is founded. Cases, like those previously alluded to as occurring in Stuttgart and Koblenz, cease to be incomprehensible if we allow that the actual cause of disease is developed in the environment, for the phe- nomena are precisely those which would naturally attend the importation of a limited amount of poison into a locality, or the introduction, not merely of an already elaborated poison, but also of a certain number of the factors producing it, into a locality in which the conditions permitting of manufacture were not present. Any one in coming from an area in which the opium poppy is cultivated may carry along with him either a certain quantity of opium alone, or a certain amount of opium together with a certain quantity of the seeds of the poppy. If he introduce the opium alone into the place to which he proceeds, it
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 47 is clear that this can only serve to give rise to a certain number of cases of opium -poisoning; if he also introduce a supply of the seed, the possible outcome of introduction will depend on whether the new locality does or does not present conditions favourable to their germination and to the growth of the resultant plants. If conditions for the growth of the plants be absent, no amount of introduction of the seed will be capable of leading to any local development of opium, and therefore cases of poisoning must cease with the ex- penditure of whatever amount of the already elaborated poison was introduced; but if conditions favouring growth be present, no such limitation exists, and there is a possibility of the occurrence of an indefinite number of cases as the result of the importation. In cases like those which occurred in Stuttgart and Koblenz, we may not be in a position to determine whether the limitation of the disease to those, who directly or indirectly came in contact with the individuals who had come from an infected locality, were due to an entire absence of any impor- tation of the factors which elaborate the poison, or merely to an absence of the local conditions allowing of their exercising their activities, but the fact remains that the phenomena are totally inexplicable on the theory that the specific poi- son is manufactured and multiplied within the bodies of those upon whom it acts, and are readily explicable on that which regards the environment as the essential site of manufacture. The acceptation of the view that the specific cause that determines the initial symptoms of cholera is manufactured in the locality and not within the bodies of the sick does not involve a refusal to allow that during the course of the disease certain toxic products may be developed within the organism and affect the ultimate outcome of the attack. It has practically been assumed that all the symptoms occurring in cases of cholera must invariably be directly due to the action of a single specific cause, but there is really great reason to doubt whether this assumption is a well-founded one, and to suspect that in many cases of the disease we are dealing with phenomena which are due to the action of two entirely distinct factors. The initial symptoms of cholera are those of acute ptomaine poisoning, and in a certain number of instances these alone present themselves, death or recovery taking place without there being anything to indicate the intervention of any influence beyond that of the primary poison. But in a large number of instances the latter portion of the course of the disease is characterised by the presence of symptoms of septicmia, and there is good reason to doubt whether these can be ascribed to the direct acton of the primary toxic agent. On the assumption that they are due to it, it is almost impossible to account for the fact that they certainly bear no definite relation to the severity or mildness of the initial symptoms of disease. Neither the presence nor the absence of secondary symptoms can be in any way definitely connected with the primary character of the attack. The disease at the outset may be exceptionally severe, and, where recovery occurs, secondary symptoms may be very slight or practically entirely absent, or it may be relatively mild and
48 Scientific Memoirs by secondary symptoms may make their appearance in an aggravated form. The difficulty of explaining these phenomena satisfactorily at once disappears if the possibility of the action of two distinct factors be recognised, the one originating in the environment and giving rise to the initial symptoms, and the other origin- ating within the organism and giving rise to the secondary ones. We have good reason to believe that the primary cause is neither manufac- tured nor multiplied within the bodies of the sick, but there is every reason to believe that its action may be capable of leading to the development of toxic materials there. The action of the primary cause certainly induces profound changes in the character of the contents of the intestinal tract, and it is impossi- ble to deny that such changes are well adapted to give rise to corresponding al- terations in the nature of the schizomycete population there. As we have already seen, any sudden change in the constitution of an environment containing a mixed population of schizomycete organisms must almost inevitably give rise to alterations in the prevalence of particular forms, those which were most adapted to the environment in its original state being liable to relative repression, and certain of those which were primarily repressed finding the conditions now favour- ing their dominancy. This is a proposition which can hardly be questioned even by those who insist most strongly that the forms of schizomycetes which occur most abundantly in the contents of the intestinal tract in cases of cholera ought to be regarded as the essential determinants of the disease. But all the forms which are present, whether under normal circumstances or in the choleraic condition, must unequivocally be giving rise to bye-products of the decompositions which they determine in their environment in connection with their growth and multiplication, and which are liable to be absorbed in greater or less amount. Those forms which abound most under normal circumstances must either give rise to innocuous products or to products which are only absorbed in such small quantities as to be incapable of causing injurious effects. But it by no means necessarily follows that those which come to prevail most under the influence of a profound change in the environment should resemble them in this respect. We know that many distinct forms may come to the front under the abnormal choleraic condition of the intestinal contents, and some of these at all events are certainly capable of manufacturing noxious products, as is clearly demonstrat- ed by the phenomena following their artificial introduction into the system by subcutaneous or intraperitoneal injection. It does not, however, follow that they are all alike in this respect, and certain experimental data seem at all events to suggest that they differ very greatly in regard to it.*But if this be so, we clearly have a very satisfactory *In the early part of the year 1886 I carried out numerous experiments on the effects of intraperitoneal and subcutaneous inoculation of choleraic-bacilli, and one of the results which was arrived at, and which appeared to be very inexplicable in the light of the then universally accepted belief that choleraic commas were necessarily invariably of the same species, was that whilst the materials derived from a particular- case of cholera usually produced fatal effects, those from other cases were apparently entirely innocuous.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 49 explanation for the apparently anomalous course followed by different cases of cholera50 Scientific Memoirs by certain local conditions favourable to its factors, so the secondary one cannot be manufactured in the absence of favourable conditions within the intestinal tract. In order to the development of the primary poison in any locality, it is necessary that certain organisms should be present, and that they should en- counter conditions favourable to their growth and multiplication. The mere presence of the organisms will be incapable of producing any appreciable effects in the absence of favourable local conditions, and the latter may be present in the highest degree without implying the presence of cholera so long as the organisms which are the actual factors of the specific cause of the initial symp- toms of the disease are wanting. Within the truly endemic area there can be no reasonable doubt that the actual factors of the poison are constantly present, and yet the activity of the process of manufacture is unequivocally entirely re- gulated by seasonal variations in the conditions of the locality; on the other hand, in many sites situated beyond the endemic area, there is every reason to believe that local conditions may at times be most favourable to the develop- ment of the disease, and yet no actual development of it occurs in the absence of the specific factors of the poison. At the same time there can be no doubt that the phenomena of epidemic diffusion indicate most clearly that the pre- sence or absence of conditions favourable to the development of the specific cause of the disease is not solely dependent on purely localised causes, but is regulated by certain widely-diffused influences. On the assumption that the pro- vision of favourable conditions is purely dependent on strictly localised influ- ences, it is as difficult to account for the fitfulness with which general epidemic diffusion takes place, as it is if the crude contagionist point of view be adopted. The actual conditions in any locality are liable to be affected not merely by influences of strictly local origin but by generally diffused ones, and it may be necessary that both should co-operate in order to determine that the environment shall be adapted to the requirements of particular organisms. Where perma- nent local conditions are constantly more or less favourable, and the actual factors of the poison are indigenous, we are dealing with an endemic locality; where local conditions are permanently unfavourable we have an exempt area; where local conditions are such that with the co-operation of certain widely-diffused influences they are capable of providing a congenial environment for the factors of the poison, then all that is necessary in order to secure the epidemic occur- rence of cholera is the presence of the factors during the period at which such co-operation is extant. In certain cases the factors may be previously present, but in a state of abeyance up to the time at which conditions favouring their multiplication and exercise of activity are provided, in others they may be absent, and the development of any local epidemic will then depend on their introduction into the locality during the period at which it provides a congenial environment for them. We have thus to distinguish between localities which
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 51 constantly present congenial conditions for the factors of the poison, localities which occasionally do so, and localities which never do so. In localities of the first nature, the disease is either constantly present or may occur at any time granted the presence of the actual factors of the poison; in those of the second, all that is necessary for the appearance of the disease is the co-operation of certain generally-diffused influences and the presence of the actual factors; in those of the third any local development of the disease is impossible. The phenomena of general epidemic diffusion of cholera cannot be accounted for solely as the result of introduction of the factors of the poison, or by the coincidence of this with the presence of permanent favourable local conditions. Were diffu- sion of the factors all that is necessary, there would be nothing to account for the fact that, whilst conditions of human intercourse remain practically the same from year to year, general epidemic diffusion of the disease only occurs at fitful intervals. During periods of general epidemic diffusion there must be an abnormal diffusion of certain conditions affecting areas which ordinarily do not furnish an entirely congenial environment for the factors of the poison, in such a fashion that for the time being they come to do so. In any area in which such temporary modification occurs, the factors of the poison may or may not pre-exist, Where they do so, the modification will be all that is necessary to secure the appearance of the disease, where they do not, it must be attended by their intro- duction. In the light of the evidence indicating that in many cases intercourse with an infected locality does exert an appreciable influence in determining the local development of cholera in previously exempt areas, the phenomena of epidemic diffusion cannot be fairly ascribed solely to the action of variations in local con- ditions in affecting the activity and prevalence of universally-diffused factors; but it by no means necessarily follows from this that intercourse with previously infected areas is invariably necessary. There has been an entire absence of satisfactory evidence to show that the local development of cholera in and around Paris during 1892 was in any way connected with importation, and it is quite possible that it was not, but was merely the result of the abnormal activity and prevalence of certain endemic factors under the influence of temporary peculiarities in local conditions. The presence of certain factors in coincidence with certain local conditions is what is necessary, but it does not follow that the evidence of their presence should always imply their recent introduction; it may merely indicate the coincidence of favourable conditions with their presence; the phenomenon may merely be the parallel to the regular periodic fluctuations in the prevalence of cholera which manifest themselves so conspicuously within the endemic area. Had the disease been prmarily due to the action of agents manufactured and multiplied within the human body, its appearance in any local- ity beyond the endemic area would necessarily have implied fresh importation; but if it be due to agents whose proper environment is in localities presenting [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002175.tif]
52 Scientific Memoirs by certain local conditions this is no longer the case, and we need no longer expect that in every case its appearance should be traceably connected with intercourse with previously-infected localities. In the year 1871 the rainfall in Calcutta was unprecedentedly excessive, and in consequence certain depressions in the great open plain of grass-land within the limits of the town were for the time being converted into pools of standing water, and in some of these plants of NymphMedical Officers of the Army of India. 53 The practical bearing which a theory of this kind has on the question of the means which ought to he adopted in any endeavour to protect a locality from invasion by epidemic cholera is evident. So long as it is, assumed that the specific cause of the disease finds its proper site for manufacture and multi- plication within the human body, it is conceivable that, were it possible anywhere to carry out theoretically perfect quarantine measures, the exclusion of the disease might be secured although at a disastrous cost, but if its development take place in the environment, the only efficient quarantine measures would lie in permanent cessation of all communication with any locality in which the disease had ever manifested itself. The experience of every epidemic in Europe shows that the agents concerned in the elaboration of the specific poison may lie dormant for periods of many months, and then again manifest their presence when the local conditions once more become favourable to them, so that the mere absence of cholera from a locality affords no security of the absence of the factors of the choleraic poison. The presence of the disease shows that factors are in activity, its absence does not show that they are absent, and hence any locality in which cholera has ever localised itself becomes a possible site from which they may be imported, and this of course implies that in order to avoid importation securely all intercourse with it must be permanently aban- doned. But even a permanent cessation of traffic would not be certainly pro- tective, as human traffic is not the only means whereby materials are conveyed from one locality to another. If birds are an efficient means in aiding the diffu- sion of seeds and molluscs from one site to another, they most assuredly may well be capable of conveying organisms of the nature of those presumably giving rise to the development of the choleraic poison. Efficient prevention of the importation of the factors of the choleraic poison according to this view becomes as theoretically impossible, as the attempts to secure it are undoubted- ly ruinously expensive and futile, but this does not imply that it assumes that nothing can be done to prevent the invasion of localities by epidemics. On the contrary, whilst it puts an end to all hope of effectively excluding the introduc- tion of the factors, it holds out a possibility of rendering such introduction a matter of no importance. Had the site proper to the existence and activity of the factors of the poison been the human organism, we should, in the failure of quarantine, been left without hope of being able to influence the diffusion and prevalence of the disease, but this is not so when we accept the environment as the site, and assume that the presence of certain conditions in it are necessary in order to allow the factors to exercise their activity. In the absence of know- ledge of the precise nature of the factors, we are unable precisely to define what these conditions are; but, what we do know is, that all general sanitary improve- ments do affect the liability to prevalence of the disease, either by preventing the manufacture of the poison or preventing its access to the human organism subsequent to manufacture. Any quarantine measures which could ever be
54 Scientific Memoirs by practically enforced would never afford any security against the importation of the factors of the specific poison or against the rejuvenescence of any which might happen to be already present, and would in any case be the cause of great expenditure without any return save very problematical prevention of cholera, but any improvements in local sanitation are a positive benefit, not only as protectives against cholera, but as protectives against other forms of disease, so that the expenditure which they involve can never be thrown away. Both on theoretical and practical grounds, therefore, the only rational course to follow in endeavouring to limit the epidemic diffusion of cholera is to abandon quarantine, and to push on general sanitary improvements. Whilst it is to local sanitary improvements, and not to quarantine restriction of traffic, that we must look to limit the development of the specific cause of the initial symptoms of cholera, and its access to the human organism in any locality; it is also possible that these may exert a further action on the disease. It is quite possible that they may have an influence in determining the presence or absence of secondary symptoms. It has already been pointed out that the occurrence of these is probably due to the absorption of products attending the excessive development of certain schizomycete organisms within the intestinal tract during the period in which its contents have acquired abnormal qualities in consequence of the establishment of the choleraic condition, and it is very possible that condi- tions in the environment may affect the nature of the intestinal schizomycete population to a greater or less extent. It is quite possible that general sanitary improvements in any locality may affect the local prevalence of those forms of schizomycetes which when they encounter a congenial environment in the con- tents of the intestinal tract are capable of manufacturing toxic products there, or may affect the chances of their gaining access to the intestinal tract. In so far, therefore, as any hygienic measures serve to limit the local development of such factors or their access to the human organism, they must tend to diminish the probability of the appearance of secondary symptoms in any cases of cholera which do occur, and it is thus possible that sanitary improvements of locality may not merely limit the diffusion, but also modify the character of the disease, so that we have additional grounds for advocating them in place of impos- sible attempts at quarantine. Another measure has recently been advocated and extensively practised in this country as a protective against cholera. M. Haffkine believes that because he can produce temporary protection against the morbid results following the introduction of virulent comma-bacilli into the lymphatic and blood-vascular system he has necessarily produced protection against cholera, and consequently assumes that the universal adoption of his system of protective inoculations is all that is necessary in order to secure the impossibility of the epidemic occur- rence of cholera in any locality. This, of course, implies the previous assump- tion that comma-bacilli are the specific factors of the poison which gives rise to
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 55 the onset of the choleraic condition, and that the symptoms which follow their inoculation into the animal organism are essentially those of cholera. But any such assumption in the meantime rests on no sufficient foundation. It is possible that the views which have been advanced in the previous pages and those which are entertained by many competent observers may be incorrect, and that comma-bacilli may really be specific factors in giving rise to the disease, but M. Haffkine's experiments and results have done absolutely nothing to indicate that they are. It has long been well known that inoculations of comma-bacilli are in many cases followed by the development of morbid and frequently fatal effects in the or- ganism into which they have been introduced, and M. Haffkine has shown that by means of his method a temporary immunity from liability to such effects can be established. But this is all that he has been able to do, and his observa- tions have done nothing whatever to settle the real question at issue, because they have done nothing to determine whether the symptoms following inocu- lation can fairly be regarded as of essentially choleraic nature. No one questions the fact that inoculations of certain comma-bacilli are liable to be followed by certain morbid effects, or that M. Haffkine has demonstrated a method of conferring temporary immunity from these, but there has been no suffi- cient proof, and there is consequently no general concensus of opinion that the mor- bid effects are of choleraic nature, and, therefore, there are no sufficient grounds for believing that temporary immunity from them implies any immunity from cholera. Neither the morbid symptoms nor the immunity can be regarded as specifically related to the action of a particular species of comma-bacillus or to the action of comma-bacilli as a group, seeing that Klein has demon- strated that they can be as effectively produced in experiments in which other forms of schizomycetes are inoculated in place of comma-bacilli, so that in fact, in place of affording any additional evidence in favour of a specific causal relation between the products developed by comma-bacilli and the induction of the choleraic condition, M. Haffkine's results have tended rather to show that no such relation exists.*The symptoms cannot be affirmed to be unequivocally choleraic, and they can be induced by the introduction of various perfectly distinct forms of schizomycetes into the system, so that there are no grounds for supposing that immunity from them implies immunity from cholera, or that they are in any sense necessarily related to the action of organisms of the nature of those occurring most frequently, and in special abundance in the contents of the intestinal tract in cases of the disease. It was shown long ago that certain morbid results follow the inoculation of comma-bacilli or of certain kinds" of comma-bacilli, and M. Haffkine has demonstrated a method of securing temporary immunity from these, but those who do not believe that there is any sufficient evidence to show that the symptoms are of a truly *" The Anti-cholera Vaccination: an experimental critique," by E. Klein, M.D., F.R.S., Brit. Med. Your., March 25, 1893, page 632.
56 Scientific Memoirs by choleraic nature can hardly be expected to see that immunity from them implies immunity from cholera. The symptoms following the inoculation of virulent comma-bacilli are certainly not unequivocally choleraic; they can be induced by the inoculation of other forms of schizomycetes, and there is a great mass of evidence tending to show that the comma-bacilli which occur in the intestinal tract in cases of cholera are not essentially concerned in the manufacture of the poison which induces the primary choleraic condition, so that there are no scientific grounds for regarding the procedure as calculated, in any way to affect the prevalence of the latter. At the same time it by no means necessarily follows that it should be abso- lutely valueless. If, as has been suggested in the previous pages, we have in most cases of cholera to deal with two distinct morbid conditions, one corresponding with the initial choleraic symptoms, and due to the action of a poison of extrinsic origin, and the other due to the action of one developed within the intestinal tract in consequence of the concurrence of certain organisms, such as some forms of comma-bacilli with the presence of conditions favouring their multiplication, then it is evident that any procedure which confers an immunity from the effects of the products of their activity is not to be regarded as valueless. It will not in any way prevent the occurrence of cases of the disease, but it will modify their character in a fashion similar to that which, as it has already been pointed out, hygienic improvements in a locality may do. The products of the activity of certain comma-bacilli unequivocally give rise to morbid results when intro- duced into the system, and the primary choleraic condition equally unequivocally provides facilities for their presence within the intestinal tract. So long as absorption is in abeyance this will produce no effect, but when it has once been re-established, the possibility of their access to the interior of the organism must necessarily at once arise, and with this the liability to the development of the secondary morbid symptoms dependent on their action. Any procedure which provides immunity against the latter will render the presence of the noxious products within the intestinal tract, and their absorption from it matters of no importance. There will be no possibility of the development of any ill effects from their action; in other words, there will, be no possibility of the development of secondary symptoms, and the termination of the attack will depend solely on the action of the primary poison on the system. But there is every reason to believe that this would imply a very great reduction in the fatality of the disease. A certain number of cases certainly do occur in which, whether as the result of the access of excessive doses of the primary poison, or of idiosyncratic reactions of the organism to minor doses, death occurs independently of the appearance of any appreciable secondary symptoms, but there can be no question that in very many instances cases, which, in so far as the primary symptoms are concerned, are of no special gravity, terminate fatally in connec- tion with the subsequent development of secondary ones. But if the latter be
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 57 caused by the products of independent factors whose activity is called into play by the primary choleraic condition, immunity from the action of these products would limit the morbid effects in any case to those directly due to that of the primary poison, and with this there is every reason to believe that a great reduction in the mortality of the disease would occur. Whilst, therefore, there are no grounds for believing that M. Haffkine's treatment can have any effect in reducing the prevalence of cholera, it remains possible that it may affect its mortality. 1
PLATE I.PLATE I.b . [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002205.tif] Fig.6 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002205.tif] Fig.7 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002205.tif] Fig.8 CHOLERAIC COMMA-BACILLI &c. TUBE CULTIVATIONS IN IO% NELSON'S PHOTOGRAPHIC GELATINE, 5 DAYS GROWTH TEMPERATURE OF PERIOD 58 0 TO 657 F. Fig. 5. a, Species PLATE II a. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002214.tif] GELATINE TUBE-CULTURES OF CHOLERAIC COMMA-BACILLIPLATE IIb. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002217.tif] GELATINE TUBE-CULTURES OF CHOLERAIC COMMA-BACILLIPLATE IIIa. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002226.tif] GELATINE TUBE-CULTURES OF CHOLERAIC COMMA-BACILLIPLATE IIIb. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002229.tif] GELATINE TUBE-CULTURES OF FOUR CHOLERAIC AND ONE NON- CHOLERAIC COMMA-BACILLIDescription of Plate. Fig. 1. Species PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002244.tif] CHARACTERS OF CERTAIN CHOLERAIC COMMA-BACILLI WHEN CULTIVATED IN NEUTRALISED AND ACID AGAR-AGAR MEDIA, AND ON POTATOES. Reg. No. 511, San. Comr., IDescription of Two New Species of Cinchona. BY GEORGE KING, M.B., F.R.S, C.I.E., BRIGADE-SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL; SUPERINTENDENT OF THE ROYAL BOTANIC GARDEN, CALCUTTA. It is now thirty-three years since the cultivation of the medicinal species of Cinchona was begun by the Government of Bengal in Sikkim. During these years, seeds purporting to be those of C. officinalis, L., C. succirubra, Pay., C. Calisaya, Wedd., C. micrantha, Ruiz and Pavon, and C. pahudiana, How., have been received from various sources, and have been sown in the Government plantation. Amongst the seedlings raised from these seeds, many forms have appeared, which it has been impossible to refer to any of the five species just mentioned, or indeed to any other described species. Most of these forms have, however, proved about as inconstant and as perplexing as those of the European species of Hieracium or Rubus. Early attempts to limit and arrange them having proved eminently unsatisfactory, the habit (perhaps rather a lazy one) arose of calling everything that did not manifestly belong to any described species a " hybrid." Amongst these so-called hybrids there are two which, from the constancy and individuality of their characters, appear to me to deserve specific rank. Their characters do not fit the diagnosis of any described species, and I now therefore venture to describe them as new. For the drawings of the dissections of the flowers, I am indebted to Mr. R. Pantling, of the Cinchona Plantation. Cinchona Gammiana, nov. spec.60 Scientific Memoirs by base slightly narrowed, the apex contracted just under the persistent calyx teeth. Seeds thin, flat, with a broad membranous jagged and ciliate margin, pointed at one end. This is, in habit, one of the most distinct forms of Cinchona known to me. The stem is slender and straight, and bears a large number of thin, stout branches, from 3 to 4 feet long. As the stem grows, these branches begin first to bend downwards and then to drop off; so that an old tree of this species, with its long, thin, naked stem and tuft of short terminal branches, looks like a palm or tree-fern, and can be distinguished even at a considerable distance from any other species of Cinchona. The bark of this species, when three years old, yielded the Cinchona alkaloids in the following proportions:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 61 from seeds sent from South America as those of C. officinalis. I believe this to be a true species, and I have named it as such. It has hairier leaves than any other of the forms of Cinchona cultivated in British India except two, viz. C. Pahudiana, How., and a form of which Mr. D. Morris sent seeds from Jamaica. Some of the varieties of C . succi- rubra come next as regards the amount of hair. But nothing of the officinalis, Calisaya, or micrantha type approaches it in this respect. The analysis of the stem bark of young trees of this species is as follows:PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002262.tif] Drawn by D. N. Chowdhury; the analyses by PantlinPLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002268.tif] Drawn by A. L. Singh; the analyses by Pantling. CINCHONA THWAITESII, King. Lith. by A. D. Molla.
Remarks on the Morphology of the Lumbar, Sacral, and Caudal Regions of the Panjabi. BY R. HAVELOCK CHARLES, M.D., M.CH., F.R.C.S.,I., F.Z.S., SURGEON-CAPTAIN, BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE; PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY, MEDICAL COLLEGE, LAHORE; SURGEON, MAYO HOSPITAL, LAHORE; FELLOW OF THE PANJAB UNIVERSITY. The following remarks are founded on the examination of material received in the Anatomical Department of the Lahore Medical College. The " subjects " come, as in Europe, from the poor or friendless. Amongst these one meets with very many different types. In fact they are flotsam and jetsam, consisting of fragments derived from several races and castes, from the aboriginal or black variety to the individual of so-called Aryan descent. The Lumbar Vertebrae of the Panjabi. The lumbar region presents certain characteristics distinguishing it from the ordinary European type. For sake of convenience I shall note these serially (1) As to the relation of the anterior and posterior vertical diameters of the vertebr. (2) As to the size and thickness of the intervertebral discs. (3) As to the prevalence of a straight or very slightly convex lumbar curve. (4) As to the large size of the accessory processes especially, in the 5th vertebra. (5) An imperfection in development. 1. The vertical anterior and posterior diameters. 64 Scientific Memoirs by of life is passed in the squatting or sartorial postures, the growing bones would be acted on by pressure being greatest in front, as flexion of the lumbar region is more commonly practised than extension, and amounts to a greater degree than can with comfort be exercised by a European. Power of flexion is increased by the vertebr being thin in front, whilst correlative changes occur in the cartilages, the discs being thick anteriorly. These anatomical points are to be seen in the Panjabi skeleton. Sir William Turner says (Report on Human Skeletons):Medical Officers of the Army of India. 65 European skeletons, according to Sir William Turner, have it the reverse of this in 10 out of 12, and in the remaining two the diameters are equal. It is about from the 3rd lumbar to the sacro-vertebral articulation that motion is greatest, and hence, in any race of men, if the power of flexion is more than usually cultivated by habit or custom, it will be in this region that morpho- logical changes will occur, called up by increased physiological function. The foregoing has reference to 28 vertebral columns which belonged to fully grown adults. In Table No. 3 (Nos. XXII-XXVIII) are measurements of bones varying in age from 12-21 years. Certain interesting points are noticeable in them. In Nos. XXII-XXIV, and XXVI the total anterior diameter of the lumbar region is greater than the posterior (87mm.66 Scientific Memoirs by discs are in front, but one is led to conclude that the difference is inconsiderable save in the last cartilage. What a contrast do the intervertebral cartilages of the Panjabi lumbar region furnish ! The anterior diameter is almost 1.6 times greater than the posterior and the lumbo-sacral disc may be as much as 3.4 times thicker in front than behind. In No. XXIX the total anterior diameter was 60mm., the posterior being 28mm.. Thus, there is a variance in favour of the front measurement of 32mm.. Sir William Turner has pointed out that the " discs may perhaps be so adjusted in the black races as to be collectively thicker in front than behind in the lumbar region, and thus to compensate for the want of development in depth of the anterior surface of the vertebral bodies." The table just quoted makes what Sir William Turner stated was perhaps the case a certainty, and shows the variance of the two diameters to be very considerable indeed. Table No. 4 gives the relative and absolute measurements of the discs, and these can be compared with the data furnished for the centra. The average total anterior diameter of the discs is 56.4mm., of the posterior 33.7mm.. There is thus a difference in favour of the anterior diameter of 12.7mm.. Of the centra the mean total anterior diameter measured 113.8mm.and the mean posterior 11 8.3mm., giving 4.5mmin favour of the posterior observation. There is thus a much greater difference in the measurements of the discs than of the centra, and the lumbar curve will be hence more influenced by the thickness and form of the cartilages than of the bodies. Looking at the lumbar region from the front, the thin body and the thick cartilage will both be conducive to a power of overflexion in this region, and, in the Panjabi, the squatting habits conduce to the modification of the bones and intervertebral discs in the small of the back, as well as to certain changes in the knee, hip and ankle joints which I have demonstrated in another paper. A comparison of the data furnished will, I think, show that the discs make up a greater portion relatively of the lumbar region in the Panjabi than in the European, and that may be they are also abso- lutely thicker, though the Panjabi is probably a shorter and a lighter man than the average European, The nucleus pulposus of the disc is always large and well marked. 3. As to the prevalence of a straight or very slightly convex lumbar curve. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 67 be Orthorachic or straight, and the last (a female) would be Kurtorachic or convex anteriorly. The average general lumbar index for the twenty-eight adult Panjabis is 103.8. By way of comparison I quote the following from Sir William Turner's " Report on the Bones of the Human Skeleton," page 67:68 Scientific Memoirs by 5. An imperfection in development. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 69 The margins of the bodies on the anterior surface were in some cases very prominent, in others quite flat. In one instance (No. 11) the centrum of the 2nd sacral was larger than that of the 1st vertebra. The ossification of the neural arches varied. In twenty-six sacra the canal was bounded fully to the 4th centrum. In ten sacra the lamin were only com- plete as far as the 3rd body. In four specimens the sacral canal was completely closed to the 5th vertebra, so that the lamin of the 5th sacral vertebra were fully and entirely developed, meeting in the middle line in a small tubercular spinous process. In one sacrum (No. 9) the lamin of the 1st vertebra were incomplete, though below this level the posterior arches of the remaining verte- br were normal. The auricular surface is described (Professor Macalister, F.R.S., "Text Book of Human Anatomy") as being formed in European bones by three verte- br (Sacrum Ncessaire ). In the Panjabi there is a difference. In ten sacra (Nos. 4, 8, 10, 11, 13, 27, 33, 37, 7, 42) the auricular surface is formed by three vertebr70 Scientific Memoirs by 24th vertebra has all the characters of a 1st sacral, as it enters into the formation of the right ala and right auricular surface, where- as, on the left side, the junction has not occurred between.the 24th and 25th vertebr, and they have the characters of a 5th lumbar and 1st sacral respectively. When the ossification has been com- pleted on both sides, it is impossible to differentiate by mere inspec- tion the 24th and 25th vertebr from each other, and then there is a sacrum with six vertebr (Photo. 8). The costal and transverse processes of the 1st sacral vertebra as well as the costal and accessory processes (transverse processes) of the 5th lumbar are, as I have said, of considerable magnitude, and between the latter mentioned prominences of the 24th and 25th vertebr pass the lumbo-sacral ligaments. These ligaments (in Europeans often variable) are homologous to the superior costo transverse ligaments of the dorsal region, and pass down from the trans- verse (accessory) process of the 5th lumbar to the transverse and costal pro- cesses of the 1st sacral blending with the anterior sacro-iliac ligament, that is, the ligament passes from a transverse process to a rib. The excess in size and strength of these ligaments, and of the accessory processes from which they arise over western types shows that a considerably greater strain is thrown on the articulations in the neighbourhood than the same European joints are sub- ject to. Increase of growth may occur to such an extent that the processes, as before stated, are frequently articular (20%) for mutual coaptation. (Photos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10). In none of my specimens when the 5th lumbar is free do the accessory processes articulate by their tips with the ilia but when (Photos. 7 and 8) the 5th is a lumbo-sacral wholly or partially, it happens that the auricular sur- face of the sacrum is supported by three vertebr (5th lumbar, 1st sacral, 2nd sacral), and there is a tendency for this surface to move further forward, as is also seen in Nos. 42, 43, 44, 46, 47. The average Panjabi at the sacro-vertebral articulation has got a centrum to his 5th lumbar differing from the European in being less wedge-shaped. His 5th lumbar has abnormally large accessory and costal processes either for articula- tion with 1st sacral and ilia, or for attachment of strong lumbo-sacral and ilio- lumbar ligaments, and, lastly, he has a lumbo-sacral disc larger comparatively than that of the European. These facts point to the likelihood of there being an excess of movement in this region of the spine, and, at the same time, show that nature has, as usual, taken precautionary measures against injury by causing an increase in the size and strength of the ligaments and of their bony attachmentsMedical Officers of the Army of India. 71 disposed that the line of gravity falls exactly on the centre of the base of the sacrum. From this the weight of the trunk and head, etc., is transmitted through the sacro-iliac joints to the heads of the thigh bones in the upright attitude. In the squatting and sartorial postures the weight will also fall on the lumbo- sacral articulation, and, owing to the position, there is a tendency for the 5th lumbar to be disarticulated forward from off the base of the sacrum. This is precluded by the arrangements aforementioned. The peculiarities of this region in the Panjabi are explained by their habits when at work or at rest. Panjabi Coccyx. The observations embodied in Table No. 6 have been made with the object of determining the number of vertebr most frequently present in the Panjabi coccyx, and the condition of these vertebra at different ages. There are thirty specimens, and of these 27 are of males and 3 of females. The castes are various. The ages are approximate. Twenty-three out of thirty-one coccyx had four vertebr. Five were present in three instances (Photo. 11), and three in five of the coccyx. In one case (t. 40) the 1st vertebra was joined on to the sacrum, but the remaining were free. There was complete ankylosis of the four vertebra in two coccyx (t. 60 and 36 years). In neither was there union with the sacrum. The first vertebra was free, whilst the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th were fused in eight speci- mens (ages varied from 3072 Scientific Memoirs by of the skull, to which I have drawn attention in another paper (Page 10, Vol. XXVII, Journal of Anatomy and Physiology). Gray's description is fallacious as far as Panjabi bones are concerned. One very interesting peculiarity (shown in Photo. 12) is of an arch of bone on the anterior surface of the 1st coccygeal vertebra of the nature of a hma- pophysis. It had passing under it the end of the middle sacral artery, and seems to be a hypapophysis similar to the chevron bones of the lower animals. I am not aware of any such specimen being before obtained from a human body. I have to thank my friend Dr. W. P. Dickson of the Central Jail, Lahore, for kindly photographing the specimens for me.
Medical Officers of the Army in India. 73 Table No. 1. Measurements of Lumbar Vertebr. [The diameters are the vertical, anterior, and posterior. The special and general Lumbar Indices are calculated therefrom.] Serial number of sets or Lumbar Vertebr. Serial number of Vartebr. DIAMETERS. Special Lumbar Index. Serial number of sets of Lumbar Vertebr. Serial number of Vartebr. DIAMETERS. Special Lumbar Index. Serial number of sets of Lumbar Vertebr. Serial number of Vartebr. DIAMETERS. Special Lumbar Index. Antertor. Posterior. Antertor. Posterior. Antertor. Posterior. I. 1st 20 23 115. VI. 1st 20 20 100. XI. 1st 20 22 110. 2nd 23 25 108.7 2nd 22 21 95.4 2nd 25 24 96. 3rd 24 20 108.3 3rd 21 21 100. 3rd 24 24 100. 4th 25 24 96. 4th 20 20 100. 4th 24 23 95.8 5th 24 20 83.3 5th 20 22 110. 5th 23 19 76. 116 118 101. 103 104 100.9 118 112 94.9 II. 1st 20 23 115. VII. 1st 21 22 104.7 XII. 1st 22 24 109. 2nd 22 24 109. 2nd 22 23 104.5 2nd 22 23 104. 3rd 21 21 100. 3rd 24 23 ... 3rd 23 23 100. 4th 21 21 100. 4th 25 23 92. 4th 23 22 104.3 5th 24 19 79.1 5th 25 21 84. 5th 20 24 120. 108 108 100. 117* 112 95.7 110 116 105.4 III.* 1st 22 24 109. VIII. 1st 21 23 109.5 XIII. 1st 21 22 104.7 2nd 22 22 100. 2nd 24 24 100. 2nd 20 23 115.3 3rd 24 25 104. 3rd 23 24 104.3 3rd 23 24 104. 4th 25 22 88. 4th 22 22 100. 4th 22 22 100. 5th 24 20 83.3 5th 22 22 100. 5th 19 22 115.7 117* 113 96.5 112 115 102.6 105 113 107.6 IV. 1st 21 24 114.2 IX. 1st 24 25 104. 2nd 23 25 108.7 2nd 20 23 115. 3rd 125 26 104. 3rd 21 21 100. 4th 23 23 100. 4th 24 24 100. 5th 24 24 100. 5th 25 20 80. 116 122 105.2 114* 113 99.1 V. 1st 18 21 116.6 X. 1st 20 24 120. 2nd 22 24 109' 2nd 23 25 108.7 3rd 24 23 95.8 3rd 22 26 118.1 4th 21 24 114.2 4th 22 24 109. 5th 19 18 94.6 5th 23 22 95.6 104 110 105.7 110 121 110. L
74 Scientific Memoirs by Table No. 2. Measurements of Lumbar VertebrMedical Officers of the Army in India. 75 Table No. 3. Measurements of Lumbar Vertebr 76 Scientific Memoirs by Table No. 4. Measurements of Lumbar Vertebr Medical Officers of the Army of India. 77 Table No. 5. Measurements of forty-seven Panjabi Sacra (eight females, thirty-nine males) with Sacral Index computed for each. Table also shows number of Vertebr present in every individual Sacrum. Serial No. and Sex. Number of Vertebr. SACRAL DIAMETERS, Index. Serial No. and Sex. Number of Vertebr. SACRAL DIAMETERS. Index. Br. L. Br. L. 1 M. 5 117 113 103.5 P. 25 M. 5 105 99 106. P. 2 F. 78 scientific Memoirs by Table No. 6. Condition of the Panjabi Coccyx at various ages and the usual number of Vertebr present. Serial No. Age and Sex. Caste. Number of Vertebr. Those ankylosed. 1 28, Male Mahomedan 4 3rd and 4th. 2 30 Medical Officers of the Army of India. 79 Rsum. 1. As a rule, the body of a Panjabi lumbar vertebra is thicker behind than in front; but there are exceptions. 2. As the type matures with age, the excess of the posterior diameter over the anterior becomes more pronounced. 3. In the female only is the anterior measurement greater than the posterior. 4. The total posterior diameter of the five lumbar vertebr in one instance exceeded the anterior by 19 mm.Generally the difference is 8 mm., in favour of the posterior. 5. The 5th lumbar vertebra in the Panjabi is only exceptionally wedge-shaped as in the European. 6. Up to the age of 12 years none of the changes typical of the Panjabi lumbar region have taken place in the bodies of the vertebr. 7. It is probable that the growth giving a lumbar vertebra its wedge-shaped form occurs in the epiphysary area, and that it progresses between puberty and 25 years of age. The deepest part of the centrum in the Panjabi is behind, and the changes eventuate as the racial type matures. 8. The inter-vertebral cartilages in the lumbar region of the Panjabi are thick. The anterior diameter is almost 1.6 times greater than the posterior. 9. The lumbo-sacral disc may be as much as 3.4 times thicker in front than behind. 10. The discs are collectively thicker in front (56.4 mm.) than behind (33.7 mm.) and " compensate for the want of development in depth of the anterior surface of the vertebral bodies." (Sir Wm. Turner. ) 11. The morphology of the Panjabi lumbar centra and discs is conducive to a power of overflexion in this region, and the anatomical characters are modifications in structure due to function, exaggerated by the squatting habits of the people. 12. The Panjabi skeleton furnishes examples of changes in structure brought on by habit in the lumbar region, tibia, the hip, knee, and ankle joints. 13. The lumbar curve in the Panjabi is straight or very slightly convex. The mean general lumbar index of seven recent vertebral columns was 106.8. 14. The Panjabi female has a more convex lumbar curve than the male Panjabi. 15. The accessory processes of the 5th lumbar vertebra are frequently very largely developed and often articulate with the al of the sacrum. 16. The lumbo-sacral and ilio lumbar ligaments are of considerable size. 17. It is probable that the "5th lumbar vertebra may normally develop on a different plan from that of the other lumbars." (Sir Wm. Turner. ) 18. The usual number of vertebr in the sacrum is five: sometimes there are six, but oftener only four. 19. 34% of Panjabi sacra are dolichohieric. 20. There is great variation in the curve of the anterior surface. 21. The hiatus sacralis may be altogether absent owing to the lamin of the 5th sacra vertebr being perfect and meeting in a median ridge. 22. The auricular surface in 78.7% is formed of only two vertebr80 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army in India. 25. As to order of fusion of the coccygeal vertebr. The 3rd and 4th first join. Then the 2nd ankyloses to the 3rd, and finally the 1st fuses to the 2nd. 26. No deductions as to the age of the skeleton can be safely based on the state of the coccyx alone. The fusion of the bones is very irregular as to time, but not as to order. 27. In one specimen on the anterior surface of the first vertebra there was a hmal arch. G. I. C. P. O.PLATE 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002328.tif] Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, October 1893.
PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002334.tif] oto-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, October 1893.
PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002340.tif] Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, October 1898.
PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002346.tif] Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, October 1893.
PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002349.tif] Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, October 1893.
TABLE A. Tracings of Lumbar Curves. (The Number over each is for reference to Table No. 4 "Measurements of Lumbar VertebrTABLE B. Diagrams showing the Curvature of Typical Punjabi Sacra. (The Number over each is for reference to the Table of Sacral Measurements). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002364.tif] Reg. No. 476. San. Comr., I. TABLE B.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002373.tif] Reg. No. 476,San. Comr., I.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON MAJOR-GENERAL W. R. RICE, M.D., C.S.I., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VIII. 1894. 1.